Immigration is the international movement of people to a destination country of which they are not usual residents or where they do not possess nationality in order to settle as permanent residents. Commuters, tourists, and other short-term stays in a destination country do not fall under the definition of immigration or migration; seasonal labour immigration is sometimes included, however. As for economic effects, research suggests that migration is beneficial both to the receiving and sending countries. Research, with few exceptions, finds that immigration on average has positive economic effects on the native population, but is mixed as to whether low-skilled immigration adversely affects underprivileged natives. Studies show that the elimination of barriers to migration would have profound effects on world GDP, with estimates of gains ranging between 67 and 147 percent for the scenarios in which 37 to 53 percent of the developing countries' workers migrate to the developed countries. Development economists argue that reducing barriers to labor mobility between developing countries and developed countries would be one of the most efficient tools of poverty reduction. Positive net immigration can soften the demographic dilemma in the aging global North. The academic literature provides mixed findings for the relationship between immigration and crime worldwide, but finds for the United States that immigration either has no impact on the crime rate or that it reduces the crime rate. Research shows that country of origin matters for speed and depth of immigrant assimilation, but that there is considerable assimilation overall for both first- and second-generation immigrants. Research has found extensive evidence of discrimination against foreign-born and minority populations in criminal justice, business, the economy, housing, health care, media, and politics in the United States and Europe. The term immigration was coined in the 17th century, referring to non-warlike population movements between the emerging nation states. When people cross national borders during their migration, they are called migrants or immigrants (from Latin: migrare, 'wanderer') from the perspective of the destination country. In contrast, from the perspective of the country from which they leave, they are called emigrants or outmigrants. Human migration is the movement by people from one place to another, particularly different countries, with the intention of settling temporarily or permanently in the new location. It typically involves movements over long distances and from one country or region to another. The number of people involved in every wave of immigration differs depending on the specific circumstances. Historically, early human migration includes the peopling of the world, i.e. migration to world regions where there was previously no human habitation, during the Upper Paleolithic. Since the Neolithic, most migrations (except for the peopling of remote regions such as the Arctic or the Pacific), were predominantly warlike, consisting of conquest or Landnahme on the part of expanding populations.[citation needed] Colonialism involves expansion of sedentary populations into previously only sparsely settled territories or territories with no permanent settlements. In the modern period, human migration has primarily taken the form of migration within and between existing sovereign states, either controlled (legal immigration) or uncontrolled and in violation of immigration laws (illegal immigration). Migration can be voluntary or involuntary. Involuntary migration includes forced displacement (in various forms such as deportation, the slave trade, flight (war refugees and ethnic cleansing), all of which could result in the creation of diasporas. As of 2015[update], the number of international migrants has reached 244 million worldwide, which reflects a 41% increase since 2000. The largest number of international migrants live in the United States, with 19% of the world's total. One third of the world's international migrants are living in just 20 countries. Germany and Russia host 12 million migrants each, taking the second and third place in countries with the most migrants worldwide. Saudi Arabia hosts 10 million migrants, followed by the United Kingdom (9 million) and the United Arab Emirates (8 million). In most parts of the world, migration occurs between countries that are located within the same major area. Between 2000 and 2015, Asia added more international migrants than any other major area in the world, gaining 26 million. Europe added the second largest with about 20 million. In 2015, the number of international migrants below the age of 20 reached 37 million, while 177 million are between the ages of 20 and 64. International migrants living in Africa were the youngest, with a median age of 29, followed by Asia (35 years), and Latin America/Caribbean (36 years), while migrants were older in Northern America (42 years), Europe (43 years), and Oceania (44 years). Nearly half (43%) of all international migrants originate in Asia, and Europe was the birthplace of the second largest number of migrants (25%), followed by Latin America (15%). India has the largest diaspora in the world (16 million people), followed by Mexico (12 million) and Russia (11 million). A 2012 survey by Gallup found that given the opportunity, 640 million adults would migrate to another country, with 23% of these would-be immigrant choosing the United States as their desired future residence, while 7% of respondents, representing 45 million people, would choose the United Kingdom. Canada, France, Saudi Arabia, Australia, Germany, Spain, Italy, and the United Arab Emirates made up the rest of the top ten desired destination countries. In USA there were in 2023 1,197,254 immigration applications initial receipts, 523,477 immigration cases completed, and 2,464,021 immigration cases pending according to the U.S. Department of Justice. One theory of immigration distinguishes between push and pull factors, referring to the economic, political, and social influences by which people migrate from or to specific countries. Immigrants are motivated to leave their former countries of citizenship, or habitual residence, for a variety of reasons, including: a lack of local access to resources, a desire for economic prosperity, to find or engage in paid work, to better their standard of living, family reunification, retirement, climate or environmentally induced migration, exile, escape from prejudice, conflict or natural disaster, or simply the wish to change one's quality of life. Commuters, tourists, and other short-term stays in a destination country do not fall under the definition of immigration or migration; seasonal labour immigration is sometimes included, however. Push factors (or determinant factors) refer primarily to the motive for leaving one's country of origin (either voluntarily or involuntarily), whereas pull factors (or attraction factors) refer to one's motivations behind or the encouragement towards immigrating to a particular country. In the case of economic migration (usually labor migration), differentials in wage rates are common. If the value of wages in the new country surpasses the value of wages in one's native country, he or she may choose to migrate, as long as the costs are not too high. Particularly in the 19th century, economic expansion of the US increased immigrant flow, and nearly 15% of the population was foreign-born, thus making up a significant amount of the labor force. As transportation technology improved, travel time, and costs decreased dramatically between the 18th and early 20th century. Travel across the Atlantic used to take up to 5 weeks in the 18th century, but around the time of the 20th century it took a mere 8 days. When the opportunity cost is lower, the immigration rates tend to be higher. Escape from poverty (personal or for relatives staying behind) is a traditional push factor, and the availability of jobs is the related pull factor. Natural disasters can amplify poverty-driven migration flows. Research shows that for middle-income countries, higher temperatures increase emigration rates to urban areas and to other countries. For low-income countries, higher temperatures reduce emigration. Emigration and immigration are sometimes mandatory in a contract of employment: religious missionaries and employees of transnational corporations, international non-governmental organizations, and the diplomatic service expect, by definition, to work "overseas". They are often referred to as "expatriates", and their conditions of employment are typically equal to or better than those applying in the host country (for similar work).[citation needed] Non-economic push factors include persecution (religious and otherwise), frequent abuse, bullying, oppression, ethnic cleansing, genocide, risks to civilians during war, and social marginalization. Political motives traditionally motivate refugee flows; for instance, people may emigrate in order to escape a dictatorship. Some migration is for personal reasons, based on a relationship (e.g. to be with family or a partner), such as in family reunification or transnational marriage (especially in the instance of a gender imbalance). Recent research has found gender, age, and cross-cultural differences in the ownership of the idea to immigrate. In a few cases, an individual may wish to immigrate to a new country in a form of transferred patriotism. Evasion of criminal justice (e.g., avoiding arrest) is a personal motivation. This type of emigration and immigration is not normally legal, if a crime is internationally recognized, although criminals may disguise their identities or find other loopholes to evade detection. For example, there have been reports of war criminals disguising themselves as victims of war or conflict and then pursuing asylum in a different country. Barriers to immigration come not only in legal form or political form; natural and social barriers to immigration can also be very powerful. Immigrants when leaving their country also leave everything familiar: their family, friends, support network, and culture. They also need to liquidate their assets, and they incur the expense of moving. When they arrive in a new country, this is often with many uncertainties including finding work, where to live, new laws, new cultural norms, language or accent issues, possible racism, and other exclusionary behavior towards them and their family. The politics of immigration have become increasingly associated with other issues, such as national security and terrorism, especially in western Europe, with the presence of Islam as a new major religion. Those with security concerns cite the 2005 French riots and point to the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy as examples of the value conflicts arising from immigration of Muslims in Western Europe. Because of all these associations, immigration has become an emotional political issue in many European nations. Studies have suggested that some special interest groups lobby for less immigration for their own group and more immigration for other groups since they see effects of immigration, such as increased labor competition, as detrimental when affecting their own group but beneficial when impacting other groups. A 2010 European study suggested that "employers are more likely to be pro-immigration than employees, provided that immigrants are thought to compete with employees who are already in the country. Or else, when immigrants are thought to compete with employers rather than employees, employers are more likely to be anti-immigration than employees." A 2011 study examining the voting of US representatives on migration policy suggests that "representatives from more skilled labor abundant districts are more likely to support an open immigration policy towards the unskilled, whereas the opposite is true for representatives from more unskilled labor abundant districts." Another contributing factor may be lobbying by earlier immigrants. The chairman for the US Irish Lobby for Immigration Reform—which lobby for more permissive rules for immigrants, as well as special arrangements just for Irish people—has stated that "the Irish Lobby will push for any special arrangement it can get—'as will every other ethnic group in the country.'" Several countries have been accused of encouraging immigration to other countries in order to create divisions. The term economic migrant refers to someone who has travelled from one region to another region for the purposes of seeking employment and an improvement in quality of life and access to resources. An economic migrant is distinct from someone who is a refugee fleeing persecution. Many countries have immigration and visa restrictions that prohibit a person entering the country for the purposes of gaining work without a valid work visa. As a violation of a State's immigration laws a person who is declared to be an economic migrant can be refused entry into a country. The World Bank estimates that remittances totaled $420 billion in 2009, of which $317 billion went to developing countries. Legislation regarding the protection of rights of immigrants and equal access to justice differs per nation. International law – the product of the United Nations and other multinational organizations – creates protocols governing immigrant rights. International law and the European Convention of Human Rights state that immigrants can only be detained for ‘legitimate aims’ of the state. It also notes that vulnerable people should be protected from unreasonable punishment and lengthy detention. International law outlines requirements for due process and suitable conditions. However, nations are sovereign, and the protocols of international law cannot be enforced upon them. Nations have the freedom to handle immigrants as they choose, and to structure how any legal aid is distributed. Human rights organizations strongly criticize individual nation-states for the limitations of their immigration policies and practices. Treatment of migrants in host countries, both by governments, employers, and original population, is a topic of continual debate and criticism, and the violation of migrant human rights is an ongoing crisis. The United Nations Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, has been ratified by 48 states, most of which are heavy exporters of cheap labor. Major migrant-receiving countries and regions—including Western Europe, North America, Pacific Asia, Australia, and the Gulf States—have not ratified the convention, even though they are host to the majority of international migrant workers. Although freedom of movement is often recognized as a civil right in many documents such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), the freedom only applies to movement within national borders and the ability to return to one's home state. Some proponents of immigration argue that the freedom of movement both within and between countries is a basic human right, and that the restrictive immigration policies, typical of nation-states, violate this human right of freedom of movement. Such arguments are common among ideologies like anarchism and libertarianism. As philosopher and open borders activist Jacob Appel has written, "Treating human beings differently, simply because they were born on the opposite side of a national boundary, is hard to justify under any mainstream philosophical, religious or ethical theory."[citation needed] Where immigration is permitted, it is typically selective. As of 2003[update], family reunification accounted for approximately two-thirds of legal immigration to the US every year. Ethnic selection, such as the White Australia policy, has generally disappeared, but priority is usually given to the educated, skilled, and wealthy. Less privileged individuals, including the mass of poor people in low-income countries, cannot avail themselves of the legal and protected immigration opportunities offered by wealthy states. This inequality has also been criticized as conflicting with the principle of equal opportunities. The fact that the door is closed for the unskilled, while at the same time many developed countries have a huge demand for unskilled labor, is a major factor in illegal immigration. The contradictory nature of this policy—which specifically disadvantages the unskilled immigrants while exploiting their labor—has also been criticized on ethical grounds.[citation needed] Immigration policies which selectively grant freedom of movement to targeted individuals are intended to produce a net economic gain for the host country. They can also mean net loss for a poor donor country through the loss of the educated minority—a "brain drain". This can exacerbate the global inequality in standards of living that provided the motivation for the individual to migrate in the first place. One example of competition for skilled labour is active recruitment of health workers from developing countries by developed countries. There may however also be a "brain gain" to emigration, as migration opportunities lead to greater investments in education in developing countries. Overall, research suggests that migration is beneficial both to the receiving and sending countries. A survey of European economists shows a consensus that freer movement of people to live and work across borders within Europe makes the average European better off, and strong support behind the notion that it has not made low-skilled Europeans worse off. According to David Card, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston, "most existing studies of the economic impacts of immigration suggest these impacts are small, and on average benefit the native population". In a survey of the existing literature, Örn B Bodvarsson and Hendrik Van den Berg write, "a comparison of the evidence from all the studies... makes it clear that, with very few exceptions, there is no strong statistical support for the view held by many members of the public, mainly that immigration has an adverse effect on native-born workers in the destination country." Research also suggests that diversity and immigration have a net positive effect on productivity and economic prosperity. Immigration has also been associated with reductions in offshoring. A study found that the Age of Mass Migration (1850–1920) contributed to "higher incomes, higher productivity, more innovation, and more industrialization" in the short-run and "higher incomes, less poverty, less unemployment, higher rates of urbanization, and greater educational attainment" in the long-run for the United States. Research also shows that migration to Latin America during the Age of Mass Migration had a positive impact on long-run economic development. A 2016 paper by University of Southern Denmark and University of Copenhagen economists found that the 1924 immigration restrictions enacted in the United States impaired the economy. The view that economic impact on the average native tends to be only small and positive is disputed by some studies, such as a 2023 statistical analysis of historical immigration data in Netherlands which found economic effects with both larger positive and negative net contributions per capita depending on different factors including previous education and income of the immigrant. Effects may vary due to factors like the migrants' age, education, reason for migration, the strength of the economy, and how long ago the migration took place. Overall immigration was found to account for a relatively small share of the rise of native wage inequality, but low-skill immigration has been linked to greater income inequality in the native population. Measuring the national impact of immigration on the change of total GDP or on the change of GDP per capita can have distinct results. David Card's 1990 work is considered a landmark study in the topic. It followed the Mariel boatlift, a natural experiment when 125,000 Cubans (Marielitos) came to Miami after a sudden relaxation in emigration rules. It lacked the limitations of previous studies, including that migrants often choose high-wage cities, so increases in wages could simply be a result of the economic success of the city rather than the migrants. But the Marielitos chose Miami simply because it was near Cuba rather than for lucrative wages. Preceding studies were also limited in that firms and natives may respond to migration and its effects by moving to more lucrative areas. However, the six-month period of this migration was too brief for most firms or individuals to leave Miami. Another natural experiment followed a group of Czech workers who, shortly after the fall of the Berlin wall, were suddenly able to work in Germany though they continued to live in Czechia. It found significant declines in native wages and employment as a result. It is argued migrants must also spend their wages in the employing country in order to stimulate the economy and offset their impacts. According to economists Michael Clemens and Lant Pritchett, "permitting people to move from low-productivity places to high-productivity places appears to be by far the most efficient generalized policy tool, at the margin, for poverty reduction". A successful two-year in situ anti-poverty program, for instance, helps poor people make in a year what is the equivalent of working one day in the developed world. A slight reduction in the barriers to labor mobility between the developing and developed world could do more to reduce poverty in the developing world than any remaining trade liberalization. Studies show that the elimination of barriers to migration could have profound effects on world GDP, with estimates of gains ranging between 67 and 147.3%. Research also finds that migration leads to greater trade in goods and services, and increases in financial flows between the sending and receiving countries. Greater openness to low-skilled immigration in wealthy countries could drastically reduce global income inequality. According to Branko Milanović, country of residency is by far the most important determinant of global income inequality, which suggests that the reduction in labor barriers could significantly reduce global income inequality. Research on a migration lottery allowing Tongans to move to New Zealand found that the lottery winners saw a 263% increase in income from migrating (after only one year in New Zealand) relative to the unsuccessful lottery entrants. A longer-term study on the Tongan lottery winners finds that they "continue to earn almost 300 percent more than non-migrants, have better mental health, live in households with more than 250 percent higher expenditure, own more vehicles, and have more durable assets". A conservative estimate of their lifetime gain to migration is NZ$315,000 in net present value terms (approximately US$237,000). A 2017 study of Mexican immigrant households in the United States found that by virtue of moving to the United States, the households increase their incomes more than fivefold immediately. The study also found that the "average gains accruing to migrants surpass those of even the most successful current programs of economic development." A 2017 study of European migrant workers in the UK shows that upon accession to the EU, the migrant workers see a substantial positive impact on their earnings. The data indicate that acquiring EU status raises earnings for the workers by giving them the right to freely change jobs. A 2017 study in the Quarterly Journal of Economics found that immigrants from middle- and low-income countries to the United States increased their wages by a factor of two to three upon migration. A survey of leading economists shows a consensus behind the view that high-skilled immigration makes the average American better off. A survey of the same economists also shows support behind the notion that low-skilled immigration makes the average American better off and makes many low-skilled American workers substantially worse off unless they are compensated by others. Studies show more mixed results for low-skilled natives, but whether the effects are positive or negative, they tend to be small either way. Research indicates immigrants are more likely to work in risky jobs than U.S.-born workers, partly due to differences in average characteristics, such as immigrants' lower English language ability and educational attainment. According to a 2017 survey of the existing economic literature, studies on high-skilled migrants "rarely find adverse wage and employment consequences, and longer time horizons tend to show greater gains". Competition from immigrants in a particular profession may aggravate underemployment in that profession, but increase wages for other natives; for instance, a 2017 study in Science found that "the influx of foreign-born computer scientists since the early 1990s... increased the size of the US IT sector... benefited consumers via lower prices and more efficient products... raised overall worker incomes by 0.2 to 0.3% but decreased wages of U.S. computer scientists by 2.6 to 5.1%." A 2019 study found that foreign college workers in STEM occupations did not displace native college workers in STEM occupations, but instead had a positive impact on the latter group's wages. A 2021 study similarly found that highly educated immigrants to Switzerland caused wages to increase for highly educated Swiss natives. A 2019 study found that greater immigration led to less off-shoring by firms. By increasing overall demand, immigrants could push natives out of low-skilled manual labor into better paying occupations. A 2018 study in the American Economic Review found that the Bracero program (which allowed almost half a million Mexican workers to do seasonal farm labor in the United States) did not have any adverse impact on the labor market outcomes of American-born farm workers. A 2019 study by economic historians found that immigration restrictions implemented in the 1920s had an adverse impact on US-born workers' earnings. A 2011 literature review of the economic impacts of immigration found that the net fiscal impact of migrants varies across studies but that the most credible analyses typically find small and positive fiscal effects on average. According to the authors, "the net social impact of an immigrant over his or her lifetime depends substantially and in predictable ways on the immigrant's age at arrival, education, reason for migration, and similar". According to a 2007 literature review by the Congressional Budget Office, "Over the past two decades, most efforts to estimate the fiscal impact of immigration in the United States have concluded that, in aggregate and over the long term, tax revenues of all types generated by immigrants—both legal and unauthorized—exceed the cost of the services they use." A 2022 study found that the sharp reduction in refugee admissions adversely affected public coffers at all levels of government in the United States. A 2018 study found that inflows of asylum seekers into Western Europe from 1985 to 2015 had a net positive fiscal impact. Research has shown that EU immigrants made a net positive fiscal contribution to Denmark and the United Kingdom. A 2017 study found that when Romanian and Bulgarian immigrants to the United Kingdom gained permission to acquire welfare benefits in 2014 that it had no discernible impact on the immigrants' use of welfare benefits. A paper by a group of French economists found that over the period 1980–2015, "international migration had a positive impact on the economic and fiscal performance of OECD countries." A 2023 study in the Netherlands found both large positive and large negative fiscal impact depending on previous education and income of immigrant. A 2017 survey of leading economists found that 34% of economists agreed with the statement "The influx of refugees into Germany beginning in the summer of 2015 will generate net economic benefits for German citizens over the succeeding decade", whereas 38% were uncertain and 6% disagreed. Studies of refugees' impact on native welfare are scant but the existing literature shows mixed results (negative, positive and no significant effects). According to economist Michael Clemens, "when economists have studied past influxes of refugees and migrants they have found the labor market effects, while varied, are very limited, and can in fact be positive." A 2018 study in the Economic Journal found that Vietnamese refugees to the United States had a positive impact on American exports, as exports to Vietnam grew most in US states with larger Vietnamese populations. A 2018 study in the journal Science Advances found that asylum seekers entering Western Europe in the period 1985–2015 had a positive macroeconomic and fiscal impact. A 2019 study found that the mass influx of 1.3 million Syrian refugees to Jordan (total population: 6.6 million) did not have harm the labor market outcomes of native Jordanians. A 2020 study found that Syrian refugees to Turkey improved the productivity of Turkish firms. A 2017 paper by Evans and Fitzgerald found that refugees to the United States pay "$21,000 more in taxes than they receive in benefits over their first 20 years in the U.S." An internal study by the Department of Health and Human Services under the Trump administration, which was suppressed and not shown to the public, found that refugees to the United States brought in $63 billion more in government revenues than they cost the government. According to University of California, Davis, labor economist Giovanni Peri, the existing literature suggests that there are no economic reasons why the American labor market could not easily absorb 100,000 Syrian refugees in a year.[citation needed] A 2017 paper looking at the long-term impact of refugees on the American labor market over the period 1980–2010 found "that there is no adverse long-run impact of refugees on the U.S. labor market." A 2022 study by economist Michael Clemens found that the sharp reduction in refugee admissions in the United States since 2017 had cost the U.S. economy over $9.1 billion per year and cost public coffers over $2 billion per year. Refugees integrate more slowly into host countries' labor markets than labor migrants, in part due to the loss and depreciation of human capital and credentials during the asylum procedure. Refugees tend to do worse in economic terms than natives, even when they have the same skills and language proficiencies of natives. For instance, a 2013 study of Germans in West-Germany who had been displaced from Eastern Europe during and after World War II showed that the forced German migrants did far worse economically than their native West-German counterparts decades later. Second-generation forced German migrants also did worse in economic terms than their native counterparts. A study of refugees to the United States found that "refugees that enter the U.S. before age 14 graduate high school and enter college at the same rate as natives. Refugees that enter as older teenagers have lower attainment with much of the difference attributable to language barriers and because many in this group are not accompanied by a parent to the U.S." Refugees that entered the U.S. at ages 18–45, have "much lower levels of education and poorer language skills than natives and outcomes are initially poor with low employment, high welfare use and low earnings." But the authors of the study find that "outcomes improve considerably as refugees age." A 2017 study found that the 0.5 million Portuguese who returned to Portugal from Mozambique and Angola in the mid-1970s lowered labor productivity and wages. A 2018 paper found that the areas in Greece that took on a larger share of Greek Orthodox refugees from the Greco-Turkish War of 1919–1922 "have today higher earnings, higher levels of household wealth, greater educational attainment, as well as larger financial and manufacturing sectors." Research on the economic effects of undocumented immigrants is scant but existing studies suggests that the effects are positive for the native population, and public coffers. A 2015 study shows that "increasing deportation rates and tightening border control weakens low-skilled labor markets, increasing unemployment of native low-skilled workers. Legalization, instead, decreases the unemployment rate of low-skilled natives and increases income per native." Studies show that legalization of undocumented immigrants could boost the U.S. economy; a 2013 study found that granting legal status to undocumented immigrants could raise their incomes by a quarter (increasing U.S. GDP by approximately $1.4 trillion over a ten-year period), and a 2016 study found that "legalization would increase the economic contribution of the unauthorized population by about 20%, to 3.6% of private-sector GDP." A 2018 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that undocumented immigrants to the United States "generate higher surplus for US firms relative to natives, hence restricting their entry has a depressing effect on job creation and, in turn, on native labor markets." In the US the Immigration Reform and Control Act was passed to help remove the illegal aliens. They were trying to do this by granting legal status or by imposing penalties against the employers who would knowingly work illegal immigrants. However, IRCA did not address the reality or price which caused an issue in the accomplishing of the objectives. A 2017 study in the Journal of Public Economics found that more intense immigration enforcement increased the likelihood that US-born children with undocumented immigrant parents would live in poverty. A paper by Spanish economists found that upon legalizing the undocumented immigrant population in Spain, the fiscal revenues increased by around €4,189 per newly legalized immigrant. The paper found that the wages of the newly legalized immigrants increased after legalization, some low-skilled natives had worse labor market outcomes and high-skilled natives had improved labor market outcomes. A 2018 study found no evidence that apprehensions of undocumented immigrants in districts in the United States improved the labor market outcomes for American natives. A 2020 study found that immigration enforcement in the US leads to declining production in the US dairy industry and that dairy operators respond to immigration enforcement by automating their operations (rather than hire new labor). A 2021 study in the American Economic Journal found that undocumented immigrants had beneficial effects on the employment and wages of American natives. Stricter immigration enforcement adversely affected employment and wages of American natives. Research suggests that migration is beneficial both to the receiving and sending countries. According to one study, welfare increases in both types of countries: "welfare impact of observed levels of migration is substantial, at about 5% to 10% for the main receiving countries and about 10% in countries with large incoming remittances". A study of equivalent workers in the United States and 42 developing countries found that "median wage gap for a male, unskilled (9 years of schooling), 35-year-old, urban formal sector worker born and educated in a developing country is P$15,400 per year at purchasing power parity". A 2014 survey of the existing literature on emigration finds that a 10 percent emigrant supply shock would increase wages in the sending country by 2–5.5%. Remittances increase living standards in the country of origin. Remittances are a large share of the GDP of many developing countries. A study on remittances to Mexico found that remittances lead to a substantial increase in the availability of public services in Mexico, surpassing government spending in some localities. Research finds that emigration and low migration barriers has net positive effects on human capital formation in the sending countries. This means that there is a "brain gain" instead of a "brain drain" to emigration. Emigration has also been linked to innovation in cases where the migrants return to their home country after developing skills abroad. One study finds that sending countries benefit indirectly in the long-run on the emigration of skilled workers because those skilled workers are able to innovate more in developed countries, which the sending countries are able to benefit on as a positive externality. Greater emigration of skilled workers consequently leads to greater economic growth and welfare improvements in the long-run. The negative effects of high-skill emigration remain largely unfounded. According to economist Michael Clemens, it has not been shown that restrictions on high-skill emigration reduce shortages in the countries of origin. Research also suggests that emigration, remittances and return migration can have a positive impact on political institutions and democratization in the country of origin. According to Abel Escribà-Folch, Joseph Wright, and Covadonga Meseguer, remittances "provide resources that make political opposition possible, and they decrease government dependency, undermining the patronage strategies underpinning authoritarianism." Research also shows that remittances can lower the risk of civil war in the country of origin. Research suggests that emigration causes an increase in the wages of those who remain in the country of origin. A 2014 survey of the existing literature on emigration finds that a 10 percent emigrant supply shock would increase wages in the sending country by 2–5.5%. A study of emigration from Poland shows that it led to a slight increase in wages for high- and medium-skilled workers for remaining Poles. A 2013 study finds that emigration from Eastern Europe after the 2004 EU enlargement increased the wages of remaining young workers in the country of origin by 6%, while it had no effect on the wages of old workers. The wages of Lithuanian men increased as a result of post-EU enlargement emigration. Return migration is associated with greater household firm revenues. Emigration leads to boosts in foreign direct investment to their home country. Some research shows that the remittance effect is not strong enough to make the remaining natives in countries with high emigration flows better off. A 2017 survey of the existing economic literature found that "high-skilled migrants boost innovation and productivity outcomes." According to a 2013 survey of the existing economic literature, "much of the existing research points towards positive net contributions by immigrant entrepreneurs." Areas where immigrant are more prevalent in the United States have substantially more innovation (as measured by patenting and citations). Immigrants to the United States create businesses at higher rates than natives. A 2010 study showed "that a 1 percentage point increase in immigrant college graduates' population share increases patents per capita by 9–18 percent." Mass migration can also boost innovation and growth, as shown by the Jewish, Huguenot and Bohemian diasporas in Berlin and Prussia, German Jewish Émigrés in the US, the Mariel boatlift, the exodus of Soviet Jews to Israel in the 1990s, European migration to Argentina during the Age of Mass Migration (1850–1914), west-east migration in the wake of German reunification, German migration to Russian Empire, and Polish immigration to Germany after joining the EU. A 2018 study in the Economic Journal found that "a 10% increase in immigration from exporters of a given product is associated with a 2% increase in the likelihood that the host country starts exporting that good 'from scratch' in the next decade." Immigrants have been linked to greater invention and innovation. According to one report, "immigrants have started more than half (44 of 87) of America's startup companies valued at $1 billion dollars or more and are key members of management or product development teams in over 70 percent (62 of 87) of these companies." One analysis found that immigrant-owned firms had a higher innovation rate (on most measures of innovation) than firms owned by U.S.-born entrepreneurs. Research also shows that labor migration increases human capital. Foreign doctoral students are a major source of innovation in the American economy. In the United States, immigrant workers hold a disproportionate share of jobs in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM): "In 2013, foreign-born workers accounted for 19.2 percent of STEM workers with a bachelor's degree, 40.7 percent of those with a master's degree, and more than half—54.5 percent—of those with a PhD" A number of countries across the globe offer Economic Citizenship Programs where in return for investing into the local economy, foreign investors are awarded citizenship. Such programs encourage innovation and entrepreneurship from foreign investors and high net worth individuals who as new citizens in the country can offer unique perspectives. St. Kitts and Nevis was the first country to offer economic citizenship back in 1984 creating a new market for citizenship and by the early 2000s other Caribbean countries joined them. Using 130 years of data on historical migrations to the United States, one study finds "that a doubling of the number of residents with ancestry from a given foreign country relative to the mean increases by 4.2 percentage points the probability that at least one local firm invests in that country, and increases by 31% the number of employees at domestic recipients of FDI from that country. The size of these effects increases with the ethnic diversity of the local population, the geographic distance to the origin country, and the ethno-linguistic fractionalization of the origin country." A 2017 study found that "immigrants' genetic diversity is significantly positively correlated with measures of U.S. counties' economic development [during the Age of Mass Migration]. There exists also a significant positive relationship between immigrants' genetic diversity in 1870 and contemporaneous measures of U.S. counties' average income." Some research suggests that immigration can offset some of the adverse effects of automation on native labor outcomes. A 2015 study finds "some evidence that larger immigrant population shares (or inflows) yield positive impacts on institutional quality. At a minimum, our results indicate that no negative impact on economic freedom is associated with more immigration." Another study, looking at the increase in Israel's population in the 1990s due to the unrestricted immigration of Jews from the Soviet Union, finds that the mass immigration did not undermine political institutions, and substantially increased the quality of economic institutions. A 2017 study in the British Journal of Political Science argued that the British American colonies without slavery adopted better democratic institutions in order to attract migrant workers to their colonies. A 2018 study fails to find evidence that immigration to the United States weakens economic freedom. A 2019 study of Jordan found that the massive influx of refugees into Jordan during the Gulf War had long-lasting positive effects on Jordanian economic institutions. Some research has found that as immigration and ethnic heterogeneity increase, government funding of welfare and public support for welfare decrease. Ethnic nepotism may be an explanation for this phenomenon. Other possible explanations include theories regarding in-group and out-group effects and reciprocal altruism. Research however also challenges the notion that ethnic heterogeneity reduces public goods provision. Studies that find a negative relationship between ethnic diversity and public goods provision often fail to take into account that strong states were better at assimilating minorities, thus decreasing diversity in the long run. Ethnically diverse states today consequently tend to be weaker states. Because most of the evidence on fractionalization comes from sub-Saharan Africa and the United States, the generalizability of the findings is questionable. A 2018 study in the American Political Science Review cast doubts on findings that ethnoracial homogeneity led to greater public goods provision. Research finds that Americans' attitudes towards immigration influence their attitudes towards welfare spending. A 2016 study found that immigration in the period 1940–2010 in the United States increased the high school completion of natives: "An increase of one percentage point in the share of immigrants in the population aged 11–64 increases the probability that natives aged 11–17 eventually complete 12 years of schooling by 0.3 percentage point." A 2019 NBER paper found little evidence that exposure to foreign-born students had an impact on US-born students. Studies have found that non-native speakers of English in the UK have no causal impact on the performance of other pupils, immigrant children have no significant impact on the test scores of Dutch children, no effect on grade repetition among native students exposed to migrant students in Austrian schools, that the presence of Latin American children in schools had no significant negative effects on peers, but that students with limited English skills had slight negative effects on peers, and that the influx of Haitians to Florida public schools after the 2010 Haiti earthquake had no effects on the educational outcomes of incumbent students. A 2018 study found that the "presence of immigrant students who have been in the country for some time is found to have no effect on natives. However, a small negative effect of recent immigrants on natives' language scores is reported." Another 2018 study found that the presence of immigrant students to Italy was associated with "small negative average effects on maths test scores that are larger for low ability native students, strongly non-linear and only observable in classes with a high (top 20%) immigrant concentration. These outcomes are driven by classes with a high average linguistic distance between immigrants and natives, with no apparent additional role played by ethnic diversity." After immigrant children's scores were included in Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 15-year-old school pupils' educational evaluations in Sweden the Swedish PISA scores significantly decreased. There is some research that suggests that immigration adversely affects social capital. One study, for instance, found that "larger increases in US states' Mexican population shares correspond to larger decreases in social capital over the period" 1986–2004. A 2017 study in the Journal of Comparative Economics found that "individuals whose ancestors migrated from countries with higher autocracy levels are less likely to trust others and to vote in presidential elections in the U.S. The impact of autocratic culture on trust can last for at least three generations while the impact on voting disappears after one generation. These impacts on trust and voting are also significant across Europe." A 2019 study found that "humans are inclined to react negatively to threats to homogeneity... in the short term. However, these negative outcomes are compensated in the long term by the beneficial influence of intergroup contact, which alleviates initial negative influences." Research suggests that immigration has positive effects on native workers' health. As immigration rises, native workers are pushed into less demanding jobs, which improves native workers' health outcomes. A 2018 study found that immigration to the United Kingdom "reduced waiting times for outpatient referrals and did not have significant effects on waiting times in accident and emergency departments (A&E) and elective care." The study also found "evidence that immigration increased waiting times for outpatient referrals in more deprived areas outside of London" but that this increase disappears after 3 to 4 years. A 2018 systemic review and meta-analysis in The Lancet found that migrants generally have better health than the general population. In the EU, the use of personal health records for migrants is being tested in the new REHEALTH 2 project. High immigration can cause higher stress on highly regulated sectors such as healthcare, education, and housing, leading to negative effects. A 2014 study of the United Kingdom found that immigration generally reduced local house prices in the areas they moved to, because natives at the top of the wage distribution respond to immigration by moving to other areas, locally reducing demand for housing. At the national level, an increase in the number of immigrants increases house prices. Immigration and crime refers to the relationship between criminal activity and the phenomenon of immigration. The academic literature and official statistics provide mixed findings for the relationship between immigration and crime. Research in the United States tends to suggest that immigration either has no impact on the crime rate or even that immigrants are less prone to crime.[excessive citations] A meta-analysis of 51 studies from 1994–2014 on the relationship between immigration and crime in the United States found that, overall, the immigration-crime association is negative, but the relationship is very weak and there is significant variation in findings across studies. This is in line with a 2009 review of high-quality studies conducted in the United States that also found a negative relationship. Research and statistics in some other, mainly European countries suggest a positive link between immigration and crime: immigrants from particular countries are often overrepresented in crime figures.[excessive citations] The over-representation of immigrants in the criminal justice systems of several countries may be due to socioeconomic factors, imprisonment for migration offenses, and racial and ethnic discrimination by police and the judicial system.[excessive citations] The relationship between immigration and terrorism is understudied, but existing research is inconclusive. Research on the relationship between refugee migration and crime is scarce and existing empirical evidence is often contradictory. According to statistics from some countries, asylum seekers are overrepresented in crime figures.[failed verification] Bogus recruitment agencies and rogue recruitment agencies make fake promises of better opportunities, education, income, some of the abuses and crimes experienced by immigrants are the followed: Employees are forced to work in activities that were not included in their contracts, where workplace harassment is openly allowed, tolerated and even promoted. Workers are forced to work more than 20 hours a day with low wages or no payment, Slavery, human trafficking, Sexual harassment, sexual abuse, sexual assault, sexual exploitation. Offering fake immigrant visas in order to make it impossible for employees to return to their countries. In many countries there is a lack of prosecution of this crimes, since these countries obtain benefits and taxes paid by these companies that benefit the economies and also because of the current shortage of workers. A 2019 review of existing research in the Annual Review of Sociology on immigrant assimilation in the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Belgium, the Netherlands and Spain concluded "we find an overall pattern of intergenerational assimilation in terms of socioeconomic attainment, social relations, and cultural beliefs." Return migration from countries with liberal gender norms has been associated with the transfer of liberal gender norms to the home country. A 2018 study in the American Sociological Review found that within racial groups, most immigrants to the United States had fully assimilated within a span of 20 years. Immigrants arriving in the United States after 1994 assimilate more rapidly than immigrants who arrived in previous periods. Measuring assimilation can be difficult due to "ethnic attrition", which refers to when descendants of migrants cease to self-identify with the nationality or ethnicity of their ancestors. This means that successful cases of assimilation will be underestimated. Research shows that ethnic attrition is sizable in Hispanic and Asian immigrant groups in the United States. By taking account of ethnic attrition, the assimilation rate of Hispanics in the United States improves significantly. A 2016 paper challenges the view that cultural differences are necessarily an obstacle to long-run economic performance of migrants. It finds that "first generation migrants seem to be less likely to success the more culturally distant they are, but this effect vanishes as time spent in the US increases." A 2018 study found that Chinese nationals in the United States who received permanent residency permits from the US government amid the Tiananmen Square protests (and subsequent Chinese government clampdown) experienced significant employment and earnings gains relative to similar immigrant groups who did not have the same residency rights. During the Age of Mass Migration, infant arrivals to the United States had greater economic success over their lifetime than teenage arrivals. A 2015 report by the National Institute of Demographic Studies finds that an overwhelming majority of second-generation immigrants of all origins in France feel French, despite the persistent discrimination in education, housing and employment that many of the minorities face. Research shows that country of origin matters for speed and depth of immigrant assimilation but that there is considerable assimilation overall. Research finds that first generation immigrants from countries with less egalitarian gender cultures adopt gender values more similar to natives over time. According to one study, "this acculturation process is almost completed within one generational succession: The gender attitudes of second generation immigrants are difficult to distinguish from the attitudes of members of mainstream society. This holds also for children born to immigrants from very gender traditional cultures and for children born to less well integrated immigrant families." Similar results are found on a study of Turkish migrants to Western Europe. The assimilation on gender attitudes has been observed in education, as one study finds "that the female advantage in education observed among the majority population is usually present among second-generation immigrants." A 2017 study of Switzerland found that naturalization strongly improves long-term social integration of immigrants: "The integration returns to naturalization are larger for more marginalized immigrant groups and when naturalization occurs earlier, rather than later in the residency period." A separate study of Switzerland found that naturalization improved the economic integration of immigrants: "winning Swiss citizenship in the referendum increased annual earnings by an average of approximately 5,000 U.S. dollars over the subsequent 15 years. This effect is concentrated among more marginalized immigrants." First-generation immigrants tend to hold less accepting views of homosexuality but opposition weakens with longer stays. Second-generation immigrants are overall more accepting of homosexuality, but the acculturation effect is weaker for Muslims and to some extent, Eastern Orthodox migrants. A study of Bangladeshi migrants in East London found they shifted towards the thinking styles of the wider non-migrant population in just a single generation. A study on Germany found that foreign-born parents are more likely to integrate if their children are entitled to German citizenship at birth. A 2017 study found that "faster access to citizenship improves the economic situation of immigrant women, especially their labour market attachment with higher employment rates, longer working hours and more stable jobs. Immigrants also invest more in host country-specific skills like language and vocational training. Faster access to citizenship seems a powerful policy instrument to boost economic integration in countries with traditionally restrictive citizenship policies." Naturalization is associated with large and persistent wage gains for the naturalized citizens in most countries. One study of Denmark found that providing immigrants with voting rights reduced their crime rate. Studies on programs that randomly allocate refugee immigrants across municipalities find that the assignment of neighborhood impacts immigrant crime propensity, education and earnings. A 2019 study found that refugees who resettled in areas with many conationals were more likely to be economically integrated. Research suggests that bilingual schooling reduces barriers between speakers from two different communities. Research suggests that a vicious cycle of bigotry and isolation could reduce assimilation and increase bigotry towards immigrants in the long-term. For instance, University of California, San Diego political scientist Claire Adida, Stanford University political scientist David Laitin and Sorbonne University economist Marie-Anne Valfort argue "fear-based policies that target groups of people according to their religion or region of origin are counter-productive. Our own research, which explains the failed integration of Muslim immigrants in France, suggests that such policies can feed into a vicious cycle that damages national security. French Islamophobia—a response to cultural difference—has encouraged Muslim immigrants to withdraw from French society, which then feeds back into French Islamophobia, thus further exacerbating Muslims' alienation, and so on. Indeed, the failure of French security in 2015 was likely due to police tactics that intimidated rather than welcomed the children of immigrants—an approach that makes it hard to obtain crucial information from community members about potential threats." A study which examined Catalan nationalism examined the Catalan Government's policy towards the integration of immigrants during the start of the 1990s. At this time the Spanish region of Catalonia was experiencing a large influx in the number of immigrants from Northern Africa, Latin America and Asia. The Spanish government paid little attention to this influx of immigrants. However, Catalan politicians began discussing how the increase in immigrants would effect Catalan identity. Members of the Catalan parliament petitioned for a plan to integrate these immigrants into Catalan society. Crucially, the plan did not include policies regarding naturalisation, which were key immigration policies of the Spanish government. The plan of the Catalan parliament aimed to create a shared Catalan identity which included both the native Catalan population and immigrant communities. This meant that immigrants were encouraged to relate as part of the Catalan community but also encouraged to retain their own culture and traditions. In this way assimilation of immigrant cultures in Catalonia was avoided. A 2018 study in the British Journal of Political Science found that immigrants in Norway became more politically engaged the earlier that they were given voting rights. A 2019 study in the European Economic Review found that language training improved the economic assimilation of immigrants in France. A 2020 study using data from large-scale comparative surveys in Germany, France, and United Kingdom found that sampled households with a language barrier tend to have poor living conditions and are migrants. Inferences about their demographic, attitudinal, or behavioral traits cannot be made because the ability to speak the official language(s) of the country is one of the criteria for survey participation. A 2020 paper on reforms of refugee policy in Denmark found that language training boosted the economic and social integration of refugees, whereas cuts to refugees' welfare benefits had no impact, except to temporarily increase property crimes. Research suggests that police practices, such as racial profiling, over-policing in areas populated by minorities and in-group bias may result in disproportionately high numbers of racial minorities among crime suspects in Sweden, Italy, and England and Wales. Research also suggests that there may be possible discrimination by the judicial system, which contributes to a higher number of convictions for racial minorities in Sweden, the Netherlands, Italy, Germany, Denmark and France. A 2018 study found that the Dutch are less likely to reciprocate in games played with immigrants than the native Dutch. Several meta-analyses find extensive evidence of ethnic and racial discrimination in hiring in the North-American and European labor markets. A 2016 meta-analysis of 738 correspondence tests in 43 separate studies conducted in OECD countries between 1990 and 2015 finds that there is extensive racial discrimination in hiring decisions in Europe and North-America. Equivalent minority candidates need to send around 50% more applications to be invited for an interview than majority candidates. A 2014 meta-analysis found extensive evidence of racial and ethnic discrimination in the housing market of several European countries. Since 2010, the United Kingdom's policies surrounding immigrant detention have come under fire for insufficiently protecting vulnerable groups. In the early 2000s, the United Kingdom adopted the Detention Duty Advice (DDA) scheme in order to provide free, government-funded, legal aid to immigrants. The DDA scheme at face value granted liberty on administrative grounds by considering immigrant merits, nature of their work, their financial means, and other factors that would then determine how much free legal aid detainees were granted. Recent research by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), demonstrates that marginalized groups have been barred from legal assistance in detention centers. The barriers immigrants face in order to access justice through the DDA disproportionately impacted underrepresented groups of immigrants, and the language barrier and lack of interpreters led to further hurdles that detainees were unable to jump through. In Canada immigrant detainees face barriers to justice due to a lack of international enforcement. Canada's immigration detention system has significant legal and normative problems, and the rubric of ‘access to justice’ that is presented by international law fails to identify these faults. There is a lack of access to legal aid for immigrants in detention, as well as inhumane treatment in detention centers. Research has demonstrated irreparable psychological, physical, and social damage to immigrants, and the international community ignores these injustices. A 2014 meta-analysis of racial discrimination in product markets found extensive evidence of minority applicants being quoted higher prices for products. A 1995 study found that car dealers "quoted significantly lower prices to white males than to black or female test buyers using identical, scripted bargaining strategies." A 2013 study found that eBay sellers of iPods received 21 percent more offers if a white hand held the iPod in the photo than a black hand. Research suggests that police practices, such as racial profiling, over-policing in areas populated by minorities and in-group bias may result in disproportionately high numbers of racial minorities among crime suspects. Research also suggests that there may be possible discrimination by the judicial system, which contributes to a higher number of convictions for racial minorities. A 2012 study found that "(i) juries formed from all-white jury pools convict black defendants significantly (16 percentage points) more often than white defendants, and (ii) this gap in conviction rates is entirely eliminated when the jury pool includes at least one black member." Research has found evidence of in-group bias, where "black (white) juveniles who are randomly assigned to black (white) judges are more likely to get incarcerated (as opposed to being placed on probation), and they receive longer sentences." In-group bias has also been observed when it comes to traffic citations, as black and white cops are more likely to cite out-groups. A 2015 study using correspondence tests "found that when considering requests from prospective students seeking mentoring in the future, faculty were significantly more responsive to White males than to all other categories of students, collectively, particularly in higher-paying disciplines and private institutions." According to an analysis of the National Study of College Experience, elite colleges may favor minority applicants due to affirmative action policies. A 2018 National Bureau of Economic Research paper found that math teachers discriminate against the children of immigrants. When the teachers were informed about negative stereotypes towards the children of immigrants, they gave higher grades to the children of immigrants. As of 2020, 2 percent of all students enrolled in U.S. higher education. That comes out to about 454,000 students. Fewer than half of the undocumented are eligible for the DACA program. DACA is formally known as Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals. A 2014 meta-analysis found extensive evidence of racial discrimination in the American housing market. Minority applicants for housing needed to make many more enquiries to view properties. Geographical steering of African-Americans in US housing remained significant. A 2003 study finds "evidence that agents interpret an initial housing request as an indication of a customer's preferences, but also are more likely to withhold a house from all customers when it is in an integrated suburban neighborhood (redlining). Moreover, agents' marketing efforts increase with asking price for white, but not for black, customers; blacks are more likely than whites to see houses in suburban, integrated areas (steering); and the houses agents show are more likely to deviate from the initial request when the customer is black than when the customer is white. These three findings are consistent with the possibility that agents act upon the belief that some types of transactions are relatively unlikely for black customers (statistical discrimination)." A report by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development where the department sent African-Americans and whites to look at apartments found that African-Americans were shown fewer apartments to rent and houses for sale. Several meta-analyses find extensive evidence of ethnic and racial discrimination in hiring in the American labor market. A 2016 meta-analysis of 738 correspondence tests—tests where identical CVs for stereotypically black and white names were sent to employers—in 43 separate studies conducted in OECD countries between 1990 and 2015 finds that there is extensive racial discrimination in hiring decisions in Europe and North-America. These correspondence tests showed that equivalent minority candidates need to send around 50% more applications to be invited for an interview than majority candidates. A study that examine the job applications of actual people provided with identical résumés and similar interview training showed that African-American applicants with no criminal record were offered jobs at a rate as low as white applicants who had criminal records. Iranian companies faced a mass exodus of youth and skilled labor out of the country in recent years. In June 2023 Iranian parliament illegalized immigration ads online. Criticism of multiculturalism Immigration law Immigration reform List of sovereign states by net migration rate List of countries and dependencies by population density Multiculturalism Opposition to immigration People smuggling Repatriation Replacement migration Non-citizen suffrage White genocide conspiracy theory Women migrant workers from developing countries Xenophobia "immigration". OxfordDictionaries.com. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "immigrate". Merriam-Webster.com. Merriam-Webster, In. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Who's who: Definitions". London, England: Refugee Council. 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2015. "International Migration Law No. 34 - Glossary on Migration". International Organization for Migration. 19 June 2019. ISSN 1813-2278. Koczan, Zsoka; Peri, Giovanni; Pinat, Magali; Rozhkov, Dmitriy (2021), "Migration", in Valerie Cerra; Barry Eichengreen; Asmaa El-Ganainy; Martin Schindler (eds.), How to Achieve Inclusive Growth, Oxford University Press, doi:10.1093/oso/9780192846938.003.0009, ISBN 978-0-19-284693-8 di Giovanni, Julian; Levchenko, Andrei A.; Ortega, Francesc (1 February 2015). "A Global View of Cross-Border Migration" (PDF). Journal of the European Economic Association. 13 (1): 168–202. doi:10.1111/jeea.12110. hdl:10230/22196. ISSN 1542-4774. S2CID 3465938. Andreas, Willenbockel, Dirk; Sia, Go, Delfin; Amer, Ahmed, S. (11 April 2016). "Global migration revisited: short-term pains, long-term gains, and the potential of south-south migration". The World Bank.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Card, David; Dustmann, Christian; Preston, Ian (1 February 2012). "Immigration, Wages, and Compositional Amenities" (PDF). Journal of the European Economic Association. 10 (1): 78–119. doi:10.1111/j.1542-4774.2011.01051.x. ISSN 1542-4774. S2CID 154303869. Bodvarsson, Örn B; Van den Berg, Hendrik (2013). The economics of immigration: theory and policy. New York; Heidelberg [u.a.]: Springer. p. 157. ISBN 978-1461421153. OCLC 852632755. "Migration Within Europe | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 7 December 2016. "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 19 September 2015. "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 19 September 2015. Iregui, Ana Maria (1 January 2003). "Efficiency Gains from the Elimination of Global Restrictions on Labour Mobility: An Analysis using a Multiregional CGE Model". Wider Working Paper Series. Clemens, Michael A (1 August 2011). "Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 25 (3): 83–106. doi:10.1257/jep.25.3.83. ISSN 0895-3309. S2CID 59507836. Hamilton, B.; Whalley, J. (1 February 1984). "Efficiency and distributional implications of global restrictions on labour mobility: calculations and policy implications". Journal of Development Economics. 14 (1–2): 61–75. doi:10.1016/0304-3878(84)90043-9. ISSN 0304-3878. PMID 12266702. Dustmann, Christian; Preston, Ian P. (2 August 2019). "Free Movement, Open Borders, and the Global Gains from Labor Mobility". Annual Review of Economics. 11 (1): 783–808. doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-080218-025843. ISSN 1941-1383. Milanovic, Branko (7 January 2014). "Global Inequality of Opportunity: How Much of Our Income Is Determined by Where We Live?". Review of Economics and Statistics. 97 (2): 452–460. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00432. hdl:10986/21484. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 11046799. Mishra, Prachi (2014). "Emigration and wages in source countries: A survey of the empirical literature". International Handbook on Migration and Economic Development. Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 241–266. doi:10.4337/9781782548072.00013. ISBN 978-1782548072. S2CID 143429722. Clemens, Michael A.; Pritchett, Lant (2019). "The New Economic Case for Migration Restrictions: An Assessment". Journal of Development Economics. 138 (9730): 153–164. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2018.12.003. S2CID 204418677. Pritchett, Lant; Hani, Farah (30 July 2020). The Economics of International Wage Differentials and Migration. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190625979.013.353. ISBN 978-0190625979. Retrieved 11 August 2020. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) Peri, Giovanni. "Can Immigration Solve the Demographic Dilemma?". www.imf.org. IMF. Retrieved 16 July 2020. Harvey, Fiona (15 July 2020). "World population in 2100 could be 2 billion below UN forecasts, study suggests". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 16 July 2020. The Integration of Immigrants into American Society. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015. doi:10.17226/21746. ISBN 978-0-309-37398-2. Americans have long believed that immigrants are more likely than natives to commit crimes and that rising immigration leads to rising crime... This belief is remarkably resilient to the contrary evidence that immigrants are in fact much less likely than natives to commit crimes. Lee, Matthew T.; Martinez Jr., Ramiro (2009). "Immigration reduces crime: an emerging scholarly consensus". Immigration, Crime and Justice. Emerald Group Publishing. pp. 3–16. ISBN 978-1848554382. Villarreal, Andrés; Tamborini, Christopher R. (2018). "Immigrants' Economic Assimilation: Evidence from Longitudinal Earnings Records". American Sociological Review. 83 (4): 686–715. doi:10.1177/0003122418780366. PMC 6290669. PMID 30555169. Blau, Francine D. (2015). "Immigrants and Gender Roles: Assimilation vs. Culture" (PDF). IZA Journal of Migration. 4 (1): 1–21. doi:10.1186/s40176-015-0048-5. S2CID 53414354. Retrieved 13 October 2018. Zschirnt, Eva; Ruedin, Didier (27 May 2016). "Ethnic discrimination in hiring decisions: a meta-analysis of correspondence tests 1990–2015". Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. 42 (7): 1115–1134. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2015.1133279. hdl:10419/142176. ISSN 1369-183X. S2CID 10261744. Rich, Judy (October 2014). "What Do Field Experiments of Discrimination in Markets Tell Us? A Meta Analysis of Studies Conducted since 2000". IZA Discussion Papers (8584). SSRN 2517887. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Rehavi, M. Marit; Starr, Sonja B. (2014). "Racial Disparity in Federal Criminal Sentences". Journal of Political Economy. 122 (6): 1320–1354. doi:10.1086/677255. ISSN 0022-3808. S2CID 3348344. Enos, Ryan D. (1 January 2016). "What the Demolition of Public Housing Teaches Us about the Impact of Racial Threat on Political Behavior". American Journal of Political Science. 60 (1): 123–142. doi:10.1111/ajps.12156. S2CID 51895998. "outmigrant". OxfordDictionaries.com. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "United Nations Population Division | Department of Economic and Social Affairs". www.un.org. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Trends in international migration, 2015" (PDF). UN.org. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. December 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2016. "150 Million Adults Worldwide Would Migrate to the U.S". Gallup.com. 20 April 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2014. Pending Cases, New Cases and Total Completions, Executive Office For Immigration Review, Adjuction Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice Bilefsky, Dan (5 June 2009). "Crisis Strands Vietnamese Workers in a Czech Limbo". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "White ethnic Britons in minority in London". Financial Times. 11 December 2012. Graeme Paton (1 October 2007). "One fifth of children from ethnic minorities". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 7 June 2008. See the NIDI/Eurostat "push and pull study" for details and examples: [1] Archived 9 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine York, Harlan (4 July 2015). "How Many People are Immigrants?". Harlan York and Associates. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. Retrieved 30 July 2015. Boustan, Adain May (15 January 2009). Fertility and Immigration. UCLA. Cattaneo, Cristina; Peri, Giovanni (2016). "The Migration Response to Increasing Temperatures" (PDF). Journal of Development Economics. 122 (C): 127–146. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2016.05.004. hdl:10419/130264. Chiswick, Barry (March 2000). "The Earnings of Male Hispanic Immigrants in the United States". Social Science Research Network (Working paper). University of Illinois at Chicago Institute for the Study of Labor. SSRN 224241. Borjas, George J. (1 April 1982). "The Earnings of Male Hispanic Immigrants in the United States". Industrial & Labor Relations Review. 35 (3): 343–353. doi:10.1177/001979398203500304. ISSN 0019-7939. S2CID 36445207. Rubin, Mark (July 2013). ""It Wasn't My Idea to Come Here!": Young Women Lack Ownership of the Idea to Immigrate – Mark Rubin's Social Psychology Research". International Journal of Intercultural Relations. 37 (4): 497–501. doi:10.1016/j.ijintrel.2013.02.001. ISSN 0147-1767. Retrieved 3 October 2018. Haskell, Leslie (18 September 2014). "EU asylum and war criminals: No place to hide". EUobserver.com. EUobserver. Retrieved 13 May 2016. Knight, Ben (11 April 2016). "Refugees in Germany reporting dozens of war crimes". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 13 May 2016. Porter, Tom (26 February 2016). "Sweden: Syrian asylum seeker suspected of war crimes under Assad regime arrested in Stockholm". International Business Times. Retrieved 13 May 2016. May, Julia. "Lack of network hurting migrant workers". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 2 January 2017. Nunez, Christina (12 December 2014). "The 7 biggest challenges facing refugees and immigrants in the US". Global Citizen. Global Poverty Project. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Charles Rodriguez, U.; Venegas de la Torre, M. D. L. P.; Hecker, V.; Laing, R. A.; Larouche, R. (2022). "The Relationship Between Nature and Immigrants' Integration, Wellbeing and Physical Activity: A Scoping Review". Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health. 25 (1): 190–218. doi:10.1007/s10903-022-01339-3. PMID 35201532. S2CID 247060104. Djajić, Slobodan (1 September 2013). "Barriers to immigration and the dynamics of emigration". Journal of Macroeconomics. 37: 41–52. doi:10.1016/j.jmacro.2013.06.001. Anita Böcker (1998) Regulation of migration: international experiences. Het Spinhuis. p. 218. ISBN 90-5589-095-2 "Migration, refugees, Europe – waves of emotion". Euranet Plus inside. Euranet Plus Network. 7 May 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Nowicki, Dan. "Europe learns integration can become emotional". AZCentral.com. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Tamura, Yuji (29 July 2010). "Do Employers Support Immigration?". Trinity Economics Papers (1107). doi:10.2139/ssrn.1021941. ISSN 1556-5068. S2CID 55485879. Retrieved 29 October 2018. Facchini, G.; Steinhardt, M. F. (2011). "What drives U.S. Immigration policy? Evidence from congressional roll call votes". Journal of Public Economics. 95 (7–8): 734. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.585.3903. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.02.008. S2CID 6940099. Bernstein, Nina (16 March 2006). "An Irish Face on the Cause of Citizenship". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 May 2016. National Council of La Raza. "Action on Immigration Reform". National Council of La Raza. Archived from the original on 13 April 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2018. Migrant crisis: Russia and Syria 'weaponising' migration, BBC, 2016 Remittance Prices Worldwide MAKING MARKETS MORE TRANSPARENT (28 April 2014). "Remittance Prices Worldwide". Remittanceprices.worldbank.org. Retrieved 14 May 2014. Lindley, Anna (5 April 2022). "'Hit and Miss'? Access to Legal Assistance in Immigration Detention". Journal of Human Rights Practice. 13 (3): 629–653. doi:10.1093/jhuman/huab045. ISSN 1757-9627. "Amnesty International State of the World 2015–2016". AmnestyUSA.org. Amnesty International USA. 23 February 2016. Retrieved 11 May 2016. Truong, Thanh-Dam; Gasper, Des (2011). Transnational Migration and Human Security: The Migration-Development-Security Nexus. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-3642127571. "International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families". Treaties.UN.org. New York: United Nations. 18 December 1990. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights". UN.org. Paris: United Nations. 10 December 1948. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights". OHCHR.org. Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 16 December 1966. Retrieved 11 May 2016. Hayter, Theresa (2000). Open Borders: The Case Against Immigration Controls. London: Pluto Press. "Anarchism and Immigration". theanarchistlibrary. 1 January 2005. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. Griswold, Dan (2008). "Immigration". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.). Nozick, Robert (1938–2002). The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Cato Institute. pp. 235–257. doi:10.4135/9781412965811.n220. ISBN 978-1412965804. LCCN 2008009151. OCLC 750831024. McKay, Ramah (1 May 2003). "Family Reunification". migrationpolicy.org. Migration Policy Institute. Krotz, Larry (12 September 2012). "Poaching Foreign Doctors". The Walrus. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Stilwell, Barbara; Diallo, Khassoum; Zurn, Pascal; Vujicic, Marko; Adams, Orvill; Dal Poz, Mario (2004). "Migration of health-care workers from developing countries: strategic approaches to its management" (PDF). Bulletin of the World Health Organization (82): 595–600. Retrieved 16 May 2016. Shrestha, Slesh A. (1 April 2016). "No Man Left Behind: Effects of Emigration Prospects on Educational and Labour Outcomes of Non-migrants". The Economic Journal. 127 (600): 495–521. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12306. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 154362034. Beine, Michel; Docquier, Fréderic; Rapoport, Hillel (1 April 2008). "Brain Drain and Human Capital Formation in Developing Countries: Winners and Losers" (PDF). The Economic Journal. 118 (528): 631–652. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2008.02135.x. hdl:2078.1/5768. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 28988486. Dinkelman, Taryn; Mariotti, Martine (2016). "The Long Run Effects of Labor Migration on Human Capital Formation in Communities of Origin" (PDF). American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 8 (4): 1–35. doi:10.1257/app.20150405. S2CID 5140105. Batista, Catia; Lacuesta, Aitor; Vicente, Pedro C. (1 January 2012). "Testing the 'brain gain' hypothesis: Micro evidence from Cape Verde". Journal of Development Economics. 97 (1): 32–45. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2011.01.005. hdl:10419/44193. S2CID 4489444. Bodvarsson, Örn B; Van den Berg, Hendrik (2013). The economics of immigration: theory and policy. New York; Heidelberg [u.a.]: Springer. p. 157. ISBN 978-1461421153. OCLC 852632755. Bahar, Dany; Hauptmann, Andreas; Özgüzel, Cem; Rapoport, Hillel (2022). "Migration and Knowledge Diffusion: The Effect of Returning Refugees on Export Performance in the Former Yugoslavia". The Review of Economics and Statistics: 1–50. doi:10.1162/rest_a_01165. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 246564474. Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P.; Peri, Giovanni (1 January 2006). "The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence from US cities" (PDF). Journal of Economic Geography. 6 (1): 9–44. doi:10.1093/jeg/lbi002. ISSN 1468-2702. Peri, Giovanni (7 October 2010). "The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence From U.S. States" (PDF). Review of Economics and Statistics. 94 (1): 348–358. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00137. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 17957545. Mitaritonna, Cristina; Orefice, Gianluca; Peri, Giovanni (2017). "Immigrants and Firms' Outcomes: Evidence from France" (PDF). European Economic Review. 96: 62–82. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2017.05.001. S2CID 157561906. Razin, Assaf (February 2018). Israel's Immigration Story: Winners and Losers. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w24283. Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P.; Perie, Giovanni; Wright, Greg C. (2018). "Immigration, Trade and Productivity in Services: Evidence from U.K. Firms" (PDF). Journal of International Economics. 112: 88–108. doi:10.1016/j.jinteco.2018.02.007. S2CID 153400835. Alesina, Alberto; Harnoss, Johann; Rapoport, Hillel (17 February 2016). "Birthplace diversity and economic prosperity". Journal of Economic Growth (Submitted manuscript). 21 (2): 101–138. doi:10.1007/s10887-016-9127-6. ISSN 1381-4338. S2CID 34712861. "Multiculturalism and Growth: Skill-Specific Evidence from the Post-World War II Period" (PDF). Bove, Vincenzo; Elia, Leandro (1 January 2017). "Migration, Diversity, and Economic Growth". World Development. 89: 227–239. doi:10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.08.012. Bove, Vincenzo; Elia, Leandro (16 November 2016). "Cultural heterogeneity and economic development". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 16 November 2016. Boubtane, Ekrame; Dumont, Jean-Christophe; Rault, Christophe (1 April 2016). "Immigration and economic growth in the OECD countries 1986–2006" (PDF). Oxford Economic Papers. 68 (2): 340–360. doi:10.1093/oep/gpw001. ISSN 0030-7653. S2CID 208009990. Qian, Nancy; Nunn, Nathan; Sequeira, Sandra (2019). "Immigrants and the Making of America". The Review of Economic Studies. 87: 382–419. doi:10.1093/restud/rdz003. S2CID 53597318. SÁNCHEZ-ALONSO, BLANCA (11 November 2018). "The age of mass migration in Latin America". The Economic History Review. 72: 3–31. doi:10.1111/ehr.12787. hdl:10637/11782. ISSN 0013-0117. S2CID 158530812. "One Sure Way to Hurt the U.S. Economy? Cut Immigration". Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Ager, Philipp; Hansen, Casper Worm (8 November 2016). "National Immigration Quotas and Local Economic Growth". SSRN 2866411. Borderless Welfare State, The Consequences of Immigration for Public Finances, Jan H. van de Beek, Hans, Roodenburg, Joop Hartog, Gerri W. Kreffer, 2023, Demo-Demo publisher, Zeist, Netherlands, ISBN 978908333482, Statistical data by Project Agreement 8290 Budgetary consequences of immigration in the Netherlands (University of Amsterdam and CBS Microdata Services, 19 June 2018) Kerr, Sari Pekkala; Kerr, William R. (2011). "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey" (PDF). Finnish Economic Papers. 24 (1): 1–32. Devlin, Ciaran; Bolt, Olivia; Patel, Dhiren; Harding, David; Hussain, Ishtiaq (March 2014). "Impacts of migration on UK native employment: An analytical review of the evidence" (PDF). The Home Office. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2024. Retrieved 12 January 2024. Card, David (1 April 2009). "Immigration and Inequality". American Economic Review. 99 (2): 1–21. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.412.9244. doi:10.1257/aer.99.2.1. ISSN 0002-8282. S2CID 154716407. ...the presence of immigration can account for a relatively small share (4–6 percent) of the rise in overall wage inequality over the past 25 years Green, Alan G.; Green, David A. (1 June 2016). "Immigration and the Canadian Earnings Distribution in the First Half of the Twentieth Century". The Journal of Economic History. 76 (2): 387–426. doi:10.1017/S0022050716000541. ISSN 1471-6372. S2CID 156620314. Xu, Ping; Garand, James C.; Zhu, Ling (23 September 2015). "Imported Inequality? Immigration and Income Inequality in the American States". State Politics & Policy Quarterly (Submitted manuscript). 16 (2): 147–171. doi:10.1177/1532440015603814. ISSN 1532-4400. S2CID 155197472. Glen Weyl, E. (17 January 2018). "The Openness-equality Trade-off in Global Redistribution". The Economic Journal. 128 (612): F1–F36. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12469. ISSN 0013-0133. S2CID 51027330. Jiří, Mazurek. "On some issues concerning definition of an economic recession." (2012). Card, David (1990). "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market" (PDF). Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 43 (2): 245–257. doi:10.1177/001979399004300205. S2CID 15116852 – via JSTOR. Banerjee, Abhijit; Duflo, Esther (2019). Good Economics for Hard Times. London: Penguin. Borjas, George J. (2017). "The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal". ILR Review. 70 (5): 1077–1110. doi:10.1177/0019793917692945. ISSN 0019-7939. JSTOR 26944704. Dustmann, C; Schonberg, U; Stuhler, J (2017). "Labor Supply Shocks, Native Wages, and the Adjustment of Local Employment'". The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 132 (1): 435–483. doi:10.1093/qje/qjw032. Walmsley, Terrie L.; Winters, L. Alan (1 January 2005). "Relaxing the Restrictions on the Temporary Movement of Natural Persons: A Simulation Analysis". Journal of Economic Integration. 20 (4): 688–726. doi:10.11130/jei.2005.20.4.688. JSTOR 23000667. Clemens, Michael A.; Montenegro, Claudio; Pritchett, Lant (2 November 2018). "The Place Premium: Bounding the Price Equivalent of Migration Barriers". The Review of Economics and Statistics. 101 (2): 201–213. doi:10.1162/rest_a_00776. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 109938634. Borjas, G. J. (2015). "Immigration and Globalization: A Review Essay". Journal of Economic Literature. 53 (4): 965. doi:10.1257/jel.53.4.961. Bradford, Scott (2021). "A global model of migration and poverty". The World Economy. 44 (4): 1018–1030. doi:10.1111/twec.13051. ISSN 1467-9701. S2CID 225163119. Aner, Emilie; Graneli, Anna; Lodefolk, Magnus (14 October 2015). "Cross-border movement of persons stimulates trade". VoxEU.org. Centre for Economic Policy Research. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Bratti, Massimiliano; Benedictis, Luca De; Santoni, Gianluca (18 April 2014). "On the pro-trade effects of immigrants" (PDF). Review of World Economics. 150 (3): 557–594. doi:10.1007/s10290-014-0191-8. hdl:11393/195448. ISSN 1610-2878. S2CID 4981719. Foley, C. Fritz; Kerr, William R. (2013). "Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm Activity". Management Science. 59 (7): 1529–1544. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.361.36. doi:10.1287/mnsc.1120.1684. S2CID 7275466. Dunlevy, James A.; Hutchinson, William K. (December 1999). "The Impact of Immigration on American Import Trade in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries". The Journal of Economic History. 59 (4): 1043–1062. doi:10.1017/S002205070002413X. ISSN 1471-6372. S2CID 154985080. Parsons, Christopher; Vézina, Pierre-Louis (2018). "Migrant Networks and Trade: The Vietnamese Boat People as a Natural Experiment" (PDF). The Economic Journal. 128 (612): F210–F234. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12457. hdl:10419/145246. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 154442776. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Kugler, Maurice; Levintal, Oren; Rapoport, Hillel (2017). "Migration and Cross-Border Financial Flows" (PDF). The World Bank Economic Review. 32: 148–162. doi:10.1093/wber/lhx007. hdl:10419/90017. Egger, Peter H.; Erhardt, Katharina; Lassmann, Andrea (2018). "Immigration and Firms' Integration in International Production Networks". European Economic Review. 111: 1–34. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2018.08.009. hdl:20.500.11850/293259. ISSN 0014-2921. S2CID 158560371. "How Do Migration and Remittances Affect Inequality? A Case Study of Mexico". IMF. Retrieved 18 August 2018. Milanovic, Branko (20 April 2016). "There is a trade-off between citizenship and migration". Financial Times. ISSN 0307-1766. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2016. McKenzie, David; Stillman, Steven; Gibson, John (1 June 2010). "How Important is Selection? Experimental VS. Non-Experimental Measures of the Income Gains from Migration" (PDF). Journal of the European Economic Association. 8 (4): 913–945. doi:10.1111/j.1542-4774.2010.tb00544.x. hdl:10289/1638. ISSN 1542-4774. S2CID 14629302. Gibson, John; Mckenzie, David J.; Rohorua, Halahingano; Stillman, Steven (2017). "The long-term impacts of international migration: evidence from a lottery". The World Bank Economic Review. 32: 127–147. doi:10.1093/wber/lhx003. hdl:10986/32168. Gove, Michael (18 April 2017). "Migration as Development: Household Survey Evidence on Migrants' Wage Gains". Social Indicators Research. 137 (3): 1033–1060. doi:10.1007/s11205-017-1630-4. ISSN 0303-8300. S2CID 157541486. Ruhs, Martin (1 February 2017). "The Impact of Acquiring EU Status on the Earnings of East European Migrants in the UK: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment". British Journal of Industrial Relations. 55 (4): 716–750. doi:10.1111/bjir.12223. ISSN 1467-8543. S2CID 157615154. Hendricks, Lutz; Schoellman, Todd (2017). "Human Capital and Development Accounting: New Evidence from Wage Gains at Migration". The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 133 (2): 665–700. doi:10.1093/qje/qjx047. S2CID 157828205. "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 19 September 2015. "Poll Results | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 19 September 2015. Longhi, Simonetta; Nijkamp, Peter; Poot, Jacques (1 October 2010). "Meta-Analyses of Labour-Market Impacts of Immigration: Key Conclusions and Policy Implications". Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy. 28 (5): 819–833. Bibcode:2010EnPlC..28..819L. doi:10.1068/c09151r. ISSN 0263-774X. S2CID 154749568. Okkerse, Liesbet (1 February 2008). "How to Measure Labour Market Effects of Immigration: A Review". Journal of Economic Surveys. 22 (1): 1–30. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6419.2007.00533.x. ISSN 1467-6419. S2CID 55145701. Battisti, Michele; Felbermayr, Gabriel; Peri, Giovanni; Poutvaara, Panu (1 May 2014). Immigration, Search, and Redistribution: A Quantitative Assessment of Native Welfare. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w20131. Dustmann, Christian; Glitz, Albrecht; Frattini, Tommaso (21 September 2008). "The labour market impact of immigration". Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 24 (3): 477–494. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.521.9523. doi:10.1093/oxrep/grn024. ISSN 0266-903X. Immigration, Panel on the Economic and Fiscal Consequences of; Statistics, Committee on National; Education, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and; Sciences, National Academies of; Engineering; Medicine, and (2017). Blau, Francine D; MacKie, Christopher (eds.). The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration (PDF). doi:10.17226/23550. hdl:10919/83151. ISBN 978-0309444422. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Edo, Anthony (2018). "The Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market". Journal of Economic Surveys. 33 (3): 922–948. doi:10.1111/joes.12300. ISSN 1467-6419. S2CID 158532621. Pia m. Orrenius, P. M.; Zavodny, M. (2009). "Do Immigrants Work in Riskier Jobs?". Demography. 46 (3): 535–551. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.529.311. doi:10.1353/dem.0.0064. PMC 2831347. PMID 19771943. Kerr, Sari Pekkala; Kerr, William; Özden, Çağlar; Parsons, Christopher (2017). "High-Skilled Migration and Agglomeration". Annual Review of Economics (Submitted manuscript). 9 (1): 201–234. doi:10.1146/annurev-economics-063016-103705. S2CID 157793269. Birrell, Bob (8 March 2016). "Australia's Skilled Migration Program: Scarce Skills Not Required" (PDF). The Australian Population Research Institute. Monash University. Retrieved 15 June 2018. The great majority of those visaed in the skill program are professionals, an increasing share of whom hold occupations that are oversupplied. Bound, John; Khanna, Gaurav; Morales, Nicolas (19 May 2017). "Reservoir of foreign talent". Science. 356 (6339): 697. Bibcode:2017Sci...356..697B. doi:10.1126/science.aan2956. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 28522491. S2CID 206659473. Lin, Gary C. (18 June 2019). "High-skilled immigration and native task specialization in U.S. cities". Regional Science and Urban Economics. 77: 289–305. doi:10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2019.06.004. ISSN 0166-0462. S2CID 197794882. Beerli, Andreas; Ruffner, Jan; Siegenthaler, Michael; Peri, Giovanni (2021). "The Abolition of Immigration Restrictions and the Performance of Firms and Workers: Evidence from Switzerland". American Economic Review. 111 (3): 976–1012. doi:10.1257/aer.20181779. ISSN 0002-8282. S2CID 242370156. Olney, William W.; Pozzoli, Dario (21 August 2019). "The Impact of Immigration on Firm-Level Offshoring" (PDF). The Review of Economics and Statistics. 103: 177–195. doi:10.1162/rest_a_00861. hdl:10398/9656. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 13743885. Basso, Gaetano; Peri, Giovanni; Rahman, Ahmed (October 2017). Computerization and Immigration: Theory and Evidence from the United States. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w23935. Basso, Gaetano; Peri, Giovanni; Rahman, Ahmed (12 January 2018). "The impact of immigration on wage distributions in the era of technical automation". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Clemens, Michael A.; Lewis, Ethan G.; Postel, Hannah M. (2018). "Immigration Restrictions as Active Labor Market Policy: Evidence from the Mexican Bracero Exclusion". American Economic Review. 108 (6): 1468–1487. doi:10.1257/aer.20170765. hdl:10419/161135. ISSN 0002-8282. PMC 6040835. PMID 30008480. Abramitzky, Ran; Ager, Philipp; Boustan, Leah Platt; Cohen, Elior; Hansen, Casper W (2019). The Effects of Immigration on the Economy: Lessons from the 1920s Border Closure. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w26536. S2CID 208979065. Kerr, Sari Pekkala; Kerr, William R. (2011). "Economic Impacts of Immigration: A Survey" (PDF). Finnish Economic Papers. 24 (1): 1–32. "The Impact of Unauthorized Immigrants on the Budgets of State and Local Governments". 6 December 2007. Retrieved 28 June 2016. Clemens, Michael Andrew (2022). "The Economic and Fiscal Effects on the United States from Reduced Numbers of Refugees and Asylum Seekers". Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 38 (3): 449–486. doi:10.1093/oxrep/grac012. hdl:10419/263533. ISSN 1556-5068. d'Albis, Hippolyte; Boubtane, Ekrame; Coulibaly, Dramane (1 June 2018). "Macroeconomic evidence suggests that asylum seekers are not a "burden" for Western European countries". Science Advances. 4 (6): eaaq0883. Bibcode:2018SciA....4..883D. doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaq0883. ISSN 2375-2548. PMC 6010334. PMID 29938219. Maxmen, Amy (20 June 2018). "Migrants and refugees are good for economies". Nature. doi:10.1038/d41586-018-05507-0. ISSN 0028-0836. S2CID 169653469. Martinsen, Dorte Sindbjerg; Pons Rotger, Gabriel (5 July 2017). "The fiscal impact of EU immigration on the tax-financed welfare state: Testing the 'welfare burden' thesis" (PDF). European Union Politics. 18 (4): 1465116517717340. doi:10.1177/1465116517717340. ISSN 1465-1165. S2CID 157127175. "The Fiscal Impact of Immigration in the UK". Migration Observatory. Retrieved 6 July 2017. "The effects of EU migration on Britain in 5 charts: Did migrants really force down wages and are they a drain on the UK exchequer?". Financial Times. 18 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2018. Ruhs, Martin; Wadsworth, Jonathan (10 October 2017). "The Impact of Acquiring Unrestricted Work Authorization on Romanian and Bulgarian Migrants in the United Kingdom". ILR Review. 71 (4): 823–852. doi:10.1177/0019793917735100. ISSN 0019-7939. S2CID 158420236. "Immigration and Government Spending in OECD Countries". "Refugees in Germany | IGM Forum". www.igmchicago.org. Retrieved 25 July 2017. Foged, Mette; Peri, Giovanni (2016). "Immigrants' Effect on Native Workers: New Analysis on Longitudinal Data" (PDF). American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 8 (2): 1–34. doi:10.1257/app.20150114. hdl:10419/110686. S2CID 5245205. Taylor, J. Edward; Filipski, Mateusz J.; Alloush, Mohamad; Gupta, Anubhab; Valdes, Ruben Irvin Rojas; Gonzalez-Estrada, Ernesto (5 July 2016). "Economic impact of refugees". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 113 (27): 7449–7453. Bibcode:2016PNAS..113.7449T. doi:10.1073/pnas.1604566113. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 4941434. PMID 27325782. Fallah, Belal; Krafft, Caroline; Wahba, Jackline (1 June 2019). "The impact of refugees on employment and wages in Jordan" (PDF). Journal of Development Economics. 139: 203–216. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2019.03.009. ISSN 0304-3878. S2CID 159084500. Fakih, Ali; Ibrahim, May (2 January 2016). "The impact of Syrian refugees on the labor market in neighboring countries: empirical evidence from Jordan" (PDF). Defence and Peace Economics. 27 (1): 64–86. doi:10.1080/10242694.2015.1055936. hdl:10419/130351. ISSN 1024-2694. S2CID 1672742. Inan, Osman Kaan; Yang, Judy (28 January 2016). "What are the impacts of Syrian refugees on host community welfare in Turkey ? a subnational poverty analysis (English) | The World Bank". documents.worldbank.org: 1–38. Retrieved 15 February 2016. Tumen, Semih (1 May 2016). "The Economic Impact of Syrian Refugees on Host Countries: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Turkey". American Economic Review. 106 (5): 456–460. doi:10.1257/aer.p20161065. ISSN 0002-8282. S2CID 2938529. Clemens, Michael A.; Hunt, Jennifer (May 2017). The Labor Market Effects of Refugee Waves: Reconciling Conflicting Results. NBER Working Paper No. 23433 (Report). doi:10.3386/w23433. "What the Mariel Boatlift of Cuban Refugees Can Teach Us about the Economics of Immigration: An Explainer and a Revelation". Center For Global Development. Retrieved 22 May 2017. Card, David (1990). "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market". Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 43 (2): 245–257. doi:10.1177/001979399004300205. S2CID 15116852. Evans, William N.; Fitzgerald, Daniel (June 2017). The Economic and Social Outcomes of Refugees in the United States: Evidence from the ACS. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w23498. Azarnert, Leonid V. (2018). "Refugee resettlement, redistribution and growth" (PDF). European Journal of Political Economy. 54: 89–98. doi:10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2018.03.007. hdl:10419/162191. ISSN 0176-2680. S2CID 157461167. "The Real Economic Cost of Accepting Refugees". Center For Global Development. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Altındağ, Onur; Bakis, Ozan; Rozo, Sandra (2020). "Blessing or burden? Impacts of refugees on businesses and the informal economy". Journal of Development Economics. 146: 102490. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2020.102490. ISSN 0304-3878. S2CID 226191631. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Sengupta, Somini (18 September 2017). "Trump Administration Rejects Study Showing Positive Impact of Refugees". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 19 September 2017. Mayda, Anna Maria; Parsons, Chris; Peri, Giovanni; Wagner, Mathis (August 2017). "The Labor Market Impact of Refugees: Evidence from the U.S. Resettlement Program" (PDF). OCE Working Paper 2017-04. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 February 2019. Bevelander, Pieter; Malmö, University of (1 May 2016). "Integrating refugees into labor markets". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.269. Bauer, Thomas K.; Braun, Sebastian; Kvasnicka, Michael (1 September 2013). "The Economic Integration of Forced Migrants: Evidence for Post-War Germany". The Economic Journal. 123 (571): 998–1024. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12023. hdl:10419/61358. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 812620. Mäkelä, Erik (1 September 2017). "The effect of mass influx on labor markets: Portuguese 1974 evidence revisited". European Economic Review. 98: 240–263. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2017.06.016. S2CID 102491721. Murard, Elie; Sakalli, Seyhun Orcan (June 2018). "Mass Refugee Inflow and Long-Run Prosperity: Lessons from the Greek Population Resettlement". IZA Discussion Papers (11613). Retrieved 13 October 2018. Palivos, Theodore (4 June 2008). "Welfare effects of illegal immigration" (PDF). Journal of Population Economics. 22 (1): 131–144. doi:10.1007/s00148-007-0182-3. ISSN 0933-1433. S2CID 154625546. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Liu, Xiangbo (1 December 2010). "On the macroeconomic and welfare effects of illegal immigration" (PDF). Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control. 34 (12): 2547–2567. doi:10.1016/j.jedc.2010.06.030. Monras, Joan; Vázquez-Grenno, Javier; Elias, Ferran (15 May 2018). "Understanding the effects of legalising undocumented immigrants". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 16 May 2018. Chassamboulli, Andri; Peri, Giovanni (1 October 2015). "The labor market effects of reducing the number of illegal immigrants". Review of Economic Dynamics (Submitted manuscript). 18 (4): 792–821. doi:10.1016/j.red.2015.07.005. S2CID 16242107. "The Economic Effects of Granting Legal Status and Citizenship to Undocumented Immigrants" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2016. Edwards, Ryan; Ortega, Francesc (November 2016). The Economic Contribution of Unauthorized Workers: An Industry Analysis. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w22834. Chassamboulli, Andri; Peri, Giovanni (2018). The Economic Effect of Immigration Policies: Analyzing and Simulating the U.S. Case. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w25074. S2CID 240281198. Chiswick, Barry R. (September 1988). "Illegal Immigration and Immigration Control". Journal of Economic Perspectives. 2 (3): 101–115. doi:10.1257/jep.2.3.101. ISSN 0895-3309. Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina; Arenas-Arroyo, Esther; Sevilla, Almudena (2018). "Immigration enforcement and economic resources of children with likely unauthorized parents". Journal of Public Economics. 158: 63–78. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2017.12.004. S2CID 158175416. "Do Apprehensions of Undocumented Immigrants Reduce Crime and Create Jobs? Evidence from U.S. Districts, 2000–2015" (PDF). UC Davis Law Review. 2018. Charlton, Diane; Kostandini, Genti (2020). "Can Technology Compensate for a Labor Shortage? Effects of 287(g) Immigration Policies on the U.S. Dairy Industry". American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 103: 70–89. doi:10.1111/ajae.12125. ISSN 1467-8276. S2CID 225430289. Albert, Christoph (2021). "The Labor Market Impact of Immigration: Job Creation versus Job Competition". American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 13 (1): 35–78. doi:10.1257/mac.20190042. ISSN 1945-7707. S2CID 210054914. Clemens, Michael (15 January 2009). "The Place Premium: Wage Differences for Identical Workers Across the US Border". Harvard Kennedy School. Ratha, Dilip; Silwal (2012). "Remittance flows in 2011" (PDF). Migration and Development Brief –Migration and Remittances Unit, the World Bank. 18: 1–3. Adida, Claire L.; Girod, Desha M. (1 January 2011). "Do Migrants Improve Their Hometowns? Remittances and Access to Public Services in Mexico, 1995–2000". Comparative Political Studies. 44 (1): 3–27. doi:10.1177/0010414010381073. ISSN 0010-4140. S2CID 154767019. Grönberg, Per-Olof (2019). The Peregrine Profession: Transnational Mobility of Nordic Engineers and Architects, 1880–1930. Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-38520-7. Thorhallsson, Baldur (2018). Small States and Shelter Theory: Iceland's External Affairs. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-46316-7. Xu, Rui. "High-Skilled Migration and Global Innovation" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 January 2016. Clemens, Michael; Development, Center for Global; USA (2015). "Smart policy toward high-skill emigrants". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.203. Escribà-Folch, Abel; Wright, Joseph; Meseguer, Covadonga (2022). Migration and Democracy: How Remittances Undermine Dictatorships. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-22305-6. Docquier, Frédéric; Lodigiani, Elisabetta; Rapoport, Hillel; Schiff, Maurice (1 May 2016). "Emigration and democracy" (PDF). Journal of Development Economics. 120: 209–223. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2015.12.001. S2CID 15380816. Escribà-Folch, Abel; Meseguer, Covadonga; Wright, Joseph (1 September 2015). "Remittances and Democratization" (PDF). International Studies Quarterly. 59 (3): 571–586. doi:10.1111/isqu.12180. ISSN 1468-2478. S2CID 28432111.[permanent dead link] "Mounir Karadja". sites.google.com. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "Can emigration lead to political change in poor countries? It did in 19th century Sweden: Guest Post by Mounir Karadja". Impact Evaluations. December 2015. Retrieved 4 December 2015. Tuccio, Michele; Wahba, Jackline; Hamdouch, Bachir (1 January 2016). "International Migration: Driver of Political and Social Change?". IZA Discussion Papers (9794). Retrieved 13 October 2018. "Migration, Political Institutions, and Social Networks in Mozambique". Batista, Catia; Vicente, Pedro C. (1 January 2011). "Do Migrants Improve Governance at Home? Evidence from a Voting Experiment". The World Bank Economic Review. 25 (1): 77–104. doi:10.1093/wber/lhr009. hdl:10419/36182. ISSN 0258-6770. S2CID 1813461. Mahmoud, Omar; Toman; Rapoport, Hillel; Steinmayr, Andreas; Trebesch, Christoph (18 September 2013). "The Effect of Labor Migration on the Diffusion of Democracy: Evidence from a Former Soviet Republic". SSRN 2327441. Escribà-Folch, Abel; Meseguer, Covadonga; Wright, Joseph (18 August 2018). "Remittances and Protest in Dictatorships". American Journal of Political Science. 62 (4): 889–904. doi:10.1111/ajps.12382. ISSN 0092-5853. S2CID 158602666. Grewal, Sharan (2020). "From Islamists to Muslim Democrats: The Case of Tunisia's Ennahda". American Political Science Review. 114 (2): 519–535. doi:10.1017/S0003055419000819. ISSN 0003-0554. Regan, Patrick M.; Frank, Richard W. (1 November 2014). "Migrant remittances and the onset of civil war". Conflict Management and Peace Science. 31 (5): 502–520. doi:10.1177/0738894213520369. ISSN 0738-8942. S2CID 154500219. Dustmann, Christian; Frattini, Tommaso; Rosso, Anna (1 April 2015). "The Effect of Emigration from Poland on Polish Wages". The Scandinavian Journal of Economics (Submitted manuscript). 117 (2): 522–564. doi:10.1111/sjoe.12102. hdl:2434/271640. ISSN 1467-9442. S2CID 7253614. Elsner, Benjamin (1 September 2013). "Emigration and wages: The EU enlargement experiment" (PDF). Journal of International Economics. 91 (1): 154–163. doi:10.1016/j.jinteco.2013.06.002. hdl:10419/48716. Elsner, Benjamin (10 November 2012). "Does emigration benefit the stayers? Evidence from EU enlargement". Journal of Population Economics. 26 (2): 531–553. doi:10.1007/s00148-012-0452-6. hdl:10419/67322. ISSN 0933-1433. S2CID 155884602. Bensassi, Sami; Jabbour, Liza (15 July 2015). "The effects of return migration on Egyptian household revenues" (PDF). Retrieved 11 May 2016. Mayda, Anna Maria; Parsons, Christopher; Pham, Han; Vézina, Pierre-Louis (20 January 2020). "Refugees and foreign investment: Quasi-experimental evidence from the US Refugee Resettlement Program". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 20 January 2020. Fairlie, Robert W.; Lofstrom, Magnus (2015). "Immigration and Entrepreneurship". Handbook on the Economics of International Immigration. Handbook of the Economics of International Migration. 1 (7669): 877–911. doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-53768-3.00017-5. ISBN 978-0444633729. S2CID 152830080. Ufuk, Akcigit; John, Grigsby; Tom, Nicholas (1 May 2017). "Immigration and the Rise of American Ingenuity" (PDF). American Economic Review. 107 (5): 327–331. doi:10.1257/aer.p20171021. ISSN 0002-8282. S2CID 35552861. Kerr, Sari Pekkala; Kerr, William R. (June 2016). "Immigrant Entrepreneurship". Harvard Business School Working Paper Series # 17-011. Kerr, Sari Pekkala; Kerr, William R. (July 2016). Immigrant Entrepreneurship (Report). doi:10.3386/w22385. Hunt, Jennifer; Gauthier-Loiselle, Marjolaine (1 January 2010). "How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?" (PDF). American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. 2 (2): 31–56. doi:10.1257/mac.2.2.31. JSTOR 25760296. S2CID 15707203. Hornung, Erik (2014). "Immigration and the Diffusion of Technology: The Huguenot Diaspora in Prussia" (PDF). American Economic Review. 104 (1): 84–122. doi:10.1257/aer.104.1.84. hdl:10419/37227. Hornung, Erik (2018). "Diasporas, Diversity, and Economic Activity: Evidence from 18th-century Berlin". Explorations in Economic History. 73: 101261. doi:10.1016/j.eeh.2018.10.001. ISSN 0014-4983. S2CID 53649771. de Vries, Jan (1976). The Economy of Europe in an Age of Crisis, 1600–1750. Cambridge University Press. pp. 87–88. doi:10.1017/cbo9781107049772. ISBN 978-0521211239. Moser, Petra; Voena, Alessandra; Waldinger, Fabian (2014). "German Jewish Émigrés and US Invention". American Economic Review. 104 (10): 3222–3255. doi:10.1257/aer.104.10.3222. Harris, Rachel Anne. "The Mariel Boatlift – A Natural Experiment in Low-Skilled Immigration and Innovation" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2016. Droller, Federico (1 March 2017). "Migration, Population Composition, and Long Run Economic Development: Evidence from Settlements in the Pampas". The Economic Journal. 128 (614): 2321–2352. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12505. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 53352818. Hausmann, Ricardo; Neffke, Frank M. H. (2019). "The workforce of pioneer plants: The role of worker mobility in the diffusion of industries". Research Policy. 48 (3): 628–648. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2018.10.017. ISSN 0048-7333. S2CID 158524654. Natkhov, Timur; Vasilenok, Natalia (2021). "Skilled immigrants and technology adoption: Evidence from the German settlements in the Russian Empire". Explorations in Economic History. 81: 101399. doi:10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101399. ISSN 0014-4983. S2CID 233521311. "Polish immigrants stimulate innovation in Germany". LSE Business Review. 10 May 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2018. Bahar, Dany; Rapoport, Hillel (2018). "Migration, Knowledge Diffusion and the Comparative Advantage of Nations". The Economic Journal. 128 (612): F273–F305. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12450. hdl:10419/130392. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 54856798. Kerr, William R. (1 January 2010). "Breakthrough inventions and migrating clusters of innovation". Journal of Urban Economics. Special Issue: Cities and Entrepreneurship – Sponsored by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation (www.kauffman.org). 67 (1): 46–60. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.461.9614. doi:10.1016/j.jue.2009.09.006. Khanna, Gaurav; Lee, Munseob (2018). High-Skill Immigration, Innovation, and Creative Destruction. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w24824. Kerr, William (2018). The Gift of Global Talent: How Migration Shapes Business, Economy & Society. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-1503605022. Dimmock, Stephen G; Huang, Jiekun; Weisbenner, Scott J (2019). Give Me Your Tired, Your Poor, Your High-Skilled Labor: H-1B Lottery Outcomes and Entrepreneurial Success. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w26392. Bahar, Dany; Choudhury, Raj; Rapoport, Hillel (28 February 2020). "How migration helps countries become competitive at innovating in new technologies". VoxEU.org. Retrieved 2 March 2020. Burchardi, Konrad B; Chaney, Thomas; Hassan, Tarek Alexander; Tarquinio, Lisa; Terry, Stephen J (2020). Immigration, Innovation, and Growth. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w27075. S2CID 85560970. "Immigrants and Billion Dollar Startups" (PDF). Brown, J. David; Earle, John S; Kim, Mee Jung; Lee, Kyung Min (2019). Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Innovation in the U.S. High-Tech Sector. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w25565. hdl:10419/196688. S2CID 169210007. "Skilled Emigration and Skill Creation: A quasi-experiment – Working Paper 152". Retrieved 3 July 2016. Stuen, Eric T.; Mobarak, Ahmed Mushfiq; Maskus, Keith E. (1 December 2012). "Skilled Immigration and Innovation: Evidence from Enrollment Fluctuations in US Doctoral Programmes". The Economic Journal. 122 (565): 1143–1176. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.712.2787. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2012.02543.x. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 19741509. "Immigrants Play a Key Role in STEM Fields". NBER. Insider, Investment Migration (25 April 2017). "Future of the Citizenship-by-Investment Market: Predictions for 2027". Investment Migration Insider. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Burchardi, Konrad B.; Chaney, Thomas; Hassan, Tarek A. (January 2016). Migrants, Ancestors, and Investments. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w21847. Ager, Philipp; Brueckner, Markus (2017). "Immigrants' Genes: Genetic Diversity and Economic Development in the United States". Economic Inquiry. 56 (2): 1149–1164. doi:10.1111/ecin.12540. ISSN 1465-7295. S2CID 158553197. Clark, J.R.; Lawson, Robert; Nowrasteh, Alex; Powell, Benjamin; Murphy, Ryan (June 2015). "Does immigration impact institutions?" (PDF). Public Choice. 163 (3): 321–335. doi:10.1007/s11127-015-0254-y. S2CID 55968273. Powell, Benjamin; Clark, J.R.; Nowrasteh, Alex (1 September 2017). "Does mass immigration destroy institutions? 1990s Israel as a natural experiment". Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization. 141: 83–95. doi:10.1016/j.jebo.2017.06.008. ISSN 0167-2681. Nikolova, Elena (1 January 2017). "Destined for Democracy? Labour Markets and Political Change in Colonial British America". British Journal of Political Science. 47 (1): 19–45. doi:10.1017/S0007123415000101. ISSN 0007-1234. S2CID 17112994. Nikolova, Elena; Nikolova, Milena (1 September 2017). "Suffrage, labour markets and coalitions in colonial Virginia". European Journal of Political Economy. 49: 108–122. doi:10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2017.01.002. hdl:10419/147912. S2CID 157369080. Padilla, Alexandre; Cachanosky, Nicolás (5 February 2018). "The Grecian horse: does immigration lead to the deterioration of American institutions?". Public Choice. 174 (3–4): 351–405. doi:10.1007/s11127-018-0509-5. ISSN 0048-5829. S2CID 157264613. Blondin, Cole; Forrester, Andrew C.; Nowrasteh, Alex (2019). "How Mass Immigration Affects Countries with Weak Economic Institutions: A Natural Experiment in Jordan" (PDF). The World Bank Economic Review. 34 (2): 533–549. doi:10.1093/wber/lhy032. hdl:10986/31559. Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of Difference. Oxford University Press. 2004. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2016. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) Schmidt-Catran, Alexander W.; Spies, Dennis C. (4 March 2016). "Immigration and Welfare Support in Germany". American Sociological Review. 81 (2): 0003122416633140. doi:10.1177/0003122416633140. ISSN 0003-1224. S2CID 155433506. Lee, Woojin; Roemer, John E. (1 August 2006). "Racism and redistribution in the United States: A solution to the problem of American exceptionalism" (PDF). Journal of Public Economics. 90 (6): 1027–1052. doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2005.08.008. S2CID 10965659. Alesina, Alberto; Glaeser, Edward (2004). Fighting Poverty in the US and Europe: A World of Difference. Oxford Scholarship. doi:10.1093/0199267669.001.0001. ISBN 978-0199267668. S2CID 156474870. Habyarimana, James; Humphreys, Macartan; Posner, Daniel N.; Weinstein, Jeremy M. (2007). "Why Does Ethnic Diversity Undermine Public Goods Provision?". American Political Science Review. 101 (4): 709–725. doi:10.1017/S0003055407070499. ISSN 1537-5943. S2CID 4498060. Laitin, David (2007). Nations, States and Violence. OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0199228232. Retrieved 10 November 2019. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) Freeman, G. P. (2009). "Immigration, Diversity, and Welfare Chauvinism". The Forum. 7 (3). doi:10.2202/1540-8884.1317. S2CID 144470028. Wimmer, Andreas (28 July 2015). "Is Diversity Detrimental? Ethnic Fractionalization, Public Goods Provision, and the Historical Legacies of Stateness". Comparative Political Studies. 49 (11): 1407–1445. doi:10.1177/0010414015592645. ISSN 0010-4140. S2CID 7998506. Pardelli, Giuliana; Kustov, Alexander (2022). "When Coethnicity Fails". World Politics. 74 (2): 249–284. doi:10.1017/S0043887121000241. ISSN 0043-8871. S2CID 246855942. Kymlicka, Will; Banting, Keith (1 September 2006). "Immigration, Multiculturalism, and the Welfare State". Ethics & International Affairs. 20 (3): 281–304. doi:10.1111/j.1747-7093.2006.00027.x. ISSN 1747-7093. S2CID 154547573. Gisselquist, Rachel M. (29 July 2014). "Ethnic divisions and public goods provision, revisited". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 37 (9): 1605–1627. doi:10.1080/01419870.2012.762106. ISSN 0141-9870. S2CID 145381859. Kustov, Alexander; Pardelli, Giuliana (2018). "Ethnoracial Homogeneity and Public Outcomes: The (Non)effects of Diversity". American Political Science Review. 112 (4): 1096–1103. doi:10.1017/S0003055418000308. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 149495272. Garand, James C.; Xu, Ping; Davis, Belinda C. (1 December 2015). "Immigration Attitudes and Support for the Welfare State in the American Mass Public". American Journal of Political Science. 61: 146–162. doi:10.1111/ajps.12233. ISSN 1540-5907. Hunt, Jennifer (2 September 2016). "The Impact of Immigration on the Educational Attainment of Natives". Journal of Human Resources. 52 (4): 0115–6913R1. doi:10.3368/jhr.52.4.0115-6913R1. hdl:10419/67241. ISSN 0022-166X. Fletcher, Jason; Kim, Jinho; Nobles, Jenna; Ross, Stephen; Shaorshadze, Irina (2019). The Effects of Foreign-Born Peers in US High Schools and Middle Schools. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w26491. S2CID 213323363. Geay, Charlotte; McNally, Sandra; Telhaj, Shqiponja (1 August 2013). "Non-native Speakers of English in the Classroom: What Are the Effects on Pupil Performance?" (PDF). The Economic Journal. 123 (570): F281–F307. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12054. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 14306752. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Ohinata, Asako; van Ours, Jan C. (1 August 2013). "How Immigrant Children Affect the Academic Achievement of Native Dutch Children" (PDF). The Economic Journal. 123 (570): F308–F331. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12052. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 29570106. Schneeweis, Nicole (1 August 2015). "Immigrant concentration in schools: Consequences for native and migrant students" (PDF). Labour Economics. 35: 63–76. doi:10.1016/j.labeco.2015.03.004. hdl:10419/115095. S2CID 74494602. Diette, Timothy M.; Uwaifo Oyelere, Ruth (January 2016). "Gender and Racial Differences in Peer Effects of Limited English Students: A Story of Language or Ethnicity?". IZA Discussion Papers (9661). Retrieved 21 January 2016. Figlio, David; Özek, Umut (2019). "Unwelcome Guests? The Effects of Refugees on the Educational Outcomes of Incumbent Students" (PDF). Journal of Labor Economics. 37 (4): 1061–1096. doi:10.1086/703116. S2CID 158575753. Bossavie, Laurent (5 September 2018). "The Effect of Immigration on Natives' School Performance: Does Length of Stay in the Host Country Matter?". Journal of Human Resources: 1017–9151R2. doi:10.3368/jhr.55.3.1017-9151R2. ISSN 0022-166X. S2CID 159010723. Frattini, Tommaso; Meschi, Elena (25 December 2018). "The effect of immigrant peers in vocational schools#" (PDF). European Economic Review. 113: 1–22. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2018.12.005. hdl:2434/608118. ISSN 0014-2921. S2CID 85504429. "Sveriges PISA-framgång bygger på falska siffror". 2 June 2020. Algan, Yann; Hémet, Camille; Laitin, David D. (4 May 2016). "The Social Effects of Ethnic Diversity at the Local Level: A Natural Experiment with Exogenous Residential Allocation". Journal of Political Economy. 124 (3): 000. doi:10.1086/686010. ISSN 0022-3808. S2CID 15590490. Levy, Morris (1 December 2015). "The Effect of Immigration from Mexico on Social Capital in the United States". International Migration Review. 51 (3): 757–788. doi:10.1111/imre.12231. ISSN 1747-7379. S2CID 155253270. Xu, Xu; Jin, Xin (2018). "The autocratic roots of social distrust". Journal of Comparative Economics. 46 (1): 362–380. doi:10.1016/j.jce.2017.12.002. ISSN 0147-5967. S2CID 157751513. Hewstone, Miles; Massey, Douglas S.; Bennett, Matthew R.; Ramos, Miguel R. (9 May 2019). "Humans adapt to social diversity over time". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (25): 12244–12249. Bibcode:2019PNAS..11612244R. doi:10.1073/pnas.1818884116. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 6589669. PMID 31072924. Giuntella, Osea; Mazzonna, Fabrizio; Nicodemo, Catia; Vargas-Silva, Carlos (1 July 2019). "Immigration and the reallocation of work health risks". Journal of Population Economics. 32 (3): 1009–1042. doi:10.1007/s00148-018-0710-3. ISSN 1432-1475. Gunadi, Christian (2020). "Immigration and the Health of U.S. Natives". Southern Economic Journal. 86 (4): 1278–1306. doi:10.1002/soej.12425. ISSN 2325-8012. S2CID 214313284. Giuntella, Osea; Nicodemo, Catia; Vargas-Silva, Carlos (1 March 2018). "The effects of immigration on NHS waiting times". Journal of Health Economics. 58: 123–143. doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2018.02.001. ISSN 0167-6296. PMID 29477952. Abubakar, Ibrahim; Friedland, Jon S.; Tollman, Stephen; Miranda, J. Jaime; Hargreaves, Sally; Burns, Rachel; Patel, Parth; Barr, Anna Louise; Bartlett, Sean (5 December 2018). "Global patterns of mortality in international migrants: a systematic review and meta-analysis". The Lancet. 392 (10164): 2553–2566. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32781-8. ISSN 1474-547X. PMC 6294735. PMID 30528484. "PHR for migrants". Doyle, Matthew, Mikal Skuterud, and Christopher Worswick. The economics of Canadian immigration levels. No. 58. Working Paper Series, 2023. Sá, Filipa (1 September 2015). "Immigration and House Prices in the UK". The Economic Journal. 125 (587): 1393–1424. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12158. hdl:10419/51818. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 11283393. Baker, S. R. (2011). "Effects of Immigrant Legalization on Crime: The 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act". SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.1829368. S2CID 20388764. The Integration of Immigrants into American Society. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2015. doi:10.17226/21746. ISBN 978-0-309-37398-2. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2018. Americans have long believed that immigrants are more likely than natives to commit crimes and that rising immigration leads to rising crime... This belief is remarkably resilient to the contrary evidence that immigrants are in fact much less likely than natives to commit crimes. Papadopoulos, Georgios (2 July 2014). "Immigration status and property crime: an application of estimators for underreported outcomes". IZA Journal of Migration. 3 (1): 12. doi:10.1186/2193-9039-3-12. ISSN 2193-9039. Jaitman, Laura; Machin, Stephen (25 October 2013). "Crime and immigration: new evidence from England and Wales". IZA Journal of Migration. 2 (1): 19. doi:10.1186/2193-9039-2-19. ISSN 2193-9039. Bell, Brian; Fasani, Francesco; Machin, Stephen (10 October 2012). "Crime and Immigration: Evidence from Large Immigrant Waves" (PDF). Review of Economics and Statistics. 95 (4): 1278–1290. doi:10.1162/REST_a_00337. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 11566473. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Bell, Brian; Machin, Stephen (1 February 2013). "Immigrant Enclaves and Crime" (PDF). Journal of Regional Science. 53 (1): 118–141. Bibcode:2013JRegS..53..118B. doi:10.1111/jors.12003. ISSN 1467-9787. S2CID 19138479. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 February 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Ousey, Graham C.; Kubrin, Charis E. (2018). "Immigration and Crime: Assessing a Contentious Issue". Annual Review of Criminology. 1 (1): 63–84. doi:10.1146/annurev-criminol-032317-092026. Lee, Matthew T.; Martinez Jr., Ramiro (2009). "Immigration reduces crime: an emerging scholarly consensus". Immigration, Crime and Justice. Emerald Group Publishing. pp. 3–16. ISBN 978-1-84855-438-2. Archived from the original on 24 February 2024. Retrieved 25 May 2016. "Fængselsformand: Udenlandske indsatte udfordrer os helt vildt". DR (in Danish). 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 3 October 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2019. "Indvandrere i Danmark 2015" [Immigrants in Denmark 2015] (in Danish). Statistics Denmark. 2015. pp. 93, 100 & others. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2019. Salmi, Venla; Kivivuori, Janne; Aaltonen, Mikko (1 November 2015). "Correlates of immigrant youth crime in Finland". European Journal of Criminology. 12 (6): 681–699. doi:10.1177/1477370815587768. ISSN 1477-3708. S2CID 142551581. "Foreigners figure high in rape statistics". Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. When the victims file their accusations, as many as 17% of the women involved believed the rapist to be of foreign extraction. This is a pretty huge figure, given that there are only some 85,000 foreigners living in Finland, or just 1.65% of the population. "Prevention improvement is solution to refugee crime, study finds". 3 January 2018. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Buonanno, Paolo; Drago, Francesco; Galbiati, Roberto; Zanella, Giulio (1 July 2011). "Crime in Europe and the United States: dissecting the 'reversal of misfortunes'". Economic Policy. 26 (67): 347–385. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0327.2011.00267.x. ISSN 0266-4658. S2CID 3747500. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 18 August 2019. "Kriminalität im Kontext von Zuwanderung - Bundeslagebild 2017". BKA. 2018. pp. 27, 55, 61. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2019. Mayntz, Gregor (4 February 2019). "Jeder Dritte in NRW: Zahl der Ausländer in Gefängnissen auf Rekordhoch". RP ONLINE (in German). Archived from the original on 22 February 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2019. Pancevski, Bojan (15 October 2018). "An Ice-Cream Truck Slaying, Party Drugs and Real-Estate Kings: Ethnic Clans Clash in Berlin's Underworld". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 20 October 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Greeks confront crime wave amid austerity". BBC News. 16 August 2012. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2018. ispisito (28 February 2019). "Jihadist Radicalization in Italian Prisons: A Primer". ISPI. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "Veel jonge criminele allochtonen in Rotterdam". RTV Rijnmond. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013. "Schokkende cijfers criminaliteit Marokkanen Rotterdam". Elsevier. Archived from the original on 22 February 2013. Couttenier, Mathieu; Petrencu, Veronica; Rohner, Dominic; Thoenig, Mathias (2019). "The Violent Legacy of Conflict: Evidence on Asylum Seekers, Crime, and Public Policy in Switzerland". American Economic Review. 109 (12): 4378–4425. doi:10.1257/aer.20170263. "Immigration, Crime and Criminal Justice Systems". Transnational Criminology Manual Volume I (PDF). Wolf Legal Publishers. 2010. pp. 659–673. ISBN 978-90-5850-573-6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 5 December 2012. Achbari, W., Leerkes, A.S., 2017, Van perceptie naar feit — Asielzoekers en buurtcriminaliteit WODC, Cahiers 2017-16 Bianchi, Milo; Buonanno, Paolo; Pinotti, Paolo (1 December 2012). "Do Immigrants Cause Crime?" (PDF). Journal of the European Economic Association. 10 (6): 1318–1347. doi:10.1111/j.1542-4774.2012.01085.x. ISSN 1542-4774. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Bell, Brian (2014). "Crime and immigration". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.33. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2016. Crocitti, Stefania (2014). Immigration, Crime, and Criminalization in Italy – Oxford Handbooks. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199859016.013.029. West, Jeremy (February 2018). "Racial Bias in Police Investigations" (PDF). Working Paper. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2018. Hällsten, Martin; Szulkin, Ryszard; Sarnecki, Jerzy (1 May 2013). "Crime as a Price of Inequality? The Gap in Registered Crime between Childhood Immigrants, Children of Immigrants and Children of Native Swedes". British Journal of Criminology. 53 (3): 456–481. doi:10.1093/bjc/azt005. ISSN 0007-0955. Colombo, Asher (1 November 2013). "Foreigners and immigrants in Italy's penal and administrative detention systems". European Journal of Criminology. 10 (6): 746–759. doi:10.1177/1477370813495128. ISSN 1477-3708. S2CID 145099179. Parmar, Alpa (2014). Ethnicities, Racism, and Crime in England and Wales – Oxford Handbooks. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199859016.013.014. Helbling, Marc; Meierrieks, Daniel (2020). "Terrorism and Migration: An Overview". British Journal of Political Science. 52 (2): 977–996. doi:10.1017/S0007123420000587. ISSN 0007-1234. "Centre for Economic Policy Research". cepr.org. 26 May 2017. Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Bove, Vincenzo; Böhmelt, Tobias (11 February 2016). "Does Immigration Induce Terrorism?" (PDF). The Journal of Politics. 78 (2): 572–588. doi:10.1086/684679. ISSN 0022-3816. S2CID 51947927. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Fasani, Francesco; Mastrobuoni, Giovanni; Owens, Emily G.; Pinotti, Paolo (2019). "Refugee Waves and Crime: Evidence from EU Countries". Does Immigration Increase Crime?: Migration Policy and the Creation of the Criminal Immigrant. Cambridge University Press. pp. 129–155. doi:10.1017/9781108626286.006. ISBN 978-1-108-62628-6. S2CID 216605573. Masterson, Daniel; Yasenov, Vasil (2021). "Does Halting Refugee Resettlement Reduce Crime? Evidence from the US Refugee Ban". American Political Science Review. 115 (3): 1066–1073. doi:10.1017/S0003055421000150. ISSN 0003-0554. Alkousaa, Riham (3 January 2018). "Violent crime rises in Germany and is attributed to refugees". U.S. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "Ausländerkriminalität in der Schweiz". Vimentis. Archived from the original on 30 August 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2009. "Forced labour, modern slavery and human trafficking (Forced labour, modern slavery and human trafficking)". www.ilo.org. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Landmark Forced Labour Protocol enters into force". YouTube. Hill, Angela (2011). "This Modern Day Slavery": Sex Trafficking and Moral Panic in the United Kingdom (PhD dissertation). University of California, Berkeley. Hidden Slaves: Forced Labor in the United States University of California Berkeley, September 2004 Drouhot, Lucas G.; Nee, Victor (2019). "Assimilation and the Second Generation in Europe and America: Blending and Segregating Social Dynamics Between Immigrants and Natives". Annual Review of Sociology. 45 (1): 177–199. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-073117-041335. S2CID 150635159. Tuccio, Michele; Wahba, Jackline (2018). "Return migration and the transfer of gender norms: Evidence from the Middle East" (PDF). Journal of Comparative Economics. 46 (4): 1006–1029. doi:10.1016/j.jce.2018.07.015. ISSN 0147-5967. S2CID 158958516. Duncan, Brian; Trejo, Stephen J (2011). "Tracking Intergenerational Progress for Immigrant Groups: The Problem of Ethnic Attrition". American Economic Review. 101 (3): 603–608. doi:10.1257/aer.101.3.603. S2CID 46552371. Alba, Richard; Islam, Tariqul (1 January 2009). "The Case of the Disappearing Mexican Americans: An Ethnic-Identity Mystery". Population Research and Policy Review. 28 (2): 109–121. doi:10.1007/s11113-008-9081-x. JSTOR 20616620. S2CID 154929099. Duncan, Brian; Trejo, Stephen (2017). "The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians". ILR Review. 70 (5): 1146–1175. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.403.8151. doi:10.1177/0019793916679613. PMC 5602570. PMID 28935997. "Achieving the American Dream: Cultural Distance, Cultural Diversity and Economic Performance | Oxford Economic and Social History Working Papers | Working Papers". www.economics.ox.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. Retrieved 18 May 2016. Orrenius, Pia; Zavodny, Madeline; Kerr, Emily (June 2012). "Chinese Immigrants in the U.S. Labor Market: Effects of Post-Tiananmen Immigration Policy". International Migration Review. 46 (2): 456–482. doi:10.1111/j.1747-7379.2012.00893.x. hdl:10419/58772. ISSN 0197-9183. S2CID 145589806. Alexander, Rohan; Ward, Zachary (2018). "Age at Arrival and Assimilation During the Age of Mass Migration" (PDF). The Journal of Economic History. 78 (3): 904–937. doi:10.1017/S0022050718000335. ISSN 0022-0507. S2CID 158352415. Bohlen, Celestine (25 January 2016). "Study Finds Children of Immigrants Embracing 'Frenchness'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 19 April 2016. Röder, Antje; Mühlau, Peter (1 March 2014). "Are They Acculturating? Europe's Immigrants and Gender Egalitarianism". Social Forces. 92 (3): 899–928. doi:10.1093/sf/sot126. ISSN 0037-7732. S2CID 145434097. Spierings, Niels (16 April 2015). "Gender Equality Attitudes among Turks in Western Europe and Turkey: The Interrelated Impact of Migration and Parents' Attitudes". Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. 41 (5): 749–771. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2014.948394. ISSN 1369-183X. S2CID 146326410. Fleischmann, Fenella; Kristen, Cornelia; Contributions, With; Research, Including the Provision of Data and Analyses Instrumental to The; by; Heath, Anthony F.; Brinbaum, Yaël; Deboosere, Patrick; Granato, Nadia (1 July 2014). "Gender Inequalities in the Education of the Second Generation in Western Countries". Sociology of Education (Submitted manuscript). 87 (3): 143–170. doi:10.1177/0038040714537836. hdl:1874/301991. ISSN 0038-0407. S2CID 59353417. Hainmueller, Jens; Hangartner, Dominik; Pietrantuono, Giuseppe (1 February 2017). "Catalyst or Crown: Does Naturalization Promote the Long-Term Social Integration of Immigrants?". American Political Science Review. 111 (2): 256–276. doi:10.1017/S0003055416000745. hdl:20.500.11850/235430. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 229169145. "Citizenship Increases the Long-Term Earnings of Marginalized Immigrants". Immigration Policy Lab. Retrieved 1 March 2019. Röder, Antje (1 December 2015). "Immigrants' Attitudes toward Homosexuality: Socialization, Religion, and Acculturation in European Host Societies". International Migration Review. 49 (4): 1042–1070. doi:10.1111/imre.12113. ISSN 1747-7379. S2CID 144531409. Mesoudi, Alex; Magid, Kesson; Hussain, Delwar (13 January 2016). "How Do People Become W.E.I.R.D.? Migration Reveals the Cultural Transmission Mechanisms Underlying Variation in Psychological Processes". PLOS ONE. 11 (1): e0147162. Bibcode:2016PLoSO..1147162M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0147162. PMC 4711941. PMID 26760972. Avitabile, Ciro; Clots-Figueras, Irma; Masella, Paolo (1 August 2013). "The Effect of Birthright Citizenship on Parental Integration Outcomes". The Journal of Law and Economics. 56 (3): 777–810. doi:10.1086/673266. hdl:1814/13410. ISSN 0022-2186. S2CID 19012438. Gathmann, Christina; Keller, Nicolas (2017). "Access to Citizenship and the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants". The Economic Journal. 128 (616): 3141–3181. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12546. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 157082274. Gathmann, Christina (1 February 2015). "Naturalization and citizenship: Who benefits?". IZA World of Labor. doi:10.15185/izawol.125. Slotwinski, Michaela; Stutzer, Alois; Gorinas, Cédric (27 February 2017). "Democratic Involvement and Immigrants' Compliance with the Law". SSRN 2923633. Damm, Anna Piil; Dustmann, Christian (2014). "Does Growing Up in a High Crime Neighborhood Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?". American Economic Review (Submitted manuscript). 104 (6): 1806–1832. doi:10.1257/aer.104.6.1806. Åslund, Olof; Edin, Per-Anders; Fredriksson, Peter; Grönqvist, Hans (2011). "Peers, Neighborhoods, and Immigrant Student Achievement: Evidence from a Placement Policy" (PDF). American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 3 (2): 67–95. doi:10.1257/app.3.2.67. hdl:2445/116663. S2CID 31236419. Damm, Anna Piil (1 January 2014). "Neighborhood quality and labor market outcomes: Evidence from quasi-random neighborhood assignment of immigrants" (PDF). Journal of Urban Economics. Spatial Dimensions of Labor Markets. 79: 139–166. doi:10.1016/j.jue.2013.08.004. Damm, Anna Piil (1 April 2009). "Ethnic Enclaves and Immigrant Labor Market Outcomes: Quasi-Experimental Evidence". Journal of Labor Economics. 27 (2): 281–314. doi:10.1086/599336. ISSN 0734-306X. S2CID 17521852. Edin, Per-Anders; Fredriksson, Peter; Åslund, Olof (1 February 2003). "Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic Success of Immigrants—Evidence from a Natural Experiment". The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118 (1): 329–357. doi:10.1162/00335530360535225. hdl:10419/82170. ISSN 0033-5533. S2CID 16520774. Jones, Will; Teytelboym, Alexander (2017). "The Local Refugee Match: Aligning Refugees' Preferences with the Capacities and Priorities of Localities". Journal of Refugee Studies. 31 (2): 152–178. doi:10.1093/jrs/fex022. S2CID 111381382. Hangartner, Dominik; Hainmueller, Jens; Martén, Linna (24 July 2019). "Ethnic networks can foster the economic integration of refugees". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (33): 16280–16285. Bibcode:2019PNAS..11616280M. doi:10.1073/pnas.1820345116. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 6697878. PMID 31358632. Cappellari, Lorenzo; Di Paolo, Antonio (October 2015). "Bilingual Schooling and Earnings: Evidence from a Language-in-Education Reform". IZA Discussion Papers (9431). Retrieved 22 March 2016. Adida, Claire L.; Laitin, David D.; Valfort, Marie-Anne (1 February 2017). "The Wrong Way to Stop Terrorism". Foreign Affairs. "AdidaLaitinValfort2017_ForeignAffairs.pdf". Google Docs. Retrieved 4 February 2017. Coversi; et al. (2017). "Despite the crisis: The resilience of intercultural nationalism in Catalonia". International Migration. 55 (2): 53–67. doi:10.1111/imig.12323. S2CID 151628467. Ferwerda, Jeremy; Finseraas, Henning; Bergh, Johannes (2018). "Voting Rights and Immigrant Incorporation: Evidence from Norway". British Journal of Political Science. 50 (2): 713–730. doi:10.1017/S0007123417000643. ISSN 0007-1234. S2CID 158137269. Alexia Lochmann; Hillel Rapoport; Biagio Speciale (April 2019). "The effect of language training on immigrants' economic integration: Empirical evidence from France". European Economic Review. 113: 265–296. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2019.01.008. S2CID 149045384. "The effect of language training on immigrants' economic integration: Empirical evidence from France". Paris School of Economics. March 2019. Heck-Grossek, Nicholas; Dardha, Sonia (30 April 2020). Sha, Mandy (ed.). Void of the voiceless: An analysis of residents with a language barrier in Germany, France, and the United Kingdom (Chapter 6) in The Essential Role of Language in Survey Research. RTI Press. pp. 117–126. doi:10.3768/rtipress.bk.0023.2004. ISBN 978-1-934831-24-3. Arendt, Jacob Nielsen; Bolvig, Iben; Foged, Mette; Hasager, Linea; Peri, Giovanni (2020). Integrating Refugees: Language Training or Work-First Incentives?. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w26834. S2CID 216251239. "Diskriminering i rättsprocessen – Brå". www.bra.se (in Swedish). Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2016. Hällsten, Martin; Szulkin, Ryszard; Sarnecki, Jerzy (1 May 2013). "Crime as a Price of Inequality? The Gap in Registered Crime between Childhood Immigrants, Children of Immigrants and Children of Native Swedes". British Journal of Criminology. 53 (3): 456–481. doi:10.1093/bjc/azt005. ISSN 0007-0955. Crocitti, Stefania (2013). Immigration, Crime, and Criminalization in Italy. Oxford Handbooks. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199859016.013.029. Colombo, Asher (1 November 2013). "Foreigners and immigrants in Italy's penal and administrative detention systems". European Journal of Criminology. 10 (6): 746–759. doi:10.1177/1477370813495128. ISSN 1477-3708. S2CID 145099179. Parmar, Alpa (2013). "Ethnicities, Racism, and Crime in England and Wales – Oxford Handbooks". The Oxford Handbook of Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199859016.013.014. ISBN 978-0-19-985901-6. Archived from the original on 18 June 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2016. Holmberg, Lars; Kyvsgaard, Britta (2003). "Are Immigrants and Their Descendants Discriminated against in the Danish Criminal Justice System?". Journal of Scandinavian Studies in Criminology and Crime Prevention. 4 (2): 125–142. doi:10.1080/14043850310020027. S2CID 143646955. Roché, Sebastian; Gordon, Mirta B.; Depuiset, Marie-Aude (2013). "Case Study". The Oxford Handbook of Ethnicity, Crime, and Immigration. Oxford Handbooks. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199859016.013.030. ISBN 978-0-19-985901-6. Light, Michael T. (1 March 2016). "The Punishment Consequences of Lacking National Membership in Germany, 1998–2010". Social Forces. 94 (3): 1385–1408. doi:10.1093/sf/sov084. ISSN 0037-7732. S2CID 155814847. Wermink, Hilde; Johnson, Brian D.; Nieuwbeerta, Paul; Keijser, Jan W. de (1 November 2015). "Expanding the scope of sentencing research: Determinants of juvenile and adult punishment in the Netherlands". European Journal of Criminology. 12 (6): 739–768. doi:10.1177/1477370815597253. ISSN 1477-3708. S2CID 143366742. Cettolin, Elena; Suetens, Sigrid (18 July 2018). "Return on Trust is Lower for Immigrants". The Economic Journal. 129 (621): 1992–2009. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12629. ISSN 0013-0133. Riach, P. A.; Rich, J. (1 November 2002). "Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place". The Economic Journal. 112 (483): F480–F518. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.417.9100. doi:10.1111/1468-0297.00080. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 19024888. Silverman, Stephanie J.; Molnar, Petra (29 February 2016). "Everyday Injustices: Barriers to Access to Justice for Immigration Detainees in Canada". Refugee Survey Quarterly. 35 (1): 109–127. doi:10.1093/rsq/hdv016. ISSN 1020-4067. Ayres, Ian; Siegelman, Peter (1 January 1995). "Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New Car". American Economic Review. 85 (3): 304–21. Doleac, Jennifer L.; Stein, Luke C.D. (1 November 2013). "The Visible Hand: Race and Online Market Outcomes". The Economic Journal. 123 (572): F469–F492. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12082. ISSN 1468-0297. S2CID 154984687. Warren, Patricia Y.; Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald (1 May 2009). "Racial profiling and searches: Did the politics of racial profiling change police behavior?". Criminology & Public Policy. 8 (2): 343–369. doi:10.1111/j.1745-9133.2009.00556.x. ISSN 1745-9133. Statistics on Race and the Criminal Justice System 2008/09, p. 8., 22 West, Jeremy (November 2015). "Racial Bias in Police Investigations" (PDF). MIT.edu (Working paper). Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 13 May 2016. Donohue III, John J.; Levitt, Steven D. (1 January 2001). "The Impact of Race on Policing and Arrests". The Journal of Law & Economics. 44 (2): 367–394. doi:10.1086/322810. JSTOR 10.1086/322810. S2CID 1547854. Abrams, David S.; Bertrand, Marianne; Mullainathan, Sendhil (1 June 2012). "Do Judges Vary in Their Treatment of Race?". The Journal of Legal Studies. 41 (2): 347–383. doi:10.1086/666006. ISSN 0047-2530. S2CID 2338687. Mustard, David B. (1 April 2001). "Racial, Ethnic, and Gender Disparities in Sentencing: Evidence from the U.S. Federal Courts". The Journal of Law and Economics. 44 (1): 285–314. doi:10.1086/320276. ISSN 0022-2186. S2CID 154533225. Anwar, Shamena; Bayer, Patrick; Hjalmarsson, Randi (1 May 2012). "The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal Trials". The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 127 (2): 1017–1055. doi:10.1093/qje/qjs014. ISSN 0033-5533. Daudistel, Howard C.; Hosch, Harmon M.; Holmes, Malcolm D.; Graves, Joseph B. (1 February 1999). "Effects of Defendant Ethnicity on Juries' Dispositions of Felony Cases". Journal of Applied Social Psychology. 29 (2): 317–336. doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1999.tb01389.x. ISSN 1559-1816. Depew, Briggs; Eren, Ozkan; Mocan, Naci (2017). "Judges, Juveniles, and In-Group Bias" (PDF). Journal of Law and Economics. 60 (2): 209–239. doi:10.1086/693822. S2CID 147631237. Milkman, Katherine L.; Akinola, Modupe; Chugh, Dolly (1 November 2015). "What happens before? A field experiment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into organizations". The Journal of Applied Psychology. 100 (6): 1678–1712. doi:10.1037/apl0000022. ISSN 1939-1854. PMID 25867167. Espenshade, Thomas J.; Radford, Alexandria Walton (2009). Espenshade, T.J. and Radford, A.W.: No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class in Elite College Admission and Campus Life. (eBook, Paperback and Hardcover). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0691141602. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Alesina, Alberto; Carlana, Michela; Ferrara, Eliana La; Pinotti, Paolo (2018). Revealing Stereotypes: Evidence from Immigrants in Schools. National Bureau of Economic Research (Report). doi:10.3386/w25333. S2CID 145030825. "Report estimates that more than 450,000 undocumented immigrants are enrolled in higher ed". www.insidehighered.com. 17 April 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2021. Ondrich, Jan; Ross, Stephen; Yinger, John (1 November 2003). "Now You See It, Now You Don't: Why Do Real Estate Agents Withhold Available Houses from Black Customers?" (PDF). Review of Economics and Statistics. 85 (4): 854–873. doi:10.1162/003465303772815772. ISSN 0034-6535. S2CID 8524510. "Housing Discrimination against Racial and Ethnic Minorities 2012: Full Report". www.urban.org. 4 June 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2016. Bertrand, Marianne; Mullainathan, Sendhil (2004). "Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination". American Economic Review. 94 (4): 991–1013. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.321.8621. doi:10.1257/0002828042002561. Pager, Devah; Western, Bruce; Bonikowski, Bart (1 October 2009). "Discrimination in a Low-Wage Labor Market A Field Experiment". American Sociological Review. 74 (5): 777–799. doi:10.1177/000312240907400505. ISSN 0003-1224. PMC 2915472. PMID 20689685. "20 نکته دربارۀ آمار تکان‌دهندۀ مهاجرت ایرانیان/ چمدان‌هایم کو؟!". "مرکز پژوهش‌های مجلس خواهان «ممنوعیت هرگونه تبلیغات درباره مهاجرت» شد!". محبت نیوز (in Persian). 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "جوان ایرانی هیچ دلیلی برای ماندن در کشور ندارد / مهاجرت پاشنه آشیل زیست‌بوم نوآوری – تجارت‌نیوز". tejaratnews.com (in Persian). 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "روزنامه اعتماد: موج مهاجرت از ایران به دانش‌آموزان و کودکان رسیده است". ایران اینترنشنال (in Persian). 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. فردا, رادیو (7 June 2023). "«کاهش سن مهاجرت» در ایران؛ گزارش‌ها از مهاجرت دانش‌آموزان به کانادا و ترکیه". رادیو فردا (in Persian). Retrieved 12 June 2023. گلمکانی, سپهر (10 June 2023). "قوانین جدید برای اینفلوئنسرها: تبلیغ مهاجرت ممنوع!". سخت افزار مگ (in Persian). Retrieved 12 June 2023. Bartram, David; Poros, Maritsa; Monforte, Pierre (2014). Key Concepts in Migration. London: Sage. ISBN 978-0-85702-079-6. Bauder, H. (2006). Labor Movement: How Migration Regulates Labor Markets. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-020835-6. Retrieved 20 May 2023. Borjas, George J. (2014). Immigration Economics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-04977-2. Borjas, George. "Increasing the Supply of Labor Through Immigration" Archived 19 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Center for Immigration Studies, May 2004. Burtless, Gary (1 December 2009). "Impact of Immigration on the Distribution of American Well-Being" (PDF). Center for Retirement Research at Boston College. SSRN 1553271. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Torre, Miguel A. De La (2009). Trails of Hope and Terror. Orbis Books. ISBN 978-1-57075-798-3. Esbenshade, Jill. Division and Dislocation: Regulating Immigration through Local Housing Ordinances. Immigration Policy Center, American Immigration Law Foundation, Summer 2007. Ewing, Walter A. Border Insecurity: U.S. Border-Enforcement Policies and National Security, Immigration Policy Center, American Immigration Law Foundation, Spring 2006. Fell, Peter and Hayes, Debra. What are they Doing Here? A Critical Guide to Asylum and Immigration, Birmimgham, Venture Press, 2007. Fitzgerald, David Scott; Cook-Martin, David (2014). Culling the Masses: The Democratic Origins of Racist Immigration Policy in the Americas. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674-72904-9. Immigration Policy Center. Economic Growth & Immigration: Bridging the Demographic Divide. Immigration Policy Center, American Immigration Law Foundation, November 2005. "Immigration: The Demographic and Economic Facts". Cato Institute. 1995. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010. Karakayali, Nedim (2005). "Duality and Diversity in the Lives of Immigrant Children: Rethinking the 'Problem of Second Generation' in Light of Immigrant Autobiographies". Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology. 42 (3): 325–344. doi:10.1111/j.1755-618X.2005.tb00843.x. hdl:11693/38069. Kolb, Eva (2009). The Evolution of New York City's Multiculturalism: Melting Pot or Salad Bowl: Immigrants in New York from the 19th Century until the End of the Gilded Age (1. Aufl ed.). Books on Demand. ISBN 978-3-8370-9303-2. Legrain, Philippe (2007). Immigrants: your country needs them (First Princetonition ed.). Little Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-73248-2. Massey, Douglas S. Beyond the Border Buildup: Towards a New Approach to Mexico-U.S. Migration. Immigration Policy Center, American Immigration Law Foundation, September 2005. Massey, Douglas S.; Arango, Joaquín; Graeme, Hugo; Kouaouci, Ali; Adela, Pellegrino; Taylor, J. Edward (2005). Worlds in Motion: Understanding International Migration at the End of the Millennium. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-928276-0. Meilander, Peter C. (2001). Toward a theory of immigration (1st ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-24034-9. Molina, N. (2006). Fit to Be Citizens?: Public Health and Race in Los Angeles, 1879-1939. American Crossroads. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24649-2. Retrieved 20 May 2023. Myers, Dowell (2007). Immigrants and Boomers: Forging a New Social Contract for the Future of America. Russell Sage Foundation. ISBN 978-0-87154-636-4. Passel, Jeffrey S. Estimates of the Size and Characteristics of the Undocumented Population. Pew Hispanic Center, March 2005. Passel, Jeffrey S. Growing Share of Immigrants Choosing Naturalization. Pew Hispanic Center, March 2007. Passel, Jeffrey S. and Roberto Suro. Rise, Peak and Decline: Trends in U.S. Immigration. Pew Hispanic Center, September 2005. Pearce, Susan C. Immigrant Women in the United States: A Demographic Portrait. Immigration Policy Center, American Immigration Law Foundation, Summer 2006. Portes, Alejandro; Böröcz, József (1989). "Contemporary Immigration: Theoretical Perspectives on Its Determinants and Modes of Incorporation" (PDF). The International Migration Review. 23 (3 (Special Silver Anniversary Issue: International Migration an Assessment for the 90's )): 606–630. doi:10.2307/2546431. JSTOR 2546431. PMID 12282796. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Rumbaut, Ruben and Walter Ewing. "The Myth of Immigrant Criminality and the Paradox of Assimilation: Incarceration Rates among Native and Foreign-Born Men." The Immigration Policy Center, Spring 2007. Sintès Pierre, La raison du mouvement : territoires et réseaux de migrants albanais en Grèce, Karthala, Maison Méditerranéenne des sciences de l'homme, Ecole française d'Athènes, Paris – Aix-en-Provence – Athens, 2010. Sirkeci, Ibrahim (2006). The Environment of Insecurity in Turkey and the Emigration of Turkish Kurds to Germany. New York: Edwin Mellen Press. ISBN 978-0773457393. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Valle, Isabel (1994). Fields of Toil: A Migrant Family's Journey. Washington State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87422-101-5. Zolberg, Aristide R. (2006). A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning of America. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02218-8. Look up immigration in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to Immigration. Wikisource has the text of an 1879 American Cyclopædia article about Immigration. Media related to Immigration at Wikimedia Commons