Guns N' Roses is an American hard rock band from Los Angeles, California, formed in March 1985 when local bands Hollywood Rose and L.A. Guns merged. When they signed to Geffen Records in 1986, the band's "classic lineup" consisted of vocalist Axl Rose, lead guitarist Slash, rhythm guitarist Izzy Stradlin, bassist Duff McKagan, and drummer Steven Adler. The current lineup consists of Rose, Slash, McKagan, guitarist Richard Fortus, drummer Frank Ferrer and keyboardists Dizzy Reed and Melissa Reese. Guns N' Roses heavily toured the West Coast club circuit during their early years before embarking on the Appetite for Destruction Tour. Their debut album Appetite for Destruction (1987) failed to gain traction, debuting at number 182 on the Billboard 200, until a year after its release when a grassroots campaign for the "Welcome to the Jungle" music video brought the band mainstream popularity. "Welcome to the Jungle" and "Paradise City" both became top 10 singles, with "Sweet Child o' Mine" becoming the band's only single to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100. The album has sold approximately 30 million copies worldwide, including 18 million units in the United States, making it the country's best-selling debut album and eleventh-best-selling album. With their stylistic mix of punk rock, blues rock and heavy metal, the band helped move mainstream rock away from the glam metal era of the mid-late 1980s. In addition, they are credited with revitalizing power ballads in rock. Their next studio album, G N' R Lies (1988) combined an early EP, Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide, with new acoustic songs and reached number two on the Billboard 200, sold ten million copies worldwide (including five million in the U.S.), and included the top 5 hit "Patience" and the controversial "One in a Million". Adler was fired due to his drug addiction in 1990 and was replaced by Matt Sorum. Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II, recorded and released simultaneously in 1991, debuted at number two and number one on the Billboard 200 respectively and have sold a combined 35 million copies worldwide (including 14 million units in the U.S.). The Illusion albums included the lead single "You Could Be Mine", covers of "Live and Let Die" and "Knockin' on Heaven's Door", and a trilogy of ballads ("Don't Cry", "November Rain", and "Estranged"), which featured notably high-budget music videos. The records were supported by the Use Your Illusion Tour, a world tour that lasted from 1991 to 1993. Stradlin abruptly left the band near the beginning of the tour in 1991, replaced by Gilby Clarke. The punk covers album "The Spaghetti Incident?" (1993) was the last studio album to feature Stradlin and Sorum, only to feature Clarke, and the last for Slash and McKagan before their initial departure. While mostly well received, it was the band's worst-selling studio album to date and was not supported by a tour. Work on a follow-up album stalled due to creative differences and personal conflicts between Rose and other members; Slash and McKagan left the band while Clarke and Sorum were fired. In 1998 Rose, Reed, guitarists Paul Tobias and Robin Finck, bassist Tommy Stinson, drummer Josh Freese and multi-instrumentalist Chris Pitman started writing and recording new songs. Guitarists Buckethead, Bumblefoot and Fortus, and drummers Brain and Ferrer all contributed as the band's lineup changed. Their upcoming sixth studio album, Chinese Democracy (2008), was promoted with the expansive Chinese Democracy Tour (2001-2011). With Rose failing to deliver the album on schedule, Geffen released Greatest Hits (2004), which became the 8th longest charting album in the history of the Billboard 200, reaching 631 weeks by July 2023. The long-awaited Chinese Democracy was released in November 2008, featuring the title track as the lead single. At an estimated $14 million in production costs, it is the most expensive rock album in history. It debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with a generally positive critical reception. Slash and McKagan rejoined the band in 2016 for the quasi-reunion Not in This Lifetime... Tour, which became one of the highest grossing concert tours of all-time, grossing over $584 million by its conclusion in 2019. In their early years, the band's hedonism and rebelliousness drew comparisons to the early Rolling Stones and earned them the nickname "the most dangerous band in the world". Significant controversy followed the band due to late show starts and riots (notably the 1991 Riverport riot), lyrics perceived as problematic, Rose's outspoken persona, several other members' drug and alcohol abuse issues, lawsuits, and public feuds with other artists. Several members of the band are considered some of the best in their fields with Rose considered one of the best vocalists, Slash as one of the best guitarists and McKagan as one of the best bassists by various publications. Guns N' Roses (Rose, Stradlin, McKagan, Slash, Adler, Sorum and Reed) were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2012. Guns N' Roses have sold more than 100 million records worldwide, including 45 million in the United States, making them one of the best-selling bands in history. In 1984, Hollywood Rose member Izzy Stradlin was living with L.A. Guns member Tracii Guns. When L.A. Guns needed a new vocalist, Stradlin suggested Hollywood Rose singer Axl Rose. This led to Guns N' Roses being formed in March 1985 by Rose, rhythm guitarist Stradlin, along with L.A. Guns founders lead guitarist Guns, drummer Rob Gardner, and bassist Ole Beich. Guns recalled the formation of the band in a 2019 interview, stating: "Axl got into an argument with our manager and our manager fired Axl but we all lived together so it was all really weird. So, that same night he got fired we started Guns N' Roses and I called Izzy the next day and said 'Hey, we are gonna start this new band called Guns N' Roses, do you want in?' It was as simple as that, no paint or cocaine involved." The band coined its name by combining the names of both previous groups; initially it was the name of a label they were going to release music on. Rejected names for the band included "Heads of Amazon" and "AIDS". After the band's first two rehearsals, Beich was fired and replaced by Duff McKagan. The first rehearsal with McKagan was recorded and three songs from it ("Don't Cry", "Think About You" and "Anything Goes") were played during the band's first radio interview, aired two days before their first ever show at the Troubadour on March 26, 1985. Around this time, the band planned to release an EP with the three aforementioned songs and a cover of "Heartbreak Hotel". However, Guns left the band after an argument with Rose, and plans for the release fell through. Guns was replaced by a former Hollywood Rose member, Slash. Gardner, the last remaining L.A. Guns member to remain in the band, quit soon after. Steven Adler, another former Hollywood Rose member, filled Gardner's spot. We had a singer (Mike Jagosz) that our manager didn't like, so we fired him. So then I asked Axl to join L.A. Guns and he was in the band for about six, seven months. The same manager ended up hating Axl and he wanted to fire him. We're all living together at this point and Axl and I sat down and went 'What are we going to do?' So we both said 'Fuck that', and came up with the name Guns N' Roses, which was going to be just a record label that we'd put singles out on. —Original guitarist Tracii Guns The band's "classic" lineup was finalized on June 4, 1985, when Adler and Slash officially joined. After two days of rehearsals, the band played their first show with the lineup on June 6, 1985. Two days later, the band embarked on a short, disorganized tour of the West Coast, from Sacramento, California, to McKagan's hometown of Seattle, Washington. The band drove in a separate van and had to abandon their gear when both vans broke down on the way to Seattle, forcing them to hitch-hike up the coast and back home to LA with only their guitars. The so-called "Hell Tour" settled the band's first stable lineup, with McKagan later commenting, "This trip had set a new benchmark for what we were capable of, what we could and would put ourselves through to achieve our goals as a band." The band then took up residence at a house and rehearsal space dubbed "The Hell House". Through the band's increasing presence on the Hollywood club scene – playing famed bars such as The Troubadour and The Roxy – Guns N' Roses drew the attention of major record labels. The group signed with Geffen Records in March 1986, receiving a $75,000 ($208,470 in current dollar terms) advance. They had turned down an offer from Chrysalis Records that was nearly double Geffen's, due to Chrysalis wanting to change the band's image and sound and Geffen offering full artistic freedom. In December of that year, the group released the four-song EP Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide, designed to keep interest in the band alive while the group withdrew from the club scene to work in the studio. The EP release was designed to sooth over the label, who felt the band did not have enough songs to record an album. The EP contained covers of Rose Tattoo's "Nice Boys" and Aerosmith's "Mama Kin", along with two original compositions: the punk-influenced "Reckless Life" and the classic rock-inspired "Move to the City". Although billed as a live recording, the four songs were taken from the band's demo tapes and overdubbed with crowd noise. Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide was released on the Geffen subsidiary Uzi Suicide, with production limited to 10,000 vinyl copies. Seeking to record their debut album, producer Spencer Proffer was hired to record "Nightrain" and "Sweet Child o' Mine" to test his chemistry with the band. The band eventually recorded 9 songs during these sessions, including "Heartbreak Hotel", "Don't Cry", "Welcome to the Jungle" and "Shadow of Your Love". The band then recorded demos with Nazareth guitarist Manny Charlton. Paul Stanley of KISS was considered as producer, but he was rejected after he wanted to change Adler's drum set more than Adler wanted. Robert John "Mutt" Lange and Tom Werman were also considered, but the label did not want to spend the extra money on a famous producer. Ultimately, Mike Clink (who had produced several Triumph records) was chosen, and the group recorded "Shadow of Your Love" first with Clink as a test. After some weeks of rehearsal, the band entered Daryl Dragon's Rumbo Recorders in January 1987 to record their debut album. Two weeks were spent recording basic tracks, with a month of overdubs. The drums were done in six days, but Rose's vocals took much longer as he insisted on doing them one line at a time. Guns N' Roses' debut album Appetite for Destruction was released July 21, 1987. The album underwent an artwork change after the original cover design by Robert Williams, which depicted a surrealist scene in which a dagger-toothed monster vengefully attacks a robot rapist, was deemed too controversial. The band stated the original artwork was "a symbolic social statement, with the robot representing the industrial system that's raping and polluting our environment". The revised cover was done by Andy Engell, based on a design by tattoo artist Bill White Jr., who had designed the artwork for a tattoo Rose had acquired the previous year. The artwork featured each of the five band members' skulls layered on a cross. The band's first single was "It's So Easy", released on June 15, 1987, in the UK only, where it reached number eighty-four on the UK Singles Chart. In the U.S., "Welcome to the Jungle" was issued as the album's first single in October, with an accompanying music video. Initially, the album and single lingered for almost a year without performing well, but when Geffen founder David Geffen was asked to lend support to the band, he obliged, personally convincing MTV executives to play "Welcome to the Jungle" during the network's after-hours rotation. Even though the video was initially only played once at 4 a.m. on a Sunday, heavy metal and hard rock fans took notice and soon began requesting the video and song en masse. The song, written in Seattle, was about Los Angeles. The music video took place in New York. According to Rose, the inspiration for the lyrics came from an encounter he and a friend had with a homeless man while they were coming out of a bus into New York. Trying to put a scare into the young runaways, the man yelled at them, "You know where you are? You're in the jungle baby; you're gonna die!" The song was featured in the 1988 Dirty Harry film The Dead Pool, starring Clint Eastwood, and members of the band had a cameo appearance in the film. "Sweet Child o' Mine" was the album's second U.S. single, a love song co-written by Rose as a poem for his then-girlfriend Erin Everly, daughter of Don Everly of the Everly Brothers. Due to the growing grassroots success of the band and the cross-gender appeal of the song, "Sweet Child o' Mine" and its accompanying music video received heavy airplay on both radio and MTV, becoming a huge hit during the summer of 1988 and reaching the top of the charts in the U.S. Slash later commented, "I hated that song with a huge passion for the longest time, and it turned out to be our hugest hit, so it goes to show what I know." The song was released in Japan as part of the EP Live from the Jungle, which also featured a selection of live recordings from the band's June 1987 dates at London's The Marquee, the group's first shows outside the United States. The song is the highest charting Guns N' Roses song, and is the band's only song to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100. After the success of "Sweet Child o' Mine", "Welcome to the Jungle" was re-issued as a single and reached No. 7 in the U.S. By the time "Paradise City" and its video reached the airwaves, peaking at No. 5 in the U.S., Appetite for Destruction had reached No. 1 on the Billboard 200. To date, the album has sold in excess of 30 million copies worldwide, including 18 million units sold in the United States, making it the best-selling debut album of all time in the U.S, in addition to being the eleventh best-selling album in the United States. Guns N' Roses toured extensively in support of their debut album, embarking on the 16-month-long Appetite for Destruction Tour. In addition to headlining dates in Europe and the U.S., the band opened North American shows for The Cult, Mötley Crüe, and Alice Cooper throughout the second half of 1987. During the 1987 tour, drummer Steven Adler broke his hand in a fight, and was replaced for 8 shows by Cinderella drummer Fred Coury. Bassist Duff McKagan missed several shows in May 1988 to attend his wedding; Kid "Haggis" Chaos from The Cult filled in. Don Henley of the Eagles played drums for the band during the 1989 AMA show while Adler was in rehab. The band proceeded to tour the United States, Australia and Japan, while serving as opening acts on North America shows by Iron Maiden and Aerosmith. Tim Collins, Aerosmith's then-manager, remarked, "By the end of the tour, Guns N' Roses were huge. They basically just exploded. We were all pissed that Rolling Stone magazine showed up to do a story on Aerosmith, but Guns N' Roses ended up on the cover of the magazine. Suddenly, the opening act was bigger than we were." Guns N' Roses' second album, G N' R Lies, was released in November 1988. It included the four recordings from the band's 1986 EP Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide as well as four new acoustic tracks. "Patience", the only single, reached number 4 in the U.S., while the album reached number 2. The album cover, a parody of tabloid newspapers, was modified after initial pressings to remove the headlines "Wife-beating has been around for 10,000 years" and "Ladies, welcome to the Dark Ages". The song "One in a Million" raised accusations of racism, xenophobia and homophobia. The song's lyrics include the following: "Police and niggers, that's right, get out of my way, don't need to buy none of your gold chains today" and "Immigrants and faggots, they make no sense to me, they come to our country and think they'll do as they please, like start some mini Iran or spread some fucking disease". Rose denied that he was a racist and defended his use of the word "nigger", claiming that "it's a word to describe somebody that is basically a pain in your life, a problem. The word nigger doesn't necessarily mean black." He cited the rap group N.W.A. and the John Lennon song "Woman Is the Nigger of the World" as other examples of musicians using the word. Several years later, Rose conceded that he had used the word as an insult towards black people who had tried to rob him, and because the word is a taboo. In response to the allegations of homophobia, Rose stated that he considered himself "pro-heterosexual" and blamed this attitude on "bad experiences" with gay men. During a November 1987 show in Atlanta, Rose assaulted multiple security guards and was held backstage by police. The band continued the concert with a roadie performing lead vocals. Riots nearly broke out during two August 1988 shows in New York. At England's Monsters of Rock festival, held that same month, two fans were crushed to death during the group's set by the slam-dancing crowd. During the first of four October 1989 dates opening for the Rolling Stones at the L.A. Coliseum, Rose announced that the shows would be the group's last if certain members of the band did not stop "dancing with Mr. Brownstone", a reference to the band's song of the same name about heroin. "That was serious", the singer remarked. "I'm not gonna be a part of watching them kill each other, just killing themselves off. Everybody was pissed at me, but afterwards Slash's mom came and shook my hand and so did his brothers." Events such as these helped earn Guns N' Roses the moniker "the most dangerous band in the world". In 1990, Guns N' Roses returned to the studio. Adler was briefly fired over his drug use, but was reinstated after signing a contract in which he vowed to stop taking drugs. During the recording session of "Civil War", Adler was unable to perform well due to his struggles with cocaine and heroin addiction, and caused the band to do nearly 30 takes. Adler claimed at the time he was sick from taking opiate blockers to help with the addictions. He was fired on July 11, 1990 as a result, and later filed a lawsuit against the band. In 2005, he recalled: Doug Goldstein called me into the office about two weeks later. He wanted me to sign some contracts. I was told that every time I did heroin, the band would fine me $2,000. There was a whole stack of papers, with colored paper clips everywhere for my signatures. What these contracts actually said was that the band were paying me $2,000 to leave. They were taking my royalties, all my writing credits. They didn't like me anymore and just wanted me gone. That's why I filed the lawsuit – to get all those things back. Martin Chambers of the Pretenders and Adam Maples of Sea Hags were considered as replacements. Jussi Tegelman, from the Finnish band Havana Black, assisted on drums in studio sessions before a permanent replacement was found. The position was filled by drummer Matt Sorum, who had played briefly with the Cult. Slash credited Sorum with preventing the band from breaking up at the time. In response to an interviewer's suggestion that replacing Adler with Sorum had turned Guns N' Roses from a rock 'n' roll band to a heavy metal band, Stradlin responded: "Yeah, a big musical difference. The first time I realized what Steve did for the band was when he broke his hand in Michigan ... So we had Fred Coury come in from Cinderella for the Houston show. Fred played technically good and steady, but the songs sounded just awful. They were written with Steve playing the drums and his sense of swing was the push and pull that give the songs their feel. When that was gone, it was just ... unbelievable, weird. Nothing worked." A few months prior, keyboardist Dizzy Reed became the sixth member of the group when he joined as a full-time member. In May 1991, Guns N' Roses fired their manager, Alan Niven, replacing him with Doug Goldstein. According to a 1991 cover story by Rolling Stone, Rose forced the dismissal of Niven against the wishes of some of his bandmates by refusing to complete the albums until he was replaced. The band released the recordings as two albums, Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II, on September 17, 1991. The tactic paid off when the albums debuted at No. 2 and No. 1 respectively in the Billboard charts, making Guns N' Roses the only act to achieve this feat until hip hop artist Nelly in 2004 and the first to have the top two albums since Jim Croce in 1974. The albums sold 770,000 units (Use Your Illusion II) and 685,000 units (Use Your Illusion I) in their first week, and spent 108 weeks on the chart. They have sold a combined 35 million copies worldwide, including 14 million in the United States. Guns N' Roses accompanied the Use Your Illusion albums with many videos, including "Don't Cry", "November Rain" and "Estranged", some of the most expensive music videos ever made. The ballad "November Rain" reached number 3 in the US and became the most requested video on MTV, eventually winning the 1992 MTV Video Music Award for best cinematography. At 8:57, it was at the time also the longest song in US chart history to reach the top ten. During the awards show, the band performed the song with Elton John accompanying on piano. Before the release of the albums, Guns N' Roses embarked on the 28-month-long Use Your Illusion Tour. It became famous for both its financial success and for the many controversial incidents that occurred at the shows. The tour included 192 dates in 27 countries, with over seven million people attending concerts. The Use Your Illusion Tour is considered the "longest tour in rock history". The Use Your Illusion World Tour program included a guitar solo from Slash based on The Godfather theme; a piano-driven cover of "It's Alright" by Black Sabbath; and an extended jam on the classic rock-inspired "Move to the City", where the group showcased the ensemble of musicians assembled for the tour. On July 2, 1991, at the Riverport Amphitheater in Maryland Heights, Missouri, Rose discovered that a fan was filming the show with a camera. After asking the venue's security to take away the camera, Rose jumped into the audience, had a heated confrontation with the fan, and assaulted him. After being pulled from the audience by members of the crew, Rose said, "Well, thanks to the lame-ass security, I'm going home!", threw his microphone to the ground and stormed off the stage. The angry crowd rioted, injuring dozens. Footage was captured by Robert John, who was documenting the tour. The police were unable to arrest Rose until almost a year later, as the band went overseas to continue the tour. Charges were filed against Rose, but a judge ruled that he did not directly incite the riot. In his defense, Rose stated that the Guns N' Roses security team had made four separate requests to the venue's security staff to remove the camera, that those requests were ignored, that other members of the band had reported being hit by bottles launched from the audience, and that the security staff refused to enforce a drinking limit. Rose was eventually found guilty of property damage and assault. He was fined $50,000 and given two years probation. Rhythm guitarist Izzy Stradlin abruptly quit the band on November 7, 1991, after a repeat of the St. Louis incident nearly unfolded during a concert in Germany. As reasons for his departure, Stradlin cited a combination of Rose's personal behavior, his mismanagement of the band, and difficulties being around Slash, Sorum, and McKagan due to his newfound sobriety and their continuing addictions. Stradlin later commented, "Once I quit drugs, I couldn't help looking around and asking myself, 'Is this all there is?' I was just tired of it; I needed to get out". The band had three weeks to find a replacement or cancel several shows. Dave Navarro from Jane's Addiction was considered, but according to Slash, "he couldn't get it together". Stradlin was eventually replaced by Los Angeles guitarist Gilby Clarke, whom Slash credited for saving the band. At many shows on the tour, Rose introduced Clarke to the audience, and Slash and Clarke would play "Wild Horses", a Rolling Stones cover. In 1993, Clarke broke his arm in a motorcycle accident during the tour and was replaced by Stradlin for several weeks. In 1992, the band performed three songs at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert. Because of the controversial song "One in a Million", activist group ACT UP demanded that the band be dropped from the bill, urged other artists to shun GN'R, and the urged crowd to boo the group. Members of Queen dismissed the activists, with lead guitarist Brian May stating: "People seem so blind. Don't they realize that the mere fact that Guns N' Roses are here is the biggest statement that you could get?" Slash later performed "Tie Your Mother Down" with the remaining members of Queen and Def Leppard vocalist Joe Elliott, while Rose performed "We Will Rock You" and sang a duet with Elton John on "Bohemian Rhapsody". Their personal set included "Paradise City" and "Knockin' on Heaven's Door". When the band returned to the US for the second leg of the Use Your Illusion Tour, Rose had wanted the grunge band Nirvana as the support act, but lead singer Kurt Cobain declined. Later that year, Guns N' Roses embarked on the Guns N' Roses/Metallica Stadium Tour with heavy metal band Metallica, supported by Faith No More, Motörhead, and Body Count. During a show in August 1992 at Montreal's Olympic Stadium, Metallica's lead singer James Hetfield suffered second-degree burns to his hands and face after malfunctions with pyrotechnics. Metallica was forced to cancel the second hour of the show, but promised to return to the city for another performance. After a long delay, during which the audience became increasingly restless, Guns N' Roses took the stage. However, the shortened time between sets did not allow for adequate tuning of stage monitors and the band members could not hear themselves. In addition, Rose claimed that his throat hurt, causing the band to leave the stage early. The cancellation led to another audience riot, in which 10 audience members and three police officers were injured. Police made at least a dozen arrests related to the incident. The Use Your Illusion tour ended in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on July 17, 1993. The tour set attendance records and lasted for 28 months, in which 194 shows were played in 27 countries. The show in Buenos Aires marked the last time that Sorum and Clarke played in the band, and the last time Slash performed with the band until 2016. Initially, the band planned to release an EP of covers in 1992 or 1993, but decided to record a full album. Their fifth studio album, "The Spaghetti Incident?", a collection of punk and glam rock covers, was released on November 23, 1993. The album features covers of songs of punk artists such as U.K. Subs, The Damned, New York Dolls, The Stooges, Dead Boys, Misfits, Johnny Thunders, The Professionals, FEAR, as well as T. Rex, Soundgarden and The Skyliners. The lead single, "Ain't It Fun" featured Hanoi Rocks singer Michael Monroe as a guest vocalist. The album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard charts, and sold 190,000 copies its first week. Many of the tracks were recorded during the same sessions as the Illusions albums, which were originally intended to produce three or four albums. Stradlin's guitar parts were reportedly re-recorded entirely by Gilby Clarke. Slash described the recording as "spontaneous and unpainted", and recording the songs served as "a purpose to alleviate the pressure of making the Illusions records". The band wanted to increase the profile of some of their favorite bands and help them financially via royalties with the tracklist selection, and considered naming the album "Pension Fund". The album includes a hidden track, a cover of "Look at Your Game, Girl", originally by cult leader Charles Manson. The track was kept secret and left off advance tapes sent to reviewers. The inclusion of the song caused controversy, with law enforcement and victims rights groups expressing outrage. Rose stated "we wanted to downplay it. We don't give any credit to Charles Manson on the album". Label president David Geffen commented: "[If] Rose had realized how offensive people would find this, he would not have ever recorded this song". Slash mentioned that the song was "done with naive and innocent black humor on our part". Rose stated he would donate all performance royalties from the song to a nonprofit environmental organization. The band was going to remove the song before learning that royalties would be donated to the son of one of Manson's victims. Geffen Records stated their share of royalties would be donated to the Doris Tate Crime Victims Bureau. The band did not tour in support of "The Spaghetti Incident?". Although well received critically; it is the band's worst selling studio album, having sold 1 million copies by 2018. Between 1994 and 1996, the band sporadically recorded new material. According to Matt Sorum, in 1996, the band had recorded seven songs, with seven more in the writing stages, and intended to release a single album with 10 or 12 songs in spring 1997. In May 1994, Gilby Clarke said work on the next Guns N' Roses album had ended. Rose said the material was scrapped due to the lack of collaboration between band members: "We still needed the collaboration of the band as a whole to write the best songs. Since none of that happened, that's the reason why that material got scrapped." The album was described by McKagan as consisting of "up-tempo rock songs" with "no ballads". Sorum said that It's Five O'Clock Somewhere, the debut album from Slash's band Slash's Snakepit, "could have been a Guns N' Roses album, but Axl didn't think it was good enough". In 1994, all of the then-current members of the band contributed to Gilby Clarke's debut album, Pawnshop Guitars. In December 1994, GN'R released a cover of the Rolling Stones' "Sympathy for the Devil". The song appeared in the films Interview with the Vampire and Fallen and was released as a single. Entertainment Weekly stated that the 'note-for-note remake works up a decent lather but seems utterly bankrupt'. "Sympathy for the Devil" is the final GN'R track to feature Slash on lead guitar, McKagan on bass, and Sorum on drums. The song also featured Rose's childhood friend and Hollywood Rose collaborator Paul "Huge" Tobias on rhythm guitar. Tobias's presence in the band created tension; Slash had 'creative and personal differences' with Tobias. A 2001 interview revealed Slash told his bandmates in September 1996, "I'm going to confront it. Either Paul goes, or [I go]." The music was going in a direction that was completely indulgent to his friend [Huge] ... And another factor is this guy that Axl brought in and told us, 'This is our new guitar player' ... There was no democracy there. And that's when Slash really started going, 'Fuck this. What, this is his band now? or something?' ... It was ridiculous. I'd go down there to start rehearsal at 10, and Axl would show up at four or five in the morning. That sort of thing was going on for a couple of years. — Duff McKagan Gilby Clarke's contract was not renewed and he was gone from the band by 1995. Slash stated in his book that Rose fired Clarke without consulting anyone, claiming he was a "hired hand". Clarke was not involved in the recording of 'Sympathy for the Devil': "I knew that that was the ending because nobody told me about it". Clarke mentioned that before the final show of the Use Your Illusion Tour, Rose told him "Hey, enjoy your last show". Clarke later sued the band over the use of his likeness in Guns N' Roses Pinball. In August 1995, Rose legally left the band and created a new partnership under the band's name. Rose later stated that he took this step "to salvage Guns not steal it". Rose reportedly purchased the full rights to the Guns N' Roses name in 1997. Slash claimed he and bandmates signed over the name under duress: "Axl refused to go onstage one night during the Use Your Illusion tour in 1992 unless the band signed away the name rights to the band. Unfortunately, we signed it. I didn't think he'd go on stage otherwise." Rose denied the claim, saying "(it) Never happened, all made up, fallacy and fantasy. Not one single solitary thread of truth to it. Had that been the case I would have been cremated years ago legally, could've cleaned me out for the name and damages. It's called under duress with extenuating circumstances." In 1996, Rose, Slash, McKagan, and former member Izzy Stradlin guested on Anxious Disease, the debut album by The Outpatience. This would be the last material the four classic-era band members worked on together. The recording of "Sympathy for the Devil", coupled with tension between Slash and Rose, led the former to quit the band officially in October 1996. Rose sent a fax notifying MTV of the departure, and Slash responded: "Axl and I have not been capable of seeing eye to eye on Guns N' Roses for some time. We tried to collaborate, but at this point, I'm no longer in the band." Slash stated, "Axl's whole visionary style, as far as his input in Guns N' Roses, is completely different from mine. I just like to play guitar, write a good riff, go out there and play, as opposed to presenting an image." Slash was replaced by Nine Inch Nails touring guitarist Robin Finck in January 1997. He signed a two-year contract with the band in August 1997, making him an official member. Finck was originally recommended by Matt Sorum to Rose a year earlier as a possible second guitarist to complement Slash. Slash's departure was followed by the departure of Matt Sorum in April 1997. Sorum was fired by Rose following an argument about Tobias's inclusion in the band. Sorum later stated that Tobias was the "Yoko Ono of Guns N' Roses". Rose auditioned multiple potential members, including multi-instrumentalist Chris Vrenna and guitarist Zakk Wylde, alongside drummers Dave Abbruzzese, Michael Bland, Joey Castillo and Kellii Scott from Failure. Rolling Stone reported in April 1997 that the lineup of Guns N' Roses was Rose, McKagan, Tobias, Finck & Vrenna. McKagan was the last of the Appetite lineup to leave, resigning as bassist in August 1997. McKagan had recently become a father and wrote about his decision to leave in his autobiography: "Guns had been paying rent on studios for three years now—from 1994 to 1997—and still did not have a single song. The whole operation was so erratic that it didn't seem to fit with my hopes for parenthood, for stability."Josh Freese was ultimately hired to replace Sorum on drums, joining in the summer of 1997. After being recommended by Freese, former Replacements bassist Tommy Stinson joined in 1998, replacing McKagan. By the end of 1998, a new version of Guns N' Roses had emerged: Rose on lead vocals, Stinson on bass, Freese on drums, Finck on lead guitar, Tobias on rhythm guitar, Reed on keyboards, and multi-instrumentalist Chris Pitman. In 1998, Geffen released an edited single disc version of the Illusion albums entitled Use Your Illusion. In November 1999, the label released Live Era '87–'93, a collection of live performances from various concerts during the Appetite for Destruction and Use Your Illusion tours. Former guitarist Slash described the selection of songs of the album as a "very mutual effort", adding that "the live album was one of the easiest projects we all worked on. I didn't actually see Axl, but we communicated via the powers that be." A new Guns N' Roses album had reportedly been in the works since 1994, with Rose the only original member still in the band. Several producers, including Youth, Moby, Mike Clink, Eric Caudieux & Sean Beaven worked with the band during the late 90s, incorporating new electronic and industrial elements to the music. Rolling Stone stated that the label planned for the album to be released in late 1999. By August 1999, the band had recorded over 30 songs for the album, which was tentatively entitled 2000 Intentions. In November 1999, during an interview with Kurt Loder for MTV, Rose said that he had re-recorded Appetite for Destruction with the then-new band, apart from two songs which he had replaced with "Patience" and "You Could Be Mine". During the interview, Rose announced the title of the upcoming album, Chinese Democracy. Rose explained: There's a lot of Chinese democracy movements, and it's something that there's a lot of talk about, and it's something that will be nice to see. It could also just be like an ironic statement. I don't know, I just like the sound of it. (The album has) a lot of different sounds. There's some heavy songs, there's a lot of aggressive songs, but they're all in different styles and different sounds. It is truly a melting pot. Band manager Doug Goldstein stated in November 1999 that the band had 'almost finished' recording the music, and the album was due out some time in 2000. Later that month, the band released a new song, the industrial styled "Oh My God", which was included on the soundtrack of the film End of Days. The track featured additional guitar work by Dave Navarro and Gary Sunshine, Rose's personal guitar teacher. Rose claimed that former members Duff McKagan and Matt Sorum had 'failed to see the potential' of the song and had no interest in recording or playing the piece. In August 1999, guitarist Robin Finck departed the band to rejoin his former band, Nine Inch Nails, on tour. In March 2000, avant-garde guitarist Brian Carroll, more commonly referred to as Buckethead, joined Guns N' Roses as a replacement for Finck. Also in March 2000, drummer Josh Freese left the band. He was replaced by former Primus drummer Bryan Mantia, known professionally as Brain. Robin Finck returned to the band in late 2000, to complement Buckethead on lead guitar. With the album nearing completion in mid-2000, producer Roy Thomas Baker convinced Rose to re-record it, causing further delays. In an interview with Rolling Stone in February 2000, Rose played several songs of the upcoming album to reporters, including "Chinese Democracy", "Catcher in the Rye", "I.R.S.", "The Blues", "There Was a Time" and "Oklahoma". Rose mentioned that part of the delay of the new album was him 'educating himself about the technology that's come to define rock', stating that "it's like from scratch, learning how to work with something, and not wanting it just to be something you did on a computer." Rolling Stone described the album as "Led Zeppelin's Physical Graffiti remixed by Beck and Trent Reznor. Rose mentioned that the expense of the record would be negated by the recording sessions yielding multiple albums, including a record that is "more industrial and electronica-influenced than Chinese Democracy". In a 2001 interview, Rose described the album as having "all kinds of styles, many influences as blues, mixed in the songs" and said that it was "not industrial". Describing why he continued using the Guns N' Roses name, instead of labeling the upcoming album an 'Axl Rose solo album', Rose stated "there were other people in Guns n' Roses before them, you know. I contemplated letting go of that, but it doesn't feel right in any way. I am not the person who chose to try to kill it and walked away. ... Everybody is putting everything they've got into singing and building. Maybe I'm helping steer it to what it should be built like." Also in the interview, Rose attributed the breakup of the old lineup to drug addictions and 'an effort from inside the band to destroy him', stating "There was an effort to bring me down. It was a king-of-the-mountain thing", and that he "needed to take control to survive", also describing the dissolution as "a divorce". Eight years after the previous Guns N' Roses concert, the band made a public appearance in January 2001 with two well-received concerts: one in Las Vegas and one at the Rock in Rio Festival in Rio de Janeiro. The band played both songs from previous albums and songs from then-unreleased Chinese Democracy. During the band's Rock in Rio set, Rose made the following comment regarding former members of the band: I know that many of you are disappointed that some of the people you came to know and love could not be with us here today. Regardless of what you have heard or read, people worked very hard (meaning my former friends) to do everything they could so that I could not be here today. I am as hurt and disappointed as you that unlike Oasis, we could not find a way to all get along. The group played two shows in Las Vegas at the end of 2001. Former guitarist Slash claimed that he tried to attend a show and was turned away at the door by security. Due to his frustrations with touring, rhythm guitarist Paul Tobias left the band in 2002 and was replaced by Richard Fortus (formerly of The Psychedelic Furs and Love Spit Love). The band then played several shows in August 2002, headlining festivals and concerts throughout Asia and Europe, including Pukkelpop, Summer Sonic Festival, and The Carling Weekend. At the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards on August 29, 2002, Guns N' Roses closed the show in a previously unannounced performance, playing "Welcome to the Jungle", "Madagascar", and "Paradise City". In November 2002, the band's first North American tour since 1993 was organized to support Chinese Democracy, with CKY and Mix Master Mike joining. However, the opening show in Vancouver was canceled by the venue when Rose failed to turn up. According to Guns' management, "Axl's flight from L.A. had been delayed by mechanical troubles". A riot ensued. The tour was met with mixed results, some concerts did not sell well, while shows in larger markets such as New York City sold out in minutes. Due to a second riot by fans in Philadelphia when the band failed to show up again, tour promoter Clear Channel canceled the remainder of the tour. Guns N' Roses tour canceled. Typical. And freakishly expected. Haha. Really bad idea. I wouldn't suggest they come back. —Opening band CKY In September 2003, Eddie Trunk played a previously unheard track, "I.R.S.", on his radio show, given to him by baseball player Mike Piazza. The band management heard about the nationwide leak, and obtained a cease and desist order for all stations that had a copy of the track. Rose had played several new songs at a strip club in Las Vegas two months earlier to gauge the reactions of the crowd. In February 2004, Geffen said, "Having exceeded all budgeted and approved recording costs by millions of dollars, it is Mr. Rose's obligation to fund and complete the album, not Geffen's." By March 2004, Geffen had pulled funding from Chinese Democracy. Around then, band manager Merck Mercuriadis stated that "The 'Chinese Democracy' album is very close to being completed". According to a 2005 report by The New York Times, Rose had allegedly spent $13 million ($20,280,797 in current dollar terms) in the studio by that point. Mercuriadis rejected the budget claims made by The New York Times, claiming the sources had not been involved in the project in several years. The album was frequently described as "the most expensive album ever made". In March 2004, since Rose had failed to deliver a new studio album in more than ten years, Geffen released Guns N' Roses' Greatest Hits. Slash and McKagan joined Rose in suing Geffen to stop the release of the album, which was compiled without authorization from any current or former band members. The lawsuit was thrown out and the album went triple platinum in the US, eventually going on to be the third-longest-charting album in the Nielsen SoundScan era. McKagan and Slash also joined Rose in an unsuccessful effort to prevent the release of The Roots of Guns N' Roses. The band was scheduled to play at Rock in Rio Lisboa in May 2004. However, Buckethead left the band in March of that year, causing the band to cancel the show. Buckethead reportedly left the band because of the "inability to complete an album or tour", according to his manager. Rose claimed "the band has been put in an untenable position by guitarist Buckethead and his untimely departure. During his tenure with the band, Buckethead has been inconsistent and erratic in both his behavior and commitment ... His transient lifestyle has made it impossible for even his closest friends to have nearly any form of communication with him whatsoever." In February 2006, demos of the songs "Better", "Catcher in the Rye", "I.R.S.", and "There Was a Time" were leaked on to the Internet through a Guns N' Roses fan site. The band's management requested that all links to the MP3 files and all lyrics to the songs be removed from forums and websites. Despite this, radio stations began adding "I.R.S." to playlists, and the song reached No. 49 on the Radio & Records Active Rock National Airplay chart in the final week of February. In August 2006, Slash and McKagan sued Rose over publishing and songwriting credits, which Rose's lawyer claimed were due to a 'clerical error' while changing publishers. Following a recommendation from guitar virtuoso Joe Satriani, guitarist Ron "Bumblefoot" Thal joined Guns N' Roses in 2006, replacing Buckethead. Thal made his live debut with the band at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York City on May 12, 2006, the band's first live show in over three years. Five warm-up shows before a North American tour were held in September 2006. The tour officially commenced on October 24 in Miami. Drummer Frank Ferrer replaced Brain, who took a leave of absence to be with his wife and newborn child. Coinciding with the tour, the song "Better" was featured in an internet advertisement for Harley-Davidson in October 2006. Keyboardist Dizzy Reed stated that the release was an accident, with two versions being made—one 'experimental edit' featuring a demo of "Better" and one with "Paradise City". The ad with Better was mislabeled and inadvertently uploaded online for a day before being replaced by the intended ad with Paradise City. In November 2006, shows in Portland, Maine were cancelled, with the band claiming that the cancellations were "due to limitations imposed by local fire marshals". Rose later apologized in a statement, stating "We have chosen to take the public heat for these events in order to have another shot at the future today with a new album." In December 2006, Rose released an open letter to fans announcing that Merck Mercuriadis had been fired as the band's manager. He revealed that the last four dates of the North American tour would be cut so the band could work on post-production for Chinese Democracy. He also set a tentative release date for the album for the first time since the album's announcement: March 6, 2007. On February 23, 2007, Del James announced that the recording stage of Chinese Democracy was finished and the band had now moved onto mixing the album. However, this proved that March 6 release date would be impossible to achieve, and the album once again had no scheduled release date. In February 2007, the 'final' version of "Better" leaked online to positive reviews. On May 4, 2007, three more tracks leaked from Chinese Democracy: An updated version of "I.R.S.", "The Blues", and the title track. All three tracks had previously been played live. Guns N' Roses embarked on the 2007 leg of the Chinese Democracy World Tour in Mexico in June, followed by dates in Australia and Japan. The songs "Nice Boys" and "Don't Cry" (appearing as an instrumental Bumblefoot solo) were played for the first time since the Use Your Illusion Tour. The tour ended on the twentieth anniversary of Appetite for Destruction's release date, in Osaka. During this tour, the band featured vocalist Axl Rose, Robin Finck, Ron Thal and Richard Fortus on guitars, Tommy Stinson on bass, Dizzy Reed and Chris Pitman on keyboards and Frank Ferrer on drums. In December 2007, Eddie Trunk reported that the album was done and handed over to Geffen Records, but delayed due to issues with the label. The following month, reports that the delays were disagreements between Geffen and Rose on marketing emerged. In February 2008, Rose's manager, Beta Lebeis, debunked Trunk's suggestion and stated the band is "in negotiations" with the record label, and the album had been finished since Christmas 2007. On March 26, 2008, Dr Pepper announced a plan to give everyone in America – except the band's former guitarists Slash and Buckethead – a free can of Dr Pepper if the band released Chinese Democracy before the end of 2008. Rose stated he was "surprised and very happy" about the announcement, adding, "As some of Buckethead's performances are on our album, I'll share my Dr Pepper with him." Guns N' Roses "Chinese Democracy" (2008) Sample of "Chinese Democracy" from Chinese Democracy. It is the first single released by Guns N' Roses since 1994. The song represented a shift in style for the band towards industrial rock. Problems playing this file? See media help. On March 27, 2008, the day after Dr Pepper's announcement, the band members announced that they had hired a new management team, headed by Irving Azoff and Andy Gould. Amidst industry rumors in April 2008 that a release was coming soon, nine tracks purported to be from Chinese Democracy were leaked to a website on June 19, 2008, but were quickly removed due to a cease-and-desist letter from the band's label. Six of the leaked tracks had surfaced previously in some form, while three were new. On July 14, 2008, Harmonix, in conjunction with MTV Games, officially announced the release of a new song from Chinese Democracy. The song, entitled "Shackler's Revenge", was released through the new game Rock Band 2. The song "If the World" debuted October 10, 2008, playing in the end credits of the Ridley Scott film Body of Lies. Wikinews has related news: Guns N' Roses' 'Chinese Democracy' released after 15 years On October 22, 2008, after several months of speculation, band management, Best Buy, and Interscope Geffen A&M Records issued a joint press release confirming that the much-anticipated release of Chinese Democracy in the US had been scheduled for November 23, 2008, as a Best Buy exclusive. Several days before its official release, the band streamed the entire Chinese Democracy album on the group's Myspace page. The album was streamed over three million times, breaking the Myspace record for most streamed album ever. Chinese Democracy, the band's sixth studio album and its first since 1993's "The Spaghetti Incident?" was released on November 22, 2008, in Europe and Australia, on November 23, 2008, in North America, and on November 24, 2008, in the United Kingdom. Chinese Democracy debuted at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 but undersold industry expectations. The album's divided reception led to it being included on several publication's year end worst-of lists, as well of best-of lists. On February 6, 2009, Rose gave his first interview in nine years when he sat down with Billboard's Jonathan Cohen. Rose said that there was no chance that he would ever agree with a reunion with Slash: What's clear is that one of the two of us will die before a reunion and however sad, ugly or unfortunate anyone views it, it is how it is. Those decisions were made a long time ago and reiterated year after year by one man. Rose however stated that he was open to working again with Stradlin and McKagan: I could see doing a song or so on the side with Izzy or having him out [on tour] again. I'm not so comfortable with doing anything having more than one of the alumni. Maybe something with Duff, but that's it, and not something I'd have to really get down into, as I'd get left with sorting it out and then blamed on top of it. So, no, not me. In March 2009, the band announced that DJ Ashba would be the new lead guitarist, replacing a departing Robin Finck, who rejoined Nine Inch Nails. In June 2009, it was reported that manager Irving Azoff had been "fired, then re-hired, then fired". A year later, Azoff's company Front Line Management sued Rose, claiming he "violated an oral agreement to pay 15% of earnings, or nearly $2 million, from a lucrative concert tour" and seeking $1.87 million in unpaid fees. Rose filed a $5 million counter-lawsuit against Azoff, saying that Azoff sabotaged sales of Guns N' Roses' comeback album, attempted to force Rose to reunite with his estranged former bandmates, failed to promote Chinese Democracy, and filed suit for "commissions he didn't earn and had no right to receive". The lawsuit was settled in 2011. Several years later, Guns N' Roses' management, led by Rose's former personal assistant Beta Lebeis and her family, stated that previous tensions led to an ultimatum of "no more managers". Guns N' Roses headlined the Friday night at Reading Festival 2010 and closed Leeds Festival two days later. Guns N' Roses was 58 minutes late coming on to the stage, and because of a curfew issued by Reading Council the band's set ended at midnight. Rose orchestrated fan frustration toward the organizers, citing the strict curfew. Further late showings caused issues; during a concert on September 1, 2010, in Dublin, the band was over an hour late arriving on stage. Rose stopped the band in the middle of the second song, "Welcome to the Jungle", after multiple bottles were thrown on stage to warn the crowd. After another bottle was thrown, the band left the stage during the fourth song of the set. The band returned to the stage an hour later to finish the show. Former bassist Duff McKagan joined the band on stage for the first time since leaving the band on October 14, 2010, at The O2 Arena, in London, England. He performed four songs with the group: "You Could Be Mine", "Nice Boys", "Knockin' on Heaven's Door", and "Patience". The appearance was said to be a spur-of-the-moment decision, as he and Rose happened to be staying in the same hotel. Rose told the audience, "There was this guy at the end of my hallway playing all this loud music and shit. What the fuck? Oh—it's Duff!". McKagan later joined Guns N' Roses for two Seattle shows in December 2011 and had his band Loaded open for Guns N' Roses. Guns N' Roses performed at Rock in Rio 4 on October 2, 2011, during heavy rain, playing "Estranged" for the first time since 1993. Guitarist Bumblefoot stated that due to the conditions, it was the "worst concert he's ever been a part of". Two months later, during a performance in Nashville, Tennessee, "Civil War" also made a return after an eighteen-year absence. On November 10, 2011, Rose gave his first TV interview in years to Eddie Trunk, Don Jamieson and Jim Florentine of That Metal Show, discussing his whole career and the band's future. Izzy Stradlin joined the band for a surprise performance at a wedding in Saint-Tropez, France, in July 2012. Also in July 2012, the band toured Israel for the first time since 1992. NME reported that year that the band's tour security said they had been instructed by Guns N' Roses' management that anyone wearing a Slash T-shirt not be allowed into the tour venue. On April 14, 2012, Guns N' Roses were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Slash, McKagan, Adler, Sorum and Clarke reunited for the induction. Clarke, who was not inducted, performed at the request of Sorum. The band performed "Mr. Brownstone", "Sweet Child o' Mine", and "Paradise City", with Alter Bridge and Myles Kennedy on lead vocals. Rose did not attend and had asked not to be inducted, writing in an open letter that the Hall of Fame "doesn't appear to be somewhere I'm actually wanted or respected". Stradlin and Reed also declined to attend the induction. At the ceremony, the crowd booed Rose's name and chanted "Fuck Axl". Afterwards, Rose released a statement saying he did did not understand the purpose of the Hall of Fame, how it was funded or how acts are chosen. In an interview, Slash said that none of the band initially wanted to take part and were uncertain of how it would proceed. In early 2012, the band announced the upcoming Up Close and Personal Tour, with shows in the United States and Europe. The shows themselves varied considerably in comparison to the previous Chinese Democracy Tour. All of the North American shows took place in smaller-scale clubs, not large arenas or stadiums. All pyrotechnics were removed from the shows. On August 13, 2012, the band announced a residency at The Joint in Las Vegas entitled "Appetite for Democracy", celebrating the 25th anniversary of Appetite for Destruction and the fourth anniversary of Chinese Democracy. On November 21, 2012, the band's performance in Vegas was taped in 3D and was screened across theaters in 2014 before being released as Appetite for Democracy 3D on July 1, 2014. In October 2012, Guns N' Roses performed an acoustic set at Neil Young's Bridge School Benefit show. The performance was widely panned by critics, and Rose claimed an onset of strep throat hampered his vocals. The band launched a South American tour in early 2014, including shows in Brazil and Portugal. For several shows, former bassist Duff McKagan rejoined the band to fill in for Stinson, who had previous commitments to touring with The Replacements. The group headlined the Revolver Golden Gods awards show, with McKagan on bass, on April 24, 2014. During the ceremony, Rose was awarded the Ronnie James Dio lifetime achievement award. From May 21 to June 7, 2014, the band returned to Las Vegas for its second residency at The Joint, titled No Trickery! An Evening of Destruction. In an MTV phone interview with Kurt Loder in 1999, Rose said he and the then-new band had recorded enough material for a double album. In an informal chat with Rolling Stone magazine in February 2006, Rose stated the band had 32 songs in the works. While appearing on various fan message boards in December 2008, Rose stated several working titles of songs for a possible future album. Former drummer Brain mentioned working on a 'club remix' of "Shackler's Revenge", stating that Rose planned to put out a remix album of songs from Chinese Democracy. Several band members mentioned they had been collaborating on ideas and working on a new album throughout the late 2000s and early 2010s. In October 2012, Rose said, "All the guys are writing, and we recorded a lot of songs over the years. We'll figure out what we feel best about". In August 2013, a new song entitled "Going Down" was leaked online. The track features bassist Tommy Stinson on lead vocals, with Rose providing backing vocals. Bumblefoot confirmed the song to be legitimate on his Twitter. Spin described it as "a country-tinged, mid-tempo lighter-raiser with lyrics about how "you've got nothin' good to say / Keep your mouth shut." In an interview in June 2014, Rose commented on upcoming plans: We recorded a lot of things before Chinese was out. We've worked more on some of those things and we've written a few new things. But basically, we have what I call kind of the second half of Chinese. That's already recorded. And then we have a remix album made of the songs from Chinese. That's been done for a while, too. On July 27, 2015, guitarist DJ Ashba left the band, citing his commitments to his family and his other band, Sixx:A.M. Ashba released a statement saying "I have reached a point in my life where I feel it's time to dedicate myself to my band Sixx:A.M., my adoring wife and family, and to the many new adventures that the future holds for me." Several days later, music journalist Gary Graff reported that a 'confirmed source within the band' had told him that Ron Thal had left the band after the 2014 tour. No official announcement from Thal or the band was made. Tommy Stinson then left the band, citing personal reasons making him unavailable to tour. On December 29, 2015, several days after a Guns N' Roses-related teaser was released to movie theaters, Billboard reported that Slash was set to rejoin the band and a "reunited" lineup will headline Coachella 2016. Rose was set to appear on Jimmy Kimmel Live! the following week to talk about the future of the band, but his appearance was cancelled due to "unforeseen circumstances". Guns N' Roses was officially announced as the headliner of Coachella on January 4, 2016, with KROQ reporting Slash and Duff McKagan were rejoining the band. The Coachella festival confirmed via press release that McKagan and Slash were rejoining. On March 25, 2016, the band announced the Not in This Lifetime... Tour. The tour's name was a reference to a 2012 interview in which Rose, when asked about when a potential reunion would happen, responded "not in this lifetime". A previously unannounced warmup gig at the Troubadour in Los Angeles took place on April 1, 2016. Melissa Reese replaced Chris Pitman as the second keyboardist after Pitman quit. During the show at the Troubadour, Rose fell off a monitor and broke his foot. Rose was given Dave Grohl's customized throne that Grohl had used to perform when he broke his leg at a concert. The band's first scheduled concerts with Slash and McKagan took place at the newly opened T-Mobile Arena on April 8 and 9, 2016. At the performance at the first weekend of Coachella, AC/DC guitarist Angus Young joined the band on stage (Rose was set to join AC/DC as a touring vocalist). During the band's show of July 6, 2016, in Cincinnati, former drummer Steven Adler joined the band on drums for "Out ta Get Me" and "My Michelle". It was the first time since 1990 that Adler performed with the group. Adler would later join the band at shows in Nashville, Los Angeles, and Buenos Aires. The tour featured additional guest performers, including Sebastian Bach, more appearances by Angus Young, Angry Anderson, P!nk, Billy Gibbons and Dave Grohl. In November 2017, Guns N' Roses was announced as the headline act at the UK Download Festival in June 2018. In addition, they won Top Tour/Top Draw at the 2017 Billboard Touring Awards. They were nominated for Top Touring artist and Top Rock Tour, as well as Top Duo/Group at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards. The next year, they were nominated again for Top Rock Tour and Top Touring artist. They also headlined the 2018 Graspop Metal Meeting, alongside Iron Maiden and Marilyn Manson. The tour was a financial success, grossing over $480 million by December 2017 and at that time was listed as the fourth highest-grossing concert tour of all-time. By the end of the tour in December 2018, the tour had grossed $563.3 million, making it the then second-highest grossing tour, behind U2's U2 360° Tour. On April 30, 2018, billboards in several large cities, as well as a website (GNR.FM), were spotted with the tagline "Destruction Is Coming". The website was updated with a countdown clock to May 4, 2018, and a snippet of the song "Shadow of Your Love" playing. Journalist Mitch Lafon stated the campaign was for a deluxe edition of Appetite for Destruction. A video announcement was inadvertently released a day early, detailing the "Appetite for Destruction: Locked N' Loaded" edition. The boxed set includes 73 songs on four CDs (49 of which were previously unreleased), seven 12-inch 180-gram LPs, remastered versions of Appetite, an EP of B-sides, a 96-page book with unreleased photos, 12 lithographs, and assorted replica memorabilia. "Shadow of Your Love" was released as a single on May 4, 2018, the band's first single in almost a decade. To promote the release, a previously unseen music video for "It's So Easy" was released on Apple Music, as well as several promotional singles. The box set was released on June 29, 2018, to universal critical acclaim. Rose discussed Slash and McKagan rejoining in a June 2016 interview, stating "It was always looked at as a possibility, but it never seemed right or felt right". During the interview, Rose also reiterated his intention to release new Guns N' Roses music in the future. Slash later commented on the tour, telling Aerosmith's Joey Kramer in an interview with WZLX that "We all were pretty positive (the reunion) would never happen, so it's still sort of blowing our minds. ... But everybody's really getting along great and I think everybody's come a long way, and it's all cool." In 2017, 2018, 2019, and 2020, various band members continued to discuss plans to release a new Guns N' Roses album. In 2020, the band announced a North American stadium tour, as well as several festival dates, billed as a new tour instead of a continuation of the Not in This Lifetime... Tour. In September 2020, the band's Greatest Hits album was re-released (with "Shadow of Your Love" added), including a vinyl pressing for the first time. In June 2021, Guns N' Roses announced they would return to the road with the We're F'n' Back Tour, touring the United States from July to October. The tour was later announced to extend into 2022 with legs in Europe, Latin America, and Oceania. On August 6, 2021, after debuting the song onstage at Fenway Park a few days earlier, the band released the single "Absurd", their first new material released since 2008. On September 24, another single, "Hard Skool", was released. Both singles are reworkings of songs from the Chinese Democracy sessions. The "Hard Skool" physical release was announced as both an EP and a vinyl single with different track listings, with the former released on February 25, 2022, featuring "Absurd" and live tracks. Later in 2021, Slash stated that the band had been reworking Chinese-era songs for future release. In 2022, he further confirmed that the band was working on more new songs that might be compiled later, stating "There's new Guns material coming out as we speak, and we'll probably keep putting it out until the entire record's worth of stuff is done". He later said that two more of these singles would probably be released by June. On September 20, 2022, the band announced a remastered deluxe box set of the two Illusion albums, Use Your Illusion (Super Deluxe Edition), released November 11, 2022. The box set features both albums remastered, alongside two live concerts from 1991 (New York) and 1992 (Las Vegas), a blu-ray of the New York concert, photographs & memorabilia. The box set was preceded with a live version of "You Could Be Mine" as the lead single. Guns N' Roses continued touring with the Guns N' Roses 2023 Tour. On June 24, 2023, the band headlined Glastonbury Festival for the first time. The performance garnered mixed reviews – with some publications calling it one of the worst headlining sets in festival history – prompting the band to respond, claiming technical difficulties resulted in a poor mix. On August 18, 2023, the band released a new single, the piano-driven song "Perhaps". The song's 'R-side' "The General" was released digitally and on the Perhaps vinyl on December 8, 2023. Guns N' Roses signed with a major record label within eight months of the band's inception, and topped national sales charts weeks after garnering late hours airplay on MTV. Appetite for Destruction is the highest-selling debut album of all time in the United States. "Guns were five dudes with this shared vision. We met and it was the exact five right guys… The moment we got in a room and played the first three chords, we all knew it. We didn't have illusions that we were going to be huge or anything. But people started coming to our gigs and then labels started coming to our gigs and we made the record we wanted to make. And, all of a sudden, it hit, and it seems like a whole generation of the world had an affinity for that record." – Duff McKagan Many music industry peers spoke highly of GNR. Joe Perry stated that the band was the first to remind him of Led Zeppelin. Ozzy Osbourne stated that GNR could have been "the next Rolling Stones" if the classic lineup had stayed together. Country musician Steve Earle stated, in 1989, "Guns N' Roses are what every L.A. band pretends to be". Gangsta rap group N.W.A., whom Guns N' Roses were early supporters of and befriended, named a song "Appetite for Destruction" after the Guns album of the same name. However, not all peers were positive, Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain stated that his band was "not your typical Guns N' Roses type of band that has absolutely nothing to say". Early Guns N' Roses music was a fusion of punk rock, blues rock, hard rock, heavy metal, and glam metal. The Illusions albums saw the band branching out into art rock, and featuring influences from progressive rock, folk rock, progressive metal, speed metal, funk metal, and industrial music. "The Spaghetti Incident?" saw the group cover mostly punk rock songs. Since its 1999 revival, the band has retained hard rock and piano rock features while including elements of industrial rock, electronic rock, nu metal, industrial metal & trip hop. In the 1990s, the band integrated keyed instruments (played by either Rose or Reed) into the band. Teddy Andreadis was brought in as an additional keyboardist & harmonica player for the Use Your Illusion Tour, alongside multiple backing vocalists and a brass and woodwind section. Later tours saw keyboardist Chris Pitman (and after 2016, Melissa Reese) contribute sub-bass and synth parts, as well as reproducing the brass and string parts of songs electronically. A heavy influence on both the image and sound of Guns N' Roses was the Finnish band Hanoi Rocks (singer Michael Monroe and Rose have collaborated on various occasions). Rose has stated that the band was massively influenced by groups like Queen, AC/DC, the Rolling Stones, Aerosmith, and Rose Tattoo, and that the sound of Appetite for Destruction was influenced by AC/DC, Led Zeppelin, The Who, Cheap Trick, Aerosmith, Van Halen, the New York Dolls, and Hanoi Rocks. The band was also influenced by the likes of T. Rex, the Sex Pistols, Black Sabbath, and Accept. Rose's orchestral-style songwriting on the Illusion albums was influenced by the Electric Light Orchestra, Elton John, and Queen, particularly their album Queen II. Rose cited the influence of Nirvana's "Smells Like Teen Spirit" in recording the title track of Chinese Democracy. Rose was heavily influenced by the industrial rock sound of Nine Inch Nails, changing the band's sound in the lead up to Chinese Democracy. Critics noted influences of Queen, Wings and Andrew Lloyd Webber on some songs on Chinese Democracy. Guns N' Roses has influenced many modern rock bands such as Fall Out Boy, Avenged Sevenfold, Mother Love Bone, Buckcherry, Hinder, Manic Street Preachers, Nickelback, Bullet for My Valentine, Fozzy, the Strokes, Sum 41, and Black Label Society. Guns n' Roses are still an example of how a band can move rock forward. Sometimes you think, "How can you top anything by The Yardbirds, or Zeppelin, or the Stones?" And then you hear Guns n' Roses, and it's inspiring. You can think that it's all been written, but it hasn't. —Aerosmith guitarist Joe Perry. Appetite for Destruction is credited with "(changing) hard rock's sensibilities at the time", and bringing a "danger, attitude and legitimacy" to rock, leading to a decline in the late-80's glam metal craze. The band has been credited with helping re-popularize power ballads in heavy metal music. "Welcome to the Jungle", frequently played at sporting events, is considered a sports anthem. In 2002, Q magazine named Guns N' Roses in its list of the "50 Bands to See Before You Die". The television network VH1 ranked Guns N' Roses ninth in its "100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock" special, and also 32nd on its "100 Greatest Artists of All Time". Appetite for Destruction was ranked 62nd greatest album of all time in Rolling Stone magazine's special issue "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time". In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked Guns N' Roses No. 92 on its list of the "100 Greatest Artists of All Time". "Paradise City" has also been voted 9th-best "Best Hard Rock Song" out of 100 candidates by VH1. Guns N' Roses was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on April 14, 2012, in its first year of eligibility. The group is one of the world's best-selling bands of all time, having sold more than 100 million records worldwide, including shipments of 45 million in the United States. The U.S. release of the PlayStation game Mega Man X5 had the names of the game's bosses changed in honor of the band. Their song "Sweet Child o' Mine" has the most views on YouTube for a 1980s music video, and "November Rain" has the most for a 1990s music video, becoming the first from that decade to reach 1 billion views. Several of the band's members are considered among the best in their respective fields and the world's most acclaimed—Rose has been called one of the best vocalists of all time, Slash ranked as one of the best guitar players of all time, and McKagan hailed as one of the best bass players in rock by publications ranging from Rolling Stone and NME to Time and Guitar World. Izzy Stradlin was ranked as one of the best rhythm guitarists of all time by Ultimate Guitar, and Steven Adler was ranked as the 98th greatest drummer of all time by Rolling Stone. Later members were also ranked among the best in their field: keyboardist Dizzy Reed ranked among the greatest rock pianists by IROCKU, drummer Matt Sorum ranked among the best rock drummers by DRUM!, guitarist Buckethead was ranked among the fastest and most innovative guitarists of all time by publications such as Allmusic and Guitar World, and studio drummer Josh Freese ranked among the top 10 drummers by Gibson. Guns N' Roses has also received significant criticism throughout the years. The band received criticism for drug and alcohol use in the 1980s and early 1990s. Songs such as "One in a Million" and the band's cover of Charles Manson's "Look at Your Game, Girl" were considerably controversial upon release. In addition, some lyrics have been regarded as sexist. The band has also been criticized for tardiness and starting shows later than advertised. The long periods of time between albums are another source of criticism. In October 2009, Ulrich Schnauss's record labels Independiente and Domino sued Guns N' Roses, alleging that the band had committed copyright infringement by using portions of Schnauss' compositions in the track "Riad N' the Bedouins" on the album Chinese Democracy. The band claimed the samples were obtained legitimately. Chinese Democracy was banned in the People's Republic of China, due to perceived criticism in its title track of the Government of the People's Republic of China and reference to the Falun Gong. The Chinese government said through the media that it "turns its spear point on China". In November 2023, the band was sued for copyright infringement (and their manager Fernando Lebeis was sued for sexual harassment) by their former photographer Katarina Benzova, claiming they "falsely claimed ownership" over photos she took and she suffered repeated unwanted advances from Lebeis during the twelve years she worked for the band. Current members Axl Rose – lead vocals, piano, percussion (1985–present) Duff McKagan – bass guitar, backing and occasional lead vocals (1985–1997, 2016–present) Slash – guitars, backing vocals (1985–1996, 2016–present) Dizzy Reed – keyboards, piano, backing vocals, percussion (1990–present) Richard Fortus – guitars, backing vocals (2002–present) Frank Ferrer – drums, backing vocals (2006–present) Melissa Reese – synthesizers, keyboards, backing vocals, sub-bass, programming, percussion (2016–present) Appetite for Destruction (1987) G N' R Lies (1988) Use Your Illusion I (1991) Use Your Illusion II (1991) "The Spaghetti Incident?" (1993) Chinese Democracy (2008) The Early Days of Guns N' Roses (1985–1987) Appetite for Destruction Tour (1987–1988) Use Your Illusion Tour (1991–1993) Chinese Democracy Tour (2001–2011) Up Close and Personal Tour (2012) Appetite for Democracy (2012–2014) Not in This Lifetime... Tour (2016–2019) We're F'N' Back! Tour (2021–2022) 2023 Tour (2023) American Music Awards 1989: Favorite Pop/Rock single – "Sweet Child o' Mine" 1990: Favorite Heavy Metal/Hard Rock Artist 1990: Favorite Heavy Metal/Hard Rock Album – Appetite for Destruction 1992: Favorite Heavy Metal/Hard Rock Artist Billboard Touring Awards 2017: Top Tour- "Not In This Lifetime... Tour" 2017: Top Draw- "Not In This Lifetime... Tour" MTV Video Music Awards 1988: Best New Artist in a Video – "Welcome to the Jungle" 1989: Best Heavy Metal Video – "Sweet Child o' Mine" 1992: Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award 1992: Best Cinematography in a Video – "November Rain" Revolver Golden Gods 2014: Ronnie James Dio Lifetime Achievement Award – Axl Rose World Music Awards[citation needed] 1993: World's Best-Selling Hard Rock Artist of the Year 1993: World's Best Group Also stylized as Guns 'N' Roses, and often abbreviated as GNR The show was billed as "L.A. Guns and Hollywood Rose presents Guns N Roses" Slash had also previously played with McKagan and Adler in Road Crew. Formerly owned by Cecil B. DeMille, the space was frequented by people such as West Arkeen, Del James, Todd Crew of Jetboy, Marc Canter (owner of Canter's Deli), and other Hollywood artists, photographers & musicians. The Charlton recorded demos were released in 2018 as part of the Appetite for Destruction Super Deluxe edition. Stanley later claimed he lost interest in producing after Slash made derogatory comments about him, Slash responded stating "We never were interested in working with him. But we sort of had him around because he was Adler's hero. The song was not reiussed on the Appetite deluxe set in 2018, which contained every other song from Lies, with Slash stating it was a collective decision by the band. Rose was held backstage and allowed to leave if he apologized to the guards; but refused and was arrested. In mid-1993, the suit was settled out of court; Adler received a back-payment check of $2,250,000 and 15% royalties for songs he recorded. Reed was previously bandmates with Sorum in Johnny Crash. Taylor Swift's All Too Well (10 Minute Version) broke the record in 2021. The pyrotechnics incident and riot can be seen on video in A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica. In a segment on the video, Hetfield mocked Rose and read his personal tour rider, making fun of various items on the list. The title references an incident Steven Adler had in 1989; while the band was temporarily staying at an apartment in Chicago. Adler stored his drugs in a refrigerator next to the band's takeout containers, which contained Italian food. McKagan explained that Adler's code word for his stash was 'spaghetti'. In his lawsuit against the band, Adler's lawyer asked the band to "tell us about the spaghetti incident", which the band found amusing and used as the title of the album. Clarke later disputed the claim, stating "Izzy didn't play on a lot of them, so I got to just put my parts on songs that were recorded. So it was a little bit of both." Though not considered an official member, Vrenna worked with the band for several months in studio. Pitman, previously of Lusk, was recommended to the group by engineer Billy Howerdel. Rose and Caram Costanzo are the credited producers on the album. Mantia had previously worked with Buckethead in several bands, including Praxis. Fortus is good friends with and had previously collaborated with bassist Tommy Stinson, who recommended him for the position. Fortus was considered to replace Finck in 1999 before Buckethead was hired. Rose mentioned in 2006 that legal issues prevented him from speaking about the shows, and stated in 2012 "I'm not saying I'm innocent" while apologizing to the city. Michael Jackson's Invincible (2001) allegedly had a $30 million production, though $25 million of that was for marketing. Ferrer had previously worked with Richard Fortus in the Psychedelic Furs and Love Spit Love and had been a member of several other bands, including The Beautiful. After the album was announced, Dr Pepper announced coupons for a free Dr Pepper on November 23, 2008. However, due to "heavy volume" on the server throughout the entire day, it was impossible to submit for a free coupon. The band condemned Dr Pepper for the failed promotion, with Rose's lawyer demanding a full-page apology in several major newspapers. Rose later said he was taken off-guard by his lawyer's actions, believing they should have been focused on the record release. The entire album was eventually added to the game as DLC in April 2009. Time Out New York, Asbury Park Press, IGN and Chicago Tribune ABC News, The Guardian, Rolling Stone, Ultimate Classic Rock, & Spin Ashba had previously played with former drummer Steven Adler in BulletBoys in 1998. The title of the residency was a play on jokes Rose had made about Red Hot Chili Peppers being forced to pantomime their performance at the Super Bowl XLVIII halftime show. Reese was recommended to the band by former drummer Brain, who had collaborated with her on several projects. Adler was originally going to take part in the April 1 show at the Troubadour, but had to pull out after having back surgery. Ed Sheeran's ÷ Tour passed the tour gross the following year, bumping the Not in This Lifetime... Tour to third. "Welcome to the Jungle (1986 Sound City Session)", "Move to the City (1988 Acoustic Version)" and "November Rain (Piano Version, 1986 Sound City Session)". Musical styles: "punk rock" "blues rock" "heavy metal" "hard rock" "hair metal" Musical styles: "industrial rock" "electronic rock" "industrial metal" "nu metal" Simon Young; Merlin Alderslade (March 3, 2023). "Here are the 20 longest-charting albums in the history of the Billboard 200". loudersound. Archived from the original on September 8, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Dr. Rock (June 16, 2010). "Giving It Both Barrels: Dr Rock Takes On Tracii Guns Of The LA Guns". TheQuietus.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2013. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Guns: 'And then I lasted for about seven or eight months in that, and then Axl and I got into an extraordinary fight ... and we did two shows after that argument and then I left. It just wasn't fun anymore.' Rosen, Steven (October 11, 2017). "Tracii Guns: What Would GN'R Sound Like Had I Stayed in the Band". ultimate-guitar.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Berelian 2005, p. 143 Trunk, Eddie (August 12, 2019). "A member of Guns N 'Roses reveals who fired Axl Rose". Sirius XM. Archived from the original on August 15, 2019. Retrieved August 15, 2019. "Guns N' Roses – Biography on Bio". bio. TheBiographyChannel.co.uk. 2008. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved June 29, 2015. Cue, Raz (2017). The Days of Guns, & Raz's (1st ed.). Luck University Press. pp. 198–199. ISBN 10 0-9827103. Archived from the original on October 23, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. After that second practice, another rehearsal was set for a tentative 'in a few days.' Ole neglected to tell anyone of his newest girlfriend, so when the next practice got scheduled, there was no way to get ahold of him. After three days of no one hearing from him, and rehearsal scheduled for the following evening, Izzy said, 'If Ole doesn't want to be in the band, there's a guy who lives across the street from me who'll do the show.' Lerche, Otto (September 28, 2008). "Historien om Ole fra Guns N' Roses" [The story of Ole from Guns N 'Roses]. politiken.dk (in Danish). Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2015. According to Rob Gardner, Tracii and Axl set aside the Danish bassist, and when he subsequently did not change, they threw him out. Ole Beich himself has more explanations of the breach. To some of his friends, he explains that he was thrown out because he went to a concert instead of practicing Guns N 'Roses. The concert was canceled, but the others were unsure of Ole's lack of commitment and threw him out. "GNRontour.com – GN'R Setlist Almanac 1985". www.gnrontour.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "1985.03.22 – L.A. Weekly – [Mention of the formation of the band]". www.a-4-d.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "1985.03.24 – Interview with the band on KPFK". www.a-4-d.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Cue, Raz (March 1985). "Guns N' Roses First Radio Interview March 1985" (Interview). KPFK. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. Branden C. Potter (April 8, 2021). "What Happened To Rob Gardner From Guns N' Roses?". Grunge.com. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Davis, Stephen (August 26, 2008). "2". Watch You Bleed: The Saga of Guns N' Roses. Penguin Publishing Group. pp. 58–. ISBN 978-1-4406-3928-9. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Slash; Anthony Bozza (October 30, 2007). Slash. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. Rosen, Steven (July 28, 2010). "Steven Adler: 'I'm Finally Starting To Get The Recognition That I Deserve'". Ultimate Guitar Archive. Archived from the original on July 31, 2010. Retrieved December 5, 2017. McKagan, Duff (2011). Stacy Creamer (ed.). It's so Easy (and other lies). Collaboration by Tim Mohr. Touchstone. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-4516-0664-5. Dave Lifton (June 6, 2020). "35 Years Ago: Guns N' Roses' Classic Lineup Plays First Show". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. McKagan, Duff (2011). Stacy Creamer (ed.). It's so Easy (and other lies). Collaboration by Tim Mohr. Touchstone. p. 38. ISBN 978-1-4516-0664-5. Spurrier, Jeff (July 6, 1986). "Guns N' Roses: Bad Boys Give It Their Best Shot". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2011. Katherine Love; Wallace Morgan; Joseph Hudak; Keith Harris; Maura Johnston; Dan Epstein (November 24, 2015). "50 Wildest Guns N' Roses Moments:June 7th, 1985: The Hell Tour". RollingStone.com. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Blow, Paul Diamond. "Guns N' Roses, the Early Days: 1985 "Hell Tour" to Seattle. A First Hand Account of Guns N' Roses First Show in Seattle, June of 1985". Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Hiatt, Brian (August 9, 2007). "Guns N' Roses' 'Appetite for Destruction': Inside Band's Legendary Debut". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Wall, Mick (January 4, 2017). "Inside the Horrific Guns N' Roses 'Hell House'". Medium. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "Guns N' Roses' Early Days: Exclusive Photos from the book Reckless Road". Rolling Stone. 2013. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2015. McKagan, Duff (2011). Stacy Creamer (ed.). It's so Easy (and other lies). Collaboration by Tim Mohr. Touchstone. p. 52. ISBN 978-1-4516-0664-5. Jeff Giles (March 25, 2016). "How Guns N' Roses Ended Up Signing With Geffen Records". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "G N' R Lies". Rolling Stone. January 26, 1989. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Voland, John (December 28, 1987). "Pop Review : Guns N' Roses Glam-Slams With Noisy Aggressiveness". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2017. McKagan, Duff (2011). Stacy Creamer (ed.). It's so Easy (and other lies). Collaboration by Tim Mohr. Touchstone. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-4516-0664-5. Eduardo Rivadavia (December 16, 2016). "Why Guns N' Roses' 'Live ?!*@ Like a Suicide' Wasn't Really Live". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. "Axl Rose: Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2011. "31 Years Ago: Guns N' Roses Issue 'Appetite for Destruction'". Loudwire. July 21, 2022. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2018. Grow, Kory (June 25, 2018). "Review: Guns N' Roses' Expanded 'Appetite For Destruction'". rollingstone.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2018. Retrieved December 20, 2018. Matthew Wilkening (September 11, 2014). "Why Paul Stanley Told Slash: 'Go F--- Yourself'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Colette Claire (July 21, 2019). "Guns N' Roses Conquered the Rock World with Appetite for Destruction". Consequence. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. McKagan, Duff; Mohr, Tim (2011). It's So Easy (and other Lies). Simon & Schuster. pp. 118, 120. Hiatt, Brian (August 2007). "The Making of 'Appetite for Destruction'". Rolling Stone Australia. No. 1032. Archived from the original on March 2, 2009. Retrieved October 8, 2007. Adler, Steven; Spagnola, Lawrence J. (2010). My Appetite for Destruction: Sex, and Drugs, and Guns N' Roses. It Books. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-06-191711-0. Hendrick, Michael (October 17, 1987). "Guns N' Roses: They Are What They Are". tribunedigital-mcall. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Goldstein, Patrick (August 16, 1987). "Geffen's Guns N' Roses Fires A Volley At PMRC". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Hartmann, Graham (July 20, 2012). "'Appetite For Destruction' Album Art Banned – 25 Most Destructive Guns N' Roses Moments". Loudwire.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Hewitt, Ben (July 25, 2012). "25 Things You Might Not Know About 'Appetite For Destruction'". NME. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Fisher, Mark (2008). "Lucem Fero – Album Reviews – Guns N' Roses – Appetite for Destruction". lucemfero.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Michael Christopher (July 19, 2017). "Guns N' Roses Destroy a Friend's Country Song With 'It's So Easy': The Story Behind Every 'Appetite for Destruction' Song". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Guns N' Roses". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved December 17, 2008. Michael Gallucci (July 18, 2017). "Guns N' Roses Make One Hell of an Introduction With 'Welcome to the Jungle': The Story Behind Every 'Appetite for Destruction' Song". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. AC Speed (February 13, 2020). "MTV studios literally burst into flames the first time they played 'Welcome To The Jungle' by Guns N' Roses". RawMusicTV. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. King, Tom (2001). The Operator: David Geffen Builds, Buys, and Sells the New Hollywood. New York: Broadway Books. p. 430. ISBN 978-0-7679-0757-6. Tannenbaum, Rob (November 17, 1988). "The Hard Truth About Guns N' Roses". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Spitz, Marc (July 1999). "What the World Needs Now is Axl Rose: The Unauthorized Saga of Rock's Greatest Recluse". Spin. Vol. 15, no. 7. New York City, NY, USA. pp. 80–93. ISSN 0886-3032. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Brown, Lane (August 26, 2008). "Exclusive Excerpt: Stephen Davis's 'Watch You Bleed: The Saga of Guns N' Roses'". Vulture.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Stenning 2005, p. 66. "Jungle was re-released as a single and came out in the same months as the latest Dirty Harry movie 'The Dead Pool'. Featuring Guns' in a cameo role playing at a club in Miami." Tim Grierson; Kory Grow; Daniel Kreps; Tom Mallon; Brandon Soderberg (October 31, 2014). "Guns N' Roses, 'The Dead Pool' (1988)". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "100 Greatest Songs of the 80s (Hour 5)". 1. Episode 171. VH1. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Stenning 2005, p. 63 Michael Gallucci (July 26, 2017). "Guns N' Roses Hit the Top With 'Sweet Child o' Mine': The Story Behind Every 'Appetite for Destruction' Song". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Dome, Malcolm (August 5, 1987). "Guns N' Roses Marquee, London (two nights)". Kerrang!. No. 151. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2015. Russell, Xavier (June 19, 1987). "Guns N' Roses: Review Of Their First Ever UK Show". Metal Hammer. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Guns N' Roses Billboard Singles". AllMusic. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2011. Michael Gallucci (July 23, 2017). "Guns N' Roses Sorta Celebrate the Good Life in 'Paradise City': The Story Behind Every 'Appetite for Destruction' Song". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Guns N' Roses New Album Looms". Sky News. October 23, 2008. Archived from the original on February 13, 2009. Retrieved December 18, 2011. Wyman, Bill (January 4, 2013). "Did "Thriller" Really Sell a Hundred Million Copies?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved September 17, 2015. "RIAA: Gold & Platinum albums". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Caulfield, Keith (October 3, 2008). "Ask Billboard: Best Selling Debut Album, Dido, Australian Acts Trying To Crack The U.S. Market". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 18, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2018. "Mike Clink". Guitar Center. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved August 12, 2015. "Appetite for Destruction" (Press release). Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015. As of September 2008, the album has been certified 18 times Platinum by the RIAA, accumulating worldwide sales in excess of 28 million as of October 2008 "1987 Setlist Almanac". GNROnTour.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2012. "1988 Setlist Almanac". GNROnTour.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2012. Hartmann, Graham (July 20, 2012). "Steven Adler Breaks Hand in Fight – 25 Most Destructive Guns N' Roses Moments". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Prior, Neil (April 7, 2013). "Ex-Guns N' Roses bassist Stephen Harris's Swansea reunion". BBC News. Archived from the original on September 2, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Wardlaw, Mat (July 22, 2011). "10 Things You Didn't Know About Don Henley". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "Reader's Poll: The 10 best opening acts in rock history: 8. Aerosmith/Guns N' Roses (1988)". Rolling Stone. July 11, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2015. Wall 2008, p. 135. "In May, Guns N' Roses began opening the show for Iron Maiden." Wall 2008, p. 137 "The History of GN'R: The Shocking Truth 1988". HereTodayGoneToHell.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2007. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "29 Years Ago: Guns N' Roses Release 'GN'R Lies'". Loudwire. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. "G N' R Lies". Rolling Stone. January 26, 1989. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. "Guns N' Roses Patience Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2017. "Guns N' Roses G N' R Lies Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2017. "Guns N' Roses, G N' R Lies – Top 10 Controversial Album Covers". Time. April 20, 2012. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved August 19, 2015. Goldstein, Patrick (October 15, 1989). "Behind the Guns N' Roses Racism Furor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Williams, Juan (October 15, 1989). "ESSAY FIGHTING WORDS". Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved December 17, 2017 – via www.washingtonpost.com. Cave, Damien (July 7, 2001). "Axl Rose: American Hellhound". Salon. Archived from the original on June 10, 2001. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Rock Turns Mean And Ugly". November 18, 1990. Archived from the original on February 21, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2017. "There's a New Sound in Pop Music: Bigotry". The New York Times. September 10, 1989. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. James, Del (August 10, 1989). "The Rolling Stone Interview with Axl Rose". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Neely, Kim (April 2, 1992). "Axl Rose: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 27, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2017. RS:Does it bother you that so many people think you're misogynous, homophobic and racist Rose: "It can bother me. But the racist thing is just bullshit. I used a word that was taboo. And I used that word because it was taboo. I was pissed off about some black people that were trying to rob me. I wanted to insult those particular black people. I didn't want to support racism. When I used the word faggots, I wasn't coming down on gays. I was coming down on an element of gays". James, Del (September 1992). Lonn Friend (ed.). "I, Axl". Rip. Larry Flynt Publications. Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Hiatt, Brian (August 14, 2018). "Slash Speaks! Inside the Guns N' Roses Reunion and His New Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved September 16, 2020. "Atlanta declines to beat drums for fiery singer". deseretnews.com. March 3, 1993. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. Last time he was there in 1987 he brawled with security guards, punched an Atlanta cop and got arrested. Hartmann, Graham (July 20, 2012). "Axl Rose Assaults Security Guard – 25 Most Destructive Guns N' Roses Moments". Loudwire.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. If we know just one thing about Axl Rose, it's that the frontman loves himself a good physical confrontation. Perhaps the earliest of the Axl Rose incidents, the vocalist was arrested onstage during a 1987 show in Atlanta for punching a security guard. Steve Knopper (March 23, 2016). "Concert Promoters Share Their Guns N' Roses War Stories". Vulture. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "50 Wildest Guns N' Roses Moments". Rolling Stone Australia. Retrieved December 17, 2017.[permanent dead link] "Guns n Roses at Donington '88 – The Triumph and The Tragedy". Every Record Tells A Story. June 5, 2012. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Upton, Mick (December 8, 1995). "Incident at Donington Monsters of Rock 1988" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on December 29, 2009. On the 28 August 1988. two young men died and a third was seriously injured in a fatal crowd-related incident during an open air rock concert billed as the 'Monsters of Rock' at the Donington Park motor race circuit NorthWest Leicestershire. Hilburn, Robert (October 20, 1989). "Still the Greatest". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Wall, Mick (January 2002). "Eve of Destruction – The Interview". Classic Rock. p. 92. "Meet 'The Most Dangerous Band in the World". Kerrang!. London: Wasted Talent Ltd. April 10, 2004. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2017. Wall, Mick (April 21, 1990). "Stick to Your Guns". Kerrang!. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2011. Ling, Dave (April 2005). "Steven Adler interview". Classic Rock. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2006. Steven Adler: 'Slash called me to say we had to record Civil War. I was so sick, I just couldn't do it. I went in there and tried to play the song 20, maybe 30 times. But I was so weak, my timing was like a rollercoaster. Every time we played it back they'd all shout at me, "You're fucked up".' DiMartino, David (August 9, 1991). "Guns N' Roses: Out of control". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Part II: Steven Adler Ex-Guns N' Roses Drummer". Metal Sludge. January 22, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved June 1, 2011. Kent, Nick (January 3, 2003). "Meltdown: Is Axl Rose Finished?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 10, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2011. Stenning 2005, p. 92. "After considering both Adam Maples and Martin Chambers for the drum seat, the band settled on The Cult drummer Matt Sorum." "Guns N' Roses Recording Sessions". Here Today, Gone To Hell. 2001. Archived from the original on December 31, 2009. Retrieved March 9, 2013. Aznar, Thierry. Camion Blanc: Hard Rock & Heavy Metal 40 années de purgatoire – Tome 1 [Truck White: Hard Rock & Heavy Metal 40 years of purgatory – Volume 1] (in French). Camion Blanc. pp. 553–. ISBN 978-2-35779-539-6. Retrieved April 19, 2017. "Jussi Tegelman Bio". Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 19, 2017. Christensen, Mark; Friend, Lonn (January 24, 1991). "Slash: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media LLC. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2015. The fact that Matt could play and fit in was what saved us. If we hadn't found somebody, it would have ultimately been the demise of the band. "Exclusive! Axl Rose Attacks His Enemies". Musician. No. 155. United States. September 1991. "Dizzy Reed Looks Back On His Three Decades With Guns N' Roses: 'It's Just Been A Blast'". Blabbermouth.net. November 27, 2019. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Catlin, Roger (December 7, 1991). "Guns N' Roses In Concert At Last: New Arrangement Of An Old Band". tribunedigital-thecourant. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. "Rock Eyez Webzine: Johnny Crash- "Unfinished Business "- CD Review". rockeyez.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2015. Neely, Kim (August 7, 2007). "Guns N' Roses Outta Control: The Rolling Stone Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2007. Watrous, Peter (September 18, 1991). "The Night Guns 'n' Roses' 'Illusions' Became Real". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Browne, David (December 27, 1991). "Axl Rose: One of 1991's great entertainers". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Eddie @ GNR.com (January 30, 2012). "Guns N Roses". Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Mayfield, Geoff (October 2, 2004). "Over the Counter: Nelly Up, Sales Down". Billboard. Vol. 116, no. 40. United States. pp. 49–. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Grein, Paul (October 5, 1991). "Chart Beat" (PDF). Billboard. p. 16. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Philips, Chuck (December 5, 1991). "Michael Jackson's 'Dangerous' Is No 'Thriller' : * Pop music: Sales of 326,500 copies are well below first-week figures for Guns N' Roses and Metallica". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 20, 2016. Retrieved July 3, 2015. "Which albums had the highest number of worldwide sales?". TSORT. December 15, 2007. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved March 14, 2012. Monahan, Rich (December 21, 2018). "25 Years Ago, Guns N' Roses Unveiled Their Batshit $4 Million Music Video". Vice. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2020. "1992 MTV Video Music Awards With AM-MTV Awards". AP News. September 9, 1992. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Lauryn Schaffner (September 17, 2020). "Guns N' Roses 'Use Your Illusions': 20 Facts Only Superfans Know". Loudwire. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Greene, Andy (April 2, 2013). "Flashback: Guns N' Roses Jam With Elton". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "1992 MTV Video Music Awards". Mtv.com. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2014. "Here Today ... Gone To Hell! – Guns N' Roses History". heretodaygonetohell.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2007. Retrieved April 25, 2015. "Live Era '87–'93". Gnrsource.com. Archived from the original on December 4, 2007. Retrieved December 14, 2007. Rintoul, Jack (July 2, 2021). "30 years ago: The night Axl Rose tore up Riverport". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on August 7, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Daniel Durchholz (July 26, 2017). "Guns N' Roses: 1991 Riverport Riot Remembered as Band Returns to St. Louis". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Henry Yates (September 8, 2019). "Bikers, fire hoses and looting: the story of the Guns N' Roses fan riot in St. Louis". Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Jason Miller (September 20, 2011). "Use Your Illusion Turns 20; A Look Back at the Infamous Riverport Riot". The Vinyl District. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Jeff Giles (July 12, 2017). "25 Years Ago: Axl Rose Arrested for St. Louis Guns N' Roses Riot". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Axl Rose Pleads Not Guilty". The New York Times. Associated Press. July 15, 1992. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Barat, Babu (September 1991). "There's A Riot Going On!". Musician. Archived from the original on April 30, 2010. "Axl Rose convicted of assault". Variety. Associated Press. November 10, 1992. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Harper, Jordan (June 30, 2004). "A Little Patience". Riverfront Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2015. As a result, Use Your Illusion's liner notes featured a message amidst the Thank You section: "Fuck You, St. Louis!" Michael Christopher (November 7, 2016). "25 Years Ago: Izzy Stradlin Leaves Guns N' Roses". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Luukkonen, Jarmo. "The History of GN'R: The Shocking Truth". HereTodayGoneToHell.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2011. Slash; Anthony Bozza (October 30, 2007). Slash. HarperCollins. p. 344. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. "Izzy Stradlin interview with Musician Magazine". Musician. 1992. Slash; Anthony Bozza (October 30, 2007). Slash. HarperCollins. p. 337. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. "Izzy Stradlin: Interview with Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. 1998. Tolinski, Brad (November 1992). "Trial by fire". Guitar World. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. McDermott, Mark (May 26, 2010). "Gilby Clarke rides again". Easy Reader News. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Duswalt, Craig (May 13, 2014). Welcome to My Jungle: An Unauthorized Account of How a Regular Guy Like Me Survived Years of Touring with Guns N' Roses, Pet Wallabies, Crazed Groupies, Axl Rose's Moth Extermination System, and Other Perils on the Road with One of the Greatest Rock Bands of All Time. BenBella Books. pp. 147–. ISBN 978-1-939529-81-7. "Queen Interviews – Queen – 06-25-1992 – Rolling Stone – Freddie Mercury Tribute – Queen Archives: Freddie Mercury, Brian May, Roger Taylor, John Deacon, Interviews, Articles, Reviews". queenarchives.com; Rolling Stone. June 25, 1992. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Kelley, Ken (April 2013). "Top 10 Queen Performances From The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Azerrad, Michael (1993). Come as You are: The Story of Nirvana. Doubleday. p. 239. ISBN 978-0-385-47199-2. "Riot Erupts at Concert Starring Guns 'n' Roses". The New York Times. August 11, 1992. Archived from the original on May 4, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. amit. "Top 10 On Stage Rock Meltdowns". Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Retrieved July 19, 2007. "Roses/Metallica Cancel Denver; Hetfield Burned, Out For 10 Days". The Seattle Times. August 10, 1992. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Paul Brannigan; Ian Winwood (November 4, 2014). Into the Black: The Inside Story of Metallica (1991–2014). Da Capo Press, Incorporated. pp. 29–. ISBN 978-0-306-82189-9. Michael Gallucci (December 30, 2015). "Revisiting Slash and Duff McKagan's Last Classic-Era GNR Show". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Sean Moltisanti (April 8, 2020). "Quarantine Classic Concerts: Guns N' Roses' Use Your Illusion Tour '91-'93". SPIN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (April 2, 2016). "Guns N' Roses: See Video, First Photos of Axl Rose, Slash Reunited". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Jon Wiederhorn (November 28, 2020). "27 Years Ago: Guns N' Roses Release 'The Spaghetti Incident?'". Loudwire. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2021. Gold, Jonathan (December 9, 1993). "Rolling Stone The Spaghetti Incident? review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Summer 1989: The Actual Spaghetti Incident". Rolling Stone. November 24, 2015. Archived from the original on November 24, 2017. "Michael Monroe 'Never Wanted Any Money' For His Guest Appearances On Guns N' Roses Albums". Blabbermouth.net. October 4, 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Considine, J.D. (December 3, 1993). "Guns N' Roses under fire for Manson 'bonus' song". The Baltimore Sun, Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Weingarten, Christopher R. (November 23, 2016). "Inside Guns N' Roses' Scrappy Covers Album 'The Spaghetti Incident?'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2021. Tegnér, Anders (November 1993). "Guns N' Roses: Okej interview". Okej; Here Today, Gone to Hell. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Dave Liffon (November 22, 2018). "25 Facts About Guns N' Roses' 'The Spaghetti Incident?'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2021. Hochman, Steve (November 21, 1993). "It's No Illusion: Guns N' Roses Does Charles Manson". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Philips, Chuck (December 8, 1993). "Guns N' Roses to Stick With Manson Song on Album: Convict's royalties from 'Girl' will be paid to the son of one of those killed in a spree masterminded by the cult leader". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Philips, Chuck (December 1, 1993). "Guns N' Roses May Remove Manson Song From Album". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Bring Out The Manson". Q. March 1994. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Victim's Son Gets Manson Royalties". The New York Times. December 26, 1993. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Matt Sorum – 1996". 1996. Archived from the original on February 8, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "War Of The Roses! (Gilby Clarke interview)". Kerrang!. Vol. 494. May 24, 1994. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. "For Immediate Release: Guns N' Roses Launch "Chinese Democracy" Tour In China". August 14, 2002. Archived from the original on September 15, 2002. Retrieved March 28, 2018. Howell, Peter (August 30, 1996). "Music News Of The World – August 30, 1996: Guns N' Roses Enter Studio To Record New Album". Addict.com. Archived from the original on August 25, 1999. Retrieved March 28, 2018. "Allmusic: Gilby Clarke's Pawnshop Guitars". Allmusic.com. All Media Network. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Four Bust-ups And A Single!". Raw. November 1994. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Browne, David (1994). "EW takes a look at 1994's movie soundtracks". Entertainment Weekly's EW.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. "The Guns 'N Roses Report". heretodaygonetohell.com; addict.com. January 13, 1997. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Huge's presence didn't sit well with Slash, who reportedly has 'creative and personal' differences with the latest Rose writing collaborator, which played a part in his decision to leave the band.' "Didn't You Used To Be Axl Rose?". Q. May 2001. Archived from the original on May 30, 2011. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Hotten, Jon (January 2002). "Mad bad and dangerous to know?". Classic Rock. No. 36. p. 80. Slash; Anthony Bozza (October 30, 2007). Slash. HarperCollins. p. 576. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. Giles, Jeff (October 11, 2014). "Gilby Clarke Opens Up About His Final Guns N' Roses Gig". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. 'My official end was actually at the last show of the last tour,' he continued. 'Axl was jokingly saying "bye" to everybody, but he was really saying "bye: to everybody. He even came up to me and said, "Hey, enjoy your last show."' "Book Excerpt: Duff McKagan Recalls the Bitter Dispute Over the Guns N' Roses Pinball Machine". LA Weekly. Brian Calle. May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved May 16, 2015. it was a forgone [sic] conclusion that Gilby would be in the band ... his picture was included on the big mural on the game ... suddenly [he] wasn't in the band anymore. Gilby sued us for using his likeness on the machine "1995: Chinese Whispers / 1995 / GNR Evolution – Guns N Roses Forum". www.gnrevolution.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Brown, Mark (January 30, 1997). "Axl Rose Buys "Guns N' Roses" Name". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Guns N' Roses leader Axl Rose has bought the rights to the name 'Guns N' Roses,' and can put out any music he wants under that moniker, played by anyone he chooses Brown, Mark (January 30, 1997). "Axl Rose Buys "Guns N' Roses" Name". heretodaygonetohell.com; Addicted To Noise. Archived from the original on December 16, 2010. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Greene, Andy (December 15, 2008). "Axl Rose on stealing Slash's song and other online rants". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "G n' R Songwriter West Arkeen Dies". MTV News. Viacom. June 2, 1997. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved July 2, 2015. The album boast strong G n' R connections: Axl Rose, Slash and Duff McKagan appear as guests (Rose sings backup on the title track), and former G n' R member Izzy Stradlin co-wrote one of the songs Graft, Garry (January 1997). "Slash: Exclusive: His Last Guns N' Roses Interview". Total Guitar. No. 26. United Kingdom: Future plc. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2018 – via oocities.org. "G n' R's Blizzard Of Acrimony". MTV News. November 8, 1996. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "Guns Go Clink". MTV News. Viacom. May 22, 1997. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2015. sources say former Nine Inch Nails guitarist Robin Finck will be the new primary axe-slinger. Finck is said to be replacing Slash who left the band last year over creative differences Harkness, Geoff (June 28, 2001). "SEVEN QUESTIONS with Matt Sorum of The Cult". Lawrence Journal-World. Ogden Newspapers of Kansas LLC. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Axl were having some differences in the musical direction. In '97 I got into an argument with Axl about the state of the band. He'd brought in another guitar player, Paul Huge, and none of us really wanted to play with him. Axl really wanted him in the band and we didn't really want to play with the guy. Me and Duff were showing up, trying to be professional and get the work done but it just didn't seem to be going anywhere, and obviously it still hasn't "Chris Vrenna Reveals That Queens of the Stone Age Drummer Auditioned with Guns N' Roses!". October 30, 2018. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Hodgson, Peter (January 5, 2012). "What Could Have Been: Zakk Wylde Talks Guns N' Roses". gibson.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. It could have been one of the most interesting heavy music collaborations in rock history: Zakk Wylde as a member of Guns N' Roses ... And it very nearly happened in the mid-1990s "'I Spent A Week Jammin' With Guns N' Roses'. Zakk Wylde to join GN'R?!". Kerrang!. No. 530. January 28, 1995. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Hart, Josh (January 5, 2012). "Zakk Wylde on What Guns N' Roses Would Have Sounded Like If He Had Joined". guitarworld.com. New Bay media. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Amendola, Billy (August 1, 2006). "Michael Bland". Modern Drummer. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Guns N' Roses Central (May 30, 2018). "Guns N' Roses Central Interview: Kellii Scott Drummer (Failure, Dumpster)". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021 – via YouTube. "Appetite for Deconstruction". Rolling Stone. April 4, 1997. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Rolling Stone's Random Notes Daily News reports that this is the current GN'R line-up: Vocals: Axl Rose, Bass: Duff McKagan, Rhythm Guitar: Paul Huge, Lead Guitar: Robin Finck (ex Nine Inch Nails), Drums: Chris Vrenna (ex Nine Inch Nails) "Interview with Chris Vrenna on VampireFreaks.com". 2010. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2021. McKagan, Duff (2011). Stacy Creamer (ed.). It's so Easy (and other lies). Collaboration by Tim Mohr. Touchstone. p. 123. ISBN 978-1-4516-0664-5. "The History of GN'R: The Shocking Truth 1996–99". HereTodayGoneToHell.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Fox, Brian (April 2009). "Guns N' Roses Chinese Democracy: Tommy Stinson, The Ultimate Replacement Talks Tone & Turmoul". Bass Player. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Whammy Bar: News & Notes". Guitar World. Future Publishing. September 1998. pp. 27, 29, 31. Retrieved February 1, 2020 – via the Internet Archive. Guns N' Roses, whose lineup gone through more changes than the Florida Marlins lately, has announced a new configuration that features ex-Nine Inch Nails Nails guitarist Robin Finck, ex-Replacements bassist Tommy Stinson and session drummer Josh Freese. No word yet on when a new Guns N' Roses album will surface. "Here Today ... Gone To Hell! Guns N' Roses 'Use Your Illusion'". heretodaygonetohell.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2015. Kaufman, Gil (October 16, 1999). "Guns N' Roses To Release Two-CD Live Set". Music News of the World. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015 – via heretodaygonetohell.com. Skanse, Richard (October 29, 1999). "Track List Revealed for Live G n' R Set". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015 – via heretodaygonetohell.com. 'Believe it or not, it's still a very mutual effort,' Slash said of the long process of selecting material. 'All things considered, it's as close as we ever got.' Guitar World Presents: Guitar Legends – Slash #76 pg.17 Leeds, Jeff (March 6, 2005). "The Most Expensive Album Never Made". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Strauss, Neil (July 23, 1998). "The Pop Life; Failure's Hard But Success Can Be Worse". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Bitzer, John (March 18, 1997). "Moby To Produce Guns N' Roses?". heretodaygonetohell.com; Allstarmag.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "Axl Rose Finds A Producer ... Yet Again". MTV News. Viacom. April 22, 1998. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Youth and the band are still months away from recording. Rose and cohorts are reportedly still in writing mode with no completed songs at this time. "Guns N' Roses To Go Techno?". heretodaygonetohell.com; addict.com. March 19, 1997. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Saidman, Sorelle (April 28, 2000). "Axl Records With Queen Producer". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Saidman, Sorelle (September 20, 1998). "Guns n' Roses Eye Producer". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Sources at Geffen say the company is hoping for a mid-1999 release of the new album Everley, Dave (August 21, 1999). "Guns N' Roses 2-part article". Kerrang!. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Loder, Kurt (November 3, 1999). "Axl Rose – A conversation with Kurt Loder". MTV US. heretodaygonetohell.com; MTV. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (November 10, 1999). "Axl Rose Describes Upcoming Album". Music News of the World. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Saidman, Sorelle (September 8, 1999). "'Oh My God,' Guns N' Roses Finally Has A New Song". MTV.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Skanse, Richard (September 22, 1999). "Axl Speaks Out". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Borzillo, Carrie (August 4, 1999). "Robin Finck Leaves Guns N' Roses, Rejoins Nine Inch Nails". heretodaygonetohell.com; allstarnews.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Loder, Kurt (November 21, 2002). "Beneath The Bucket, Behind The Mask: Kurt Loder Meets GN'R's Buckethead". MTV.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. But what sets (Brian) Carroll decisively apart from the pack is the outré 'Buckethead' persona he's so painstakingly created. Saidman, Sorelle (March 15, 2000). "Buckethead In, Freese Out". heretodaygonetohell.com; MTV.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Raub, Kevin (March 14, 2000). "Josh Freese Leaves Guns N' Roses". heretodaygonetohell.com; Allstarmag.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Borzillo-Vrenna, Carrie (October 30, 2000). "Guns N' Roses Make Buckethead, Robin Finck, & Bob Ezrin Official". heretodaygonetohell.com; Allstarmag.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Hyden, Steven (July 23, 2013). "Building a Better Democracy". Grantland.com. ESPN; Grantland. Archived from the original on June 16, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Rose hired Queen producer Roy Thomas Baker to help shepherd the album to completion. Only Baker did the opposite — he talked Axl into rerecording all of the songs, in spite of the monumental expense Wild, David (February 3, 2000). "Rolling Stone 833: Axl Speaks". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Axl interview Rock & Pop FM Argentina". HereTodayGoneToHell.com. Rock & Pop FM. January 22, 2001. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Wall 2008, p. 289 Strauss, Neil (January 17, 2001). "Rock in Rio Festival – For Fun and a Better World". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Moss, Corey (December 4, 2001). "Guns N' Roses Ante Up For Another New Year's Eve In Vegas". MTV.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Mancini, Al (December 31, 2001). "Slash Barred From Guns N' Roses Show". ABCnews.com. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Speaking briefly with ABCNEWS Radio, Slash said he tried to get in, but couldn't. A security guard confirmed his account, blaming band frontman Axl Rose for the exclusion Saidman, Sorelle (July 17, 2002). "Guns N' Roses Trade Paul Huge For Psychedelic Furs' Guitarist". cdnow.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "2002: Chinese Whispers / 2002 / GNR Evolution – Guns N Roses Forum". www.gnrevolution.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Krgin, Borivoj (August 19, 2002). "Guns N' Roses's Axl Rose to collaborate with Weezer?". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. last week when they praised each other's bands before the 30,000+ in attendance at Summer Sonic Festival "Guns N' Roses: Pukkelpop Festival performance to be webcast". Blabbermouth.net. August 24, 2002. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Wiederhorn, Jon (August 29, 2002). "Guns N' Roses cap night of spectacles from Diddy, Eminem, Timberlake". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 2, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Kurt Loder; MTV News staff (November 8, 2002). "Fans riot after Guns N' Roses tour Kickoff Canceled: Kurt Loder Reports". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Guns N' Roses storm New York; sold out shows, guest stars & fanatic audiences; next up – European tour". businesswire.com. May 22, 2006. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Wiederhorn, Jon (December 9, 2002). "Guns N' Roses dates canceled". MTV. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2013. Rose, W. Axl (November 7, 2006). "Message from Axl". Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on March 2, 2007. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Christopher, Michael (March 1, 2012). "Rock Music Menu: Is Axl's apology too late?". Delaware County Daily Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Dangelo, Joe (September 2, 2003). "New GN'R Tune Leaked By ... Mets Catcher Mike Piazza?!". MTV. Archived from the original on July 4, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2017. "GN'R: 'Chinese Democracy' Coming Soon?". Ultimate-guitar.com. April 8, 2008. Archived from the original on August 15, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2010. "Guns N' Roses' manager slams NY Times over 'rubbish' 'Chinese Democracy' article". Blabbermouth.net. March 6, 2005. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved November 17, 2007. Lewis, Randy (December 13, 2008). "A long wait, a fast fall". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2012. Tyrangiel, Josh (November 20, 2008). "Guns N' Roses' Chinese Democracy, at Last". Time. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Yates, Henry (November 19, 2008). "33 insane facts about Chinese Democracy". MusicRadar. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Retrieved March 14, 2012. Branigan, Tania (September 8, 2001). "Jackson spends £20m to be Invincible". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved February 16, 2013. Katherine Laidlaw (June 25, 2009). "Key Facts about Michael Jackson's life". National Post. CanWest Global Communications. Retrieved February 13, 2010.[permanent dead link] Krgin, Borivoj (May 14, 2006). "Guns N' Roses: 'Greatest Hits' Certified Triple Platinum". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Krgin, Borivoj (February 18, 2004). "Report: Guns N' Roses may sue to block 'Greatest Hits' album". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Wiederhorn, Jon (May 4, 2004). "Axl Rose Sued By Ex-Guns N' Roses Bandmates". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. "Chart Moves: Guns N' Roses 'Hits' Longevity Milestone, 'Pitch Perfect' Still Selling Strong". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 1, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Krgin, Borivoj (July 7, 2004). "Guns N' Roses singer loses motion to stop release of early recordings". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 18, 2015. Wiederhorn, Jon (March 30, 2004). "Guns N' Roses Bow Out Of Rock In Rio – Lisbon; Axl Blames Buckethead". MTV.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2018. "Axl cancels Rock In Rio show, blames Buckethead". ultimate-guitar.com. March 30, 2004. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Wiederhorn, Jon (March 17, 2004). "Buckethead's hand puppet says goodbye to Guns N' Roses". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 25, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "GNR Leak". iconofan.com. February 16, 2006. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. De Sylvia, Dave (February 17, 2006). "Another GNR demo leaks". sputnikmusic.com. Retrieved February 14, 2015. "Guns N' Roses tracks leak". ultimate-guitar.com. February 16, 2006. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Harris, Chris (February 23, 2006). "Are Guns N' Roses finally coming back? The signs are there". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Vineyard, Jennifer (August 22, 2005). "Slash, Duff sue Axl over Guns N' Roses publishing royalties". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. "Slash, Duff sue Axl over publishing". Billboard. August 26, 2005. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. "In Search of ... Bumblefoot". Live-Metal.net. May 11, 2008. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2015. "Who is Bumblefoot and why is he a guitarist in Guns N Roses? ~ 'The Spaghetti Incident?'". Thespaghettiincident.com. November 9, 2008. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012. Moore, Brian (November 20, 2008). "Axl's arsenal". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. "Guns N' Roses: New York City setlist revealed". May 13, 2006. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Ratliff, Ben (May 13, 2006). "'Warm-Up Show' for Guns N' Roses". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Krgin, Borivoj (October 24, 2006). "Axl Rose and girlfriend hanging out in Miami: photos available". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2015. Tolleson, Robin (March 2009). "Guns 'N' Roses' Bryan "Brain" Mantia". Modern Drummer. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Axl is really interested in having everybody bring what they do into the picture. I just did a remix of 'Shackler's Revenge' — made it kind of more club. And I think he wants to put out a remx album of some of the other songs we did. Krgin, Borivoj (March 13, 2007). "Guns N' Roses Keyboardist Reveals 'The Truth' About The Leaked Song 'Better'". Blabbermouth.net. Borivoj Krgin. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2015. "Monday Night's Guns N' Roses Show in Portland, Maine is Cancelled". Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on February 6, 2007. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Grossberg, Josh (December 18, 2006). "Axl: Democracy Gunning for Spring Release". E! Online. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 14, 2015. Rokken Like Dokken (February 22, 2007). "Chinese Democracy Is Finished". sputnikmusic.com. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Rosenberg, Axl (February 22, 2007). "Del James: "No Official Release Date for Chinese Democracy". MetalSucks. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. James, Del. "Chinese Democracy Update". Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on February 26, 2007. Retrieved February 23, 2007. Breihan, Tom (February 21, 2007). "New Guns N Roses Song: Pretty Good!". Status Ain't Hood. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Raftery, Brian (February 20, 2007). "Leak Of The Year: Guns N' Roses' "Democracy" Has Finally Arrived". Music News, Reviews, and Gossip on Idolator.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Guns N Roses Chinese Democracy Tour in Mexico with Adamson". fohonline.com. July 23, 2007. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Krgin, Borivoj (July 18, 2007). "Guns N' Roses joined by Bubbles from 'Trailer Park Boys' in Tokyo". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Next GN'R move on to Osaka on [Saturday, July 21] to finish off their Japan tour. Johnson, Michelle (April 4, 2007). "Gunners hit the road". The Age. Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Trunk, Eddie. "Eddie Trunk — Trunk Blog". Eddietrunk.com. Archived from the original on December 15, 2007. Retrieved January 14, 2008. "GNR Finish CD?". antiMusic.com. antiMusic. January 10, 2008. Archived from the original on January 15, 2008. Retrieved January 14, 2008. Barton, Geoff. "It's a Fact!". Classic Rock. Archived from the original on August 2, 2008. Retrieved February 9, 2008. Goodman, William (March 27, 2008). "Dr. Pepper Makes a Bet with Guns N' Roses". Spin. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. "Dr Pepper issues challenge to Guns N' Roses". Billboard. March 27, 2008. Archived from the original on October 2, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Dr. Pepper confirms free soda for 'Chinese Democracy' release". NME.COM. November 21, 2008. Archived from the original on December 16, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Axl Rose is 'very happy' about Dr Pepper's Guns N' Roses pledge". New Musical Express. March 27, 2008. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Rose, W. Axl (March 26, 2008). "Press Release from Axl Regarding Dr Pepper". Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on November 14, 2011. Harris, Chris (October 22, 2008). "Guns N' Roses Bring A Free Dr Pepper To All Americans: Here's How To Get Yours!". mtv.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Hettinger, Christian (November 28, 2008). "Axl Rose: Not a Pepper". Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved July 11, 2015. The album came out, but the sodamaker's coupon-offering Web site malfunctioned. And though the promotion was extended, Alan Gutman, the band's Beverly Hills attorney, demanded a full-page apology Wynter, Kareen (December 3, 2008). "Guns N' Roses lashes out at Dr Pepper". CNN. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Paine, Andre (November 26, 2008). "Guns N' Roses Lawyer Blasts Dr Pepper". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Rose, W. Axl (December 13, 2008). "Axl answers fans' questions on GN'R fan sites (transcripts)". HereTodayGoneToHell.com. Archived from the original on June 15, 2009. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Fan: Axl are you still thinking of suing Dr Pepper? Axl: Sure but the actions taken so far had nothing to do with me and I was taken off guard as I had specifically told our team who fucking cares now that we have a record to deal with. Rose, W. Axl (March 27, 2008). "New management team for GN'R". Guns N' Roses. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2010. Malkin, Marc (April 3, 2008). "New Music from Guns N' Roses". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008. Retrieved June 29, 2015. Cohen, Jonathan (June 19, 2008). "Purported New Guns N' Roses Tracks Hit The Web". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Michaels, Sean (June 20, 2008). "New Guns N' Roses tracks leaked". theguardian.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Lapatine, Scott (July 13, 2008). "Guns N' Roses' "Shackler's Revenge" Set For Rock Band 2". Stereogum. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Kreps, Daniel (April 10, 2009). "Guns n' Roses' 'Chinese Democracy' Coming To 'Rock Band'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Guns n' Roses Premiering New Song "If the World" in Body of Lies movie". Rolling Stone. September 26, 2008. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Kreps, Daniel (September 26, 2008). "'Chinese Democracy' Rumors: Release Date, Best Buy Exclusive". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 1, 2010. Retrieved June 29, 2015. Cohen, Jonathan (October 9, 2008). "GNR's 'Chinese Democracy' Gets Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2015. "Take that, Slash! It only took 17 years for Axl Rose's Guns N' Roses to release 'Chinese Democracy'". nydailynews.com. New York. Associated Press. October 23, 2008. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Harrington, Jim (October 23, 2008). "Guns N' Roses sets release date for 'Chinese Democracy' – A+E Interactive". A+E Interactive. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "'Chinese Democracy' begins streaming on MySpace". USA Today. November 20, 2008. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2015. MacMillan, Robert (November 20, 2008). "McCartney, Guns N' Roses albums to launch on MySpace". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Guns N' Roses album Chinese Democracy streams on MySpace". Virgin.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Jarman, Ryan (November 21, 2008). "Guns N' Roses' 'Chinese Democracy' breaks MySpace record". NME. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Steffen, Chris (November 24, 2008). "Chinese Democracy hits Best Buy in New York with a yawn". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 1, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2015. Christman, Ed (December 1, 2008). "Kanye, Guns N' Roses Post Slow Debut-Week Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2018. "The best (and worst) of 2008". Time Out New York. Time Out Group. December 16, 2008. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2016. Donnelly, Tim (January 4, 2009). "The Year in Rock". Asbury Park Press. Vaziri, Aidin (January 1, 2009). "The 10 Worst Albums of 2008". IGN. Retrieved March 30, 2019. Caro, Mark (December 28, 2008). "Something stinks: A look back at the year's worst in arts and entertainment". Chicago Tribune. "The 50 Best Albums of 2008: Nos. 50 to 26". ABC News. "2008 review: 50 albums of the year". The Guardian. December 7, 2008. "Rolling Stone's Top 50 Albums Of 2008". December 10, 2008. "Top 10 Albums of 2008". Ultimate Classic Rock. November 7, 2013. "The 40 Best Albums of 2008". Spin. December 31, 2008. Cohen, Jonathan (February 6, 2009). "The Billboard Q&A: Axl Rose". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. "Guns N' Roses Names DJ Ashba As Band's Newest Axeman". GunsNRoses.com. March 21, 2009. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Bosso, Joe (March 23, 2009). "Guns N' Roses hire DJ Ashba as new guitarist". musicradar.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Guns n' Roses Add Guitarist DJ Ashba For 'Upcoming Tour'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2010. "Steven Adler Goes From Guns To Bullets While Ex-Guns Remain Active". MTV.com. July 7, 1998. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Lealos, Shawn. "The BulletBoys remain the perfect example of a band born too late". AXS.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Bosso, Joe (June 8, 2009). "Axl Rose fires, rehires manager Irving Azoff three times". musicradar.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Montgomery, James (March 26, 2010). "Axl Rose Sued By Management Company For Nearly $2 Million". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Axl Rose Sued By Manager For Nearly $2 Million". Billboard.com. Associated Press. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Gardner, Eriq (May 19, 2010). "Axl Rose Slams Irving Azoff In $5 Million Countersuit". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Simon Vozick-Levinson (May 19, 2010). "Axl Rose sues former manager over alleged 'sabotage'". Entertainment Weekly's EW.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Sisario, Ben (May 18, 2010). "Axl Rose Sues His Former Manager for $5 Million". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 20, 2010. Sciarretto, Amy (June 16, 2011). "Axl Rose Settles Lawsuit Against Former Manager Irving Azoff". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on April 30, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Settlements Reached In Lawsuits Between Axl Rose And Former Manager". Blabbermouth.net. June 14, 2011. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Roberts, Randall (December 21, 2011). "Axl Rose's appetite is for today's Guns N' Roses". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Crookes, Del (July 23, 2010). "Reading raises capacity at this year's festival by 3,500". BBC. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Fairbarn, Sam (August 29, 2010). "Axl Rose declares 'war' on promoters as Guns N' Roses headline Leeds Festival – NME.COM". NME.COM. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Michaels, Sean (August 31, 2010). "Guns N' Roses blast Reading and Leeds festival for pulling the plug". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Guns N' Roses have their Reading Festival set cut short". BBC. August 28, 2010. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2015. McCabe, Joanne (August 30, 2010). "Guns N' Roses at Leeds Festival 2010: 'Be safe, good night and f**k you'". Metro. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Cochrane, Greg (September 2, 2010). "Guns N' Roses bottled off stage in Dublin". BBC. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Collis, Clark (September 2, 2010). "Guns N' Roses: Axl Rose leaves stage at Irish show after bottles and 'unknown substances' are thrown at him". Entertainment Weekly's EW.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Fairbarn, Sam (September 2, 2010). "NME News Axl Rose bottled offstage at Guns N' Roses' Dublin gig". nme.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2010. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Guns N' Roses: Statement issued by promotors MCD and the management of the O2". MCD.ie. September 1, 2010. Archived from the original on February 10, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2010. "Duff McKagan plays with Guns N' Roses in London". Ticketsthere.com. October 14, 2010. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved June 13, 2011. Greene, Andy (October 14, 2010). "Video: Duff McKagan Reunites With Axl Rose Onstage". RollingStone.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Shaw, Zach (October 15, 2010). "Duff McKagan Joins GN'R Onstage". MetalInsider.net. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. "Duff McKagan Joins Guns N' Roses On Stage In London!". Blabbermouth.net. October 19, 2010. Archived from the original on March 12, 2011. Partridge, Kenneth (December 17, 2011). "Duff McKagan Reunites With Guns N' Roses in Seattle". Noisecreep. Archived from the original on April 16, 2012. Retrieved March 10, 2012. Rose, Rustyn (October 3, 2011). "Concert Review: Guns N' Roses Perform Rock In Rio Under October Rain". Metalholic. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Rosenberg, Axl (October 3, 2011). "Axl Rose Performs 'Estranged' for the First Time in Eighteen Years". MetalSucks. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "TMS BTS: Bumblefoot". VH1. February 6, 2014. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Hart, Josh (December 6, 2011). "Video: Guns N' Roses Perform "Civil War" for the First Time in 18 Years". guitarworld.com. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Sciarretto, Amy (November 12, 2011). "'That Metal Show' Recap: Axl Rose Talks Lateness, Slash + Original 'Appetite' Cover". Loudwire. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Retrieved July 8, 2014. Swanson, Dave (July 23, 2012). "Izzy Stradlin Joins Guns N Roses Onstage In France". UltimateClassicRock.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2018. Frydberg, Tracy (July 3, 2012). "Guitar solo 'Hatikva' a highlight as Guns N' Roses returns to TA". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Goodwyn, Tom (June 1, 2012). "Guns N' Roses ban fans from wearing Slash t-shirts to their UK gigs". NME. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2012. Lewis, Randy (April 15, 2012). "Pop & Hiss". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Joe Bosso (April 17, 2012). "Matt Sorum issues statement on Guns N' Roses' Rock Hall Of Fame induction". MusicRadar. Retrieved October 13, 2021. Zakarin, Jordan (April 16, 2012). "Guns N' Roses Perform at Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Induction with Myles Kennedy in Axl Rose's Absence". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2012. Michaels, Sean (April 16, 2012). "Guns N' Roses lead Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductions". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Greene, Andy (April 17, 2012). "Axl Rose apologizes for not attending Guns n' Roses Hall of Fame induction ceremony". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Nissim, Mayer (February 17, 2014). "Slash talks Axl no-show at Guns N' Roses Hall of Fame induction". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Greene, Andy (January 30, 2012). "GNR announce six club dates". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Greene, Andy (February 11, 2012). "Guns N' Roses Kick Off 2012 Tour With Show at New York's Roseland Ballroom". RollingStone.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Riddle, Tree (February 21, 2012). "Guns N' Roses Announce More Club Dates". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Ryan, Jim (February 20, 2012). "Guns N' Roses Concert Review – 'Up Close and Personal Tour,' Live at House of Blues Chicago – Sunday, 2/19/12 (With Setlist) – Chicago At Night". chicagonow.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. gone were the pyrotechnics of arena shows past which forced the band to play in a more no frills fashion with the focus less on spectacle and more on music. "Guns N' Roses to Take Over Las Vegas With 'Appetite for Democracy' Residency". RollingStone.com. August 13, 2012. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved August 17, 2012. WENN.com (August 13, 2012). "Guns N' Roses heading to Vegas". London Free Press. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved August 17, 2012. Ouellette, Mary (November 23, 2012). "Guns N' Roses Film Vegas 'Appetite for Democracy' Residency Show in 3D". Loudwire. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Guns N' Roses: 'Appetite For Democracy' 3D Film Coming To Theaters, DVD, Blu-Ray". Blabbermouth.net. March 2, 2014. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Cooper, Leonie (May 30, 2014). "Guns N' Roses to release 3D concert film 'Appetite For Democracy'". NME.COM. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Guns N' Roses Rock Acoustically for 2012 Bridge School Benefit". Loudwire. October 21, 2012. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. O'Neal, Sean (October 23, 2012). "Guns N' Roses performed at the Bridge School Benefit, and time continued to visit its cruelties upon Axl Rose". avclub.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Roffman, Michael (October 22, 2012). "Guns N' Roses really did play Neil Young's Bridge School Benefit". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Daulerio, A.J. "Axl Rose Performed at Bridge School But Guns N' Roses Is Still a Fresh Corpse This Morning". Gawker. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Bram Teitelman (October 23, 2012). "Axl Rose Embarrasses Himself At Bridge School Benefit". Metal Insider. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Bowar, Chad (January 7, 2014). "Guns N' Roses Book 2014 South American Tour". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Graff, Gary (April 1, 2014). "Duff McKagan Reuniting With Guns N' Roses to 'Help Axl Out,' Says Tommy Stinson". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Fanelli, Damian (April 21, 2014). "Duff McKagan to Join Guns N' Roses at Revolver Golden Gods". revolvermag.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Hartmann, Graham (April 24, 2014). "Guns N' Roses play one-hour set at 2014 Revolver Golden Gods". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Gundersen, Edna (February 18, 2014). "Guns N' Roses return to Vegas with 'No Trickery!'". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2014. "Red Hot Chili Peppers Unplugged at Super Bowl: Axl Rose Weighs In". Billboard. February 5, 2014. Baltin, Steve (January 18, 2006). "Axl Rose Breaks His Silence on 'Chinese Democracy'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 2, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Rosenberg, Axl (December 12, 2008). "Axl Rose Finally Promotes Chinese Democracy ... Sort of". MetalSucks. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Young, Alex (November 9, 2010). "DJ Ashba promises new Guns N' Roses album is close, U.S. tour even closer". Consequence Of Sound.net. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2018. "Guns N' Roses could have new music out in next year, says guitarist Richard Fortus". Blabbermouth.net. Associated Press. April 24, 2014. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Fortus: 'We are working on stuff and hopefully very soon we're going to have new stuff out. Well, in the next year.' Lewis, Mark (March 18, 2012). "DJ Ashba On Guns N' Roses' Future: 'The Sky's The Limit'". Blabbermouth.net. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Gundersen, Edna (October 30, 2012). "Exclusive: Axl Rose on GNR, truce and writer's block". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 24, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Hogan, Marc (August 20, 2013). "Alleged Guns N' Roses Leak Is 'Going Down' Less Than Smoothly". Spin.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2015. Rosen, Dana (August 19, 2013). "Has a New Guns N' Roses Song Leaked Online?". eddietrunk.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2015. "Axl Rose Says Guns N' Roses Have Two New Albums Completed". Revolver. June 4, 2014. Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2015. Kreps, Daniel (July 27, 2015). "DJ Ashba leaving Guns N' Roses after six years". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2015. Childers, Chad (July 27, 2015). "Guitarist DJ Ashba exits Guns N' Roses". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2015. Lifton, Dave (July 27, 2015). "DJ Ashba quits Guns N' Roses". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2015. Graff, Gary (July 31, 2015). "Source confirms Ron "Bumblefoot" Thal has left GN'R". 93.3 WMMR. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2015. Lifton, Dave (January 23, 2016). "Tommy Stinson Speaks About Leaving Guns N' Roses". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on July 4, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2016. Waddel, Ray (December 29, 2015). "Guns N' Roses to Reunite for Coachella, Possible Stadium Tour: Sources". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on December 29, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2015. Grow, Kory (December 30, 2015). "Axl Rose, Slash to Reunite Guns N' Roses at Coachella". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (December 30, 2015). "Axl Rose to Talk Guns N' Roses on 'Jimmy Kimmel Live'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 30, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2015. Roberts, Randall (January 4, 2016). "Rose's appearance on 'Jimmy Kimmel' canceled due to 'unforeseen circumstances'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Coachella 2016 Lineup Announced: Guns N' Roses, LCD Soundsystem, Calvin Harris". KROQ.FM. January 4, 2016. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Young, Alex (January 4, 2016). "Coachella announces 2016 lineup: Guns N' Roses, LCD Soundsystem to headlined". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2016. Spanos, Brittany (January 4, 2016). "Coachella: Guns N' Roses, LCD Soundsystem, Calvin Harris Lead Lineup". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2016. Renshaw, David (January 6, 2016). "Guns N' Roses confirm return of Slash and Duff McKagan for Coachella reunion". NME.COM. Archived from the original on June 16, 2017. Retrieved January 24, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (March 25, 2016). "Guns N' Roses Confirm North American Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2016. "Guns N' Roses announce dates for Not in This Lifetime Reunion Tour | Consequence of Sound". consequence.net. April 2016. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Tavana, Art (April 2, 2016). "Here's What It Felt Like Seeing Guns N' Roses at the Troubadour". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. France-Presse, Agance (April 2, 2016). "Guns N' Roses back together after 23 years". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Lifton, Dave (April 2, 2016). "Meet Melissa Reese, Guns N' Roses' New Keyboard Player". UltimateClassicRock.com. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Brodsky, Rachel (April 8, 2017). "Axl Rose Broke His Foot, Will Perform Guns N' Roses Reunion Shows in a Cast". Spin. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016. Spanos, Brittnay (April 8, 2016). "See Axl Rose's Doctor Explain Singer's Foot Fracture". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Roffman, Michael (April 9, 2017). "Axl Rose, hobbled by a broken foot, performed last night's Guns N' Roses show in Dave Grohl's throne". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2016. Childers, Chad (January 19, 2016). "Guns N' Roses Announce Two Concerts in Las Vegas". Loudwire. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016. Torres, Ricardo (January 29, 2016). "First seats go in at T-Mobile Arena — only 19,997 to go". LasVegasSun.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016. Lynch, Joe (April 17, 2016). "Coachella 2016: Guns N' Roses Bring Out AC/DC's Angus Young to Preview Axl Rose's New Gig". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2016. Lorraine, Ali (April 17, 2016). "Guns N' Roses storm Coachella (with Angus Young)". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Kaye, Ben (July 6, 2016). "Adler reunites with GNR in Cincy". Consequence.net. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Legaspi, Althea (July 7, 2016). "Adler joines GNR onstage". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Tavana, Art (April 2, 2016). "Here's What It Felt Like Seeing Guns N' Roses at the Troubadour". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved July 7, 2016. Childers, Chad (July 10, 2016). "Steven Adler Gets in Second Show With Guns N' Roses in Nashville". Loudwire. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2018. DiVita, Joe (August 20, 2017). "Steven Adler Joins Guns N' Roses Onstage in Los Angeles". Loudwire.com. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Tavana, Art (December 1, 2016). "Steven Adler Just Proved He Can Drum a Full Guns N' Roses Set". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Kreps, Daniel (April 10, 2016). "See Guns N' Roses, Sebastian Bach Perform 'My Michelle' in Las Vegas". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Giles, Jeff (February 10, 2017). "Angus Young Joins Guns N' Roses Onstage in Sydney". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017. Reiley, Nick (June 23, 2017). "Watch Angus Young join Guns N' Roses for AC/DC cover". NME. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved July 2, 2017. Kamer, Gijsber (July 13, 2017). "Guns N' Roses het best in samenspel met Angus Young" [Guns N 'Roses best in combination with Angus Young] (in Dutch). volkskrant.nl. Archived from the original on July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 14, 2017. Lifton, Dave (February 11, 2017). "Guns N' Roses Play Rose Tattoo's 'Nice Boys' Live With Angry Anderson". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017. "Guns N' Roses Play Rose Tattoo's 'Nice Boys' Live With Angry Anderson". Triple M. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2017. Grow, Kory (October 12, 2017). "See Guns N' Roses Duet With Pink on 'Patience'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2017. Kreps, Daniel (November 11, 2017). "Watch Guns N' Roses Perform 'Patience' With ZZ Top's Billy Gibbons". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 28, 2018. Retrieved November 20, 2017. Hartmann, Graham (November 15, 2017). "Watch Dave Grohl Join Guns N' Roses Onstage for 'Paradise City'". Loudwire.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Guns N' Roses Announced As Third and Final Headliner for Download 2018 – Download Festival". Download Festival. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved November 15, 2017. "The Hellacopters cierra el cartel del Download Festival 2018 que encabeza Guns n' Roses" [The Hellacopters closes the poster of Download Festival 2018 that heads Guns n 'Roses]. La Vanguardia (in Spanish). March 15, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Cirisano, Tatiana (November 15, 2017). "Billboard's Touring Awards: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved November 20, 2017. "Drake, The Chainsmokers Lead Nominees for the 2017 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. April 10, 2017. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. "Billboard Music Awards 2018 Nominations: See the Full List". Billboard. April 17, 2018. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. Cummings-Grady, Mackenzie (March 16, 2018). "Guns 'N Roses, Marilyn Manson, Iron Maiden Among 2018 Graspop Metal Meeting Festival Headliners". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "Line up compleet!" [Line up complete!]. Graspop.be (in Dutch). March 13, 2018. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Allen, Bob (January 4, 2018). "Guns N' Roses' Not in This Lifetime Tour Now Fourth-Biggest Tour Ever: $475 Million Earned (and Counting)". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 5, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Brown, August (December 29, 2017). "U2, Guns N' Roses were 2017's top tours". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "2016 Year End Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). pollstar.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017. "2017 Mid Year Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). pollstar.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017. "Guns N' Roses' 'Not In This Lifetime' Believed To Be Second-Highest-Grossing Tour Of All Time". Blabbermouth.net. December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Beech, Mark (August 27, 2019). "Ed Sheeran's Record-Breaking Divide Tour Totals $775.6 Million, Beating U2, Guns N' Roses". Forbes. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "Guns N' Roses: 'Destruction Is Coming'". Kerrang!. May 1, 2018. Archived from the original on May 2, 2018. Retrieved May 2, 2018. Lifton, Dave (May 2, 2018). "Guns N' Roses Share Clip of Obscure 'Shadow of Your Love' Song". UltimateClassicRock.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2018. Retrieved May 2, 2018. Mitch Lafon [@mitchlafon] (May 1, 2018). "AFD deluxe box. No Reunion" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Guns N' Roses: Remastered And Expanded Edition Of 'Appetite For Destruction' Due In June". Blabbermouth.net. May 3, 2018. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018. Lifton, Dave (May 4, 2018). "Guns N' Roses Release 'Shadow of Your Love' Single". UltimateClassicRock.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Blistein, Jon (May 3, 2018). "Guns N' Roses Detail Massive 'Appetite for Destruction' Box Set". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Serota, Maggie (May 21, 2018). "Guns' N' Roses Release Never Before Seen "It's So Easy" Video". Spin. J, Diamond (June 19, 2018). "Listen to Guns N' Roses 1986 Sound City Session of Welcome to the Jungle!". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Lifton, Dave (June 22, 2018). "Listen to Guns N' Roses' Acoustic Version of 'Move to the City'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on June 22, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Guns N' Roses Posts Previously Unreleased Piano Version Of 'November Rain'". Metal Injection. June 28, 2018. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. "Appetite for Destruction: Super Deluxe Edition [Box Set]". Metacritic. June 29, 2018. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "An Evening with Axl Rose – China Exchange". ChinaExchange.uk. June 7, 2016. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Wilkening, Matthew (June 8, 2016). "20 Things We Learned During Axl Rose's New Q&A Session". Ultimate Classic Rock. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016. Gallucci, Michael (July 1, 2016). "Slash in First Interview Since Guns N' Roses Reunion: 'It's All Cool'". Ultimateclassicrock.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Johnson, Kevin C. (July 20, 2017). "Back to the jungle: Guns N' Roses returns with St. Louis guitarist Richard Fortus". Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "New Guns N' Roses Album Coming 'Faster Than You Think'". Revolver. December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 20, 2018. Greene, Andy (February 15, 2019). "Slash Says There's Talk of a New Guns N' Roses Album". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 21, 2019. Kreps, Daniel (February 23, 2019). "Duff McKagan on New Guns N' Roses Album: 'Oh, It's Real'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 21, 2019. Krol, Charlotte (January 22, 2020). "Slash says music industry changes have left Guns N' Roses uncertain about next album release". NME. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Lifton, Dave (February 3, 2020). "Guns N' Roses Announce New 2020 Stadium Tour Dates". Retrieved February 6, 2020. Will Richards (July 31, 2020). "Guns N' Roses are releasing their 'Greatest Hits' on vinyl for the first time". NME. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Edwardspublished, Briony (June 1, 2021). "Guns N' Roses announce they're 'F'n back' with summer 2021 tour dates". loudersound. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "Guns N Roses announces 2022 South American dates". The Music Universe. April 7, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2022. Minsker, Evan (August 6, 2021). "Guns N' Roses Share New Song 'ABSUЯD'". Pitchfork. Retrieved August 11, 2021. DiVita, Joe (August 6, 2021). "Guns N' Roses Release Official Studio Version of New Song 'Absurd'". Loudwire. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "Guns N' Roses To Release New Single 'Hard Skool' This Friday". Blabbermouth.net. September 23, 2021. Retrieved September 23, 2021. Jake Richardson (September 26, 2021). "Guns N' Roses to Release New EP 'Hard Skool' in 2022". Loudwire. Retrieved September 26, 2021. "Guns N' Roses Release New EP 'Hard Skool'". American Songwriter. February 25, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Taylor Linzinmeir (October 23, 2021). "Slash Gives an Update on Guns N' Roses". Loudwire. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Owen, Matt (January 7, 2022). "Slash confirms a new Guns N' Roses album is on the way". guitarworld. Retrieved January 8, 2022. "Slash says more new Guns N' Roses music is coming". NME. February 21, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "Guns N' Roses Announce New Use Your Illusion I & II Box Set". Pitchfork.com. September 20, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (September 20, 2022). "Guns N' Roses Releasing Massive 'Use Your Illusion I & II' Box Set With 63 Unreleased Tracks/Videos". Billboard.com. Retrieved June 17, 2023. @gunsnroses (September 21, 2022). "You Could Be Mine, Live In New York at the Ritz Theatre" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Rock And Roll Legends Guns N' Roses Announce 2023 World Tour". Live Nation. February 21, 2023. "Guns N' Roses announces World Tour 2023!". Guns N' Roses. February 20, 2023. "Glastonbury review: Guns N' Roses are sporadically brilliant, while Lana Del Rey is cut short". BBC News. June 25, 2023. Petridis, Alexis (June 25, 2023). "Guns N' Roses at Glastonbury review – a riotous trip into rock paradise". The Guardian. "Guns N' Roses At Glastonbury 2023, Reviewed". Mojo. July 2, 2023. Dunworth, Liberty (June 25, 2023). "Guns N' Roses live at Glastonbury: a solid performance... to the wrong crowd". NME. "Guns N' Roses Glastonbury 2023: a comically bad display". faroutmagazine.co.uk. June 25, 2023. Aldersladepublished, Merlin (June 25, 2023). "Guns N' Roses rock Glastonbury: a fun, energetic headline set in unfamiliar territory". louder. "Guns N' Roses are frontrunners for the worst Glasto headliners of all time – review". The Independent. June 27, 2023. McCormick, Neil (June 25, 2023). "Guns N' Roses review, Pyramid Stage, Glastonbury 2023: Welcome to the mumble". The Telegraph – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Kennelty, Greg (June 29, 2023). "GUNS N' ROSES Calls Out Reviewers Who Hated Their Glastonbury Performance". Metal Injection. Malkowski, Bob (June 30, 2023). "Glastonbury Sound Problems – Guns N' Roses blame the BBC". gearnews.com. Hudak, Joseph (August 18, 2023). "Axl Rose Empathizes, Apologizes in New Guns N' Roses Song 'Perhaps'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 18, 2023. Lewry, Fraser (December 8, 2023). "Guns N' Roses release anguished yet epic new recording of The General". Classic Rock. London: Future plc. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Runtagh, Jordan (September 27, 2013). "Beginner's Luck: The 50 best-selling debut records in music history". VH1. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2015. Epstein, Dan (July 12, 2018). "10 Ways Guns N' Roses' 'Appetite For Destruction' Changed The World". Revolver. Hotten, Jon (June 2009). "Q&A: Duff McKagan". Classic Rock: 40. Davis, Stephen (2008). Watch You Bleed: The Saga of Guns N' Roses. Penguin Group. p. 84. ISBN 978-1-59240-377-6. Guns N' Roses looked and sounded like the Next Big Thing ... Joe Perry later said that Guns N' Roses was the first band since Led Zeppelin that made him think of Led Zeppelin "Ozzy says 'Crucify The Dead' lyrics are what he would say to Axl Rose if he were Slash". Blabbermouth.net. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Irwin, Corey (January 30, 2022). "The Unlikely Friendship Between Guns N' Roses and N.W.A". Ultimate Classic Rock. Hartmann, Graham (July 6, 2017). "N.W.A. Talk Guns N' Roses + The Time Axl Rose Rapped in Front of Them". Loudwire. Grow, Keith Harris,Kory; Harris, Keith; Grow, Kory (April 11, 2016). "Guns N' Roses vs. Nirvana: A Beef History". Rolling Stone.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "This is why Nirvana and Guns 'N' Roses hated each other". faroutmagazine.co.uk. May 22, 2021. Robb, John (December 1, 2012). Punk Rock: An Oral History. PM Press. pp. 538–. ISBN 978-1-60486-005-4. Retrieved August 14, 2015. Daly, Joe (October 29, 2011). "Joe Daly – TNB Music Chats with Duff McKagan". thenervousbreakdown.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Hiatt, Brian (August 9, 2007). "Guns N' Roses' 'Appetite for Destruction': Filthy, Sexy, Cool". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 15, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Richard Bienstock (February 25, 2021). "Fistfights to "Bourbon Jocks": How Duff McKagan's Punk Past Shaped Guns N' Roses". Revolver. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Hall, Steve; Hayes, Steve; Manus, Ron (January 1, 1997). Basix essential licks for guitar. Alfred Music Publishing. pp. 26–. ISBN 978-0-88284-743-6. Retrieved August 14, 2015. Lauryn Schaffner (July 21, 2021). "Appetite for Destruction: 16 Facts You Probably Didn't Know". Loudwire. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Lol Henderson; Lee Stacey (January 27, 2014). Encyclopedia of Music in the 20th Century. Routledge. p. 281. ISBN 978-1-135-92946-6. Stephen Thomas Erlewine. "Guns N' Roses Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Nathan Brackett; Christian David Hoard (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide. Simon and Schuster. pp. 350–. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8. Hard rock seemed so dumb until Guns N' Roses attacked it with smarts, snot, and vitrol, cutting through a decade of hair spray with one nasty punch Slash; Anthony Bozza (October 30, 2007). Slash. HarperCollins. pp. 110–111. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. Steven Adler; Lawrence J. Spagnola (July 27, 2010). My Appetite for Destruction: Sex, and Drugs, and Guns N' Roses. HarperCollins. pp. 94–95. ISBN 978-0-06-191711-0. DK Music: Heavy Rock: Guitar Heroes. DK Publishing. October 1, 2013. pp. 331–. ISBN 978-1-4654-2126-5. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Eddy, Chuck (July 2008). "Spin: Hair Metal Essentials". Spin. pp. 105–. ISSN 0886-3032. Retrieved August 12, 2015. "Music Planner: Guns N' Roses hit Orlando, the Go-Go's say goodbye, new venue". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved February 10, 2021. glam-metal odysseys like Use Your Illusion I and II Eddy, Chuck (July 2008). "Essentials – Hair Metal". Spin. New York. p. 105. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Mills, Matt (June 30, 2022). "Guns N' Roses – their 20 greatest songs, ranked!". The Guardian. Wilkening, Matthew (September 29, 2021). "Axl Rose's Divisive 'My World' Points to Guns N' Roses' Future". Ultimate Classic Rock. Rolli, Bryan (September 25, 2021). "How Guns N' Roses Flexed Musical Muscle on Dazzling 'Locomotive'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Amy Wallace; Dick Manitoba (January 2007). The Official Punk Rock Book of Lists. Backbeat Books. pp. 201–. ISBN 978-0-87930-919-0. Abbott, Jim (November 26, 1993). "Here's what's new in the record racks:Guns N' Roses". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2013. Kaufman, Gil (August 18, 2023). "Guns N' Roses Released Florid Piano Rocker 'Perhaps' a Week After it Leaked to Digital Jukeboxes". Billboard. piano rock2 Macgregor, Jody (February 28, 2013). "In Defence Of: Guns N' Roses 'Chinese Democracy'". FasterLouder. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 8, 2015. Patterson, Dayal (December 23, 2008). "The Quietus – Opinion – In Defence Of ... – Guns N'Roses and Chinese Democracy". The Quietus. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Empire, Kitty (November 22, 2008). "CD of the week: Guns N' Roses: Chinese Democracy". The Observer. London. Observer Review section, p. 19. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. Retrieved March 25, 2013. Raub, Kevin (2001). "Guns N' Roses Use Classics, Commentary To Impress At Rock In Rio -Allstar". CDnow.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. McPadden, Mike (November 10, 2018). "11 Hard Rock + Heavy Metal Comeback Albums: 5 Hits, 5 Misses + One Lost Classic". VH1 News. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Mark Savage (January 5, 2015). "The ups n' downs of Guns N' Roses". BBC News. Retrieved September 15, 2021. MacGregor, Jody (March 7, 2013). "Guns N' Roses' Dizzy Reed: 'I'm very proud of Chinese Democracy'". FasterLouder. Sound Alliance. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Nelson, Michael (August 19, 2013). "Guns N' Roses – 'Going Down'". Stereogum. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Sean Moltisanti (April 8, 2020). "Quarantine Classic Concerts: Guns N' Roses' Use Your Illusion Tour '91-'93". SPIN. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Tavana, Art (May 3, 2017). "Guns N' Roses' First Female Member Has Become a Rock Icon". Archived from the original on May 3, 2017. Retrieved May 4, 2017. Ressner, Jeffrey (January 9, 1992). "Queen singer is rock's first major AIDS casualty". Rolling Stone. No. 621. p. 13. Archived from the original on March 12, 2007. Fink, Jesse (August 5, 2014). The Youngs: The Brothers Who Built AC/DC. St. Martin's Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-4668-6520-4. Matt Sorum: "Guns N' Roses always looked to all the great bands as influences, AC/DC at the top of that list" Wall 2008, p. 118 Stenning 2005, p. 95. "Our basic root is hard rock, a bit heavier than the Stones, more in a vein like Aerosmith." Stenning 2005, p. 30 "Rose Tattoo's Pete Wells Dies". Billboard. March 28, 2006. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2015. Rose Tattoo's influence later became apparent on U.S. rock combos like Guns N' Roses, who covered its track 'Nice Boys (Don't Play Rock'n'Roll)'. "AllMusic – Appetite For Destruction". All Media Guide. Retrieved July 19, 2007. Heller, Jason (August 8, 2013). "The glam wizardry of Marc Bolan, from solo to T. Rex". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Greer, Jim (April 1992). "7 Greatest Bands of All Time: Sex Pistols". Spin. pp. 4–. ISSN 0886-3032. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Black Sabbath". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved March 8, 2010. Vickers, Lee (January 13, 2021). "Interview – Accept guitarist Wolf Hoffmann". Velvet Thunder. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Stenning 2005, p. 96. "Axl was also succinct in admitting his other influences ... Along with ELO and Queen, Elton John was responsible for Guns N' Roses progression." Zutaut, Tom (March 2008). "GN'R Exclusive! Psychic Tests! Pet Wolves! Chicken Coops! Chinese Democracy. The Unbelievable true story – told for the first time". Classic Rock. No. 116. TeamRock. The first task set to [Zutaut] by [Axl] was to help with the drum sound for the album's title track. Axl had told the studio guys that he wanted the same drum sound as Dave Grohl on Nirvana's Smells Like Teen Spirit Wall 2008, p. 263 Macgregor, Jody (February 28, 2013). "In Defence Of: Guns N' Roses 'Chinese Democracy'". FasterLouder. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Paphides, Pete (May 25, 2008). "Hidden Tracks – record-review". Hidden Tracks. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Powers, Ann, Review: Chinese Democracy Archived January 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times, Retrieved on April 9, 2010 "Fall Out Boy's Pete Wentz: 'Why are we the only band willing to save rock'n'roll?'". Nme.com. April 20, 2013. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2014. Moss, Corey (January 3, 2006). "MTVNews.com: Avenged Sevenfold: Appetite For Destruction". mtv.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Lynch, Joe (August 20, 2013). "Track-By-Track Breakdown: Avenged Sevenfold's 'Hail to the King'". Fuse. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Prato, Greg (April 1, 2009). Grunge Is Dead: The Oral History of Seattle Rock Music. ECW Press. pp. 94–. ISBN 978-1-55490-347-4. Erickson, Anne (November 30, 2011). "Buckcherry's Keith Nelson on New Album, Axl Rose and Gibson Guitars". gibson.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Levine, Nick (May 8, 2007). "Hinder". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. "Hinder Pays Tribute To Its Influences In 'Put That Record On' Video". Blabbermouth.net. November 18, 2010. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Power, Martin (June 1, 2012). Nailed to History: The Story of the Manic Street Preachers. Music Sales Group. pp. 50–. ISBN 978-0-85712-776-1. Zaleski, Annie (April 12, 2012). "Stop teasing Axl Rose". salon.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Acosta, Dave (August 30, 2015). "Q&A: Bullet For My Valentine frontman Mathew Tuck". The Beat. Archived from the original on August 31, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Wallis, Adam (November 20, 2018). "Chris Jericho on his rock band, Fozzy, its rapid momentum and his upcoming Canadian tour". Global News. "The Roots Of… The Strokes". NME. February 8, 2013. Miller, Curt (July 22, 2015). "Metal In Their Veins: An Exclusive Interview with Jason "Cone" McCaslin of Sum 41". KNAC. Archived from the original on July 31, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2019. "Zakk Wylde On Guns N' Roses Appetite For Destruction – 'It's Beyond Iconic; Every Song Is Just Phenomenal'". bravewords.com. February 15, 2014. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Rolling Stone staff; Joe Perry (March 24, 2004). "100 Greatest Artists: Number 92: Guns n' Roses". Rolling Stone. No. 946. Archived from the original on April 24, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Powers, Ann (2004). "Guns n' Roses". In Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian (eds.). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide (4th ed.). Simon & Schuster. pp. 350–51. ISBN 0-7432-0169-8. "Guns N' Roses' 'Appetite for Destruction' Turns 30 – Loudwire Legacy". Loudwire. July 21, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Dan Epstein (July 12, 2018). "10 Ways Guns N' Roses' 'Appetite For Destruction' Changed The World". Revolver. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Justin Quirk (October 14, 2011). "Never mind Nevermind, 1991 was all about Guns N' Roses". The Guardian. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Rob Harvilla (November 12, 2020). "Guns N' Roses, 'November Rain,' and the Death of Hair Metal". The Ringer. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Jay Elwes (July 17, 2017). "How Guns N' Roses killed rock'n'roll". Prospect. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Craft, Kevin (May 4, 2012). "Guns N' Roses' Soft-Rock Legacy". The Atlantic. "Music - New Music News, Reviews, Pictures, and Videos". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 7, 2008. "Bengals Fans, It's Time to Rule The Jungle!". Bengals.com. "Guns N' Roses is about to make more money in Cincinnati: Creating a Bengals music playlist". Cincinnati.com. Staff, Noisecreep (December 26, 2013). "Metallica's 'Enter Sandman' vs. Guns N' Roses' 'Welcome to the Jungle' - Make Some Noise Debate". Noisecreep. "It's 'Thunderstruck' vs. 'Welcome to the Jungle' in Fight for Arena Anthem Glory". Deadspin. June 29, 2020. sports anthems "The 30 Best Walk-Up Songs in Baseball History". InsideHook. "50 Bands to See Before You Die". Q. No. 194. September 2002. "AmIAnnoying.com – Q Magazine's 50 Bands You Must See Before You Die". amiannoying.com. 2001. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved April 29, 2015. "VH1: '100 Greatest Hard Rock Artists': 1–50". 2000. Archived from the original on January 8, 2008. Retrieved June 4, 2015. "VH1 100 Greatest Artists Of All Time". Stereogum.com. September 3, 2010. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2015. "Guns N' Roses, 'Appetite for Destruction'". Rolling Stone. May 31, 2012. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Smith, Ben (November 7, 2012). "VH1 Classic America's Hard 100 (25 Through 1) – VH1". VH1.com. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2015. McKinley, James C. (December 7, 2011). "Rock Hall Welcomes Guns N' Roses, Red Hot Chili Peppers and the Beastie Boys". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Sherwin, Adam (November 11, 2012). "Duff McKagan: The man who went from Guns N' Roses to accountancy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved February 19, 2013. Thraves, Lucy (July 26, 2022). "Reservoir signs publishing deal with former Guns N' Roses drummer Matt Sorum". Music Week. Retrieved February 2, 2023. "RIAA: Gold and Platinum artists". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Ryckert, Dan (April 30, 2011). "Explanation Revealed For Guns N' Roses Being Mega Man X5 Bosses". GameInformer.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. "GN'R's 'November Rain' First '90s YouTube Video to Top 1B Views". Loudwire. July 16, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2018. Lethem, Jonathan (November 27, 2008). "100 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved June 3, 2011. "Michael Jackson tops NME's Greatest Singers poll". NME. June 21, 2011. Archived from the original on June 27, 2011. Retrieved July 10, 2011. Tyrangiel, Josh (August 14, 2009). "The 10 Greatest Electric Guitar Players". Time. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2011. "100 Greatest Guitarists". Rolling Stone. November 23, 2011. Archived from the original on November 2, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2015. "The 50 best bassists of all time". Music Radar. August 30, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "Friday Top: 25 Best Rhythm Guitarists of All Time". Ultimate Guitar. April 5, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2021. "Top 15 Rhythm Guitarists in Rock and Metal". Ultimate Guitar. June 25, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Greene, Christopher R. Weingarten,Jon Dolan,Matt Diehl,Ken Micallef,David Ma,Gareth Dylan Smith,Oliver Wang,Jason Heller,Jordan Runtagh,Hank Shteamer,Steve Smith,Brittany Spanos,Kory Grow,Rob Kemp,Keith Harris,Richard Gehr,Jon Wiederhorn,Maura Johnston,Andy (March 31, 2016). "100 Greatest Drummers of All Time". Rolling Stone.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "The Greatest Rock Piano Players of all Time". irocku.com. July 17, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2021. "60 Best Rock Drummers of All Time". DRUM!. July 7, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Cooper, Sean, Buckethead Biography, AllMusic. Retrieved January 6, 2009 "Top Shredders of All Time". RandyCiak.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2008. "50 fastest guitarists of all time, Guitar World, September 2011". Guitarworld.com. September 18, 2011. Archived from the original on December 29, 2011. Retrieved February 29, 2012. "Gibson's Top 10 Drummers". Classic Rock 96.1. June 27, 2011. Wall 2008, p. 127. "Controversy was more than just part of the act, it seemed." Phillips, William; Cogan, Brian (2009). Encyclopedia of Heavy Metal Music. Greenwood Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-313-34800-6. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Drugs were also certainly a major factory, especially in bands such as Guns N' Roses and Motley Crue, whose members notoriously struggled with both problems for year Williams, Juan (October 15, 1989). "Essay: Fighting Words". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Thank Heaven for Nirvana". Big O. February 13, 1992. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Guns N' Roses are promoting wrong values like sexism and the way they do drugs Goldstein, Patrick (October 15, 1989). "Behind the Guns N' Roses Racism Furor : The continuing debate over whether the band's song, 'One in a Million,' promotes bigotry". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Pareles, Jon (September 15, 1991). "Guns 'n' Roses Against the (Expletive) World". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2011. "Guns N' Roses in Manson flap – Entertainment News, Music News, Media – Variety". Variety. December 2, 1993. Archived from the original on January 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2009. Considine, J. D. (July 12, 1992). "Great records can't excuse the behavior of groups like Guns N' Roses -- can they?". The Baltimore Sun. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Queenan, Joe (September 30, 1991). "Misfit Metalheads". Time. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Kim, Jae-Ha (May 19, 1991). "Guns N' Roses' lyrics become secondary to incendiary sound". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Lifton, Dave (September 10, 2018). "Slash Admits Guns N' Roses' Songs Are 'Sort of Sexist'". Ultimate Classic Rock. Blatt, Ruth. "How Being Late And Volatile Was Axl Rose's Contribution To The Guns N' Roses Brand". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Ron, Thal (September 19, 2013). "Totally Driven Radio #46" (Interview). Interviewed by Bay Ragni. Philadelphia, PA, USA: www.TotallyDriven.TV. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. "Guns N' Roses forever late-blooming when it comes to taking the stage on time". tribunedigital-chicagotribune. November 14, 2011. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Bychawski, Adam (March 20, 2012). "Reading And Leeds Festivals boss: 'I wouldn't book the current Guns N' Roses again'". NME. UK. Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Tom Goodwyn (May 30, 2012). "Guns N' Roses fans walk out after band finish three hours late in Manchester". NME. Retrieved September 15, 2021. DeGroot, Joey (July 10, 2014). "12 Artists With Huge Gaps Between Albums: Guns N' Roses, The Eagles, And More". Music Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Kearney, Christine (October 6, 2009). "Guns N' Roses Sued For Copying Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Luerssen, John D. (October 7, 2009). "Guns N' Roses Respond to Plagiarism Lawsuit". spinner.com. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. 內地封殺 GN'R 唱片 [Mainland blocked GN'R album]. Apple Daily (in Chinese (Hong Kong)). Next Media. November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2015. "China Bans Democracy, Declares War on Guns N' Roses – David Flumenbaum". The Huffington Post. November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2015. "'Venomous' Guns N' Roses album slammed in China". CNN.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Bodeen, Christopher (November 25, 2008). "Rock album 'an attack on China'". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on February 23, 2009. Retrieved November 25, 2008. Blistein, Jon (November 14, 2023). "Guns N' Roses Face Copyright Infringement Suit, Manager Accused of Sexual Harassment". Rolling Stone. "Guns N' Roses". Rock on the Net. Archived from the original on December 3, 2007. "16th American Music Awards". Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2008. "17th American Music Awards". Rock on the Net. Archived from the original on September 25, 2008. Retrieved October 16, 2008. "19th American Music Awards". Rock on the Net. Archived from the original on January 5, 2008. Retrieved October 16, 2008. "1988 Video Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2008. "1989 Video Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on June 21, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2008. "1991 Video Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on November 26, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2018. "1992 Video Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on June 21, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2008. Adler, Steven; Spagnola, Lawrence J. (2010). My Appetite for Destruction: Sex, and Drugs, and Guns N' Roses. It Books. ISBN 978-0-06-191711-0. Berelian, Essi (2005). The Rough Guide to Heavy Metal. Rough Guides. ISBN 978-1-84353-415-0. Canter, Marc (2007). Reckless Road: Guns N' Roses and the Making of Appetite for Destruction. RecklessRoad.com. ISBN 978-0-9793418-7-8. John, Robert (1993). Guns N' Roses: The Photographic History. Bulfinch Press. ISBN 978-0-316-46695-0. McKagan, Duff (2011). It's So Easy (And Other Lies). Touchstone. ISBN 978-1-4516-0663-8. McKagan, Duff; Kornelis, Chris (2015). How to Be a Man: (and other illusions). Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-82387-9. Phillips, William; Cogan, Brian (2009). Encyclopedia of Heavy Metal Music. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-34800-6. Popoff, Martin (2000). 20th Century Rock and Roll: Heavy Metal. Collectors Guide Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-1-896522-47-0. Slash; Bozza, Anthony (2007). Slash. HarperEntertainment. ISBN 978-0-06-135142-6. Stenning, Paul (2005). The Band That Time Forgot: The Complete Unauthorised Biography of Guns N' Roses. Chrome Dreams. ISBN 978-1-84240-314-3. Sugerman, Danny (1991). Appetite for Destruction: The Days of Guns N' Roses. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-07634-4. Wall, Mick (1992). Guns N' Roses: The Most Dangerous Band in the World. Hyperion Press. ISBN 978-1-56282-951-3. Wall, Mick (2008). W.A.R.: The Unauthorized Biography of William Axl Rose. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-37767-0. Guns N' Roses at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Guns N' Roses at Curlie Guns N' Roses discography at Discogs Guns N' Roses discography at MusicBrainz Guns N' Roses Play 'Wikipedia: Fact or Fiction?', video on Loudwire Portals:  United States  California  Los Angeles  Biography  Music  Rock music  Pop music  1980s  1990s  2000s  2010s