Anton Webern (German: [ˈantoːn ˈveːbɐn] ; 3 December 1883 – 15 September 1945) was an Austrian composer and conductor. His music was among the most radical of its milieu in its concision and use of then novel atonal and twelve-tone techniques in an increasingly rigorous manner, somewhat after the Franco-Flemish School of his studies under Guido Adler. With his mentor Arnold Schoenberg and his colleague Alban Berg, Webern was at the core of those within the broader circle of the Second Viennese School. He was arguably the first and certainly the last of the three to write music an aphoristic, expressionist style, reflecting his instincts and the idiosyncrasy of his compositional process. Peripatetic and unhappy in his early conducting career, Webern came to some prominence and increasingly high regard as a vocal coach, choirmaster, conductor, and teacher in Red Vienna. With a publication agreement through Emil Hertzka's Universal Edition and Schoenberg away at the Prussian Academy of Arts, Webern wrote music of increasing confidence, independence, and scale from the 1920s onward. He maintained his "path to the new music" while marginalized as a "cultural Bolshevist". Posthumously Webern's later music was celebrated by a variety of mid-century musicians, especially composers, in a phenomenon known as post-Webernism. Yet most understanding was fledgling after years of severe disruption when his work was dismissed or opposed, nor were his musical semantics or semiotics, performance practices, or sociocultural contexts widely studied. This situation was gradually improved by musicians and scholars who helped publish and record his complete works as well as establish his music as modernist repertoire. Webern was born in Vienna, then in Austria-Hungary. He was the only surviving son of Carl von Webern, a descendent of minor nobility [de], high-ranking civil servant, mining engineer, and owner of the Lamprechtsberg copper mine in the Koralpe; and Amalie (née Geer), a competent pianist and accomplished singer. He lived in Graz and Klagenfurt for much of his youth, but his distinct and lasting sense of Heimat was shaped by reading Rosegger and by summers with his parents, sisters, and cousins at their country estate, the Preglhof. After a trip to Bayreuth, Webern studied musicology at the University of Vienna (1902–1906) with Guido Adler, a friend of Mahler, composition student of Bruckner, and devoted Wagnerian who had been in contact with both Wagner and Liszt. He learned the historical development of musical styles and techniques, writing his doctoral thesis on Heinrich Isaac's Choralis Constantinus. Webern also studied art history and philosophy under professors Max Dvořák, Laurenz Müllner [de], and Franz Wickhoff, joining the Albrecht Dürer Gesellschaft in 1903. His cousin Ernst Dietz, an art historian studying in Graz, may have led him to the work of Böcklin and Giovanni Segantini, which he admired along with that of Ferdinand Hodler and Moritz von Schwind. In 1904, he approached Hans Pfitzner for composition lessons but left angrily when Pfitzner criticized Mahler and Richard Strauss. Adler admired Schoenberg's work and may have sent Webern to him for composition lessons. Thus Webern met Berg, another Schoenberg pupil, and Schoenberg's brother-in-law Alexander Zemlinsky, through whom Webern may have worked as an assistant coach at the Volksoper (1906–1908). Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern became devoted, lifelong friends with similar musical trajectories. Webern conducted and coached singers and choirs in light music, musical theater, operetta, and opera in his early career. A summer 1908 engagement with Bad Ischl's Kurorchester [de] was "hell". He walked out on engagements in Innsbruck (1909) and at Bad Teplitz's Civic Theater (1910). He worked with Heinrich Jalowetz in Danzig (1910–1911) and Stettin (1912–1913), briefly following Schoenberg to Berlin (1911–1912) in-between. He repeatedly quit and was taken back by Zemlinsky at the Deutsches Landestheater Prague (1911–1918). Webern had little time to compose and often felt mistreated. Miserably ill, he sought medical advice and took rest at the Kurhaus Semmering [de]. In 1912–1913 he had a breakdown and saw Alfred Adler, who noted his idealism and perfectionism. Adler evaluated his symptoms as psychogenic responses to unmet expectations. Webern wrote Schoenberg that Adler's psychoanalysis was helpful and insightful. He revisited the Preglhof (sold by his father in 1912 and mourned as a "lost paradise"), the family grave at the cemetery in Schwabegg, and the surrounding Carinthian-Styrian Alps (he was an avid mountaineer) for the rest of his life. He associated these places with the memory of his mother, whose 1906 loss profoundly affected him. He wrote Schoenberg (Sept. 1912), "When I read letters from my mother, I could die of longing for the places where all these things have occurred". His music enduringly reflected these memories: "my compositions ... relate to the death of my mother"; "through my work, all that is past becomes like a childhood". He served intermittently and patriotically in World War I, moving frequently and tiring. Eventually he hoped for its end. Despite Schoenberg's and his father's advice that he not quit conducting, in 1918 Webern returned to Schoenberg in Mödling, hoping to compose more. His finances were so poor that he soon explored a return to Prague, but other opportunities arose. Webern worked with friends at the Society for Private Musical Performances (1918–1921), promoting new music through performances and contests. Music included that of Bartók, Berg, Busoni, Debussy, Korngold, Mahler, Novák, Ravel, Reger, Satie, Strauss, Stravinsky, and Webern himself. Webern wrote Berg about Stravinsky's "indescribably touching" Berceuses du chat and "glorious" Pribaoutki, which Schoenberg conducted at a sold-out 1919 Society concert. There was perhaps some shared influence among Schoenberg, Stravinsky, and Webern at this time. The Society dissolved amid catastrophic hyperinflation in 1921. Webern worked as director of the Wiener Schubertbund and in 1922 of the mixed-voice amateur Singverein der Sozialdemokratischen Kunstelle and the Arbeiter-Sinfonie-Konzerte through David Josef Bach, Director of the Sozialdemokratische Kunststelle. In 1926, Webern resigned as chorusmaster of the Mödling Männergesangverein for hiring Jewish soprano Greta Wilheim as a stand-in soloist for Schubert's cantata Mirjams Siegesgesang. Österreichischer Rundfunk aired his performances at least twenty times starting in 1927. In 1933 he hired Erich Leinsdorf as Singverein pianist; they performed Stravinsky's ballet-cantata Les Noces. Social Democrat–Christian Social relations polarized and radicalized amid the Schattendorfer Urteil [de]. Webern and others signed an "Announcement of Intellectual Vienna" published on the front page of the Social Democrats' daily Arbeiter-Zeitung days before the 1927 Austrian legislative election. On Election Day in Die Reichspost [de], Ignaz Seipel of the Einheitsliste [de] officially applied the term "Red Vienna" pejoratively, attacking Vienna's educational and cultural institutions. Social unrest escalated to the July Revolt of 1927 and beyond. Webern's nostalgia for social order intensified with increasing civil disorder. With poor finances, in 1928 friends fundraised for him, partly for another stay at the Kurhaus Semmering. Webern's music was performed more widely starting in the latter half of 1920s, yet he found no great success as Berg enjoyed with Wozzeck nor as Schoenberg did, to a lesser extent, with Pierrot lunaire or in time with Verklärte Nacht. His Symphony, Op. 21, was performed in New York by the League of Composers (1929) and in London at the 1931 International Society for Contemporary Music (ISCM) Festival. He twice received the Preis der Stadt Wien für Musik [de]. Ernst Krenek's impression was that Webern resented his financial hardships and lack of wider recognition. Webern may have been uneasily dependent on conducting work for the Social Democrats, perhaps on religious grounds, Krenek speculated uncertainly. Some on the left, notably Oscar Pollak [de] in Der Kampf (1929), criticized Webern's programming as more ambitious and bourgeois than popular and proletarian. Though Berg celebrated the "lasting works" and successes of composers "whose point of departure was ... late Mahler, Reger, and Debussy and whose temporary end point is in ... Schoenberg" in their rise from "pitiful 'cliques'" to a large, diverse, international, and "irresistible movement" (1928), they were marginalized and ostracized in Central Europe with few exceptions. In Der Weg zur Neuen Musik, an eight-lecture series Webern delivered at Rita Kurzmann-Leuchter [de]'s and her physician husband Rudolf Kurzman's home (Feb.–Apr. 1933), Webern attacked fascist cultural policy, asking "What will come of our struggle?" He observed that "'cultural Bolshevism' is the name given to everything that is going on around Schoenberg, Berg, and myself (Krenek too)" and warned, "Imagine what will be destroyed, wiped out, by this hate of culture!" Financial crises, complex social and political movements, pervasive antisemitism, culture wars, and renewed military conflicts continued to shape Webern's world, profoundly circumscribing his life. In the Austrian Civil War, Austrofascists executed, exiled, and imprisoned Social Democrats, outlawed their party, and abolished cultural institutions. Stigmatized by his decade-long association with Social Democrats, Webern lost a promising conducting career, which might have been better recorded. He worked as a UE editor and IGNM-Sektion Österreich [de] board member and president (1933–1938, 1945). He lectured more at the Kurzmann-Leuchter home, privately in 1934–1935 on Beethoven's piano sonatas to about 40 attendees and later in 1937–1938. His music and that of Berg, Krenek, Schoenberg, et al. was declared "Jewish" in Austria and "Entartete Kunst" by Nazis. Persevering, Webern wrote Krenek that "art has its own laws ... if one wants to achieve something in it, only these laws and nothing else can have validity"; upon completing Op. 26 (1935), he wrote DJ Bach, "I hope it is so good that (if people ever get to know it) they will declare me ready for a concentration camp or an insane asylum!" The Vienna Philharmonic nearly refused to play Berg's Violin Concerto (1936). Peter Stadlen's 1937 Op. 27 premières were the last Viennese Webern performances until after World War II. The critical success of Hermann Scherchen's 1938 ISCM London Op. 26 première encouraged Webern to write more cantatas and reassured him after a cellist quit Op. 20 mid-performance, declaring it unplayable. Webern's milieu comprised vast differences. Like most Austrians, he and his family were Catholic, though not church regulars; Webern was devout if unorthodox. They became politically divided. His friends (e.g., then Zionist Schoenberg, left-leaning Berg) were of a mostly Jewish milieu in late Imperial and then "red" (Social Democratic) Vienna. Alma Mahler, Krenek, Willi Reich [de], and Erwin Stein preferred or supported the "lesser evil" of Austrofascists (or aligned Italian fascists) vis-à-vis the more antisemitic Nazis. Presuming power would moderate Hitler, Webern mediated among friends with an optimistic, perhaps self-soothing, complacency, exasperating those who were at risk. He found himself surrounded mostly by one side as Schoenberg emigrated to the US (1933), Berg died (1935), and DJ Bach, among others, fled or worse. Webern's views of National Socialism were variously described. His published items reflected his audience or context. Secondary literature reflected limited evidence or ideological orientations and admitted uncertainty. Julie Brown noted hesitancy to approach the topic and echoed the Moldenhauers, considering the issue "vexed" and Webern a "political enigma". Bailey Puffett considered his politics "somewhat vague" and his situation "complex", noting that he practically avoided definitive political association. Julian Johnson described him as "personally shy, a man of private feeling and essentially apolitical", "prone to identify with Nazi politics as ... other ... Austrians". Violinist Louis Krasner surmised Webern's cognitive dissonance, finding him "idealistic and rather naive". In 1943 Kurt List described Webern as "utterly ignorant" and "perpetual[ly] confus[ed]" about politics, "a ready prey to the personal influence of family and friends". Krasner's last Webern visit was interrupted by the Anschluss: Webern turned on the radio to hear the news, urging Krasner to flee. Krasner wondered whether Webern knew the Anschluss was planned that day, as Webern's family included Nazis, and whether this was for his safety or to save Webern the embarrassment of Krasner's presence during a time of possible celebration in Webern's home or indeed in most of Mödling. Bailey Puffett suggested otherwise, noting Webern wrote his lyricist and collaborator Hildegard Jone [de] and her spouse, sculptor Josef Humplik that day, "I am totally immersed in my work [composing] and cannot, cannot be disturbed." Bailey Puffett wrote that Webern likely hoped to conduct again, securing a firmer future for his family under a new regime proclaiming itself "socialist" no less than nationalist. As an expression of pan-Germanism and populism, many German-speaking Volk, especially Austrian Deutschnationalisten, hoped for stability and prosperity within a nation-state (the Reich). In opposition to the Austrofascists and after years of Nazi soft power proceeding to occupation, some on the Austrian left had promoted unification and now supported the post hoc 1938 Austrian Anschluss referendum on premises of Realpolitik and self-determination in line with the Grossdeutsche Lösung (1848), the Provisional National Assembly's unanimous support (1918), and the Linz Program [de] (1926-1933). Kristallnacht shocked Webern. He visited and aided Jewish colleagues DJ Bach, Otto Jokl [de], Josef Polnauer, and Hugo Winter. For Jokl, a former Berg pupil, Webern wrote a recommendation letter to facilitate emigration. When that failed, Webern served as his godfather in a 1939 baptism. Polnauer, a fellow early Schoenberg pupil, historian, and librarian whose emigration Schoenberg and Webern were unable to secure, managed to survive the Holocaust as an albino; he later edited a 1959 UE publication of Webern's correspondence from this time with Humplik and Jone. Webern moved Humplik's 1929 gift of a Mahler bust to his bedroom. Webern found himself increasingly alone, with "almost all his friends and old pupils ... gone", and his financial situation was poor. He had considered joining Schoenberg in the US since 1933 but was reluctant to leave home and family. He entered a period of "inward emigration", writing to artist Franz Rederer in 1939, "We live completely withdrawn. I work a lot." He corresponded extensively to maintain relationships, imploring his student George Robert to play Schoenberg in New York and expressing his loneliness and isolation to Schoenberg. Then war limited postal service. Webern's music was performed mostly outside the Reich, where only his tonal music and arrangements were allowed as works not in the style of a "Judenknecht". Supported by IGNM-Sektion Basel, the Orchester Musikkollegium Winterthur, and Werner Reinhart, he attended three Swiss concerts. Webern intimated to Willi Reich that he might emigrate, joking (Oct. 1939) "Anything of the sort did seem quite out of the question for me!" But he failed to obtain conducting opportunities. In 1940, Erich Schmid conducted Op. 1 in Winterthur; soprano Marguerite Gradmann-Lüscher sang Op. 4 and most of Op. 12 (not No. 3) at the Musik-Akademie der Stadt Basel, Schmid accompanying. In Feb. 1943, Scherchen gave the world premiere of Op. 30 at the Winterthur Stadthaus [de]. These were Webern's last trips outside the Reich, where he also hoped for opportunities. Webern met with former Society violist Othmar Steinbauer about a formal teaching role in Vienna in early 1940, but nothing materialized. He lectured at the homes of Erwin Ratz and Carl Prohaska [de]'s widow Margaret (1940–1942). Many private pupils came to him between 1940 and 1943, even from afar, among them briefly Karl Amadeus Hartmann. Sharing in wartime public sentiment at the height of Hitler's popularity (spring 1940), Webern expressed high hopes, crediting him as "unique" and "singular" for "the new state for which the seed was laid twenty years ago". These were patriotic letters to Joseph Hueber, an active soldier, baritone, close friend, and mountaineering companion who often sent Webern gifts. Indeed, Hueber had just sent Webern Mein Kampf. Unaware of Stefan George's aversion to the Nazis, Webern marveled suggestively at the wartime leader envisioned in rereading Das neue Reich [de], but "I am not taking a position!" he wrote active soldier, singer, and onetime Social Democrat, Hans Humpelstetter. For Johnson, "Webern's own image of a neue Reich was never of this world; if his politics were ultimately complicitous it was largely because his utopian apoliticism played so easily into ... the status quo." By Aug. 1940, Webern depended financially on his children. He sought wartime emergency relief funds from Künstlerhilfe Wie and the Reichsmusikkammer Künstlerdank [de] (1940–1944), which he received despite indicating non-membership in the Nazi Party on an application. Whether Webern ever joined the party was unknown. This represented his only income after mid-1942. He nearly exhausted his savings by 1944. His 1943–1945 letters were strewn with references to bombings, death, destruction, privation, and the disintegration of local order, but several grandchildren were born. In Dec. 1943, aged 60, he wrote from a barrack that he was working 6 am–5 pm as an air-raid protection police officer, conscripted into the war effort. He corresponded with Reich about IGNM-Sektion Basel's concert marking his sixtieth, in which Paul Baumgartner played Op. 27, Walter Kägi Op. 7, and August Wenzinger Op. 11. Gradmann-Lüscher sang both Opp. 3 and 23 (world premiere). His only son Peter, intermittently conscripted since 1940, was killed in an air attack (14 Feb. 1945). Airstrike sirens interrupted the family's mourning. The Weberns assisted Schoenberg's first son Görgi during the war; with the Red Army's April 1945 arrival imminent, they gave him their Mödling apartment, the property and childhood home of Webern's son-in-law Benno Mattl. Görgi later told Krasner that Webern "felt he'd betrayed his best friends." The Weberns fled west, resorting to traveling partly on foot to Mittersill to rejoin their family of "17 persons pressed together in the smallest possible space". On the night of 15 Sept. 1945, Webern was outside smoking when he was shot and killed by a US soldier in an apparent accident. Webern's wife Wilhelmine "Minna" Mörtl's last years were marred by grief, poverty, and loneliness as friends and family continued emigrating. She wished Webern lived to see more success. With the abolition of Entartete Kunst policies, Alfred Schlee [de] solicited her for hidden manuscripts; thus Opp. 17, 24–25, and 29–31 were published. She worked to get Webern's 1907 Piano Quintet published via Kurt List. In 1947 she wrote Dietz, now in the US, that by 1945 Webern was "firmly resolved to go to England". Likewise, in 1946 she wrote DJ Bach in London: "How difficult the last eight years had been for him. ... [H]e had only the one wish: to flee from this country. But one was caught, without a will of one's own. ... It was close to the limit of endurance what we had to suffer." Minna died in 1949. Tell me, can one at all denote thinking and feeling as things entirely separable? I cannot imagine a sublime intellect without the ardor of emotion. Webern wrote to Schoenberg (June 1910). Adorno described Webern as "propound[ing] musical expressionism in its strictest sense, ... to such a point that it reverts of its own weight to a new objectivity". Webern's music was organic and parsimonious, with very small motifs, palindromes, and parameterization on both the micro- and macro-scale. His idiosyncratic approach reflected affinities with Schoenberg, Mahler, Guido Adler and early music; interest in esotericism and Naturphilosophie; and thorough perfectionism. He engaged with the work of Goethe, Bach, and the Franco-Flemish School in addition to that of Hugo Wolf, Brahms, Wagner, Liszt, Schumann, Beethoven, Schubert ("so genuinely Viennese"), and Mozart. Stylistic shifts were not neatly coterminous with gradually developed technical devices, particularly in the case of his middle-period Lieder. Concision, adventurous textures and timbres, and melodies of wide leaps and sometimes extreme ranges and registers were typical. Webern's music was often linear and song-like, and much of it (and Berg's and Schoenberg's) was for singing. In Webern's middle-period Lieder, some heard instrumentalizing of the voice (often in relation to the clarinet) representing yet some continuity with bel canto. Johnson described the song-like gestures of Op. 11/i. Lukas Näf described one of Webern's signature hairpins (the Op. 21/i mm. 8–9 bass clarinet tenuto note) as a messa di voce requiring some rubato to execute faithfully. For Johnson, Webern's rubato compressed Mahler's "'surging and ebbing'" tempi; this combined with Webern's dynamics indicated a "vestigial lyrical subjectivity." Webern related his music not only to nostalgia for the lost family and home of his youth, but also to his Alpinism and fascination with botanical aromatics and morphology. He was compared to Mahler in his orchestration and semantic preoccupations (e.g., memory, landscapes, nature, loss, often Catholic mysticism). He often set carefully chosen lyric poetry. In Jone, who he met with her husband Humplik via the Hagenbund, Webern found a lyricist who shared his esoteric, natural, and spiritual interests. She provided texts for his late vocal works. Webern's and Schoenberg's music distinctively prioritized minor seconds, major sevenths, and minor ninths as noted in 1934 by microtonalist Alois Hába. The Kholopov siblings noted the semitone's unifying role by axial inversional symmetry and octave equivalence as interval class 1 (ic1), approaching Allen Forte's generalized pitch-class set analysis. Webern's consistent use of ic1 in cells and sets, often expressed as a wide interval musically, was well noted. Symmetric pitch-interval practices varied in rigor and use by others (e.g., Berg, Schoenberg, Bartók, Debussy, Stravinsky; more nascently Mahler, Brahms, Bruckner, Liszt, Wagner). Berg and Webern took symmetric approaches to elements of music beyond pitch. Webern later linked pitches and other parameters in schemes (e.g., fixed or "frozen" register). Relatively few of Webern's works were published in his lifetime. Amid fascism and Emil Hertzka's passing, this included late as well as early works and those without opus numbers. His rediscovery prompted many publications, but some early works were unknown until after the work of the Moldenhauers well into the 1980s, obscuring formative facets of his musical identity. Thus when Boulez first oversaw a project to record Webern's music, the results fit on three CDs and the second time, six. A Gesamtausgabe has remained in progress. Webern published little juvenilia; like Brahms, he was meticulous and self-conscious, revising extensively. His earliest works were mostly Lieder on works of Richard Dehmel, Gustav Falke, and Theodor Storm. He set seven Ferdinand Avenarius poems on the "changing moods" of life and especially nature (1899–1904). Schubert, Schumann, and Wolf were important models. With its brief, potent expressivity and utopianization of the natural world, the (German) Romantic Lied had a lasting influence on Webern's musical aesthetic. He never abandoned its lyricism, intimacy, and wistful or nostalgic topics, though his music became more abstract, idealized, and introverted. Webern memorialized the Preglhof in a diary poem "An der Preglhof" and in the tone poem Im Sommerwind (1904), both after Bruno Wille's idyll. In Webern's Sommerwind, Derrick Puffett found affinities with Strauss's Alpensinfonie, Charpentier's Louise, and Delius's Paris. In the preface to his tripartite, single-movement string quartet (1905), Webern quoted Jakob Böhme; in sketches, he mentioned the panels of Segantini's Trittico della natura as "Werden–Sein–Vergehen". The Passacaglia, Op. 1 (1908) was his graduation piece after study with Schoenberg. Its chromatic harmonic language and less conventional orchestration distinguished it from prior works; its form foreshadowed those of his later works. Conducting the 1911 Danzig premiere of Op. 1 at the Friedrich-Wilhelm-Schützenhaus [de], he paired it with Debussy's 1894 Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune, Ludwig Thuille's 1896 Romantische Ouvertüre, and Mahler's 1901–1904 Kindertotenlieder in a poorly attended Moderner Abend concert. The Danziger Zeitung [de] critic derided Op. 1 as an "insane experiment". Webern also began an opera on Maeterlinck's Alladine et Palomides [fr], of which only unfinished sketches remained. Fünf Sätze for string quartet, Op. 5, I. Heftig bewegt (Schloss Preglhof, spring 1909) – Emerson String Quartet Spending summer 1909 with Webern (et al.) and seeing his Op. 5 manuscript reinvigorated Schoenberg's music, inspiring him to write Busoni: "... away with 'motivic working out.' Away with harmony as cement or bricks of a building. Harmony is expression and nothing else. ... Away with Pathos [and] protracted ten-ton scores .... My music must be brief. Concise! In two notes: not built, but expressed!! ... no stylized and sterile protracted emotion. People are not like that" (Schoenberg's emphases). Webern's music, like Schoenberg's, was freely atonal after Op. 2. Some of their and Berg's music from this time was published in Der Blaue Reiter. Schoenberg and Webern were so mutually influential, the former later joked, "I haven't the slightest idea who I am". In Op. 5/iii, Webern borrowed from Schoenberg's Op. 10/ii. In Op. 5/iv, he borrowed from Schoenberg's Op. 10/iv setting of "Ich fühle luft von anderen planeten". But Webern was no epigone; Felix Khuner found him as revolutionary as Schoenberg. The first of Webern's innovative and increasingly extremely aphoristic Opp. 5–11 (1909–1914) radically influenced Schoenberg's Opp. 11/iii and 16–17 (and Berg's Opp. 4–5). "[H]aving freed music from the shackles of tonality," Schoenberg wrote, he and his pupils believed "music could renounce motivic features". This "intuitive aesthetic" arguably proved to be aspirational insofar as motives persisted in their music. Two enduring topics emerged in Webern's work: familial (especially maternal) loss and memory, often involving some religious experience, and abstracted landscapes idealized as spiritual, even pantheistic Heimat (e.g., the Preglhof, the Eastern Alps). Webern explored these ideas via Swedenborg's correspondences in Tot (Oct. 1913), a stage play in six reflective, self-consoling Alpine tableaux vivants. Webern's music took on the character of such static dramaticovisual scenes, with pieces frequently culminating in the accumulation and amalgamation (often the developing variation) of compositional material. Fragmented melodies frequently began and ended on weak beats, settled into or emerged from ostinati, and were dynamically and texturally faded, mixed, or contrasted. Tonality became less directional, functional, or narrative than tenuous, spatial, or symbolic as fit Webern's topics and literary settings. Oliver Korte traced Webern's Klangfelder to Mahler's "suspensions". Expanding on Mahler's orchestration, Webern linked colorful, novel, fragile, and intimate sounds, often nearly silent at ppp, to lyrical topics: solo violin to female voice; closed or open voicings, sometimes sul ponticello, to dark or light; compressed range to absence, emptiness, or loneliness and registral expansion to fulfillment, (spiritual) presence, or transcendence; celesta, harp, and glockenspiel to the celestial or ethereal; and trumpet, harp, and string harmonics to angels or heaven. With elements of Kabarett, neoclassicism, and ironic Romanticism in Pierrot lunaire, Op. 21 (1912), Schoenberg began to distance himself from Webern's and latterly Berg's aphoristic expressionism, which provoked the 1913 Skandalkonzert. "Fahr hin, o Seel', zu deinem Gott" (Klagenfurt, 20 July 1917) – soprano Halina Lukomska and conductor Pierre Boulez Webern, influenced by Schoenberg's Pierrot lunaire, was characteristically earnest, not ironic. During and after World War I (1914–1926) Webern worked on some fifty-six songs, following Schoenberg's advice to set texts as a means of composing something more substantial than aphorisms. He finished thirty-two, ordered into sets as Opp. 12–19. The contrapuntal procedures and nonstandard ensemble of Pierrot influenced Webern's Opp. 14–16: "How much I owe to your Pierrot", he told Schoenberg after setting Trakl's "Abendland III" (Op. 14/iv), in which, distinctly, there was no silence until a pause at the concluding gesture. Webern mingled his usual topics with recurrent wartime themes of wandering in search of home or solace. Schoenberg "yearn[ed] for a style for large forms ... to give personal things an objective, general form." Since 1906 Berg, Schoenberg, and Webern indulged shared interest in Swedenborgian mysticism and Theosophy, reading Balzac's Louis Lambert and Séraphîta and Strindberg's Till Damaskus and Jacob lutte. Gabriel, protagonist of Schoenberg's semi-autobiographical Die Jakobsleiter (1914–1922, rev. 1944) described a journey: "whether right, whether left, forwards or backwards, uphill or down – one must keep on going without asking what lies ahead or behind", which Webern interpreted as a pitch-space metaphor. Schoenberg later reflected on "how enthusiastic [Webern and I] were about this." On the journey to composition with twelve tones, Webern revised many of his middle-period Lieder in the years after their apparent composition but before publication, increasingly prioritizing clarity of pitch relations, even against timbral effects, as Anne Shreffler and Felix Meyer described. After Op. 16, Webern used Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique for the first time, though he and Schoenberg had long experimented with the idea. "Sehr langsam" A sample from Webern's String Trio (1926–1927), Op. 20, "Sehr langsam", Webern's first use of twelve-tone technique on a large scale. Webern's 1926–1927 String Trio, Op. 20, was his first large-scale non-vocal work since the 1914 Cello Sonata. He produced many sketches and drafts toward this goal, including an abandoned 1917 string quartet; other efforts toward a string trio; a seventeen-measure 1920 movement scored for clarinet, trumpet, and violin; and piano works including Kinderstück (1924, intended as one of a set) and Klavierstück (1925). Like Brahms's and Schoenberg's, Webern's music was marked by contrapuntal rigor, formal schemes, and systematic pitch organization long before twelve-tone technique. His tone rows comprised pitch groups symmetrically related by inversion, retrograde, or both (retrograde inversion), yielding invariance. He varied this structural and motivic unity superficially as before (e.g., fragmentation, Klangfarbenmelodie, and octave displacement). Webern made further strides in his cantatas as he ecstatically wrote the Humpliks, synthesizing the rigorous style of his mature instrumental works with the word painting of his Lieder on a orchestral scale. His textures were somewhat denser yet more homophonic at the surface through nonetheless contrapuntal polyphonic means. In Op. 31/i he alternated lines and points, culminating twice in twelve-note simultaneities. For Rochberg "the principles of 'the structural spatial dimension' ... "join[ed] forces with lyrico-dramatic demands" in Webern's late cantatas and songs (Opp. 23, 25–26, 29, and 31). At his death he left sketches for the movement of an apparent third cantata (1944–1945), first planned as a concerto, setting "Das Sonnenlicht spricht" from Jone's Lumen cycle. In his youth (1903), Webern orchestrated five or more Schubert Lieder for an appropriately Schubertian orchestra (strings and pairs of flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, and horns). In 1934, he did the same for two of Schubert's 1824 Six German Dances. For Schoenberg's Society for Private Musical Performances in 1921, Webern arranged, among other things, the 1888 Schatz-Walzer (Treasure Waltz) of Johann Strauss II's Der Zigeunerbaron (The Gypsy Baron) for string quartet, harmonium, and piano. In 1924 Webern arranged Liszt's Arbeiterchor (Workers' Chorus, c. 1847–1848) for bass solo, mixed chorus, and large orchestra; thus Liszt's work was finally premièred when Webern conducted the first full-length concert of the Austrian Association of Workers Choir (13 and 14 March 1925). A review in the Wiener Zeitung (28 March 1925) read "neu in jedem Sinne, frisch, unverbraucht, durch ihn zieht die Jugend, die Freude" ("new in every respect, fresh, vital, pervaded by youth and joy"). The text (in English translation) read in part: "Let us have the adorned spades and scoops,/Come along all, who wield a sword or pen,/Come here ye, industrious, brave and strong/All who create things great or small." Webern's music was generally considered difficult by performers and inaccessible by listeners alike. "To the limited extent that it was regarded", Milton Babbitt observed, it represented "the ultimate in hermetic, specialized, and idiosyncratic composition". Composers and performers first tended to take Webern's work, with its residual post-Romanticism and initial expressionism, in mostly formalist directions with a certain literalism, departing from Webern's own practices and preferences in extrapolating from elements of his late style. This became known as post-Webernism. A richer, more historically informed understanding of Webern's music and its performance practice began to emerge in the latter half of the 20th century. Hans and Rosaleen Moldenhauer sought and archived sketches, letters, lectures, recordings, and other articles of Webern's (and others') estates. In the immediate aftermath of World War II, Webern's marginalization under Gleichschaltung was appreciated, but his pan-Germanism and assistance to Jewish friends were not as known or often mooted. For many, like Stravinsky, Webern never compromised his artistic identity and values, but for others the matter was less simple. Eric Simon ... related ... : 'Webern was obviously upset by Klemperer's sober time-beating. ... [T]o the concert master [he] said: "... the phrase there ... must be played Tiiiiiiiiiii-aaaaaaaaa." Klemperer, overhearing ... said sarcastically: "... [N]ow you probably know exactly how you have to play the passage!"' Peter Stadlen ... [described Webern]'s reaction after the performance: ... '"A high note, a low note, a note in the middle—like the music of a madman!"' The Moldenhauers detailed Webern's reaction to Otto Klemperer's 1936 Vienna performance of his Symphony (1928), Op. 21, which Webern played on piano for Klemperer "with ... intensity and fanaticism ... passionately". Webern notated articulations, dynamics, tempo rubato, and other musical expressions, coaching performers to adhere to these instructions but urging them to maximize expressivity through musical phrasing. This was supported by personal accounts, correspondence, and extant recordings of Schubert's Deutsche Tänze (arr. Webern) and Berg's Violin Concerto under Webern's direction. Ian Pace considered Peter Stadlen's account of Webern's coaching for Op. 27 as indicating Webern's "desire for an extremely flexible, highly diaphanous, and almost expressively overloaded approach". This aspect of Webern's work was often overlooked in his immediate post-war reception, which was roughly coterminous with the early music revival. Stravinsky engaged with Webern and Renaissance music in his later music; his amanuensis Robert Craft performed Webern as well as Monteverdi, Schütz, Gabrieli, and Tallis. Many musicians performed "music that is at the same time old and new", as Nicholas Cook and Anthony Pople glossed it and as Richard Taruskin addressed. J. Peter Burkholder noted early and new music audience overlap. Felix Galimir of the Galimir Quartet told The New York Times (1981): "Berg asked for enormous correctness in the performance of his music. But the moment this was achieved, he asked for a very Romanticized treatment. Webern, you know, was also terribly Romantic—as a person, and when he conducted. Everything was almost over-sentimentalized. It was entirely different from what we have been led to believe today. His music should be played very freely, very emotionally." Schoenberg admired Webern's concision. Berg joked about his brevity. In their second (1925) Abbruch self-parody, Anbruch [de] editors jested that "Webern's" (Mahler's) "extensive" Symphony of a Thousand had to be abbreviated. Hendrik Andriessen found Webern's music "pitiful" in this regard. Identifying with Webern as a "solitary soul" amid 1940s wartime fascism, Luigi Dallapiccola independently and somewhat singularly found inspiration especially in Webern's lesser-known middle-period Lieder, blending its ethereal qualities and Viennese expressionism with bel canto. Stunned by Webern's Op. 24 at its 1935 ISCM festival world première under Jalowetz in Prague, Dallapiccola's impression was of unsurpassable "aesthetic and stylistic unity". He dedicated Sex carmina alcaei "with humility and devotion" to Webern, who he met in 1942 through Schlee, coming away surprised at Webern's emphasis on "our great Central European tradition." Dallapiccola's 1953 Goethe-lieder especially recall Webern's Op. 16 in style. In 1947, Schoenberg remembered and stood firm with Berg and Webern despite rumors of the latter's having "fallen into the Nazi trap": "... [F]orget all that might have ... divided us. For there remains for our future what could only have begun to be realized posthumously: One will have to consider us three—Berg, Schoenberg, and Webern—as a unity, a oneness, because we believed in ideals ... with intensity and selfless devotion; nor would we ever have been deterred from them, even if those who tried might have succeeded in confounding us." For Krasner this put "'Vienna's Three Modern Classicists' into historical perspective". He summarized it as "what bound us together was our idealism." Webern's death should be a day of mourning for any receptive musician. We must hail ... this great ... a real hero. Doomed to ... failure in a deaf world of ignorance and indifference he ... kept on cutting ... dazzling diamonds, the mines of which he had ... perfect knowledge. Stravinsky lauded Webern in die Reihe After World War II, there was unprecedented engagement with Webern's music. It came to represent a universally or generally valid, systematic, and compellingly logical model of new composition, especially at the Darmstädter Ferienkurse. René Leibowitz performed, promulgated, and published Schoenberg et son école; Adorno, Herbert Eimert, Scherchen, and others contributed. Composers and students listened in a quasi-religious trance to Peter Stadlen's 1948 Op. 27 performance. Webern's gradual innovations in schematic organization of pitch, rhythm, register, timbre, dynamics, articulation, and melodic contour; his generalization of imitative techniques such as canon and fugue; and his inclination toward athematicism, abstraction, and lyricism variously informed and oriented European and Canadian, typically serial or avant-garde composers (e.g., Messiaen, Boulez, Stockhausen, Luigi Nono, Pousseur, Ligeti, Sylvano Bussotti, Bruno Maderna, Bernd Alois Zimmermann, Barbara Pentland). Eimert and Stockhausen devoted a special issue of die Reihe to Webern's œuvre in 1955. UE published his lectures in 1960. In the US, Babbitt and initially George Rochberg found more in Schoenberg's twelve-tone practice. Elliott Carter's and Aaron Copland's critical ambivalence was marked by a certain enthusiasm and fascination nonetheless. Robert Craft fruitfully reintroduced Stravinsky to Webern's music, without which Stravinsky's late works would have taken different shape. Stravinsky staked his contract with Columbia Records to see Webern's then known music first both recorded and widely distributed. Stravinsky lauded Webern's "not yet canonized art" in 1959. Among the New York School, John Cage and Morton Feldman first met in Carnegie Hall's lobby, ecstatic after a performance of Op. 21 by Dimitri Mitropoulos and the New York Philharmonic. They cited the effect of its sound on their music. They later sung the praises of Christian Wolff as "our Webern". Gottfried Michael Koenig suggested some early interest in Webern's music may have been that its concision and apparent simplicity facilitated didactic musical analysis. Robert Beyer [de] criticized serial approaches to Webern's music as reductive, narrowly focused more on Webern's procedures than his music while neglecting timbre in their typical selection of Opp. 27–28. Webern's music sounded like "a Mondrian canvas", "crude and unfinished", to Karel Goeyvaerts. Wolf-Eberhard von Lewinski criticized some Darmstadt music as "acoustically absurd [if] visually amusing" (Darmstädter Tagblatt [de], 1959); a Der Kurier article of his was headlined "Meager modern music—only interesting to look at". [H]ermetic constructivism seems infused with intense emotion, ... diffused across the ... surface of the music. Gone is the mono-directional thrust of Classical and Romantic music; in its place a world of rotations and reflections, opening myriad paths for the listener to trace through textures of luminous clarity yet beguiling ambiguity. George Benjamin described Webern's Op. 21. Many noted floating, spatial, static, or suspended qualities in some of Webern's music. Johnson noted spatial metaphors. Through late 1950s onward, Webern's work reached musicians as far removed as Joel Thome and Frank Zappa, yet many post-war European musicians and scholars had already begun to look beyond as much as back at Webern in his context. Nono advocated for a more cultural and historical understanding of Webern's music. Adorno lectured that in the prevailing climate "artists like Berg or Webern would hardly be able to make it" ("The Aging of the New Music", 1954). Against the "static idea of music" and "total rationalization" of the "pointillist constructivists," he advocated for more subjectivity, citing Über das Geistige in der Kunst (1911), in which Wassily Kandinsky wrote: "Schoenberg's [expressionist] music leads us to where musical experience is a matter not of the ear, but of the soul—and from this point begins the music of the future." In the 1960s, many began to describe Webern and his like as a "dead end". Rochberg felt "Webern's music leaves his followers no new, unexplored territory." Stravinsky judged Webern "too original ... too purely himself. ... [T]he entire world had to imitate him [and] fail; of course it will blame Webern"; he blamed post-Webernism: "[T]he music now being charged to his name can neither diminish his strength nor stale his perfection." In Votre Faust (1960–1968), Pousseur quoted and his protagonist Henri analyzed Webern's Op. 31. Yet there were already several elements of late or postmodernism (e.g., eclecticism of historical styles, mobile form, polyvalent roles). This coincided with a wider rapprochement with Berg, whose example Pousseur cited, from whose music he also quoted, and whose writings he translated into French in the 1950s. Boulez was "thrilled" by Berg's "universe ... never completed, always in expansion—a world so ... inexhaustible," referring to the rigorously organized, only partly twelve-tone Chamber Concerto. Engaging with Webern's atonal works by some contrast to earlier post-Webernism, both Ferneyhough and Lachenmann expanded upon and went further than Webern in attention to the smallest of details and the use of ever more radically extended techniques. Ferneyhough's 1967 Sonatas for string quartet included atonal sections much in the style of Webern's Op. 9, yet more intensely sustained. In a comparison to his own 1969 Air, Lachenmann wrote of "a melody made of a single note [...] in the viola part" of Webern's Op. 10/iv (mm. 2–4) amid "the mere ruins of the traditional linguistic context," observing that "the pure tone, now living in tonal exile, has in this new context no aesthetic advantage over pure noise" ("Hearing [Hören] is Defenseless—without Listening [Hören]", 1985). In Eastern Europe, the Second Viennese School's music represented a professionally dangerous but sometimes exciting or inspiring alternative to socialist realism. Their influence on composers behind the Iron Curtain was mediated by anti-fascist and -German sentiment as well as anti-formalist cultural policies and Cold War separation. Ligeti lamented the separation and left in 1956, noting that "after Bartók hardly any grass could grow". Webern's influence predominated after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, bearing on Pál Kadosa, Endre Szervánszky, and György Kurtág. Among Czechs, Pavel Blatný attended the Darmstädter Ferienkurse and wrote music with serial techniques in the late 1960s. He returned to tonality in Brno and was rewarded.Marek Kopelent discovered the Second Viennese as an editor and was particularly taken by Webern. Kopelent was blacklisted for his music and despaired, unable to attend international performances of his work. Official Soviet Russian condemnation eased in the post-Stalinist Khrushchev Thaw with the rehabilitation of some affected by the Zhdanov Doctrine. Sheet music and recordings entered via journalists, friends, family (e.g., from Nicolas to Sergei Slonimsky), and especially composers and musicians (e.g., Igor Blazhkov [ru], Gérard Frémy, Alexei Lubimov, Maria Yudina), who traveled more. Stationed in Zossen as a military band arranger (1955–1958), Yuri Kholopov risked arrest for obtaining scores in West Berlin and from the Leipzig office of Schott Music. Kruschchev warned, "dodecaphonic music, music of noises ... this cacophonic music we totally reject. Our people cannot include such trash". Philip Herschkowitz, poverty-stricken, taught privately in Moscow with cautious emphasis on Beethoven and the tradition from which Webern emerged. His pupil Nikolai Karetnikov taped Glenn Gould's 1957 Moscow Conservatory performance of Webern's Op. 27. In practice like that of Webern, Karetnikov derived the tone row of his Symphony No. 4 from motives as small as two notes related by semitone. In Soviet Music, Marcel Rubin criticized "Webern and His Followers" (1959), by contrast to Berg and Schoenberg, for going too far. Alfred Schnittke complained in an open letter (1961) of composers' restricted education. Through Grigory Shneyerson's anti-formalist On Music Living and Dead (1960) and Johannes Paul Thilman's anti-modernist "On the Dodecaphonic Method of Composition" (1958), many (e.g., Eduard Artemyev, Victor Ekimovsky, Vladimir Martynov, Boris Tischenko) ironically learned more about what had been and even was still forbidden. Through Andrei Volkonsky, Lydia Davydova recalled, Schoenberg's and Webern's music came to Russia alongside Renaissance and early Baroque music. Tischenko remembered that in the 1960s, Volkonsky "was the first swallow of the avant-garde. [T]hose who came after him ... already followed in his tracks. I consider [him] the discoverer." Edison Denisov described the 1960s as his "second conservatory", crediting Volkonsky not only for introducing Webern, but also Gesualdo. This tolerance did not survive the Brezhnev Stagnation. Volkonsky emigrated in 1973, Herschkowitz in 1987, and of Khrennikov's Seven (1979), Denisov, Elena Firsova, Sofia Gubaidulina, Dmitri Smirnov, and Viktor Suslin eventually emigrated. Many choreographers set Webern's music to dance. Martha Graham and George Balanchine choreographed several works in Episodes I and II respectively (1959) as a New York City Ballet "novelty". John Cranko set Opus 1 (1965) to Webern's Passacaglia, Op. 1. Rudi van Dantzig choreographed Webern's music in Ogenblikken (1968) and Antwoord gevend (1980); Glen Tetley in Praeludium (1978) and Contredanses (1979); Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker alongside that of Beethoven and Schnittke in Erts (1992); and Trisha Brown in Twelve Ton Rose (1996). Jiří Kylián set only Webern's music in No More Play (1988) and Sweet Dreams (1990), more often pairing it with that of other composers in several ballets (1984–1995). Webern's legacy was bitterly contested in the "serial wars". Amid the "Restoration of the 1980s", as Martin Kaltenecker termed a paradigm shift from structure to perception within musicological discourse, musicologists quarreled. Charles Rosen scorned "historical criticism ... avoiding any serious engagement with a work or style ... one happens not to like". Andreas Holzer warned of "post-factual tendencies". Pamela M. Potter advised considering "the complexity of ... day-to-day existence" under Nazism, partly in considering the relevance of composers' politics to their canonic status. Meanwhile Allen Forte and Bailey Puffett formally analyzed Webern's atonal and twelve-tone œuvres respectively. Taruskin prioritized audience reception, not "musical utopianism". He excoriated the Second Viennese School's "idiosyncratic view of the past", linking Webern and Adler to Eduard Hanslick and "neo-Hegelian" Franz Brendel; he criticized historical determinism, "the natural ally of totalitarian politics." Martin Scherzinger noted that Taruskin's criticisms sought "active complicity with undesirable politics". Noted for his polemicism and revisionism, Taruskin described his "dubious reputation" on Webern and New Music and was praised and criticized by many. For Franklin Cox, Taruskin was an unreliable historian who opposed the Second Viennese School's "progressivist historicist" emancipation of the dissonance with a "reactionary historicist" "ideolog[y] of tonal restoration". On Webern's 1983 birth centenary, Tim Page wrote, "a re-evaluation ... would seem to be taking place". The occasion "went almost unmarked", Glenn Watkins observed, "a fate hardly imaginable for Berg [on his] 1985 [centenary]". After describing Webern's mid-century "meteoric ascension and ultimate canonization", Watkins described "quick shifts of interest" tapering to neglect. Webern's music was established but infrequent in standard (repeating) orchestral repertoire. His œuvre was played at the Venice Festival of Contemporary Music (1983), Juilliard (1995), and the Vienna Festival (2004), echoing six international festivals in his name (1962–1978). In relative obscurity (1941 or 1942), Webern had been quietly sure that "in the future even the postman will whistle my melodies!" But many did not acquire such a taste. Webern remained polarizing and provocative. Johnson described Webern's "almost unique position in the canon of Western composers", noting a reception dominated by polemics. By contrast to the "concert canon", Anne C. Shreffler considered Webern's better standing in a "separate canon" of technical and formal innovation. Michael Walter [de] argued Webern's innovations impeded his "exoteric canonization". Burkholder argued that music of the "historicist tradition", including Webern's, was secure in "a musical museum", "for that is what the concert hall has become". Mark Berry described Webern, already among Boulez's "big five", as one of five "canonical pillars of classic historical early twentieth-century modernism". David H. Miller suggested Webern "achieved a certain kind of acceptance and canonization". Pascal Decroupet observed an unquestioned "canon of polarizations" in prior histories. Johnson noted the "co-existence and interaction of diverse stylistic practices" with "remarkable similarities", challenging "conservative and progressive" campism and decentering musicology's technical periodizations via the longue durée of global modernity. Thus he ventured continuity between the "broken homeland" of Webern's Opp. 12–18 and the "broken pastoral" of Monteverdi's L'Orfeo and Vaughan Williams' Pastoral Symphony; between Webern's "evanescent images of musical fullness" and the brief, fragmentary nature of Chopin's Op. 28, which Schumann likened to "ruins". Building on Shreffler's and Felix Meyer's sketch studies as institutions acquired and made the Moldenhauers' estate accessible, Johnson worked toward a hermeneutics of Webern's (and Mahler's) music. Webern conducts "Berg – Violin Concerto" ASIN B000003XHN Webern conducts his arrangement of Schubert's German Dances ASIN B000002707 Anton Friedrich Wilhelm von Webern never used his middle names and was Anton von Webern until the 1919 Adelsaufhebungsgesetz [de], one social-democratic reform of many in the aftermath of World War I abolishing Austrian nobility in the newly declared Republic of German-Austria. He retook his nobiliary particle in the 1930s. As teacher, Webern guided and variously influenced Frederick Dorian (Friederich Deutsch), Hanns Eisler, Arnold Elston, Fré Focke [de], Karl Amadeus Hartmann, Philip Herschkowitz, Roland Leich, Kurt List, Gerd Muehsam [de], Matty Niël [nl], Karl Rankl, Louis Rognoni [it], Humphrey Searle, Leopold Spinner, Eduard Steuermann, Stefan Wolpe, Ludwig Zenk [cs], and possibly René Leibowitz. Webern's influence was closely linked (not restricted) to serialism. Rosegger wrote Heimatkunst [de]. Bruckner told students he was no longer guided by the rules he taught, broadening Adler's normative ideas about music. Bruckner, Liszt, and Wagner all wrote of "music of the future". Albrecht Dürer Society. He later served on its board. Webern may have seen newspaper ads for Schoenberg's Schwarzwald School courses in 1904. Karl Weigl, another Adler student, impressed Webern with the score of Schoenberg's Op. 5 in 1902. In 1903–1904, Webern attended performances of Schoenberg's Lieder and Op. 4. Webern specified which ones to Berg in July 1912: "Passacaglia, [String] Quartet, most [early] songs, ... second Quartet [Op. 5], ... first orchestral pieces [Op. 6], ... second [orchestral pieces, Op. 10] (with some exceptions)". Johnson argued this held for most of Webern's œuvre as part of "larger and more complex bundle of ideas whose genealogy and weight are cultural ...". So wrote Webern to Hildegard Jone [de], who read his music as "filled ... with the endless love and delicacy of the memory of ... childhood". They included Berg, Schoenberg, and Erwin Stein. Debussy, who died in 1918, once wished for a "'Society of Musical Esotericism'". Singing Society of the Social Democratic Arts Council Workers' Symphony Concerts Social Democratic Arts Council Men's Singing Society Leinsdorf considered the experience of "utmost value to my musical and critical development". Its popevki-like 3-7A cell and its 4–10 variant were not altogether unlike the rhythmized trichords of Webern's later Op. 24 or the tetrachords of Op. 30 (which Stravinsky later admired), apart from Stravinsky's tendency to anhemitony in marked contrast to Webern's hemitonicism. Among these were Alfred Adler, Karl Bühler, Leo Delitz [de], Josef Dobrowsky, Sigmund Freud, Ernst Lichtblau, Fanina Halle [lt], Hans Kelsen, Alma Mahler, suffragist Daisy Minor, Robert Musil, Egon Wellesz, and Franz Werfel. "Die Kundgebung des geistigen Wien," April 20, 1927; it read in part, with emphasis in original: "The essence of Spirit [Geist] is above all Freedom, which is now endangered and we feel obligated to protect it. The struggle for a higher humanity and the battle against indolence [Trägheit] and sclerosis [Verödung] will always find us ready. Today, it also finds us prepared for battle." Workers' Times Supporters included DJ Bach, Ruzena Herlinger [de], Werner Reinhart, Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge, Paul Stefan, and the IGNM-Sektion Österreich [de]. The first 1924 prize, juried by Julius Bittner, Joseph Marx, and Richard Strauss, was shared by several, including Berg, Carl Prohaska [de], Franz Schmidt, Max Springer, and Karl Weigl; the note was signed by Karl Seitz, who asked Webern at a concert two weeks prior, "Are you a professional musician?" Berg and Webern later served as jurists. Only Webern received the prize in 1931. Before his suicide in 1942, Stefan Zweig wrote, "the short decade between 1924 and 1933, from the end of German inflation to Hitler's seizure of power, represents—in spite of all—an intermission in the catastrophic sequence of events whose witnesses and victims our generation has been since 1914." The Path to the New Music The transcript went unpublished until 1960 to avoid "expos[ing] Webern to serious consequences". From 1928 onward, Webern grew closer to Ernst Krenek, alongside whom he lectured, whose music (taking a twelve-tone turn) he conducted, and with whom he, Berg, and Adorno shared concerns about the future. These conflicts arose within the ideological and political context of Germany–Soviet Union relations, 1918–1941. The clericofascist Vaterländische Front appealed to Austria's Catholic identity and imperial history, maintaining independence of Nazi Germany in alliance with Fascist Italy and Hungary. The Nazis appealed to this imperial history at Nuremberg. An Austrian gauleiter on Bayerischer Rundfunk named Berg and Webern as Jewish composers in 1933. Berg wrote Adorno of prior instances, and the Reichskulturkammer referred to Berg as an "émigré musical Jew" in Die Musik following Erich Kleiber's 1935 Berlin première of Berg's Lulu Suite. Conversely, when Berg wrote in 1933 seeking an academic position for Adorno to emigrate to England, Edward Dent declined on the basis of protectionism and underfunding, dubbing Berg "Hitlerian": "You [note in Berg's hand: '(The Jews?)'] are indeed Hitlerians, as you consider Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Holland, Scandinavia, Czechoslovakia and perhaps even England as belonging to 'Germany'!!!" He was responding to Krenek's essay "Freiheit und Verantwortung" ("Freedom and Responsibility") in Willi Reich [de]'s 23—eine Wiener Musikzeitschrift (1934). Elsewhere Krenek advocated for "a Catholic Austrian avante garde", opposing "the Austrian provincialism that National Socialism wants to force on us." Only guest conductor Otto Klemperer's status sufficed to overcome their refusal, and even then, the entire orchestra abruptly walked off stage afterward, leaving Krasner, Klemperer, and Arnold Rosé to stand alone. Rosé, retired, had returned to pay his respects to the late Berg as honorary concertmaster. Webern's only son Peter was an avid Austrian National Socialist. His eldest daughter Amalie married businessman Gunter Waller, who joined the Nazi Party as a business formality. His youngest daughter Christine married Kreisleiter and Schutzstaffel member Benno Mattl, "little liked by the family", in Jun. 1938. His middle daughter Maria Halbich almost emigrated with a man "of Jewish origin". She and Webern's wife Wilhelmine "Minna" Mörtl were wary of Hitler and the Nazis. Webern avoided politics at home. Webern told Krasner, "Schoenberg, had he not been a Jew, would have been quite different!" For Bailey Puffett, this likely referred to Schoenberg's politics, which were vaguely conservative and German nationalist, then Zionist. Adorno wrote that "Berg was little concerned with politics, although he saw himself implicitly a socialist." Following the 1918 Jännerstreik and 1919 Spartacist uprising, Berg wrote to Erwin Schulhoff, who was sympathetic, "What names does the Entente have (outside of Russia) that ring of idealism as [Rosa] Luxemburg and [Karl] Liebknecht do?" In weary opposition to World War I, Berg had been adapting Junges Deutschland playwright Georg Büchner's proto-Naturalist Woyzeck, with its Vormärz theme of alienation, in his opera Wozzeck. Büchner's revolutionary 1834 call in The Hessian Courier for "Peace to the huts! War on the palaces!" (Friede den Hütten! Krieg den Palästen!) had endured, paraphrased by August Bebel (1871 Paris Commune) and Vladimir Lenin (1916, "Peace Without Annexations and the Independence of Poland as Slogans of the Day in Russia"; 1917, "Appeal to the Soldiers of All the Belligerent Countries") amid the revolutions of 1917–1923 ending World War I, the February Revolution first among them. Premièred by Erich Kleiber at the Berlin State Opera (1925), Wozzeck was then taken to Prague by Otakar Ostrčil at the National Theatre (1926), provoking a "scandal," as Berg wrote Adorno, staged by "Czech Nationalists (virtually Nazis)" and "clerical lobbies [that] was purely political! (To them I am the Berlin Jew Alban (Aaron?) Berg. Ostrčil bribed by the Russian Bolsheviks, the whole thing arranged by the 'Elders of Zion' etc)." In Rudé právo, Zdeněk Nejedlý praised Berg's music, ridiculing the idea that Wozzeck was staged as a Bolshevik conspiracy, which Antonín Šilhan insinuated in Národní listy. Emanuel Žák, writing for Čech, ascribed its "degenerate" nature to Jewish influence. The Bohemian State Committee forbade further performances. In its third première (1927), Nikolai Roslavets' Association for Contemporary Music staged Wozzeck at the Mariinsky Theatre in Leningrad with Berg and Shostakovich attending. Berg wired his wife Helene [de] "huge, tumultuous success," though critical reception was mixed. Amid Stalinism and deteriorating Germany–Soviet Union relations, Wozzeck was not restaged in Russia for 82 years. This was Erwin Stein's phrase about "what we have [in Vienna]" in a 1934 letter to Schoenberg. Nazism itself was variously outlined, often emphasizing mutually reinforcing anticommunism, expansionist nationalism (Lebensraum), and racialized antisemitism (Judeo-Bolshevism); but historians also noted multipartisan syncretic appeals of a nostalgic, populist nature, with some anti-modernism and irrationalism, socially exclusive communitarianism (Volksgemeinschaft), and criticism of capitalism. Composers' correspondence was conducted with some regard to the possibility of later publication, especially after the nineteenth century. Accounts were often self-admittedly perspectival. Tito M. Tonietti similarly observed of Schoenberg's reception history: "The many aspects of his complex life and artistic personality have ... been drastically simplified and isolated from their context. There has been a tendency to prefer only one, the most in line with the thesis that the writer wished to demonstrate. ... Schönberg has unfortunately not been understood ... [but] used ... for ... controversy ..., for ... purpose ... ." So did the Moldenhauers. Webern insisted they stop at a Munich train station café in 1936 to show Krasner that antisemitism posed no real danger. Krasner reflected in 1987 that "Jews ... were at the center of the difficulty" but that he had been "foolhardy" as to the full potential of antisemitism: revisiting Vienna in 1941 to help friends (e.g., Schoenberg's daughter Gertrude, her husband Felix Greissle) emigrate, only his US passport saved him from locals and police. Likewise, Franz Neumann reassessed the Nazis' antisemitism as late as 1944, revising his 1942 Behemoth accordingly. List ventured that "[n]ationalist ideas may have saved [Webern] from the concentration camp". Dissent was punishable under the Heimtückegesetz. The Nazis' term was Volksdeutsche. Most prominent among Austrofascists were Engelbert Dollfuss and Kurt Schuschnigg. Deteriorating German-Austrian relations and Austrian weakening were marked by the July Putsch, terror, economic warfare (e.g., the thousand-mark ban), and infrastructure destruction. Among these were prominent Austromarxists Otto Bauer (from exile) and Karl Renner. This was negated by the Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919), which imposed a post-Habsburg rump state ("ce qui reste, c'est l'Autriche"). This echoed the Linz Program of 1882. His arrangement of two of Schubert's German Dances was performed in Leipzig and broadcast in the Reich and Fascist Italy (1941). Webern emphasized. Webern's immediate reply (March 1940) was: "I ... with reference ... to my ... experiences ... wondered how such opposites could have become possible next to each other." In the tradition of parties seeking a dues-paying mass membership, formal NSDAP affiliation could oblige one to pay registration fees or dues, or even to labor. Nazis dissuaded some prospective members from formal affiliation as a strategic matter. Schoenberg was unable to secure Görgi's emigration despite many attempts. Between the Russian–German language barrier and Nazi munitions and propaganda in the apartment's storeroom, Görgi was held and nearly executed as a Nazi spy but was able to convince a German-speaking Jewish officer otherwise. Görgi and his family remained there until 1969. Webern repeatedly emphasized Zusammenhang, translated as unity, coherence, or connection. Sibelius was also noted for his organicism and natural topics. British concert programs posed him as an alternative to the Second Viennese School. Adorno and Leibowitz criticized him. Taruskin noted Webern's "descent from Mahler". Keith Fitch glossed Webern as "crystallized Mahler". The opening of Webern's Op. 21 echoed that of Mahler's Ninth. This was noted in his performances. Webern compared Op. 27/ii to the Badinerie from Bach's BWV 1067. Webern's Op. 1 was openly modeled on that of Brahms's Fourth. Webern's Op. 27/i was perhaps modeled on Brahms's Op. 116/v. Webern often referred to the Franco-Flemish School as "the Netherlanders." In Feb. 1905 Webern recorded in his diary, "Mahler pointed out ... Rameau ... Bach, Brahms, and Wagner as ... contrapuntalists ... . '... Just as in nature the entire universe has developed from the primeval cell ... beyond to God ... so also in music should a large structure develop [entirely] from a single motive ... .' Variation is ... most important ... . A theme [must] be ... beautiful ... to make its unaltered return ... . ... [M]usicians [should] combine ... contrapuntal skill ... with ... melodiousness". In Jan. 1931, Schoenberg responded to Webern's plan for lectures: "... show the logical development towards twelve-tone composition. ... [T]he Netherlands School, Bach for counterpoint, Mozart for phrase formation [and] motivic treatment, Beethoven [and] Bach for development, Brahms, and ... Mahler for varied and highly complex treatment. ... [T]itle ... : 'The path to twelve-tone composition.'" J. Peter Burkholder generalized his claim that "the use of existing music as a basis for new music is pervasive in all periods";[citation needed] he had focused on "the historicist mainstream" within the proximal eighteenth and especially nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Adriaan Peperzak, writing about the taste of "most intellectuals" at the end of the 20th century as "a plurality of cultural homes" (or about "the 'modern museum of cultures'"), stressed a general connection between new and old represented also in music (i.e., both "after" and before tonality or common practice), observing that "whereas certain works of Bartók and Stravinsky already are experienced as difficult," "Josquin des Prez, Gesualdo, Webern and Boulez seem to be reserved to a small elite, and we continue to refer to traditional art in learning how to compose new works and how to listen to the extraordinary works made according to non-traditional codes." For example, his first use of twelve-tone technique in Op. 17, Nos. 2 and 3, was more technical than stylistic, and Adorno felt that Op. 14 sounded twelve-tone. Their instrumental music has been related to vocal idioms: the "concealed vocality" and "latent opera" of Berg's Lyric Suite and the Bach chorale and folk melody of his Violin Concerto; the "recitative" of Schoenberg's Op. 16/v and the accented musical prose of his twelve-tone music. Unlike Berg and Schoenberg, Webern did not use Hauptstimmen and Nebenstimmen, but he endorsed textures of accompanied melody in his music's polyphony. He could not stop writing songs, he told Berg (1921) and Hertzka (1927), noting his work's "almost exclusively lyrical nature" and apologizing to Hertzka for the consequently inauspicious commercial implications. Berg endorsed an innovative, pluralist approach emphasizing some bel canto and like Webern, expressed faith in singers to execute challenging lines. Hairpins were arguably read as tenuto-like agogic accents. Some exceptions included Webern's Op. 23. Philip Ewell cited Erhard Karkoschka, Walter Kolneder, Heinz-Klaus Metzger, Henri Pousseur, and Karlheinz Stockhausen on this point. Eliahu Inbal, whose work with the hr-Sinfonieorchester in the 1980s was part of a Bruckner reappraisal, found additional connections between Bruckner and Webern and Romantics and modernists more generally, echoing Dika Newlin and Mahler himself. Performers also relaxed their tempi. La vita, La natura, and La morte; or Life, Nature, and Death Alpine Triptych (1898–1899) "Becoming–Being–Bygone" Modern Evening Webern was enraptured by Debussy's Pelléas et Mélisande twice in Dec. 1908 Berlin and again in 1911 Vienna. "I feel the air of other planets" Op. 11/iii (mid-1909) so differed from Op. 11/i–ii (Feb. 1909) that when Bartók performed Op. 11 (23 Apr. 1921 Budapest, 4 Apr. 1922 Paris), he omitted it. "fields of sound", sound-fields For Adorno, these were an "essential" Mahlerian formal "genre", often episodic as in a section of music marked senza tempo. Korte compared Webern's Op. 10/iii to the passage before Mahler's "Chorus mysticus". Beethoven's similar use of registral expansion was noted (e.g., Op. 111, No. 2, Var. 5 when the theme re-emerges in a strange harmonic context after a long section of trills). Examples included the circling ostinati of Op. 6/v and the end of Op. 15/v. See Sprechgesang. Schoenberg briefly directed and wrote for the Überbrettl, for example, in the 1901 Brettl-Lieder. Examples included passacaglia in "Nacht", fugue in "Der Mondfleck", and canon in both. Examples included the virtuoso solo and waltz in "Serenade" and triadic harmony in "O alter Duft". "Galgenlied" was still quite short. In Apr. 1914, after Op. 22/i, "Seraphita," so wrote Schoenberg to Alma Mahler. Scholarship varied as to the genesis of Jakobsleiter. Joseph Auner noted a scherzo fragment dated May 1914. Schoenberg told Berg about setting Strindberg's Jacob lutte in spring 1911. Webern introduced Schoenberg to Balzac's Louis Lambert and Séraphîta in Mar. 1911. "Ob rechts, ob links, vorwärts oder rückwärts, bergauf oder bergab – man hat weiterzugehen, ohne zu fragen, was vor oder hinter einem liegt." In 1941 Schoenberg lectured: "the ... law of the unity of musical space demands an absolute and unitary perception. In this space, as in Swedenborg's heaven (described in Balzac's Séraphîta) there is no absolute down, no right or left, forward or backward." Schoenberg then considered Jakobsleiter a "real twelve-tone composition" for its opening hexachordal ostinato and "Scherzo ... of all the twelve tones". Examples include Op. 9, Op. 15/iv, and Op. 16. First by hexachordal aggregation in its center; second in a registrally expansive, open voicing at the end. Among these were "Der Vollmond Strahlt auf Bergeshöhn" (the Romanze from Rosamunde), "Tränenregen" (from Die schöne Müllerin), "Der Wegweiser" (from Winterreise), "Du bist die Ruh", and "Ihr Bild". Initially inspired by his revolutionary countrymen, Liszt left it in manuscript at Carl Haslinger [de]'s discretion. In 2013, the Moldenhauers' dogged investigation into Webern's death and the experiences and testimony of those involved were portrayed in a one-act opera, The Death of Webern, which, though written in the eclectic style of its composer Michael Dellaira, paraphrases and quotes from Webern's music (e.g., the Passacaglia, Op. 1 in the third and final scenes, Klangfarbenmelodie in the sixth scene). For example, Op. 28's BACH motif (1938) and Op. 29/i, "Zündender Lichtblitz", (1938–1939, orch. 1944) troubled some commentators. See Werktreue [de]. Stadlen published a specially marked score. Cancellation Dawn Goffredo Petrassi and his student Aldo Clementi were later influenced by Webern, as was Schoenberg pupil Alfredo Sangiorgi [it]. Riccardo Malipiero organized composers, including Camillo Togni, around twelve-tone music in 1949 Milan. Dallapiccola's 1943 Sex carmina alcaei, on some of the Lirici greci [it] of Salvatore Quasimodo after Alcaeus of Mytilene, were one of three groups of Lieder from his Liriche greche set (1942–1945). This is Krasner's phrase, by which he interpreted Schoenberg's "those who tried might have succeeded in confounding us" as referring to Webern. But Douglas Jarman noted Schoenberg's discomfort with and Erwin Stein's (and later Cerha's and Perle's) defense of Berg after the Jewish banker scene in Act III of Lulu. When Schoenberg asked Webern about his feelings toward the Nazis, Webern replied, "Who dares to come between you and me?" When Eduard Steuermann asked Krasner on behalf of Schoenberg, Krasner soothed Schoenberg with a self-described lie. Schoenberg's 1934 (or 1935)–1936 Violin Concerto kept its dedication to Webern, though worded very simply ("to Anton von Webern"), whether due to Schoenberg's suspicions or to protect Webern from danger or Nazi suspicion. Schoenberg and Webern continued to correspond at least through 1939. Schoenberg prepared his statement for publication as a handwritten inscription by facsimile reproduction in Leibowitz's 1948 didactic score of Webern's then unpublished Op. 24, which Webern dedicated to Schoenberg in 1934 for his sixtieth birthday. Or possibly Craft, who often ghostwrote for Stravinsky. See Darmstadt School. See Scambi, 1957. Among these were Feldman, Pousseur, Rochberg, Stravinsky, and La Monte Young. Olin Downes described Op. 28 as "Dead End music" in 1941. Another critic wrote in 1929: "If modernism depended for progress upon the Weberns, it would get nowhere." Adorno advocated for the completion of Lulu, writing that it "reveals the extent of its quality the longer and more deeply one immerses oneself in it". Boulez conducted the 1979 première after Cerha's orchestration. By contrast, the Kolisch Quartet's 1927 performance of Berg's Lyric Suite at the Baden-Baden ISCM festival (where Bartók performed his own Piano Sonata) inspired Bartók in his subsequent third and fourth string quartets and Concerto for Orchestra. Tischenko's anti-Stalinist Requiem is a noted example of Soviet post-Webernism. Moments Giving Answer Johnson also described several shifts. Robert Fink described a "general disciplinary crisis". In new musicology and postmodernism, canons were questioned, and pluralism was promoted. Lawrence Kramer and Susan McClary emphasized musical meaning. Taruskin criticized the canon's Eurocentrism, Germanism (especially in Schoenberg's, Webern's, and Carl Dahlhaus's work), and colonialism. In relation to post-Webernism more generally, Holzer slammed attempts "to place Darmstadt in a fascistoid corner or even identifying it as a US propaganda institution amid the Cold War" ("Darmstadt in ein 'faschistoides' Eck zu stellen oder es gar als Propagandainstitution der USA im Kalten Krieg auszuweisen") via "unbelievable distortions, exaggerations, reductions and propagation of clichés" ("unglaublichen Verdrehungen, Übertreibungen, Verkürzungen und Propagierungen von Klischeebildern"). For Taruskin, pitch sets did not "conform to the physics of sound", and "optimism about human adaptability ... is the same ... that drives all utopian thinking." For J. Peter Burkholder, musical historicism as a mainstream intellectual tradition proper began in Brahms's generation's l'art pour l'art and more introverted musical experience. It intensified in Schoenberg's generation with increasing engagement with stylistic history as impetus to compositional innovation. Distantly and obliquely echoing Charles Burney's work, it flowered amid Hegelianism and theories of biological and social evolution or progress. Burkholder distinguished between more progressive historicism (Schoenberg's Erwartung), more emulative cases (Strauss's Ariadne auf Naxos), and mixed examples (Berg's Wozzeck). He noted the assimilation of peripheral national music traditions for novelty but emphasized that innovation occurred even within peripheral national contexts. For Taruskin, "the legacy of fascism is an inseparable ... facet of the lofty legacy of modernism". Krasner told Fanfare Webern "packed me off quickly" upon the Anschluss "for my safety but perhaps ... to avoid ... embarrassment ... had his family arrived, or friends celebrating ... Nazi entry". Taruskin cited Krasner to claim Webern joyfully welcomed the Nazis upon the Anschluss. In his "How Talented Composers Become Useless" postscript, Taruskin wrote, "The Nazis had every right to criticize Schoenberg ... . It is not for their criticism that we all revile them." He compared Leibowitz to Goebbels, found "Nazi resonances" in Eimert's "only composers who follow Webern are worthy of the name," and likened Boulez's "[s]ince the Viennese discoveries, any musician who has not experienced ... the necessity of dodecaphonic language is USELESS" to the Zhdanov Doctrine. "Of all in the volumes in this series," Taruskin referred to his Oxford History, "this one, covering the first half of the twentieth century, surely differs the most radically from previous accounts". Rosen charged Taruskin's "hostile presentation ... does not result in historical objectivity". Max Erwin considered Taruskin's work on the Darmstädter Ferienkurse "passionately negative" and "thoroughly discredited", particularly that "Adorno or Leibowitz officiated with near-dictatorial power". Rodney Lister wrote, "Taruskin's purpose ... is to bury Webern, not to praise him", noting "the increasing importance of 'motivization' over the course of the 19th century and of the 'collapse' of (traditional) tonality [is] something which Taruskin flatly states never took place." Larson Powell found "Taruskin's ... references to Webern's politics ... to discredit the music." Christian Utz [de] agreed with Martin Zenck [de] that Taruskin's claims were "simplifying and distorting", granting "authoritarian rhetoric ... in ... the 1950s and 60s" and the nonexistence of "'apolitical music'". Holzer also sympathized with but found Taruskin inappropriate and simplistic. In a survey of five prestigious British and French orchestras, his music was played 121 times and Beethoven’s 1,198 times between 1967 and 2017. In a US orchestra survey of the "top 100 composers in terms of works performed", his music was played 175 times and Mozart's 7,103 times between 2000 and 2009. "[A]tonal music is [like] random notes" in its macroharmony, Dmitri Tymoczko suggested as one reason. Surveying institutions and performers, Ian Pace described New Music as subcultural within classical music. Julian Johnson argued that criticisms of composers' innovations were a "constant of musical modernity for four hundred years", from il nuove musiche to die neue Musik. He quoted Girolamo Mei writing to Vincenzo Galilei in 1572: "[N]ot to appear ... inferior ... these musicians precipitated themselves at breakneck speed ... to discover always new styles and new forms of song [which] were not understood [or] felt". Mei wrote Galilei that in these innovations composers followed their ears, not their intellects. Webern's music was associated with "intellectual order". Burkholder (and Lydia Goehr, among others) likened the function of orchestras to that of museums in presenting "important" (if sometimes "difficult" or "unpopular") art, not without regard to audiences. The others, in both cases, were Bartók, Berg, Schoenberg, and Stravinsky. Ensemble intercontemporain played them often at Boulez's IRCAM as "classics" in the 1980s, which Georgina Born argued contributed to their canonization. In a case study, Martin Kaltenecker noted Taruskin's taking aim at avant-garde prestige in opposition to Célestin Deliège [fr]'s Cinquante ans de modernité musicale: De Darmstadt à l'IRCAM. He contrasted their polarized nomothetic "plots" with more idiographic approaches' "juxtapositions" and thick description. He considered how to move beyond this nomothetic–idiographic historiographical dichotomy. Johnson described music in modernity as "broken off from the past", "broken in itself", and "of individual subjectivity". It no longer "elaborate[s] ... divine unity", by contrast to medieval music, but "rema[d]e it", he argued, "as Wagner's Siegfried ... from ... his father's sword, or as Webern piece[d] together ... atomized ... interval[s]." For Johnson, modernism foregrounded the "brokenness that always lay at the heart of the pastoral". Thomas Peattie wrote about brokenness in Mahler's pastoral music. Julie Brown described a "greening" of Webern literature. Shaftel 2000, iii. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 106, 237, 257, 288, 299, 397, 454, 480. Hayes 1995, 20. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 30–31. Hayes 1995, 18. Johnson 1999, 83. Hayes 1995, 19; Johnson 1999, 21, 220 Jensen 1989, 11. Kolneder 1968, 20–21. Jensen 1989, 11; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 80–82 Johnson 1999, 252. Puffett 1996, 32. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 71–72. Simms and Erwin 2021, 58. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 103. Elliott 2007, 222. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 106–107, 111–112. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 135–173. Moskovitz 2010, 136–140. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 135–174. Johnson 2006b, 212. Johnson 1999, 20–23, 57, 80, 99, 102. Johnson 1999, 22, 38, 74–75, 79, 86, 94, 128; Street 2013, 383–384 Johnson 1999, 82. Johnson 1999, 84–85. Moskovitz 2010, 139–140. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 224. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 241. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 229. Shreffler 1994, 68–69; Simms 2006, 463–464, 467 Johnson 2006b, 197; Krenek 1998, 787–788 Bailey Puffett 1998, 121; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 292, 450 Leinsdorf 1997, 13; Stewart 1991, 187 Holland, Bernard (12 September 1993). "Erich Leinsdorf, 81, a Conductor of Intelligence and Utility, Is Dead". The New York Times.; Antokoletz 2014, 75, 225; Moldenhauer 1961, 327 Toorn and McGinness 2012, 43–52, 67–75, 124–126; Peyser 2008, 80–81; Sills 2022, 48–49, 84, 119–123 Leeuw 2005, 56–58; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 431–439; Puffett 1996, 63 Leeuw 2005, 161. Sills 2022, 48–49, 119–126, 284–285. Maes 2002, 284–285; Taruskin 1996b, 383–413 Ewell 2013, 219–223, 242; Hába 1934, 15–17 Simms and Erwin 2021, 375–377; Wasserman 2014, 1–2 Wasserman 2014, 47. Wasserman 2014, 1–2. Krasner and Seibert 1987, 337–338. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 302–305. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 258. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 301, 347. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 361, 365. Krenek 1998, 787–788. Johnson 2006a, 217. Berg 2014, 214–215, 288–290. Adamson 2003, 412; Morgan 1993, 75 Perle 1980, 201. Webern 1963, 7, 19–20. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 395. Berg 2014, 214–215, 288–290; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 451; Stewart 1991, 182–196 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 451; Webern 1963, 7, 19–20 Bailey Puffett 1998, 161; Beller 2006, 212–217; Kapp 1999, 121–128; Simms and Erwin 2021, 375–377 Simms and Erwin 2021, 375–376. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 407–408; Simms and Erwin 2021, 375–377; Wodak 2009, 52 Krones 1999, 7–8; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 408, 419, 466 Bailey Puffett 1998, 161; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 304 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 418–421, 472. Notley 2010. Adorno and Berg 2005, 85, 89. Morgan 1993, 75. Adorno and Berg 2005, 248. Adorno and Berg 2005, 249–250. Bailey Puffett 1998, 161, 165; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 473–475, 478, 491, 498–499; Taruskin 2008a, 211–212 Stewart 1991, 184–188. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 479. Krasner and Seibert 1987, 341; Morgan 1993, 75 Bailey Puffett 1998, 152; Morgan 1993, 75 Bailey Puffett 1998, 177–178; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 503 Krasner and Seibert 1987, 338. Bailey Puffett and Schingnitz 2020, 18; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 33, 139, 199, 214, 355 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 497. Bailey Puffett 1998, 86, 166-172; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 13, 497-498, 522 Bailey Puffett 1998, 171. Simms and Erwin 2021, 375. Perle 1980, 19–24. Botstein 2010, 330; Schwartz 2017, 85–91 Broué 1971, 13–14. Adorno and Berg 2005, 85. Simms and Erwin 2021, 215. Ho 2011, 117–118. Perle 1980, 199. Johnson 2006b, 199; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 530; Simms and Erwin 2021, 375 Simms and Erwin 2021, 376. Simms and Erwin 2021, 375–377. Kapp 1999, 128; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 473–474, 530–532 Kapp 1999, 121–128; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 495–496, 517–518 Fulbrook 2011, 45–47; Mayer 1988, xiii, 90–109 Bailey Puffett 1998, 166–174; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 529–530 Tonietti 2003, 236–237. Kapp 1999, 121. Brown 1998, 149–150; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 530 Bailey Puffett 1998, 166–174. Johnson 2006b, 197. Johnson 2006b, 219–225. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 532. Krasner and Seibert 1987, 343–345. Jay 1986, 92–93; Wistrich 2012, 18–19 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 554–555. Bukey 2019, 70–72; Russell 2019, 45–46 Bailey Puffett 1998, 164; Krasner and Seibert 1987, 343 Greissle-Schönberg 2003b; Krasner and Seibert 1987, 343 Bailey Puffett 1998, 86, 158, 164–165, 173–175; Shreffler 1999, 299 Bailey Puffett 1998, 161. Hochman 2016, 35, 239. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 516–519, 530–531. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 517. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 531; Schoenberg 2018, 209 Bailey Puffett 1998, 86, 105, 173; Webern 1967 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 340, 385, 530. Kapp 1999, 121–128. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 500–505. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 408–409. Bailey Puffett 1998, 174; Kapp 1999, 121–128; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 499–500 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 503–504, 519–520, 685. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 521. Kapp 1999, 121–128; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 503–504, 517, 531, 549 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 537–538. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 523–525, 548–552, 579. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 237, 538. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 539. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 538–540. Bailey Puffett 1998, 86, 166–175; Johnson 1999, 219–222; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, XI, 18, 283, 292, 333, 337, 339, 345, 356, 370, 372, 416–417, 448, 467, 517, 525–533, 538–539, 544–548, 550, 552, 555, 569, 573–575, 578, 591, 641–643; Ross 2007, 352 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 526. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 527–530. Johnson 1999, 221. Bailey Puffett 1998, 86, 166; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 522–523 Bailey Puffett 1998, 168-172; Kater 1997, 74; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 544–545 Turner 1985, 59–60, 113–124, 157, 292–293, 347, 403. Turner 1985, 143–144, 347–349. Bailey Puffett 1998, 166-172. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 544–545. Bailey Puffett 1998, 183. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 553–554. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 526, 552. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 600–603. Greissle-Schönberg 2003a; Krasner and Seibert 1987, 345-346; Schoenberg 2018, 209 Krasner and Seibert 1987, 346; Moldenhauer 1961, 85, 102, 1141–16; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 632 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 638–643. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 113. Adorno 1984, 448; Adorno 2004, 418 Bols 2020, 112–113. Bols 2020, 124–125. Burkholder 1983, 125; Frigyesi 1998, 23, 25–26, 30–33, 36–41, 90–93, 105–108; Neubauer 2001, 11–15; Neubauer 2002, 501–502; Neubauer 2009, 21–22, 29–31; Rochberg 2004, 17–18 Taruskin 2023a, 294. Johnson 1999, 205. Johnson 2006b, 205–206. Littlewood 2004, 33. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 483; Musgrave 1985, 259–260 Burkholder 1983, 119–128; Burkholder 2006, 425; Cook and Pople 2004, 672; Kolneder 1968, 20–21; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 37, 39, 49–69, 74–78, 84–88, 99, 124–125, 265, 274, 276, 300, 318–321, 325–328, 334–339, 366–369, 373–374, 378–380, 414, 419, 424–427, 482, 506–508, 570–572, 575–576, 689, 715, 738–739; Morris 2016, 172–173; Street 1989, 71–91; Tarasti 2002, 44–46, 99–104; Tarasti 2015, 292–293 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 75–76. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 374. Burkholder 1983, 115, 124–125, 129, 132. Stapleton 1994, 12–13; Peperzak 1994, 461 Peperzak 1994, 466. Adorno 1999, 100; Antokoletz 2014, 44; Bailey Puffett 1991, 14, 31–35, 94, 107–109, 125, 418; Johnson 1999, 165 Clark 2001, 573; Hayes 2021, 9 Rochberg 2004, 15; Shreffler 1994, 18; Shreffler 1999, 253–255 Schroeder 1999, 218–219. Berry 2019, 74; Simms 1999, 161–162 Schroeder 1999, 233–234. Shaftel 2000, iv. Shreffler 1994, 149. Adorno 1999, 100. Barker 2004, 24–26; Fraser 2003, 9–25; Matter 1981, 57; Shreffler 1999, 276 Berg 2014, 218–219, 222, 261; Elliott 2007, 229–230; Hayes 1995, 138; Perle 1985, 29 Johnson 1998, 275–279. Kim 2012, 46–48, 51. Näf 2019, 190. Johnson 2017, 228. Johnson 1999, 1–8, 20–37, 42–44, 50, 73–78, 100–109, 145–154, 162, 172, 182, 186, 193, 199–218, 230–232, 248, 259. Johnson 1999, 258. Rode-Breyman 1996, 1. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 340–342. Hába 1934, 15–17. Ewell 2013, 220–223, 242. Bailey Puffett 1991, 47; Hayes 2021, 9; Taruskin 2023a, 294 Ewell 2013, 219–221. Korstvedt 2004, 121; Sanderson n.d. Inbal 2022. Antokoletz 2014, 44–47; Baragwanath 1999, 62–83 Shaftel 2004, iv. Chen 2006; Puffett 1996, 38; Yang 1987, vi Fitch 2000; Webern 2000 Meyer and Shreffler 1996, 136; Shere 2007, 7 Johnson 1999, 211–236. Rode-Breyman 1996, 2. Johnson 1999, 42–45. Jensen 1989, 12–14. Jensen 1989, 11–15; Johnson 1999, 72–77; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 86 Bailey Puffett 1996, 195; Meyer and Shreffler 1996, 147, 150 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 93–97 Bailey Puffett and Schingnitz 2020, 193; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 140–141 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 116–117. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 104. Busoni 1987, 388–9; Haimo 2010, 100–104; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 123–125, 706–707 Street 2005, 86. Schoenberg 1950, 484. Brinkmann 2000, 9–12. Johnson 1999, 149. Crawford and Khuner 1996, 10. Krones 2017, 125. Adorno 1984, 448; Bailey Puffett 1997, 83–86; Haimo 2010, 100–104; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 64, 93–97, 117–134, 190–208, 263, 279, 656 Haimo 2006, 318–352. Boss 2015, 2, 5, 10–12, 46, n8. Johnson 1999, 121. Johnson 1999, 105–108. Dolan and Rehding 2021, 135, 144, 157–159, 183, 514, 527–529, 534; Johnson 1999, 57, 94, 110–112, 121, 125, 141, 201 Miller 2022b; Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 263–264, 269–272, 712–713 Johnson 1999, 129. Johnson 1999, 149–150; Shreffler 1994, 131–132 Johnson 1999, 149–150. Auner 2003, 123–124. Auner 2003, 123–125; Berry 2008, 86; Smither 2001, 678 Brown 2011, 120. Christensen 1979, Volume II: Appendices, Appendix B: Annotated Edition of the Libretto (DICH[tung]14), 6. Schoenberg 1950, 113. Shreffler 1999, 283. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 278–279, 311–320; Perle 1995, 125 Shere 2007, 10. Schmusch 1995, 223, 226–230. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 576–578. Bailey Puffett 2001. Johnson 1999, 182. Rochberg 2004, 15. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 742. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 67, 746. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 237. Merrick 1987, 31. Arnold 2002, 386–387; Merrick 1987, 31 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 282. Auner 1999, 14. Clampitt 2009, 195; Doctor 1999, 200; Johnson 1999, 128; Paddison 1998, 51; Perle 1990, 45; Prausnitz 2002, 261 Babbitt 2003, 54. Maconie 2016, 36–41, 45–50. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 292, 450, 516–517; Morgan 1993, 79; Ross 2007, 267 Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 470–471, 679–680. Pace 2022b, 406–407. Pace 2022b, 436, 439. Jackson 2005, 465. Bolcom 2004, 50; Bolcom 2016; Cook 2017, 163, 201 Johnson, J 2015, 108. Burkholder 1983, 128–134. Horowitz, Joseph (11 January 1981). "Felix Galimir Recalls Berg and Webern in Vienna". The New York Times. Andriessen and Trochimczyk 2002, 6. Dallapiccola 1972, 6. Alegant 2010, 14. Dallapiccola 1972, 2. Dallapiccola 1972, 5–6. Alegant 2010, 38–46, 103–105, 292. Krasner and Seibert 1987, 346–47. Jarman 2017; Perle 1985, 283–284 Arnold Schönberg Center n.d.; Kater 1999, clv; Krasner and Seibert 1987, 345 Leibowitz 2018, 2, 5, 7, 11, 13, 81, 83, 86. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 693; Stravinsky 1959 Andriessen 2002, 131; Fosler-Lussier 2007, 38; Grant 2001, 103; Ross 2007, 267 Taruskin 2009c, 15–18. Bols 2020, 125–126. Fosler-Lussier 2007, 40. Ross 2007, 267. Erwin 2020, 93–94. Grant 2001, 103. Vandagriff 2017, 332. Rochberg 2004, 47–48; Wlodarski 2019, 59 Emmery 2020, 72–82. Clements 2022; Miller 2022a, 99 Straus 2001, 22. Feldman 2000, 114–115. Grant 2001, 104. Goeyvaerts 1994, 39; Grant 2001, 104-105 Iddon 2013, 250. Service 2013. Rochberg 2004, 9–11, 20–22; Wlodarski 2019, 62, 179 Sills 2022, 286–287. Johnson 1999, 28, 48, 54–55, 65–66, 69, 88, 110, 217, 231. "Tom Mulhern's Interview with Frank Zappa, 1983–". Erwin 2020, 93. Iddon 2013, 90–98, 115–116, 142–143, 258. Straus 1999, 330–332. Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 667. Slonimsky 1994, 251. Wlodarski 2019, 59. Watkins 1988, 390–391. Ehman 2013, 178. Street 2005, 101–103; Watkins 1988, 651 Bregegere 2014, 147; Pousseur 2009, 227 Berg 1957; Berg 2014, ix Krones 2017, 56. Krones 2017, 123–124. Antokoletz and Susanni 2011, xxix. Suchoff 2004, 22. Fosler-Lussier 2007, 49. Frandzel 2002; Krones 2017, 122–124 Johnson, V 2015, 34. Johnson, V 2015, 53–54. Johnson, V 2015, 59–65. Schmelz 2009, 26–27, 45–50, 72, 84, 200, 275–276. Schmelz 2009, 45. Schmelz 2015, 253. Schmelz 2009, 52–54; Taruskin 2023a, 276 Taruskin 2023a, 285. Schmelz 2009, 44. Schmelz 2009, 40. Tsenova 2014, 53–54. Schmelz 2009, 40–45, 65. Schmelz 2009, 70. Schmelz 2009, 40, 70–71. Schmelz 2009, 21–24, 179, 216, 221, 267, 275, 298. Sitsky 2002, 183–185. Bremser 1999, 2. Bremser 1999, 281–287. Bremser 1999, 108–113. Bremser 1999, 46–52. Bremser 1999, 175–180. Adamson 2003, 415. Rosen 2012, 246. Holzer 2019, 293–308. Holzer 2019, 294. Potter 2005, 446. Taruskin 1994, ¶7–8; Scherzinger with Hoad 1997, 127–128 Taruskin 2011, 3–4. Taruskin 2023b, 518–519; Taruskin 2009c, 413 Burkholder 1983, 118–124. Scherzinger with Hoad 1997, 63–65, 147. Krasner and Seibert 1987, 343. Taruskin 2008a, 211–212. Taruskin 1996a; Taruskin 2008c, 92 Holzer 2019, 305; Taruskin 2009c, 18–19 Robin, William (1 July 2022). "Richard Taruskin, Vigorously Polemical Musicologist, Dies at 77". The New York Times.; Bolcom 2004, 52; Bolcom 2016; Forte 1986, 321; Ho 2011, 200; Kosman 2014; MacDonald n.d.; Mitchinson 2001, 34; Pace 2022a; Schuijer 2008, 23 Taruskin 2009b, xiv, xx. Bick 2009; Eichner 2012, 28; Taruskin 2008b, 397; Taruskin 2011, 3–4; White 2008, 203 Erwin 2021, 71. Erwin 2020, 119. Erwin 2019, 45. Lister 2006, 52; Taruskin 2011, 3 Powell 2013, 3. Utz 2021, 114. Holzer 2019, 305. Cox 2011, 1, 36–38, 53. Page, Tim (30 June 1983). "Critic's Notebook; Re-evaluations of Webern's music". The New York Times. Watkins 1988, 390–391, 528–529. Watkins 1994, 465. Bols 2020, 205. Bols 2020, 265. Bols 2020, 250. London 2013, 85. Fontana 2023, "Non è triste Venezia". Moldenhauer and Moldenhauer 1978, 540–543. Bols 2020, 207–208. Ahrend and Münnich 2018; Clampitt 2009, 195; Erwin 2020, 93–94; Miller 2022b Johnson 1997, 61. Johnson, J 2015, 32–33, 57–58, 320. Mei 1998, 494–495. Burkholder 1983, 116–118, 127–134. Burkholder 1983, 116–118, 120, 125–131, 133–134. Berry 2019, 43; Nattiez 2004, 74–75 Born 1995, 172–175. Miller 2022b, "Epilogue; or, it matters how you flop". Barthel-Calvet and Murray 2023, 6; Decroupet 2023, 37 Barthel-Calvet and Murray 2023, 5–6. Barthel-Calvet and Murray 2023, 3–10, 12; Kaltenecker 2023, 13–14, 21–31, 34 Johnson, J 2015, 7, 85, 120–122. Johnson, J 2015, 1–4, 117–119, 124–129, 184–185. Johnson, J 2015, 3–10; Lee 2023, 434–436 Johnson, J 2015, 33–34. Johnson, J 2015, 4–8, 33–34. Johnson, J 2015, 15, 28–29, 40–41, 64–66. Johnson, J 2015, 28. Batstone 2023, 113–114. Johnson, J 2015, 25–28. Miller 2022a. Adamson, Walter L. 2003. "Modernism in art, literature and political theory". The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought, eds. and intro. by Terence Ball and Richard Bellamy, 412–430. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-56354-3. Adorno, Theodor. 1984. Musikalische Schriften, Vol. 5. Gesammelte Schriften, Vol. 18. Suhrkamp Verlag ISBN 978-3-518-57696-0. Adorno, Theodor. 1999. Sound Figures, trans. Rodney Livingstone. Stanford: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-3558-2. Adorno, Theodor. 2004. Aesthetic Theory. Impacts Series. A&C Black. ISBN 978-0-8264-7691-3. Adorno, Theodor W. and Alban Berg. 2005. Correspondence 1925–1935, ed. Henri Lonitz, trans. Wieland Hoban. Cambridge, UK and Malden, MA: Polity Press. ISBN 978-0-7456-2336-8. (Translation of Briefwechsel 1925–1935. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1997.) Ahrend, Thomas and Stefan Münnich. 2018. "Anton Webern." In Oxford Bibliographies Online in Music. 2018. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/obo/9780199757824-0238 (accessed 1 Oct. 2023). Alegant, Brian. 2010. The Twelve-tone Music of Luigi Dallapiccola. Rochester: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 978-1-58046-325-6. Andriessen, Louis. 2002. "Lectures for Young Composers". The Music of Louis Andriessen, ed. and preface by Maja Trochimczyk, gen. intro. by Joseph Auner, 131–160. Studies in Contemporary Music and Culture Series. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-76966-5. Andriessen, Louis and Maja Trochimczyk. 2002. "Dialog 1: Learning". The Music of Louis Andriessen, ed. and preface by Maja Trochimczyk, gen. intro. by Joseph Auner, 3–30. Studies in Contemporary Music and Culture Series. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-76966-5. Antokoletz, Elliott. 2014. A History of Twentieth-Century Music in a Theoretic–Analytical Context. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-88187-6 (hbk). Antokoletz, Elliott, and Paolo Susanni. 2011. Béla Bartók: A Research and Information Guide, 3rd ed. New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-203-88889-6. Arnold, Ben (ed.). 2002. The Liszt Companion. Jazz Companions Series. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-30689-1 (accessed 9 Aug. 2014). Arnold Schönberg Center. n.d. "Concerto for Violin and Orchestra Op. 36". Werk- und Quellendatenbank: Werke mit Opuszahlen (op. 26–50c). Vienna: Arnold Schönberg Center (accessed 9 Aug. 2014). Auner, Joseph. 1999. "The Second Viennese School as a Historical Concept." In Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern: A Companion to the Second Viennese School, ed. Bryan R. Simms, 1–36. Westport and London: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29604-8. Auner, Joseph. 2003. A Schoenberg Reader. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12712-6. Babbitt, Milton. 2003. "The Composer as Specialist." In The Collected Essays of Milton Babbitt, ed. Stephen Peles, with Stephen Dembski, Andrew Mead, and Joseph N. Straus, 48–54. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-15540-1. Bailey Puffett, Kathryn. 2001. "Webern, Anton." Grove Music Online (accessed 9 Oct. 2022). Bailey Puffett, Kathryn. 1998. The Life of Webern. Musical Lives. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-57336-8 (cloth) ISBN 978-0-521-57566-9 (pbk). Bailey Puffett, Kathryn. 1997. "Berg's aphoristic pieces". The Cambridge Companion to Berg, ed. Anthony Pople, 83–110. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-82807-9. Bailey Puffett, Kathryn. 1996. "Webern's Row Tables". In Webern Studies, ed. and intro. Kathryn Bailey Puffett, 170–228. Cambridge Composer Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47526-6 (hbk). Bailey Puffett, Kathryn. 1991. The Twelve-Note Music of Anton Webern: Old Forms in a New Language. Music in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39088-0 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-521-54796-3 (pbk). Bailey Puffett, Kathryn and Barbara Schingnitz. 2020. Three Men of Letters: Arnold Schönberg, Alban Berg and Anton Webern, 1906-1921, preface and trans. by Kathryn Bailey Puffett and Barbara Schingnitz. Vienna: Hollitzer. ISBN 978-3-99012-777-3. Baragwanath, Nicholas. 1999. "Alban Berg, Richard Wagner, and Leitmotivs of Symmetry." 19th-century Music 23(1):62–83. Barker, Paul. 2004. Composing for Voice: A Guide for Composers, Singers, and Teachers. New York: Routledge. Reprinted 2014. ISBN 978-1-136-72337-7. Barthel-Calvet, Anne-Sylvie and Christopher Brent Murray. 2023. "Revisiting the Old Stories of New Music". Introduction: Revisiting the Historiography of Postwar Avant-Garde Music, eds. Anne-Sylvie Barthel-Calvet and Christopher Brent Murray, 1–12. Oxford: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-315-10816-2 (ebk). ISBN 978-1-138-09120-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-1-032-31004-6 (pbk). doi:10.4324/9781315108162-1. Batstone, Leah. 2023. Mahler's Nietzsche: Politics and Philosophy in the Wunderhorn Symphonies. Woodbridge: Boydell. ISBN 978-1-83765-001-9 (ePDF). ISBN 978-1-83765-001-9 (hbk). Beller, Steven. 2006. A Concise History of Austria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-511-98994-0. Berg, Alban. 1957. Écrits, ed. and trans. Henri Pousseur. Monaco: Editions du Rocher. Enlarged edition, ed. Dominique Jameaux et al., Paris: Christian Bourgois, 1985. Berg, Alban. 2014. Pro Mundo–Pro Domo: The Writings of Alban Berg, trans. and ed. with commentaries by Bryan R. Simms. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-976406-8. doi:10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199764068.001.0001. Berry, Mark. 2008. "Arnold Schoenberg's 'Biblical Way': From 'Die Jakobsleiter' to 'Moses und Aron'." Music & Letters 89(1):84–108. Berry, Mark. 2019. Arnold Schoenberg. Critical Lives Series. London: Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1-78914-087-3. Bick, Andreas. 2009. "Richard Taruskin: The Danger of Music". Silent Listening blog (accessed 2 Aug. 2014). Bolcom, William. 2004. "The End of the Mannerist Century." In The Pleasure of Modernist Music: Listening, Meaning, Intention, Ideology, Part I. Reception & Politics, ed. Arved Mark Ashby, 46–53. Rochester: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 978-1-58046-143-6. Bolcom, William. 2016. "The End of the Mannerist Century, Appendix: Correspondence between Anthony Stadlen (nephew of Peter Stadlen) and William Bolcom, Feb. 2012". William Bolcom's blog (3 March 2016, accessed 18 Jan. 2023). Bols, Ingrid M. 2020. "Programming choices and national culture: the repertoires and canons of French and British Symphony Orchestras (1967–2019)". PhD diss. Glasgow: University of Glasgow. doi:10.5525/gla.thesis.82165. Born, Georgina. 1995. Rationalizing Culture: IRCAM, Boulez, and the Institutionalization of the Musical Avant-Garde. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-08507-7 (hbk). Boss, Jack. 2015. "'Away With Motivic Working?' Not So Fast: Motivic Processes in Schoenberg's Op. 11, No. 3". Music Theory Online 21(3). Botstein, Leon. 2010. "Alban Berg and the Memory of Modernism." In Alban Berg and His World, ed. Christopher Hailey, 299–344. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-14855-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-691-14856-4 (pbk). Bregegere, Andre. 2014. "L'harmonie revée: An Analysis of Henri Pousseur's Votre Faust and Les litanies d'Icare". PhD diss. New York: City University of New York. Bremser, Martha. 1999. Fifty Contemporary Choreographers, intro. by Deborah Jowitt. London and New York: Routledge. First edition. ISBN 978-0-203-97797-2 (ebook). ISBN 978-0-415-10363-3 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-415-10364-0 (pbk). Brinkmann, Reinhold. 2000. "Schoenberg's Quartets and the Viennese Tradition." In Music of My Future: The Schoenberg Quartets and Trio, eds. Reinhold Brinkmann and Christoph Wolff, 9-12. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-9640317-1-5. Broué, Pierre. 1971. The German Revolution 1917–1923, trans. John Archer, eds. Ian Birchall and Brian Pearce, intro. by Eric D. Weitz. Historical Materialism Series. Reprinted, Chicago: Haymarket Books. 2006. ISBN 978-1-931859-32-5 (pbk). Brown, Julie. 1998. Review: Anne C. Shreffler's Webern and the Lyric Impulse: Songs and Fragments on Poems of Georg Trakl and Kathryn Bailey's Webern Studies. Music and Letters 79(1):144–150. doi:10.1093/ml/79.1.144. Brown, Julie. 2011. "Understanding Schoenberg as Christ". The Oxford Handbook of the New Cultural History of Music, ed. Jane F. Fulcher, 117–162. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-199-35409-2. Bukey, Evan. 2019. Juvenile Crime and Dissent in Nazi Vienna, 1938–1945. London: Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-350-13262-7. Burkholder, J. Peter. 2006. "The Twentieth Century and the Orchestra as Museum". The Orchestra: A Collection of 23 Essays on Its Origins and Transformations, ed. and intro. by Joan Peyser, 409–432. Milwaukee: Hal Leonard Corporation. Reprint from original in 1986 by Charles Scribners Sons. ISBN 978-1-423-41026-3. Burkholder, J. Peter. 1983. "Museum Pieces: The Historicist Mainstream in Music of the Last Hundred Years". The Journal of Musicology 2(2):115–134. doi:10.2307/763802. Busoni, Ferruccio. 1987. Ferruccio Busoni: Selected Letters, ed., trans., and intro. by Antony Beaumont. New York: Columbia University Press. Clampitt, David. 2009. "Webern's Music for String Quartet." In Intimate Voices: The Twentieth-Century String Quartet, Vol. 1: From Debussy to Villa-Lobos, ed. Evan Jones, 195–220. Rochester: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 978-1-58046-229-7. Chen, Stephanie Hui-Shan. 2006. Webern's Reception in the Post-War Era. Self-published on author's web page (accessed 4 July 2018). Christensen, Jean Marie. 1979. "Arnold Schoenberg's Oratorio Die Jakobsleiter." PhD diss. Los Angeles: University of California Los Angeles. Clark, Duncan. 2001. "Anton Webern." In Classical Music: The Rough Guide, ed. Joe Staines, 572–575. Rough Guides. London: Rough Guides Ltd. ISBN 978-1-85828-721-8. Clements, Andrew. 2022. "The Complete Music of Anton Webern review – hugely influential recordings of jewel-like works". The Guardian.com (6 Jan., accessed 18 Sept. 2022). Cook, Nicholas and Anthony Pople, eds. 2004. "The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Music". The Cambridge History of Music. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-52166-256-7. Cook, Nicholas. 2017. "Inventing Tradition: Webern's Piano Variations in Early Recordings". Music Analysis 36:163–215. doi:10.1111/musa.12094. Cox, Franklin. 2011. "Review: Richard Taruskin's The Oxford History of Western Music, Part 1". Search Journal for New Music and Culture, 9 (Winter 2012) Crawford, Caroline and Felix Khuner. 1996. Felix Khuner: A Violinist's Journey from Vienna's Kolisch Quartet to the San Francisco Symphony and Opera Orchestras, intro. by Tom Heimberg. Regional Oral History Office, The Bancroft Library. Berkeley: University of California. Dallapiccola, Luigi. 1972. "Meeting with Anton Webern (Pages from a Diary)," trans. John C. G. Waterhouse. Tempo 99:2–7. doi:10.1017/S0040298200056485. Decroupet, Pascal. 2023. "Continuity in the Creative Auto-Genealogies of Boulez, Stockhausen, Pousseur, and Nono", trans. Christopher Brent Murray. In Revisiting the Historiography of Postwar Avant-Garde Music, eds. and intro. Anne-Sylvie Barthel-Calvet and Christopher Brent Murray, 37–63. Oxford: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-315-10816-2 (ebk). ISBN 978-1-138-09120-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-1-032-31004-6 (pbk). doi:10.4324/9781315108162-3. Doctor, Jennifer. 1999. The BBC and Ultra-Modern Music, 1922–1936: Shaping a Nation's Tastes. Dolan, Emily and Alexander Rehding, eds. 2021. The Oxford Handbook of Timbre. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-063725-5 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-19-063722-4 (hbk). Ehman, Caroline. 2013. "Reimagining Faust in Postmodern Opera". PhD diss. Rochester: Eastman School of Music, University of Rochester. Eichner, Barbara. 2012. History in Mighty Sounds: Musical Constructions of German National Identity, 1848–1914. Music in Society and Culture 1. Boydell Press. ISBN 978-1-84383-754-1. Elliott, Martha. 2007. Singing in Style: A Guide to Vocal Performance Practices. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10932-0. Emmery, Laura. 2020. Compositional Process in Elliott Carter's String Quartets: A Study in Sketches. Ashgate Studies in Theory and Analysis of Music After 1900. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-367-15132-4 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-429-05525-6 (ebk). Erwin, Max Owen. 2019. "Ghosts in the Machine: The Making of European Serialism, 1945–1955". PhD thesis. Leeds: University of Leeds School of Music. Erwin, Max Owen. 2020. "Who is Buried in Webern's Tomb? Orientations in the Reception of Serial Music from Messiaen to Stockhausen." Perspectives of New Music 58(2):93–128. Erwin, Max Owen. 2021. "An Apprenticeship and Its Stocktakings: Leibowitz, Boulez, Messiaen, and the Discourse and Practice of New Music." Twentieth-Century Music 18(1):71–93. Ewell, Philip A. 2013. "Russian Pitch-Class Set Analysis and the Music of Webern." Gamut: Music Theory Society of the Mid-Atlantic, Vol. 6, 1(7):219–276 Feldman, Morton. 2000. Give My Regards to Eighth Street: Collected Writings of Morton Feldman, ed. and intro. by BH Friedman, afterword by Frank O'Hara. Cambridge, MA: Exact Change. ISBN 978-1-878972-31-6. Fitch, Fabrice. 2000. Webern Complete Edition. The Gramophone. Vol. 78: 74 (accessed 18 Sept. 2022).(subscription required) Fontana, Carlo [it]. 2023. Sarà l'avventura: Una vita per il teatro. Milan: il Saggiatore. ISBN 979-1-259-81174-5 (ebk). Forte, Allen. 1986. "Letter to the Editor in Reply to Richard Taruskin from Allen Forte: Making Stravinsky Soup and Other Epistemusicological Pursuits: A Hymenopteran Response". Music Analysis 5(2–3): 321–337.(subscription required) Fosler-Lussier, Danielle. 2007. Music Divided: Bartók's Legacy in Cold War Culture, Vol. 7. Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24965-3. Frandzel, Benjamin. 2002. "A Canon Across Time: György Kurtág's Officium Breve in memoriam Andreae Szervánszky, op. 28". Studia Musicologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 43(3–4):383–396.(subscription required) Fraser, [Catherine] Stacey. 2003. "Webern and Mozart. Two of a Kind?" [Lecture and Recital]. PhD thesis. San Diego: University of California, San Diego. Frigyesi, Judith. 1998. Béla Bartók and Turn-of-the-Century Budapest. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520924-58-1 Fulbrook, Mary. 2011. A History of Germany 1918–2008: The Divided Nation, 3rd ed. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-5972-5 Goeyvaerts, Karel. 1994. "Paris: Darmstadt 1947–1956: Excerpt from the Autobiographical Portrait", trans. Patrick Daly, Peter Vosch, and Roger Janssens. Revue belge de Musicologie / Belgisch Tijdschrift voor Muziekwetenschap 48 (The Artistic Legacy of Karel Goeyvaerts. A Collection of Essays): 35–54. Grant, M. J. 2001. Serial Music, Serial Aesthetics: Compositional Theory in Post-War Europe. Music in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-61992-9. Greissle-Schönberg, Arnold. 2003a. "Chapter Four: Georg (Görgi) Schönberg: My Favorite Uncle". Arnold Schönberg's European Family website (accessed 2 Aug. 2014). Greissle-Schönberg, Arnold. 2003b. "Chapter Five: 1938: Austria Vanishes". Arnold Schönberg's European Family website (accessed 2 Aug. 2014). Hába, Alois. 1934. "Schönberg und die weiteren möglichkeiten der musikentwicklung." In Arnold Schönberg zum 60. Geburtstag, 13. September 1934, ed. Hildegard Jone, 15–17. Vienna: Universal Edition. Haimo, Ethan. 2006. Schoenberg's Transformation of Musical Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86542-5. Haimo, Ethan. 2010. "The Rise and Fall of Radical Athematicism". The Cambridge Companion to Schoenberg, eds. Joseph Auner and Jennifer Shaw, 94–107. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-82807-9. Hayes, Aaron. 2021. Concepts of Time in Post-War European Music. London and New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-20096-0 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-367-19192-4 (hbk). Hayes, Malcolm. 1995. Anton von Webern. London: Phaidon Press. ISBN 978-0-7148-3157-2. Hochman, Erin R. 2016. Imagining a Greater Germany: Republican Nationalism and the Idea of Anschluss. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-0444-4. Ho, Allan B. and Dmitry Feofanov. 2011, rev 2014. The Shostakovich Wars. https://www.siue.edu/~aho/ShostakovichWars/SW.pdf Holzer, Andreas. 2019. "Darmstadt and the 'Cold War': A Contribution to the Elucidation of the Spread of 'Postfactual' Tendencies in Musicology." In Anklaenge, Wiener Jahrbuch für Musikwissenschaft, 2018: Die Musikgeschichte des 20. und 21. Jahrhunderts im universitären Unterricht, eds. Christian Glanz and Nikolaus Urbanek, 293–308. Vienna: Hollitzer. ISBN 978-3-99012-617-2. doi:10.21939/imi_anklaenge2018. Iddon, Martin. 2013. New Music at Darmstadt: Nono, Stockhausen, Cage, and Boulez. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-03329-0. Inbal, Eliahu. 2022. Eliahu INBAL talks on Bruckner and Webern. Tokyo Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra. YouTube. (11 Dec. 2022, accessed 7 June 2023). Jackson, Roland John. 2005. Performance Practice: A Dictionary-guide for Musicians. New York and London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-94139-6 Jarman, Douglas. 2017. "'Frisch, Fromm, Fröhlich, Frei': The Deutscher Turnerbund and the Berg Violin Concerto." Musicologica Austriaca: Journal for Austrian Music Studies (accessed 2 Nov. 2022). Jay, Martin. 1986. Permanent Exiles: Essays on the Intellectual Migration from Germany to America. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-06073-8 Jensen, EF. 1989. "Webern and Giovanni Segantini's Trittico della natura." The Musical Times 130(1751), 11–15. doi:10.2307/966096. Johnson, Julian. 2017. "The Particularity of the Moment". In Rethinking Mahler, trans. Jeremy Barham, 219–236. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-931609-0 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-19-931610-6 (pbk). Johnson, Julian. 2015. Out of Time: Music and the Making of Modernity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-023327-3. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190233273.001.0001. Johnson, Julian. 2006. "Berg's Operas and the Politics of Subjectivity". In Music, Theatre and Politics in Germany: 1848 to the Third Reich, ed. Nikolaus Bacht, 211–236. Hants: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7546-5521-3 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-19-931610-6 (pbk). Johnson, Julian. 2006. "Anton Webern, the Social Democratic Kunstelle and Musical Modernism". Austrian Studies 14(1):197–213. Johnson, Julian. 1999. Webern and the Transformation of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-66149-2. Johnson, Julian. 1998. "The Nature of Abstraction: Analysis and the Webern Myth". Music Analysis 17(3):267–280. doi:10.2307/854416. Johnson, Julian. 1997. "Webern's "Middle Period": Body of the Mother or Law of the Father?". repercussions. 6(1):61–108. Johnson, Victoria. 2015. "Notes from the Underground: Explorations of Dissent in the Music of Czech-born Composers Marek Kopelent and Petr Kotík". MA thesis. Phoenix: Arizona State University. Kaltenecker, Martin. 2023. "Recent Histories of Twentieth-Century Music and the Historiographical Tradition", trans. Christopher Brent Murray. In Revisiting the Historiography of Postwar Avant-Garde Music, eds. and intro. Anne-Sylvie Barthel-Calvet and Christopher Brent Murray, 13–36. Oxford: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-315-10816-2 (ebk). ISBN 978-1-138-09120-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-1-032-31004-6 (pbk). doi:10.4324/9781315108162-2. Kapp, Reinhard. 1999. "Weberns Politik". Anton Webern: Persönlichkeit zwischen Kunst und Politik (Symposium Report), eds. Stefan Jena, Brigitte Grünauer, and Hartmut Krones, intro. by Hartmut Krones, 51–86. Wiener Schriften zur Stilkunde und Aufführungspraxis. Vienna: Böhlau Verlag. ISBN 978-3-205-99072-7. Kater, Michael. 1999. Composers of the Nazi Era: Eight Portraits. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509924-9. Kater, Michael. 1997. The Twisted Muse: Musicians and Their Music in the Third Reich. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509620-0. Kim, David Hyun-Su. 2012. "The Brahmsian Hairpin." 19th-century Music 36(1):46–57. doi:10.1525/ncm.2012.36.1.046. Kolneder, Walter. 1968. Anton Webern: An Introduction to His Works. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Trans. Humphrey Searle. (Translation of Anton Webern, Einführung in Werk und Stil. Rodenkirchen: P. J. Tonger, 1961.) ISBN 978-0-520-34715-1. Korstvedt, Benjamin M. 2004. "Bruckner editions: the revolution revisited". The Cambridge Companion to Bruckner, ed. John Williamson, 121–137. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00878-5. Kosman, Joshua. 2014. "UC Music Historian Richard Taruskin Relishes Provocateur Role". SFGate webzine (31 May). San Francisco Chronicle website Krasner, Louis, and Don C. Seibert. "Some Memories of Anton Webern, the Berg Concerto, and Vienna in the 1930s." Fanfare (Nov.–Dec. 1987): 335–347(subscription required) Krenek, Ernst. 1998. Im Atem der Zeit: Erinnerungen an die Moderne, trans. Friedrich Saathen and Sabine Schulte. Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe. ISBN 978-3-455-11170-5 (hbk). Krones, Hartmut. 1999. "Vorwort". Anton Webern: Persönlichkeit zwischen Kunst und Politik (Symposium Report), eds. Stefan Jena, Brigitte Grünauer, and Hartmut Krones, 7–8. Wiener Schriften zur Stilkunde und Aufführungspraxis. Vienna: Böhlau Verlag. ISBN 978-3-205-99072-7. Krones, Hartmut, Helmut Loos and Klaus-Peter Koc, eds. 2017. Die Rezeption der Wiener Schule in Osteuropa. Musikgeschichte in Mittel- und Osteuropa: Mitteilungen der internationalen Arbeitsgemeinschaft an der Universität Leipzig 19. Leipzig: Gudrun Schröder Verlag. ISBN 978-3-926196-76-7. Lee, Gavin SK. 2023. "Global Musical Modernisms as Decolonial Method". Twentieth-Century Music 20:3(424–448). doi:10.1017/S1478572223000208. Leeuw, Ton de. 2005. Music of the Twentieth Century: A Study of Its Elements and Structure, trans. Stephen Taylor. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-90-5356-765-4. Trans. of Muziek van de twintigste eeuw: een onderzoek naar haar elementen en structuur. Utrecht: Oosthoek, 1964. 3rd impression, Utrecht: Bohn, Scheltema & Holkema, 1977. ISBN 978-90-313-0244-4. Leibowitz, René. 2018. René Leibowitz to Editions Dynamo: The 114 Letters of René Leibowitz to the Editions Dynamo of Pierre Aelberts Between 1947 and 1951, ed. Tobias Broeker. Stuttgart. Self-published on author's web site (accessed 9 Oct. 2022). Leinsdorf, Erich. 1997. Erich Leinsdorf on Music. Portland: Amadeus Press. ISBN 978-1-57467-028-8. Lister, Rodney. 2006. "[Review of] The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Music ed. Nicholas Cook and Anthony Pople, and The Oxford History of Western Music by Richard Taruskin". Tempo. 60(235):50–57. Cambridge University Press. Littlewood, Julian. 2004. The Variations of Johannes Brahms. London: Plumbago Books. ISBN 978-0-9540123-4-2. London, Justin. 2013. "Building a Representative Corpus of Classical Music". Music Perception 31(1):68–90. doi:10.1525/mp.2013.31.1.68. MacDonald, Ian. n.d. "The Shostakovich Debate: The Question of Dissidence (5)". Music under Soviet Rule. Southern Illinois University Edwardsville website. Maconie, Robin. 2016. Other Planets: The Complete Works of Karlheinz Stockhausen, 1950–2007. Updated edition. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-44-227268-2 (electronic). Maes, Francis. 2002. A History of Russian Music From Kamarinskaya to Babi Yar''. Trans. Arnold J. Pomerans and Erica Pomerans. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Trans. of Geschiedenis van de Russische muziek: Van Kamarinskaja tot Babi Jar. Nijmegen: Uitgeverij SUN, 1996. ISBN 978-0-520-21815-4. Matter, Henri-Louis [fr]. 1981. Anton Webern: Essai. Lausanne: Éditions L'Âge d'Homme. ISBN 978-2-82513230-2. Mayer, Arno. 1988. Why Did the Heavens Not Darken?: The "Final Solution" in History. New York: Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-394-57154-6. Mei, Girolamo. 1998. "Letter to Vincenzo Galilei (1572)". In Source Readings in Music History, ed. and fwd. Oliver Strunk, gen. ed. and fwd. Leo Treitler, 485–494. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-03752-4 (pbk). Merrick, Paul. 1987. Revolution and Religion in the Music of Liszt. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-32627-8. Meyer, Felix and Anne C. Shreffler. 1996. "Performance and revision: the early history of Webern's Four Pieces for violin and piano, Op. 7". In Webern Studies, ed. and intro. Kathryn Bailey Puffett, 135–169. Cambridge Composer Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47526-6 (hbk). Miller, David H. Spring 2022. "Singing Webern, Sounding Webern: Bethany Beardslee, Grace-Lynne Martin, and Marni Nixon, 1950–1957". Journal of the American Musicological Society. 75(1):81–127. University of California Press. Miller, David H. 2022. "Shadows, wraiths, and amoebas: the distinctive flops of Anton Webern in the United States". Transposition. 10. École des hautes études en sciences sociales (EHESS) and the Cité de la musique-Philharmonie de Paris. (30 May, accessed 26 Oct. 2022) Mitchinson, Paul. 2001. "Richard Taruskin Explores the Dark Side of Music". Lingua Franca 11(5):34–43. Moldenhauer, Hans. 1961. The Death of Anton Webern: A Drama in Documents. New York: Philosophical Library. OCLC 512111 Moldenhauer, Hans, and Rosaleen Moldenhauer. 1978. Anton von Webern: A Chronicle of His Life and Work. London: Victor Gollancz Ltd. ISBN 978-0-394-47237-9. Morgan, Robert P. 1993. Modern Times: From World War I to the Present. Man & Music Series; Vol. 8. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-349-11291-3 (ebk). ISBN 978-1-349-11293-7 (hbk). Morris, Christopher. 2016. "Modernism and the Cult of Mountains: Music, Opera, Cinema". Ashgate Interdisciplinary Studies in Opera. Oxford and New York: Taylor & Francis. Reprint from original in 2012 by Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-75466-970-8 (hbk). Moskovitz, Marc. 2010. Alexander Zemlinsky: A Lyric Symphony. Woodbridge, UK: Boydell. ISBN 978-1-84383-578-3. Musgrave, Michael. 1985. The Music of Brahms. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-7100-9776-7. Näf, Lukas. 2019. "Tempogestaltung in Weberns Sinfonie op. 21." In Rund um Beethoven: Interpretationsforschung heute, eds. Thomas Gartmann and Daniel Allenbach, 180–194. Musikforschung der Hochschule der Künste Bern, Vol. 14. Schliengen: Edition Argus. ISBN 978-3-931264-94-9. doi:10.26045/kp64-6178. Nattiez, Jean-Jacques. 2004. "Boulez Structuralist". In The Battle of Chronos and Orpheus: Essays in Applied Musical Semiology, trans. Jonathan Dunsby, 72–83. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-816610-8. Neubauer, John. 2001. "Organicism and Modernism / Music and Literature". Essays on the Song Cycle and on Defining the Field (Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Word and Music Studies at Ann Arbor, MI, 1999), 3–24. Word and Music Studies, Vol. 2. Eds. Walter Bernhart, Werner Wolf, and David Mosley. Intro. by Werner Wolf. Amsterdam: Rodopi. Reprinted, Amsterdam: Brill. 2022. ISBN 978-9-004488-74-8 (ebk). Neubauer, John. 2002. "Organicist Poetics as Romantic Heritage?". Romantic Poetry. Ed. Angela Esterhammer, 491–508. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. ISBN 978-9-027297-76-1. Neubauer, John. 2009. "Organicism and Music Theory". New Paths: Aspects of Music Theory and Aesthetics in the Age of Romanticism. Eds. Darla Crispin and Kathleen Snyers, 11–36. Collected Writings of the Orpheus Institute [nl]. Leuven: Leuven University Press. ISBN 978-9-058677-34-1. Notley, Margaret. 2010. "[1934, Alban Berg, and the Shadow of Politics: Documents of a Troubled Year]". Alban Berg and His World, ed. Christopher Hailey, 223–268. The Bard Music Festival. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-400836-47-5. Pace, Ian. 2022. "Reflections on Richard Taruskin and Performance". Desiring Progress: The Blog of Ian Pace. (2 July 2022, accessed 19 Jan. 2023). Pace, Ian. 2022. "New Music: Performance Institutions and Practices." In The Oxford Handbook of Music Performance, Vol. 1, ed. Gary E. McPherson, 396-455. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-190056-31-5 (online). ISBN 978-0-190056-28-5 (print). doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190056285.013.19. Paddison, Max. 1998. Adorno's Aesthetics of Music. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-62608-8 Peperzak, Adriaan. 1994. "Ethics in Our Time". In The Question of Hermeneutics: Essays in Honor of Joseph J. Kockelmans, "Section V. –– Hermeneutics, Art, and Ethics", ed. and intro. Timothy J. Stapleton, fwd. Pierre Kerszberg, 451–468. Vol. 17, Contributions to Phenomenology, eds. William R. McKenna et al. Dordrecht: Springer. Reprint from original in 1994 by Kluwers. ISBN 978-94-011-1160-7 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-7923-2964-0 (pbk). doi:10.1007/978-94-011-1160-7. Perle, George. 1980. The Operas of Alban Berg, Vol. I: Wozzeck. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06617-5. Perle, George. 1985. The Operas of Alban Berg, Vol. II: Lulu. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06616-8. Perle, George. 1990. The Right Notes: Twenty-Three Selected Essays by George Perle on Twentieth-Century Music. Stuyvesant: Pendragon Press. ISBN 978-0-945193-37-1. Perle, George. 1995. The Listening Composer. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-20518-5. Peyser, Joan. 2008. To Boulez and Beyond. Revised ed. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-1-4616-9776-3. Potter, Pamela M. 2005. "What Is 'Nazi Music'?". The Musical Quarterly 88(3):428–455. doi:10.1093/musqtl/gdi019. Pousseur, Henri. 2009. "Harmonie? Harmonies! (1995)". Série et harmonie généralisées: une théorie de la composition musicale. Ed. Pascal Decroupet, 225–242. Collection Musique-Musicologie. Wavre: Mardaga. ISBN 978-2-8047-0013-3. Powell, Larson. 2013. "Karl Amadeus Hartmann: The Politics of Musical Inner Emigration." Search Journal for New Music and Culture 10, http://www.searchnewmusic.org/powell_hartmann.pdf Prausnitz, Frederik. 2002. Roger Sessions: How a "Difficult" Composer Got That Way. Cary, NC: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510892-7. Puffett, Derrick. 1996. "Gone with the Summer Wind; or, What Webern Lost: Nine Variations on a Ground". In Webern Studies, ed. and intro. Kathryn Bailey Puffett, 32–73. Cambridge Composer Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47526-6 (hbk). Rochberg, George. 2004. The Aesthetics of Survival: A Composer's View of Twentieth-Century Music. Revised, expanded, and reprinted from original in 1984. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-02511-4 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-472-03026-2 (pbk). Rode-Breyman, Susanne. 1996. "'... gathering the divine from the earthly ...': Ferdinand Avenarius and his significance for Anton Webern's early settings of lyric poetry". In Webern Studies, ed. and intro. Kathryn Bailey Puffett, 1–31. Cambridge Composer Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47526-6 (hbk). Rosen, Charles. 2012. Freedom and the Arts: Essays on Music and Literature. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-04752-5 Ross, Alex. 2007. The Rest Is Noise: Listening to the Twentieth Century. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, ISBN 978-0-374-24939-7. Russell, Nestar. 2019. Understanding Willing Participants, Vol. 2: Milgram's Obedience Experiments and the Holocaust. Cham: Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-319-97999-1 (ebk). Blair Sanderson. n.d. "Bruckner: Symphonies Nos. 0–9; Symphony in F minor Review by Blair Sanderson". AllMusic. (n.d., accessed 7 June 2023). Scherzinger, Martin with Neville Hoad. 1997. "Anton Webern and the Concept of Symmetrical Inversion: A Reconsideration on the Terrain of Gender". repercussions. 6(2):63–147. Schoenberg, Arnold. 1950. Style and Idea, ed. Dika Newlin. New York: Philosophical Library, Inc. Schoenberg, Arnold. 2018. Schoenberg's Correspondence with American Composers, ed. and trans. Sabine Feisst. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-538357-7 (hbk). Schmelz, Peter John. 2015. "Serialism in the USSR". In The Cambridge Companion to Serialism, ed. Martin Iddon, 253–265. Cambridge Companions to Music Series. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-108-49252-2 (hbk). ISBN 978-1-108-71686-4 (pbk). doi:10.1017/9781108592116. Schmelz, Peter John. 2009. Such Freedom, if Only Musical: Unofficial Soviet Music during the Thaw. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-986685-4 (ebk). Schmusch, Rainer. 1995. "Klangfarbenmelodie." In Terminologie der Musik im 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Hans Heinrich Eggebrecht, 221–234. Handwörterbuch der musikalischen Terminologie. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. ISBN 978-3-515-06659-4. Schuijer, Michiel. 2008. "Analyzing Atonal Music: Pitch-class Set Theory and Its Contexts". Eastman Studies in Music. Rochester: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 978-1-58046-270-9 (hbk). Schroeder, David. 1994. "Alban Berg". Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern: A Companion to the Second Viennese School, ed. Bryan R. Simms, 185–250. Westport, Connecticut and London: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29604-8. Schwartz, Peter J. 2017. "'Guckt euch selbst an!' Büchner's Woyzeck and the Pericope Adulterae." In Georg Büchner: Contemporary Perspectives, ed. Robert Gillett, 79–91. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-34163-0 (ebk). ISBN 978-90-04-33859-3 (hbk). Service, Tom. 2013. "Symphony Guide: Webern's Op 21". Tom Service on Classical Blog. The Guardian.com (17 Dec., accessed 2 Aug. 2014). Shaftel, Matthew R. 2004. Preface. The Anton Webern Collection: Early Vocal Music, 1809–1909, ed. Matthew R. Shaftel. New York: Carl Fischer. ISBN 978-0-8258-5659-4. Shaftel, Matthew R. 2000. "Anton Webern's Early Songs: Motive, Harmony, and Influence". PhD diss. New Haven: Yale University. ISBN 978-0-599-98379-3. Shere, David Matthew. 2007. "A Survey of Webern's Life and Compositional Vocabulary". PhD diss. Santa Barbara: University of California, Santa Barbara. ISBN 978-0-549-26874-1. Shreffler, Anne C. 1994. Webern and the Lyric Impulse: Songs and Fragments on Poems of Georg Trakl, ed. and preface by Lewis Lockwood. Studies in Musical Genesis and Structure Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-816224-7. Shreffler, Anne C. 1999. "Anton Webern". Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern: A Companion to the Second Viennese School, ed. Bryan R. Simms, 251–314. Westport, Connecticut and London: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29604-8. Sills, Helen. 2022. Stravinsky, God, and Time. Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-51853-7 (ebk). ISBN 978-90-04-51853-7 (hbk). Simms, Bryan R. 1999. "Arnold Schoenberg". Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern: A Companion to the Second Viennese School, ed. Bryan R. Simms, 129–184. Westport, Connecticut and London: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29604-8. Simms, Bryan R. 2006. "Twentieth-Century Composers Return to the Small Ensemble". The Orchestra: A Collection of 23 Essays on Its Origins and Transformations, ed. and intro. by Joan Peyser, 453–474. Milwaukee: Hal Leonard Corporation. Reprint from original in 1986 by Charles Scribners Sons. ISBN 978-1-423-41026-3. Simms, Bryan R. and Charlotte Erwin. 2021. Berg. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-093144-5 (hbk). Sitsky, Larry, ed. 2002. Music of the Twentieth-Century Avant-garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook. Foreword by Jonathan D. Kramer. Westport, Coneecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29689-5 (pbk). Smither, Howard E. 2001. A History of the Oratorio, Vol. 4: The Oratorio in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Chapel Hill and London: The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-807837-78-8. Slonimsky, Nicolas. 1994. Lexicon of Musical Invective: Critical Assaults on Composers Since Beethoven's Time". 2nd ed. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press. Reprint from original in 1953 by Coleman-Ross. ISBN 978-0-295-78579-0. Stapleton, Timothy J. 1994. Introduction: The Question of Hermeneutics: Essays in Honor of Joseph J. Kockelmans, ed. Timothy J. Stapleton, fwd. Pierre Kerszberg, 1–16. Vol. 17, Contributions to Phenomenology, eds. William R. McKenna et al. Dordrecht: Springer. Reprint from original in 1994 by Kluwers. ISBN 978-94-011-1160-7 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-7923-2964-0 (pbk). doi:10.1007/978-94-011-1160-7. Stewart, John Lincoln. 1991. Ernst Krenek: The Man and His Music. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07014-1. Straus, Joseph N. 2001. Stravinsky's Late Music. Cambridge Studies in Music Theory and Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80220-8 (hbk). Straus, Joseph N. 1999. "The Myth of Serial 'Tyranny' in the 1950s and 1960s". The Musical Quarterly 83(3):301–343. doi:10.1093/mq/83.3.301. Stravinsky, Igor. 1959. "[Foreword]". Die Reihe 2 (2nd rev. English ed.) vii. Street, Alan. 1989. "Superior Myths, Dogmatic Allegories: The Resistance to Musical Unity". Music Analysis 8(77–123). doi:10.2307/854327. Street, Alan. 2005. "Expression and construction: the stage works of Schoenberg and Berg". The Cambridge Companion to Twentieth-Century Opera, ed. Mervyn Cooke, 85–104. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-78009-4 (hbk). Street, Alan. 2013. "Identity Formation in Webern's Six Pieces for Large Orchestra, op. 6". Music and Narrative since 1900, eds. and preface by Michael L. Klein and Nicholas Reyland, 381–400. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-00644-8 (pbk). Suchoff, Benjamin. 2004. Béla Bartók: A Celebration. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-4958-7 (hbk). Tarasti, Eero. 2002. Signs of Music: A Guide to Musical Semiotics. Approaches to Applied Semiotics, Vol. 3. Berlin: de Gruyter. Reprinted 2012. ISBN 978-3-1108-9987-0 (ebk). doi:10.1515/9783110899870. Tarasti, Eero. 2015. Sein und Schein [Being and Appearance]: Explorations in Existential Semiotics. Berlin: de Gruyter. ISBN 978-1-5015-0116-6 (ebk). doi:10.1515/9781614516354. Taruskin, Richard. 2023. "Коле посвящается (for Kolya)". Musical Lives and Times Examined: Keynotes and Clippings, 2006–2019, 276–298. Oakland: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-39202-1 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-520-39200-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-520-39201-4 (pbk). Taruskin, Richard. 2023. "Envoi: All Was Foreseen; Nothing Was Foreseen". Musical Lives and Times Examined: Keynotes and Clippings, 2006–2019, 512–524. Oakland: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-39202-1 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-520-39200-7 (hbk). ISBN 978-0-520-39201-4 (pbk). Taruskin, Richard. 2011. "'Alte Musik' or 'Early Music'?". Twentieth-Century Music 8(1):3–28. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/S1478572211000260. Taruskin, Richard. 2009. Music in the Late Twentieth Century. The Oxford History of Western Music, Vol. 5. Revised edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-538485-7. Taruskin, Richard. 2009. Music in the Early Twentieth Century. The Oxford History of Western Music, Vol. 4. Revised edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-979601-4. Taruskin, Richard. 2008. "How Talented Composers Become Useless". The Danger of Music and Other Anti-Utopian Essays, 86–93. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-94279-0. Taruskin, Richard. 2008. "Back to Whom? Neoclassicism as Ideology". The Danger of Music and Other Anti-Utopian Essays, 382–405. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-94279-0. Taruskin, Richard. 2008. "The Dark Side of the Moon". The Danger of Music and Other Anti-Utopian Essays, 202–216. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24977-6. Taruskin, Richard. 1996. Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions, Vol. II: A Biography of the Works Through Mavra. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07099-8. Taruskin, Richard. 1996. "How Talented Composers Become Useless". Classical View. The New York Times Archives (10 March 1996, web site accessed 30 Mar. 2024). Taruskin, Richard. 1994. "Does Nature Call the Tune?". Classical View. The New York Times Archives (18 Sept 1994, web site accessed 30 Mar. 2024). Tonietti, Tito M. 2003. "Die Jakobsleiter, twelve-tone music, and Schönberg's Gods." In Journal of the Arnold Schönberg Center, Report of the Symposium, 26. – 29. Juni 2002: Arnold Schönberg and his God, ed. and foreword by Christian Meyer, 213–237. Vienna: Arnold Schönberg Center. ISBN 978-3-902012-05-0. Toorn, Pieter van den and John McGinness. 2012. Stravinsky and the Russian Period: Sound and Legacy of a Musical Idiom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-02100-6 (hbk). Tsenova, Valeria. 2014. Underground Music from the Former USSR, ed. Valeria Tsenova, trans. Romela Kohanovskaya. Amsterdam: Overseas Publishers Association. ISBN 978-1-134-37165-5 (ebk). Turner Jr, Henry A. 1985. German Big Business and the Rise of Hitler. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-503492-9 (hbk). Utz, Christian. Musical Composition in the Context of Globalization: New Perspectives on Music History in the 20th and 21st Century, ed. Wieland Hoban. [Trans. Laurence Sinclair Willis.] Rev. and expanded ed. Bielefeld: transcript Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8376-5095-2. Wasserman, Janek. 2014. Black Vienna: The Radical Right in the Red City, 1918–1938. Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-5522-3 (ebk). Vandagriff, Rachel S. 2017. "Perspectives and the Patron: Paul Fromm, Benjamin Boretz and Perspectives of New Music". Journal of the Royal Musical Association 142(2):327–65. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1080/02690403.2017.1361175. Watkins, Glenn. 1994. Pyramids at the Louvre: Music, Culture, and Collage from Stravinsky to the Postmodernists. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-74083-9. Watkins, Glenn. 1988. Soundings: Music in the Twentieth Century. New York: Schirmer. ISBN 978-0-02-873290-9. Webern, Anton. 1963. The Path to the New Music. Ed. Willi Reich [de]. [Trans. Leo Black.] Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania: Theodore Presser Co., in Association with Universal Edition. Reprinted London: Universal Edition, 1975. (Translation of Wege zur neuen Musik. Vienna: Universal Edition, 1960.) Webern, Anton. 1967. "Letters to Hildegard Jone and Josef Humplik", ed. Josef Polnauer, trans. Cornelius Cardew and Élisabeth Bouillon. Bryn Mawr: Theodore Presser; London, Vienna, and Zürich: Universal Edition. Webern, Anton. 2000. Sämtliche Werke/Complete Works/L'Œuvre complète/L'opera completa. Oelze · Pollet · Schneider · McCormick · Finley · Aimard · Cascioli · Maisenberg · Zimerman · Kremer · Hagen · BBC Singers · Emerson String Quartet · Ensemble Intercontemporain · Berliner Philharmoniker · Pierre Boulez. 6-CD set. Deutsche Grammophon 0289 457 6372 9 GX 6. Hamburg: Deutsche Grammophon. White, Harry. 2008. Music and the Irish Literary Imagination. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-156316-4. Wistrich, Robert S. 2012. From Ambivalence to Betrayal: The Left, the Jews, and Israel. Studies in Antisemitism Series. Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press, for the Vidal Sassoon International Center for the Study of Antisemitism at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. ISBN 978-0-803240-83-4 (ebk). Wlodarski, Amy Lynn. 2019. George Rochberg, American Composer: Personal Trauma and Artistic Creativity. Eastman Studies in Music Series, senior ed. Ralph P. Locke. Rochester: University of Rochester Press. ISBN 978-1-58046-947-0. Wodak, Ruth. The Discursive Construction of National Identity. Edinburgh University Press, 2009. Yang, Tsung-Hsien. "Webern Symphony: Beyond Palindromes and Canons". PhD diss. Waltham, Massachusetts: Brandeis University, 1987. Ahrend, Thomas, and Matthias Schmidt (eds.). 2015. Der junge Webern. Texte und Kontexte. Webern-Studien. Beihefte der Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe 2b. Wien: Lafite. ISBN 978-3-85151-083-6. Ahrend, Thomas, and Matthias Schmidt (eds.). 2016. Webern-Philologien. Webern-Studien. Beihefte der Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe 3. Wien: Lafite. ISBN 978-3-85151-084-3. Bowie, Andrew. 2007. Music, Philosophy, and Modernity. Modern European Philosophy Series, gen. ed. Robert B. Pippin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-511-35443-4 (ebk). ISBN 978-0-521-87734-3 (hbk). Cavallotti, Pietro, and Simon Obert, and Rainer Schmusch (eds.). 2019. Neue Perspektiven. Anton Webern und das Komponieren im 20. Jahrhundert. Webern-Studien. Beihefte der Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe 4. Wien: Lafite. ISBN 978-3-85151-098-0. Cook, Nicholas. 2013. Beyond the Score: Music as Performance. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19935-743-7 (ebk). Distler, Jed. 2000. "Complete Webern". Classics Today, Music Reviews Digest (9 Sept. 2000, web site accessed 19 Jan. 2023). Ewen, David. 1971. "Anton Webern (1883–1945)". Composers of Tomorrow's Music, by David Ewen, 66–77. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. ISBN 978-0-396-06286-8. Forte, Allen. 1998. The Atonal Music of Anton Webern New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-07352-2 Galliari, Alain. 2007. "Anton von Webern". Paris: Fayard. ISBN 978-2-213-63457-9. Griffiths, Paul (27 August 2000). "A Complete Webern, with 'New' Works". The New York Times. Retrieved 19 January 2023. Kennicott, Philip. 2000. "Webern's Atonal Recall: Boulez Sets Record Straight on Composer". 11 June 2000. The Washington Post (web site accessed 19 Jan. 2023). Kröpfl, Monika, and Simon Obert (eds.). 2015. Der junge Webern. Künstlerische Orientierungen in Wien nach 1900. Webern-Studien. Beihefte der Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe 2a. Wien: Lafite. ISBN 978-3-85151-082-9. McClary, Susan. Spring 1989. "Terminal Prestige: The Case of Avant-Garde Music Composition". Cultural Critique ("Discursive Strategies and the Economy of Prestige"). 12:57–81. Mead, Andrew. 1993. "Webern, Tradition, and 'Composing with Twelve Tones'". Music Theory Spectrum 15(2):173–204. doi:10.2307/745813 Moldenhauer, Hans. 1966. Anton von Webern Perspectives. Ed. Demar Irvine, with an introductory interview with Igor Stravinsky. Seattle: University of Washington Press. Noller, Joachim. 1990. "Bedeutungsstrukturen: zu Anton Weberns 'alpinen' Programmen". Neue Zeitschrift für Musik 151(9):12–18. Obert, Simon (ed.). 2012. Wechselnde Erscheinung. Sechs Perspektiven auf Anton Weberns sechste Bagatelle. Webern-Studien. Beihefte der Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe 1. Wien: Lafite. ISBN 978-3-85151-080-5. Perle, George. 1991. Serial Composition and Atonality: An Introduction to the Music of Schoenberg, Berg and Webern. Sixth ed. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. Pousseur, Henri. 1964. "Music, Form and Practice (an Attempt to Reconcile Some Contradictions)". Trans. Margaret Shenfield. Die Reihe 6 (English ed. 1964, German ed. 1960):77–93. Reprint from original in Revue belge de Musicologie / Belgisch Tijdschrift voor Muziekwetenschap 13 (1959). Quick, Miriam Siân. 2010. "Performing modernism: Webern on record". PhD thesis. Revised 2011. London: King’s College London. Rockwell, John. 1983. All American Music: Composition in the Late Twentieth Century. New York: Alfred Knopf. Reprinted New York: Da Capo Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-306-80750-3, ISBN 978-0-306-80750-3. Sutherland, Roger. 2000. "Boulez's Webern." Tempo 213:52–53. doi:10.1017/S0040298200007889. Tsang, Lee. 2002. "The Atonal Music of Anton Webern (1998) by Allen Forte". Music Analysis 21(3): 417–427. Taruskin, Richard. 2009. Music in the Nineteenth Century. The Oxford History of Western Music, Vol. 3. Revised edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-538483-3. Wildgans, Friedrich. 1966. Anton Webern. Trans. Edith Temple Roberts and Humphrey Searle. Intro. and notes by Humphrey Searle. New York: October House. Free scores by Anton Webern at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP) Free scores by Anton Webern in the Choral Public Domain Library (ChoralWiki) Anton Webern Gesamtausgabe (Complete Edition) Portals:  Biography  Classical music  Music  Austria Anton Webern at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata