.tw is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Taiwan. The domain name is based on the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code TW. The registry is maintained by the Taiwan Network Information Center [zh] (TWNIC), a Taiwanese non-profit organization appointed by the National Communications Commission (NCC) and the Ministry of Transportation and Communication. Since 1 March 2001, TWNIC has stopped allowing itself to sign up new domain names directly, instead allowing new registration through its contracted reseller registrars. As of May 2023[update], there are 17 registrars. Registrations under .tw are possible in second-level space or under various domains as third-level domains: edu.tw: for educational and academic institutions gov.tw: for agencies of the Government of the Republic of China, operated by Taiwan mil.tw: for the Republic of China Armed Forces, operated by Taiwan com.tw: for companies or firms (Taiwanese or foreign) registered under the laws of their country net.tw: for network or telecommunications license holders org.tw: for non-profit organizations (Taiwanese or foreign) established according to the laws of their country idv.tw: for individuals (must verify their identity by e-mail) game.tw: unrestricted (but registrant must verify their identity by email), intended for gaming-related content ebiz.tw: unrestricted (but registrant must verify their identity by email), intended for online business-related content club.tw: unrestricted (but registrant must verify their identity by email) tw: unrestricted Domain names in Chinese characters may also be registered at the second level. Furthermore, any registrant of a standard domain name who has chosen a domestic registrar may automatically get two more domain names in Chinese characters in the following second-level domains: 網路.tw, 組織.tw and 商業.tw. These second-level domains correspond to net.tw, org.tw and com.tw, respectively. As of March 2017, around 8.31％ of the .tw domains are served via secured HTTPS protocol, with the cPanel, Inc. Certification Authority being the most popular SSL certificate. Apache is the most popular web server, serving 47.60% of the .tw domains, followed by Microsoft-IIS serving 20.31% of the total .tw domains. ICANN assigned two Internationalized country code top-level domains (IDN ccTLDs) for Taiwan on 25 June 2010: 台灣 : taiwan in traditional Chinese characters (DNS name: xn--kpry57d) 台湾 : taiwan in simplified Chinese characters (DNS name: xn--kprw13d) Presently in November 2019, and since at least November 2015, the simplified suffix is a DNAME alias for the traditional suffix. As a result any subdomain of the traditional xn--kpry57d TLD automatically has a CNAME alias from the simplified xn--kprw13d TLD. The traditional suffix is in active use. Internet portal Taiwan portal .cn (China) .jp (Japan) .kr (South Korea) "Registrars". Retrieved 2023-05-30. "台灣的網路數據統計 taiwio.com". www.taiwio.com (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Archived from the original on 2017-03-02. Retrieved 2017-03-01. "ICANN Board Meeting Minutes". ICANN. 25 June 2010. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010. Retrieved 25 June 2010. "IETF dnsop WG mailing list". .TW Whois Service IANA .tw whois information List of registrars accredited by TWNIC List of registrars accredited by Neulevel