This is a list of the largest cities and towns in Turkey by population, which includes cities and towns that are provincial capitals or have a population of at least 7,000. The total population of Turkey is 85,279,553 according to the 2023 estimate, making it the 18th most populated country in the world. Istanbul, Turkey's economic and cultural capital is the largest city with a population of 15.84 million in its metropolitan area as of 2021. Ankara, the capital of Turkey and Turkey's second-largest city has a population of 5.7 million in its metropolitan area as of 2021. Izmir, Turkey's third-largest city has a population of over 4.3 million in its metropolitan area as of 2019. Bursa, Turkey's fourth-largest city has a population of over 3.1 million in its metropolitan area as of 2021. Antalya, Turkey's fifth-largest city has a population of 2.6 million in its metropolitan area as of 2019. Cities and towns with a population of over 7,000 inhabitants according to the Turkish Statistical Institute are listed in the following table along with the results of the censuses from October 1990 and October 2000, and the provinces in which the cities are located. The numbers of inhabitants refers to the actual city, not the city's greater metropolitan area. Istanbul, the largest city in Turkey Ankara, the second-largest city and capital of Turkey İzmir, the third-largest city of Turkey and the largest city in the Aegean Region Bursa, the fourth-largest city and former Ottoman capital Antalya, the fifth-largest city; the largest city in the Mediterranean Region. Konya, the sixth-largest city and former Seljuk capital Adana, the seventh-largest city. Şanlıurfa, the eighth largest city Gaziantep, the ninth-largest city Mersin, tenth-largest city and home to a major port Diyarbakır, the largest Kurdish-majority city Kayseri Samsun, largest city in the Black Sea Region Denizli Eskişehir Adapazari Kahramanmaraş Erzurum Van Istanbul Ankara İzmir Bursa Adana Gaziantep Konya Antalya Kayseri Mersin Eskişehir Diyarbakır Samsun Denizli Şanlıurfa Adapazarı Malatya Kahramanmaraş Erzurum Van List of regions in Turkey List of provinces in Turkey List of districts in Turkey List of villages in Turkey Metropolitan centers in Turkey "ADNKS Results, 2020". www.turkstat.gov.tr. "..::Welcome to Turkish Statistical Institute(TurkStat)'s Web Pages::." www.turkstat.gov.tr. State Institute of Statistics The World Gazetteer: Turkey: Map of Largest Cities at archive.today (archived 2012-12-05)