.ky is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the Cayman Islands. The code was chosen as other possible options had already been allocated. Registration was limited to residents and registered companies in the Cayman Islands with a local address, but this restriction was removed in September 2015. The Cayman Islands also has the international three-letter code CYM and has won a bid to be awarded the .cym domain in a future expansion of the top-level domain space. Registrations are permitted directly at the second level, or at the third level beneath these names: com.ky org.ky net.ky edu.ky (restricted to educational institutions) gov.ky (restricted to governmental entities) IANA received a request to establish the .ky ccTLD in April 1995. From 1995 to 2002, the .ky ccTLD registry was operated by an individual, Clint Mole, initially as an employee of the Cayman Islands government, but then later under contract with a company Domain Name Trust (DNT). In 2002, the Cayman Islands government established the Information and Communications Technical Authority (ICTA) and contacted ICANN requesting that administrative operation be changed to ICTA. In June 2003, IANA and ICANN concluded that the .ky ccTLD should be redelegated to ICTA. In January 2015 the Cayman Islands ICTA announced a partnership with Uniregistry for the operation of the .ky name extension. Uniregistry became the first ICANN accredited registrar to retail .ky names on 2 March 2015. The logo was designed by Darren Cornwell and approved on 17 December 2014 as Uniregistry took on the .ky namespace. It's a representation of the islands based on their geographical dimensions (the largest island being Grand Cayman, the next being Cayman Brac and finally Little Cayman). The blue was chosen to represent the sea that surrounds the islands. Internet in the Cayman Islands Internet in the United Kingdom .uk "Wales loses to Cayman Islands in battle for .cym domain". BBC. 4 November 2010. Retrieved 7 December 2010. New gTLDs — Frequently Asked Questions – ICANN, June 2011 "IANA Report on Redelegation of the .ky Top-Level Domain". ICANN. Retrieved 16 December 2020. "Registering a domain name". OfReg.ky. 17 December 2022. Archived from the original on 17 December 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2022. IANA .ky whois information .ky domain registration website OfReg v t e v t e