Dhaka (/ˈdɑːkə/ DAH-kə or /ˈdækə/ DAK-ə; Bengali: ঢাকা, romanized: Ḍhākā, IPA: [ˈɖʱaka]), formerly known as Dacca, is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh. It is the ninth-largest and seventh-most densely populated city in the world. Dhaka is a megacity, and has a population of 10.2 million residents as of 2022, and a population of over 22.4 million residents in Dhaka Metropolitan Area. It is widely considered to be the most densely populated built-up urban area in the world. Dhaka is the most important cultural, economic, and scientific hub of Eastern South Asia, as well as a major Muslim-majority city. Dhaka ranks third in South Asia and 39th in the world in terms of GDP. Lying on the Ganges Delta, it is bounded by the Buriganga, Turag, Dhaleshwari and Shitalakshya rivers. Dhaka is also the largest Bengali-speaking city in the world. The area of Dhaka has been inhabited since the first millennium. An early modern city developed from the 17th century as a provincial capital and commercial centre of the Mughal Empire. Dhaka was the capital of a proto-industrialised Mughal Bengal for 75 years (1608–39 and 1660–1704). It was the hub of the muslin trade in Bengal and one of the most prosperous cities in the world. The Mughal city was named Jahangirnagar (The City of Jahangir) in honour of the erstwhile ruling emperor Jahangir. The city's wealthy Mughal elite included princes and the sons of Mughal emperors. The pre-colonial city's glory peaked in the 17th and 18th centuries when it was home to merchants from across Eurasia. The Port of Dhaka was a major trading post for both riverine and seaborne trade. The Mughals decorated the city with well-laid gardens, tombs, mosques, palaces, and forts. The city was once called the Venice of the East. Under British rule, the city saw the introduction of electricity, railways, cinemas, Western-style universities and colleges and a modern water supply. It became an important administrative and educational centre in the British Raj, as the capital of Eastern Bengal and Assam province after 1905. In 1947, after the end of British rule, the city became the administrative capital of East Pakistan. It was declared the legislative capital of Pakistan in 1962. In 1971, after the Liberation War, it became the capital of independent Bangladesh. In 2008, Dhaka celebrated 400 years as a municipal city. A beta-global city, Dhaka is the centre of political, economic and cultural life in Bangladesh. It is the seat of the Government of Bangladesh, many Bangladeshi companies, and leading Bangladeshi educational, scientific, research, and cultural organizations. Since its establishment as a modern capital city, the population, area and social and economic diversity of Dhaka have grown tremendously. The city is now one of the most densely industrialized regions in the country. The city accounts for 35% of Bangladesh's economy. The Dhaka Stock Exchange has over 750 listed companies. Dhaka hosts over 50 diplomatic missions; as well as the headquarters of BIMSTEC, CIRDAP, and the International Jute Study Group. Dhaka has a renowned culinary heritage. The city's culture is known for its rickshaws, Kachi Biryani, art festivals, street food, and religious diversity. Dhaka's most prominent architectural landmark is the modernist Jatiyo Sangshad Bhaban; while it has a heritage of 2000 buildings from the Mughal and British periods. The city is associated with two Nobel laureates. Dhaka's annual Bengali New Year parade, its Jamdani sari, and its rickshaw art have been recognized by UNESCO as the intangible cultural heritage of humanity. The city has produced many writers and poets in several languages, especially in Bengali and English. The origins of the name Dhaka are uncertain. It may derive from the dhak tree, which was once common in the area, or from Dhakeshwari, the 'patron goddess' of the region. Another popular theory states that Dhaka refers to a membranophone instrument, dhak which was played by order of Subahdar Islam Khan I during the inauguration of the Bengal capital in 1610. Some references also say it was derived from a Prakrit dialect called Dhaka Bhasa; or Dhakka, used in the Rajtarangini for a watch station; or it is the same as Davaka, mentioned in the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta as an eastern frontier kingdom. According to Rajatarangini written by a Kashmiri Brahman, Kalhana, the region was originally known as Dhakka. The word Dhakka means watchtower. Bikrampur and Sonargaon—the earlier strongholds of Bengal rulers were situated nearby. So Dhaka was most likely used as the watchtower for fortification purpose. The history of urban settlements in the area of modern-day Dhaka dates to the first millennium. The region was part of the ancient district of Bikrampur, which was ruled by the Sena dynasty. Under Islamic rule, it became part of the historic district of Sonargaon, the regional administrative hub of the Delhi and the Bengal Sultanates. The Grand Trunk Road passed through the region, connecting it with North India, Central Asia and the southeastern port city of Chittagong. Before Dhaka, the capital of Bengal was Gour. Even earlier capitals included Pandua, Bikrampur and Sonargaon. The latter was also the seat of Isa Khan and his son Musa Khan, who both headed a confederation of twelve chieftains that resisted Mughal expansion in eastern Bengal during the late 16th century. Due to a change in the course of the Ganges, the strategic importance of Gour was lost. Dhaka was viewed with strategic importance due to the Mughal need to consolidate control in eastern Bengal. The Mughals also planned to extend their empire beyond into Assam and Arakan. Dhaka and Chittagong became the eastern frontiers of the Mughal Empire. Dhaka became the capital of the Mughal province of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa in 1610 with a jurisdiction covering modern-day Bangladesh and eastern India, including the modern-day Indian states of West Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. This province was known as Bengal Subah. The city was founded during the reign of Emperor Jahangir. Emperor Shah Jahan visited Dhaka in 1624 and stayed in the city for a week, four years before he became emperor in 1628. Dhaka became one of the richest and greatest cities in the world during the early period of Bengal Subah (1610-1717). The prosperity of Dhaka reached its peak during the administration of governor Shaista Khan (1644-1677 and 1680–1688). Rice was then sold at eight maunds per rupee. Thomas Bowrey, an English merchant sailor who visited the city between 1669 and 1670, wrote that the city was 40 miles in circuit. He estimated the city to be more populated than London with 900,000 people. Bengal became the economic engine of the Mughal Empire. Dhaka played a key role in the proto-industrialisation of Bengal. It was the centre of the muslin trade in Bengal, leading to muslin being called "daka" in distant markets as far away as Central Asia. Mughal India depended on Bengali products like rice, silk and cotton textiles. European East India Companies from Britain, Holland, France, and Denmark also depended on Bengali products. Bengal accounted for 40% of Dutch imports from Asia, with many products being sold to Dutch ships in Bengali harbours and then transported to Batavia in the Dutch East Indies. Bengal accounted for 50% of textiles and 80% of silks in Dutch textile imports from Asia. Silk was also exported to premodern Japan. The region had a large shipbuilding industry which supplied the Mughal Navy. The shipbuilding output of Bengal during the 16th and 17th centuries stood at 223,250 tons annually, compared to 23,061 tons produced by North America from 1769 to 1771. The Mughals decorated the city with well-laid-out gardens. Caravanserai included the Bara Katra and Choto Katra. The architect of the palatial Bara Katra was Abul Qashim Al Hussaini Attabatayi Assemani. According to inscriptions in the Bangladesh National Museum, the ownership of Bara Katra was entrusted to an Islamic waqf. The Bara Katra also served as a residence for Mughal governors, including Prince Shah Shuja (the son of Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan). Dhaka was home to an array of Mughal bureaucrats and military officials, as well as members of the imperial family. The city was guarded by Mughal artillery like the Bibi Mariam Cannon (Lady Mary Cannon). Islam Khan I was the first Mughal governor to reside in the city. Khan named it "Jahangir Nagar" (The City of Jahangir) in honour of the Emperor Jahangir. The name was dropped soon after the English conquered. The main expansion of the city took place under Governor Shaista Khan. The city then measured 19 by 13 kilometres (11.8 by 8.1 mi), with a population of nearly one million. Dhaka became home to one of the richest elites in Mughal India. The construction of Lalbagh Fort was commenced in 1678 by Prince Azam Shah, who was the governor of Bengal, a son of Emperor Aurangzeb and a future Mughal Emperor himself. The Lalbagh Fort was intended to be the viceregal residence of Mughal governors in eastern India. Before the fort's construction could be completed, the prince was recalled by Emperor Aurangzeb. The fort's construction was halted by Shaista Khan after the death of his daughter Pari Bibi, who is buried in a tomb in the centre of the unfinished fort. Pari Bibi, whose name means Fairy Lady, was legendary for her beauty, engaged to Prince Azam Shah, and a potential future Mughal empress before her premature death. Internal conflict in the Mughal court cut short Dhaka's growth as an imperial city. Prince Azam Shah's rivalry with Murshid Quli Khan resulted in Dhaka losing its status as the provincial capital. In 1717, the provincial capital was shifted to Murshidabad where Murshid Quli Khan declared himself as the Nawab of Bengal. Under the Nawabs of Bengal, the Naib Nazim of Dhaka was in charge of the city. As the principal tax collector, the annual revenue of the Naib Nazim was 1 million rupees, which was a staggeringly high amount in that era. The Naib Nazim was the deputy governor of Bengal. He also dealt with the upkeep of the Mughal Navy. The Naib Nazim was in charge of the Dhaka Division, which included Dhaka, Comilla, and Chittagong. Dhaka Division was one of the four divisions under the Nawabs of Bengal. The Nawabs of Bengal allowed European trading companies to establish factories across Bengal. The region then became a hotbed for European rivalries. The British moved to oust the last independent Nawab of Bengal in 1757, who was allied with the French. Due to the defection of Nawab's army chief Mir Jafar to the British side, the last Nawab lost the Battle of Plassey. After the Battle of Buxar in 1765, the Treaty of Allahabad allowed the British East India Company to become the tax collector in Bengal on behalf of the Mughal Emperor in Delhi. The Naib Nazim continued to function until 1793 when all his powers were transferred to the East India Company. The city formally passed to the control of the East India Company in 1793. British military raids damaged a lot of the city's infrastructure. The military conflict caused a sharp decline in the urban population. Dhaka's fortunes received a boost with connections to the mercantile networks of the British Empire. With the dawn of the Industrial Revolution in Britain, Dhaka became a leading centre of the jute trade, as Bengal accounted for the largest share of the world's jute production. But the British neglected Dhaka's industrial and urban development until the late 19th century. Income from the pre-colonial, proto-industrialized textile industry dried up. Bengali weavers went out of business after the imposition of a 75% tax on the export of cotton from Bengal, as well as the surge in imports of cheap, British-manufactured fabrics after the advent of the spinning mule and steam power. Many of the city's weavers starved to death during Bengal's great famines under British rule. The rapid growth of the colonial capital Calcutta contributed to the decline in Dhaka's population and economy in the early 1800s. In 1824, an Anglican bishop described Dhaka as a "city of magnificent ruins". Dhaka hosted factories of the English East India Company, the Dutch East India Company, and French East India Company. The property of the Ahsan Manzil was initially bought by the French for their factory and later sold to the Dhaka Nawab Family. The Portuguese were reportedly responsible for introducing cheese. Dhaka saw an influx of migrants during the Mughal Empire. An Armenian community from the Safavid Empire settled in Dhaka and was involved in the city's textile trade, paying a 3.5% tax. The Armenians were very active in the city's social life. They opened the Pogose School. Marwaris were the Hindu trading community. Dhaka also became home to Jews and Greeks. The city has a Greek memorial. Several families of Dhaka's elite spoke Urdu and included Urdu poets. Persians also settled in the city to serve as administrators and military commanders of the Mughal government in Bengal. The legacy of cosmopolitan trading communities lives on in the names of neighbourhoods in Old Dhaka, including Farashganj (French Bazaar), Armanitola (Armenian Quarter) and Postogola (Portuguese Quarter). According to those who lived in the historic city, "Dhaka was a courtly, genteel town – the very last flowering, in their telling, of Mughal etiquette and sensibility. It is this history that is today still reflected in the faded grandeur of the old city, now crumbling due to decades of neglect. The narrow, winding, high-walled lanes and alleyways, the old high-ceilinged houses with verandas and balconies, the old neighbourhoods, the graveyards and gardens, the mosques, the grand old mansions – these are all still there if one goes looking". Railway stations, postal departments, civil service posts and river port stations were often staffed by Anglo-Indians. The city's hinterland supplied rice, jute, gunny sacks, turmeric, ginger, leather hides, silk, rugs, saltpeter, salt, sugar, indigo, cotton, and iron. British opium policy in Bengal contributed to the Opium Wars with China. American traders collected artwork, handicrafts, terracotta, sculptures, religious and literary texts, manuscripts, and military weapons from Bengal. Some objects from the region are on display in the Peabody Essex Museum. The increase in international trade led to profits for many families in the city, allowing them to buy imported luxury goods. During the Indian mutiny of 1857, the city witnessed revolts by the Bengal Army. Direct rule by the British crown was established following the successful quelling of the mutiny. It bestowed privileges on the Dhaka Nawab Family, which dominated the city's political and social elite. The Dhaka Cantonment was established as a base for the British Indian Army. The British developed the modern city around Ramna, Shahbag Garden, and Victoria Park. Dhaka got its own version of the hansom cab as public transport in 1856. The number of carriages increased from 60 in 1867 to 600 in 1889. A modern civic water system was introduced in 1874. In 1885, the Dhaka State Railway was opened with a 144 km metre gauge (1000 mm) rail line connecting Mymensingh and the Port of Narayanganj through Dhaka. The city later became a hub of the Eastern Bengal State Railway. The first film shown in Dhaka was screened on the Riverfront Crown Theatre on 17 April 1898. The film show was organized by the Bedford Bioscope Company. The electricity supply began in 1901. This period is described as being "the colonial-era part of Dhaka, developed by the British during the early 20th century. Similar to colonial boroughs the length and breadth of the Subcontinent, this development was typified by stately government buildings, spacious tree-lined avenues, and sturdy white-washed bungalows set amidst always overgrown (the British never did manage to fully tame the landscape) gardens. Once upon a time, this was the new city; and even though it is today far from the ritziest part of town, the streets here are still wider and the trees more abundant and the greenery more evident than in any other part". Some of the early educational institutions established during the period of British rule include the Dhaka College, the Dhaka Medical School, the Eden College, St. Gregory's School, the Mohsinia Madrasa, Jagannath College and the Ahsanullah School of Engineering. Horse racing was a favourite pastime for elite residents in the city's Ramna Race Course beside the Dhaka Club. The Viceroy of India would often dine and entertain with Bengali aristocrats in the city. Automobiles began appearing after the turn of the century. A 1937 Sunbeam-Talbot Ten was preserved in the Liberation War Museum. The Nawabs of Dhaka owned Rolls-Royces. Austin cars were widely used. Beauty Boarding was a popular inn and restaurant. Dhaka's fortunes changed in the early 20th century. British neglect of Dhaka's urban development was overturned with the first partition of Bengal in 1905, which restored Dhaka's status as a regional capital. The city became the seat of government for Eastern Bengal and Assam, with a jurisdiction covering most of modern-day Bangladesh and all of what is now Northeast India. The partition was the brainchild of Lord Curzon, who finally acted on British ideas for partitioning Bengal to improve administration, education, and business. Dhaka became the seat of the Eastern Bengal and Assam Legislative Council. While Dhaka was the main capital throughout the year, Shillong acted as the summer retreat of the administration. Lieutenant Governors were in charge of the province. They resided in Dhaka. The Lt Governors included Sir Bampfylde Fuller (1905-1906), Sir Lancelot Hare (1906-1911), and Sir Charles Stuart Bayley (1911-1912). Their legacy lives on in the names of three major thoroughfares in modern Dhaka, including Hare Road, Bayley Road, and Fuller Road. The period saw the construction of stately buildings, including the High Court and Curzon Hall. The city was home to diverse groups of people, including Armenians, Jews, Anglo-Indians and Hindus. The Hindus included both Marwaris and Bengali Hindus, with a plurality emerging by 1941 and engaged in professions like teaching, medicine, law, and business. Dhaka was the seat of government for 4 administrative divisions, including the Assam Valley Division, Chittagong Division, Dacca Division, Rajshahi Division, and the Surma Valley Division. There were a total of 30 districts in Eastern Bengal and Assam, including Dacca, Mymensingh, Faridpur and Backergunge in Dacca Division; Tippera, Noakhali, Chittagong and the Hill Tracts in Chittagong Division; Rajshahi, Dinajpur, Jalpaiguri, Rangpur, Bogra, Pabna and Malda in Rajshahi Division; Sylhet, Cachar, the Khasi and Jaintia Hills, the Naga Hills and the Lushai Hills in Surma Valley Division; and Goalpara, Kamrup, the Garo Hills, Darrang, Nowgong, Sibsagar and Lakhimpur in Assam Valley Division. The province was bordered by Cooch Behar State, Hill Tipperah and the Kingdom of Bhutan. On the political front, partition allowed Dhaka to project itself as the standard-bearer of Muslim communities in British India; as opposed to the heavily Hindu-dominated city of Calcutta. In 1906, the All India Muslim League was founded in the city during a conference on liberal education hosted by the Nawab of Dhaka and the Aga Khan III. The Muslim population in Dhaka and eastern Bengal generally favoured partition in the hopes of getting better jobs and educational opportunities. Many Bengalis, however, opposed the bifurcation of the ethnolinguistic region. The partition was annulled by an announcement from King George V during the Delhi Durbar in 1911. The British decided to reunite Bengal while the capital of India was shifted to New Delhi from Calcutta. As a "splendid compensation" for the annulment of partition, the British gave the city a newly formed university in the 1920s. The University of Dhaka was initially modelled on the residential style of the University of Oxford. It became known as the Oxford of the East because of its residential character. Like Oxford, students in Dhaka were affiliated with their halls of residence instead of their academic departments (this system was dropped after 1947 and students are now affiliated with academic departments). The university's faculty included scientist Satyendra Nath Bose (who is the namesake of the Higgs boson); linguist Muhammad Shahidullah, Sir A F Rahman (the first Bengali vice-chancellor of the university); and historian R. C. Majumdar. The university was established in 1921 by the Imperial Legislative Council. It started with three faculties and 12 departments, covering the subjects of Sanskrit, Bengali, English, liberal arts, history, Arabic, Islamic Studies, Persian, Urdu, philosophy, economics, politics, physics, chemistry, mathematics, and law. The East Bengal Cinematograph Company produced the first full-length silent movies in Dhaka during the 1920s, including Sukumari and The Last Kiss. DEVCO, a subsidiary of the Occtavian Steel Company, began widescale power distribution in 1930. The Tejgaon Airport was constructed during World War II as a base for Allied Forces. The Dhaka Medical College was established in 1946. At the time of the partition of India, many rich Hindu families relocated to West Bengal. Their properties were seized by the state under laws that eventually became known as the Vested Property Act. The development of the "real city" began after the partition of India. After partition, Dhaka became known as the second capital of Pakistan. This was formalized in 1962 when Ayub Khan declared the city as the legislative capital under the 1962 constitution. New neighbourhoods began to spring up in formerly barren and agrarian areas. These included Dhanmondi (rice granary), Katabon (thorn forest), Kathalbagan (jackfruit grove), Kalabagan (banana grove), and Gulshan (flower garden). Living standards rapidly improved from the pre-partition standards. The economy began to industrialize. On the outskirts of the city, the world's largest jute mill was built. The mill produced jute goods which were in high demand during the Korean War. People began building duplex houses. In 1961, Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip witnessed the improved living standards of Dhaka's residents. The Intercontinental hotel, designed by William B. Tabler, was opened in 1966. Estonian-American architect Louis I. Kahn was enlisted to design the Dhaka Assembly, which was originally intended to be the federal parliament of Pakistan and later became independent Bangladesh's parliament. The East Pakistan Helicopter Service connected the city to regional towns. The Dhaka Stock Exchange was opened on 28 April 1954. The first local airline Orient Airways began flights between Dhaka and Karachi on 6 June 1954. The Dhaka Improvement Trust was established in 1956 to coordinate the city's development. The first master plan for the city was drawn up in 1959. The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization established a medical research centre (now called ICDDR,B) in the city in 1960. The early period of political turbulence was seen between 1947 and 1952, particularly the Bengali Language Movement. From the mid-1960s, the Awami League's 6-point autonomy demands began giving rise to pro-independence aspirations across East Pakistan. In 1969, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was released from prison amid a mass upsurge which led to the resignation of Ayub Khan in 1970. The city had an influential press with prominent newspapers like the Pakistan Observer, Ittefaq, Forum, and the Weekly Holiday. During the political and constitutional crisis in 1971, the military junta led by Yahya Khan refused to transfer power to the newly elected National Assembly, causing mass riots, civil disobedience, and a movement for self-determination. On 7 March 1971, Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman addressed a massive public gathering at the Ramna Race Course Maidan in Dhaka, in which he warned of an independence struggle. Subsequently, East Pakistan came under a non-co-operation movement against the Pakistani state. On Pakistan's Republic Day (23 March 1971), Bangladeshi flags were hoisted throughout Dhaka in a show of resistance. On 25 March 1971, the Pakistan Army launched military operations under Operation Searchlight against the population of East Pakistan. Dhaka bore the brunt of the army's atrocities, witnessing a genocide and a campaign of wide-scale repression, with the arrest, torture, and murder of the city's civilians, students, intelligentsia, political activists and religious minorities. The army faced mutinies from the East Pakistan Rifles and the Bengali police. Large parts of the city were burnt and destroyed, including Hindu neighbourhoods. Much of the city's population was either displaced or forced to flee to the countryside. Dhaka was struck with numerous air raids by the Indian Air Force in December. The Pakistan Eastern Command surrendered to Lt. Gen. Jagjit Singh Aurora at the Ramna Race Course in Dhaka on 16 December 1971. After independence, Dhaka's population grew from several hundred thousand to several million in five decades. Dhaka was declared the national capital by the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh in 1972. The post-independence period witnessed rapid growth as Dhaka attracted migrant workers from across rural Bangladesh. 60% of population growth has been due to rural migration. The city endured socialist unrest in the early 1970s, followed by a few years of martial law. The stock exchange and free market were restored in the late 1970s. In the 1980s, Dhaka saw the inauguration of the National Parliament House (which won the Aga Khan Award for Architecture), a new international airport and the Bangladesh National Museum. Bangladesh pioneered the formation of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and hosted its first summit in Dhaka in 1985. A mass uprising in 1990 led to the return of parliamentary democracy. Dhaka hosted a trilateral summit between India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh in 1998; the summit of the D-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation in 1999 and conferences of the Commonwealth, SAARC, the OIC and United Nations agencies during various years. In the 1990s and 2000s, Dhaka experienced improved economic growth and the emergence of affluent business districts and satellite towns. Between 1990 and 2005, the city's population doubled from 6 million to 12 million. There has been increased foreign investment in the city, particularly in the financial and textile manufacturing sectors. Between 2008 and 2011, the government of Bangladesh organized three years of celebrations to mark 400 years since Dhaka's founding as an early modern city. But frequent hartals by political parties have greatly hampered the city's economy. The hartal rate has declined since 2014. In some years, the city experienced a widespread flash flood during the monsoon. Dhaka is one of the fastest-growing megacities in the world. It is predicted to be one of the world's largest metropolises by 2025, along with Tokyo, Mexico City, Shanghai, Beijing and New York City. Most of its population are rural migrants, including climate refugees. Congestion is one of the most prominent features of modern Dhaka. In 2014, it was reported that only 7% of the city was covered by roads. The first phase of Dhaka Metro Rail from Uttara to Agargaon was inaugurated by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on 28 December 2022. However, nearly one third of Dhaka's population lives in slums, as of 2016. The city's main river, the Buriganga River, has become one of the most polluted rivers in the country. Dhaka is located in central Bangladesh at 23°42′N 90°22′E﻿ / ﻿23.700°N 90.367°E﻿ / 23.700; 90.367, on the eastern banks of the Buriganga River. The city lies on the lower reaches of the Ganges Delta and covers a total area of 270 square kilometres (100 sq mi). Tropical vegetation and moist soils characterize the land, which is flat and close to sea level. This leaves Dhaka susceptible to flooding during the monsoon seasons owing to heavy rainfall and cyclones. Due to its location on the lowland plain of the Ganges Delta, the city is fringed by extensive mangroves and tidal flat ecosystems. Dhaka District is bounded by the districts of Gazipur, Tangail, Munshiganj, Rajbari, Narayanganj, and Manikganj. Except Old Dhaka, which is an old bazaar-style neighbourhood, the layout of the city follows a grid pattern with organic development influenced by traditional South Asian as well as Middle Eastern and Western patterns. Growth of the city is largely unplanned and is focused on the northern regions and around the city centre, where many of the more affluent neighbourhoods may be found. Most of the construction in the city consists of concrete high-rise buildings. Middle-class and upper-class housing, along with commercial and industrial areas, occupy most of the city. However, nearly one third of Dhaka's population lives in slums, as of 2016 (see below). Dhaka does not have a well-defined central business district. Old Dhaka is the historic commercial centre, but most development has moved to the north. In 1985, the area around Motijheel was considered the "modern" CBD, while by 2005 Gulshan was considered the "newest" part of the CBD. Many Bangladeshi government institutions can be found in Motijheel, Segunbagicha, Tejgaon, Karwan Bazar, and Sher-e-Bangla Nagar. Much activity is centred around a few large roads, where road laws are rarely obeyed and street vendors and beggars are frequently encountered. For much of recent history, Dhaka was characterized by roadside markets and small shops that sold a wide variety of goods. Recent years have seen the widespread construction of shopping malls. Two of the largest shopping malls in the city and the wider South Asian region are the Jamuna Future Park and Bashundhara City. Under the Köppen climate classification, Dhaka has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen Aw). The city has a distinct monsoonal season, with an annual average temperature of 26 °C (79 °F) and monthly means varying between 19 °C (66 °F) in January and 29 °C (84 °F) in May. Approximately 87% of the average annual rainfall of 2,123 millimetres (83.6 inches) occurs between May and October. There are many parks within Dhaka City, including Ramna Park, Suhrawardy Udyan, Shishu Park, National Botanical Garden, Baldha Garden, Chandrima Uddan, Gulshan Park and Dhaka Zoo. Almost 10% of the city's area consists of water: There are 676 ponds and 43 canals. The Buriganga River flows past the southwest outskirts of Dhaka. Its average depth is 7.6 metres (25 ft) and its maximum depth is 18 metres (58 ft). It ranks among the most polluted rivers in the country. The city is surrounded by six interconnected river systems—the Buriganga and Dhaleshwari in the southwest, Turag and Tongi Khal in the north, and Balu and Sitalakhya in the east—which support trade, transport, and stormwater drainage. There are several lakes within the city, such as Crescent Lake, Dhanmondi Lake, Baridhara-Gulshan Lake, Banani lake, Uttara Lake, Hatirjheel-Begunbari Lake, 300 Feet Road Prionty lake, Ramna lake. Increasing air and water pollution affects public health and the quality of life in the city. The air pollution is caused for example by vehicle traffic and congestion. Also, due to the unregulated manufacturing of bricks and other causes, Dhaka has very high levels of fine particulate matter (PM2.5) air pollution. Water pollution is caused by the discharge of municipal wastewater from households and industry without treatment. As of 2011 only 20% of the city is connected to a sewer system, whereas 80% is not connected. As a result, the rivers in Dhaka have severe pathogen pollution, as indicated by the fecal coliform count that is several hundred times higher than the recommended national and international standards of less than 200 cfu per litre for bathing and swimming. In addition to the organic and pathogen pollution load from the 1.2 million m3 of untreated sewage, the rivers receive about 60,000 m3 of industrial effluent every day from nine major industrial clusters (as of 2021). There are an estimated 500–700 wet processing and dyeing textile factories releasing a range of chemicals including salts, dyes and bleaches, and 155 tanneries discharging heavy metals, including chromium. Four of the rivers surrounding Dhaka—Buriganaga, Sitalakhya, Balu and Turag—are so polluted that they have been declared as ecologically critical areas in 2009 by the Department of Environment. This makes them unsuitable for any human use. Nevertheless, people living in low-income and slum areas still have a lot of direct contact with river water, exposing them to health risks. They use river water for dish washing, laundry, cleaning fish and vegetables, and personal washing, washing and dyeing denim, washing fish baskets or plastic sheets, collecting plastic waste and fishing. As a result, many of the immediate environmental burdens of river pollution are borne by these low-income residents. Water bodies and wetlands around Dhaka are facing destruction as these are being filled up to construct multi-storied buildings and other real estate developments. Coupled with pollution, such erosion of natural habitats threatens to destroy much of the regional biodiversity. As the capital of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Dhaka is home to numerous state and diplomatic institutions. The Bangabhaban is the official residence and workplace of the President of Bangladesh, who is the ceremonial head of state under the constitution. The National Parliament House is located in the modernist capital complex designed by Louis Kahn in Sher-e-Bangla Nagar. The Ganabhaban, the official residence of the Prime Minister, is situated on the north side of Parliament. The Prime Minister's Office is located in Tejgaon. Most ministries of the Government of Bangladesh are housed in the Bangladesh Secretariat. The Supreme Court, the Dhaka High Court and the Foreign Ministry are located in the Segunbagicha-Shahbagh area. The Defence Ministry and the Ministry of Planning are located in Sher-e-Bangla Nagar. The Armed Forces Division of the government of Bangladesh and the army, navy and air force HQs of the Bangladesh Armed Forces are located in Dhaka Cantonment. Several important installations of the Bangladesh Army are also situated in Dhaka and Mirpur Cantonments. The Bangladesh Navy's principal administrative and logistics base, BNS Haji Mohshin, is located in Dhaka. The Bangladesh Air Force maintains the BAF Bangabandhu Air Base and BAF Khademul Bashar Air Base in Dhaka. Dhaka hosts 54 resident embassies and high commissions and numerous international organizations. Most diplomatic missions are located in the Gulshan and Baridhara areas of the city. The Agargaon area near Parliament is home to the country offices of the United Nations, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank. The municipality of Dhaka was founded on 1 August 1864 and upgraded to "Metropolitan" status in 1978. In 1983, the Dhaka City Corporation was created as a self-governing entity to govern Dhaka. Under a new act in 1993, an election was held in 1994 for the first elected Mayor of Dhaka. The Dhaka City Corporation ran the affairs of the city until November 2011. In 2011, Dhaka City Corporation was split into two separate corporations – Dhaka North City Corporation and Dhaka South City Corporation to ensure better civic facilities. These two corporations are headed by two mayors, who are elected by direct vote of the citizen for 5 years. The area within city corporations was divided into several wards, each having an elected commissioner. In total, the city has 130 wards and 725 mohallas. RAJUK is responsible for coordinating urban development in the Greater Dhaka area. DMP is responsible for maintaining law and order within the metro area. It was established in 1976. DMP has 56 police stations as administrative units. Unlike other megacities worldwide, Dhaka is serviced by over two dozen government organizations under different ministries. Lack of coordination among them and centralization of all powers by the Government of Bangladesh keeps the development and maintenance of the city in a chaotic situation. As the most densely industrialized region of the country, the Greater Dhaka Area accounts for 35% of Bangladesh's economy. The Globalization and World Cities Research Network ranks Dhaka as a beta− global city, in other words, one that is instrumental in linking their region into the world economy. Major industrial areas are Tejgaon, Shyampur and Hazaribagh. The city has a growing middle class, driving the market for modern consumer and luxury goods. Shopping malls serve as vital elements in the city's economy. The city has historically attracted numerous migrant workers. Hawkers, peddlers, small shops, rickshaw transport, roadside vendors and stalls employ a large segment of the population – rickshaw drivers alone number as many as 400,000. Half the workforce is employed in household and unorganised labour, while about 800,000 work in the textile industry. The unemployment rate in Dhaka was 23% in 2013. Almost all large local conglomerates have their corporate offices located in Dhaka. Microcredit also began here and the offices of the Nobel Prize-winning Grameen Bank and BRAC (the largest non-governmental development organisation in the world) are based in Dhaka. Urban developments have sparked a widespread construction boom; new high-rise buildings and skyscrapers have changed the city's landscape. Growth has been especially strong in the finance, banking, manufacturing, telecommunications, and service sectors, while tourism, hotels, and restaurants continue as important elements of the Dhaka economy. Dhaka has rising traffic congestion and inadequate infrastructure; the national government has recently implemented a policy for rapid urbanization of surrounding areas and beyond by the introduction of a ten-year relief on income tax for new construction of facilities and buildings outside Dhaka. The Dhaka metropolitan area boasts of several central business districts (CBDs). In the southern part of the city, the riverfront of Old Dhaka is home to many small businesses, factories, and trading companies. Near Old Dhaka lies Motijheel, which is the biggest CBD in Bangladesh. The Motijheel area developed in the 1960s. Motijheel is home to the Bangladesh Bank, the nation's central bank; as well as the headquarters of the largest state-owned banks, including Janata Bank, Pubali Bank, Sonali Bank and Rupali Bank. By the 1990s, the affluent residential neighbourhoods of Gulshan, Banani and Uttara in the northern part of the city became major business centres and now hosts many international companies operating in Bangladesh. The Purbachal New Town Project is planned as the city's future CBD. The following is a list of the main CBDs in Dhaka. Motijheel Kawran Bazar Paltan Dhanmondi Gulshan Banani Uttara Mirpur Bashundhara Residential Area Panthapath Maghbazar Mohakhali Tejgaon Old Dhaka Major trade associations based in the city include: Federation of Bangladesh Chambers of Commerce & Industries (FBCCI) Dhaka Chamber of Commerce & Industry (DCCI) Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI) Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BKMEA) Newspaper Owners' Association of Bangladesh (NOAB) Real Estate and Housing Association of Bangladesh (REHAB) The Dhaka Stock Exchange (DSE) had a market capitalization of BDT 5,136,979.000 million in 2021. Some of the largest companies listed on the DSE include: Grameenphone BEXIMCO BSRM Titas Gas Summit Group The City Bank BRAC Bank IDLC Finance Limited Square Pharmaceuticals Eastern Bank Limited Orion Group The city, in combination with localities forming the wider metropolitan area, is home to over 22 million as of 2022[update]. The population is growing by an estimated 3.3% per year, one of the highest rates among Asian cities. The continuing growth reflects ongoing migration from rural areas to the Dhaka urban region, which accounted for 60% of the city's growth in the 1960s and 1970s. More recently, the city's population has also grown with the expansion of city boundaries, a process that added more than a million people to the city in the 1980s. According to the Far Eastern Economic Review, Dhaka will be home to 25 million people by the end of 2025. This rapid population growth makes it difficult for the city government to provide the necessary infrastructure in a timely manner, e.g. for water supply, electricity and waste management. About 30% of Dhaka's population lives in slums (or unplanned urban settlements), as of 2016. Estimates from 2011 and 2015 found that there are about "3 to 5 thousand slums and squatter settlements scattered all over the city". It is often the new arrivals, people migrating from rural areas, who end up living in slums. People only have very limited access to water, sanitation and other services in those slum areas. Slums may be found in the outskirts and in less-visible areas such as alleyways. As of 2021, the largest slum is in Kamrangirchar, where about 600,000 people live in slum conditions. The city population is composed of people from virtually every region of Bangladesh. The long-standing inhabitants of the old city are known as Dhakaite and have a distinctive Bengali dialect and culture. Dhaka is also home to a large number of Bihari refugees, who are descendants of migrant Muslims from eastern India during 1947 and settled down in East Pakistan. The correct population of Biharis living in the city is ambiguous, but it is estimated that there are at least 300,000 Urdu-speakers in all of Bangladesh, mostly residing in old Dhaka and in refugee camps in Dhaka, although official figures estimate only 40,000. Between 15,000 and 20,000 of the Rohingya, Santal, Khasi, Garo, Chakma and Mandi tribal peoples reside in the city. Most residents of Dhaka speak Bengali, the national language. Many distinctive Bengali dialects such as Dhakaiya Kutti, Chittagonian and Sylheti are also spoken by segments of the population. English is spoken by a large segment of the population, especially for business purposes. The city has both Bengali and English newspapers. Urdu, including Dhakaiya Urdu, is spoken by members of several non-Bengali communities, including the Biharis. The literacy rate in Dhaka is also increasing quickly. It was estimated at 69.2% in 2001. The literacy rate had gone up to 74.6% by 2011 which is significantly higher than the national average of 72%. Islam is the dominant religion of the city, with 19.3 million of the city's population being Muslim, and a majority belonging to the Sunni sect. There is also a small Shia sect, and an Ahmadiya community. Hinduism is the second-largest religion numbering around 1.47 million adherents. Smaller segments represent 1% and practise Christianity and Buddhism. In the city proper, over 8.5 million of the 8.9 million residents are Muslims, while 320,000 are Hindu and nearly 50,000 Christian. Dhaka is a major centre for Bengali literature. It has been the hub of Bengali Muslim literature for more than a century. Its heritage also includes historic Urdu and Persian literary traditions. Dark Diamond by Shazia Omar in set in Mughal-era Dhaka during the reign of Shaista Khan, the Mughal viceroy and uncle of Emperor Aurangzeb.The Soldier in the Attic by Akhteruzzaman Elias is considered to be one of the best depictions of life in Old Dhaka and is set during Bengali uprisings in 1969. A Golden Age by Tahmima Anam is also set in Dhaka during the Bangladeshi War of Independence and includes references to the Dhaka Club, the Dhaka University and the Dhanmondi area. For centuries, the region around Dhaka has been the center of production for fine cotton textiles. Muslin was abundantly produced in the region. The weavers of Dhaka were patronized by the rulers of Bengal and Delhi. They supplied textiles to the Mughal imperial court. The city of Dhaka became one of the most important centers of the cotton textile trade in the 17th century. It was literally the capital of the Muslin trade in Bengal. Merchants from around the world came to Dhaka to buy its much sought after cotton fabrics. UNESCO has recognized Jamdani muslin as an intangible cultural heritage. According to UNESCO, "Jamdani is a vividly patterned, sheer cotton fabric, traditionally woven on a handloom by craftspeople and apprentices around Dhaka". UNESCO believes "the Jamdani sari is a symbol of identity, dignity and self-recognition and provides wearers with a sense of cultural identity and social cohesion. The weavers develop an occupational identity and take great pride in their heritage; they enjoy social recognition and are highly respected for their skills". Annual celebrations for Language Martyrs' Day (21 February), Independence Day (26 March), and Victory Day (16 December) are prominently celebrated across the city. Dhaka's people congregate at the Shaheed Minar and the Jatiyo Smriti Soudho to remember the national heroes of the liberation war. These occasions are observed with public ceremonies and rallies on public grounds. Many schools and colleges organise fairs, festivals, and concerts in which citizens from all levels of society participate.Pohela Baishakh, the Bengali New Year, falls annually on 14 April and is popularly celebrated across the city. Large crowds of people gather on the streets of Shahbag, Ramna Park and the campus of the University of Dhaka for celebrations. Pahela Falgun, the first day of spring of the month Falgun in the Bengali calendar, is also festively celebrated in the city. This day is marked with colourful celebration and traditionally, women wear yellow saris to celebrate this day. This celebration is also known as Basanta Utsab (Spring Festival). Nabanna is a harvest celebration, usually celebrated with food and dance, and music on the 1st day of the month of Agrahayan of the Bengali year. Birthdays of Rabindranath Tagore and Kazi Nazrul Islam are observed respectively as Rabindra Jayanti and Nazrul Jayanti. The Ekushey Book Fair, which is arranged each year by Bangla Academy, takes place for the whole month of February. This event is dedicated to the martyrs who died on 21 February 1952 in a demonstration calling for the establishment of Bengali as one of the state languages of former East Pakistan. Shakrain Festival is an annual celebration observed with the flying of kites. It is usually observed in the old part of the city at the end of Poush, the ninth month of the Bengali calendar (14 or 15 January in the Gregorian calendar). The Islamic festivals of Eid ul-Fitr, Eid ul-Adha, Eid-E-Miladunnabi and Muharram; the Hindu festival of Durga Puja; the Buddhist festival of Buddha Purnima; and the Christian festival of Christmas witness widespread celebrations across the city. Despite the growing popularity of music groups and rock bands, traditional folk music remains widely popular. The works of the national poet Kazi Nazrul Islam, national anthem writer Rabindranath Tagore and mystic saint songwriter Lalon have a widespread following across Dhaka. Bailey Road is known as natak para (drama neighbourhood) for its two theatre halls. Bengal Foundation Chhayanaut Institute of Fine Arts Nazrul Institute Samdani Art Foundation Shilpakala Academy Bengal Classical Music Festival Chobi Mela International Photography Festival Dhaka Art Summit Dhaka Lit Fest Dhaka World Music Festival Dhaka International Book Fair Dhaka International Trade Fair Ekushey Book Fair Dhaka has been called the Rickshaw Capital of the World. Once home to over a million cycle rickshaws, the number of cycle rickshaws has reduced in recent years. Cycle rickshaws also cause enormous traffic congestion for local residents. Locals have debated a potential ban on rickshaws to clear Dhaka's streets for smooth traffic. Cycle rickshaws are a source of income for low income people who migrate to Dhaka in search of work. The cycle rickshaw is three wheeled and driven by a single person. Rickshaws have become a symbol of the city. Rickshaws are colorfully painted with floral patterns and depictions of birds, animals, movie stars, religious text, historical events and national heroes. According to UNESCO, "Rickshaws and rickshaw painting are viewed as a key part of the city’s cultural tradition and a dynamic form of urban folk art". Historically, Dhaka has been the culinary capital of Bengal in terms of Mughlai cuisine. A distinct variant of Bengali-Mughlai cuisine evolved in the city. Chefs from Dhaka, the former Mughal provincial capital, served in the kitchens of the Nawabs of Bengal in Murshidabad. They invented the Kachi Biryani, which is a variant of biryani with mutton steaks and potatoes. One of the longest surviving outlets serving authentic Kachi Biryani is Fakhruddin's. Kachi Biryani is highly popular in Bangladeshi cuisine, with food critic and former MasterChef Australia judge Matt Preston praising its use of potatoes. Borhani is served as a drink alongside biryani. The Nawabi cuisine of Dhaka was notable for its patishapta dessert and the Kubali pulao. The korma recipe of the Nawab family was included by Madhur Jaffrey in her cookbook "Madhur Jaffrey's Ultimate Curry Bible". Bakarkhani breads from Dhaka were served in the courts of Mughal rulers. Since 1939, Haji biryani has been a leading biryani restaurant in the city. Dhaka also has a style of Murg Pulao (chicken biryani) which uses turmeric and malai (cream of milk) together. Local kebabs are widely eaten when dining out. The seekh kebab and chicken tikka are the most popular dishes in kebab restaurants, which are eaten with either naan or paratha. Star Kabab is the most popular kebab chain in the city, alongside other chains and gourmet restaurants. Along with South Asian cuisine, a large variety of Western and Chinese cuisine is served at numerous restaurants and food courts. Upmarket areas include many Thai, Japanese and Korean restaurants. Italian food is also very popular in Dhaka, especially in upmarket areas. During Ramadan, Chowkbazaar becomes a busy marketplace for iftar items. The jilapi of Dhaka are much thicker than counterparts in India and Pakistan. The Shahi jilapi (king's jilapi) is one of the thickest jilapi produced. The phuchka and jhalmuri are popular street food. Dhaka hosts an array of Bengali dessert chains that sell a wide variety of sweets. Samosas and shingaras are also widely eaten traditional snacks. In recent years, the number of Bangladeshi-owned burger outlets has increased across the city. Notable bakeries include the Prince of Wales bakery in Old Dhaka and the Cooper's chain. The architectural history of Dhaka can be subdivided into the Mughal, British, and modern periods. As a result, Dhaka has landmarks of Mughal architecture, Indo-Saracenic architecture, and modernist architecture. The oldest brick structure in the city is the Binat Bibi Mosque, which was built in 1454 in the Narinda area of Dhaka during the reign of the Sultan Nasiruddin Mahmud Shah (r. 1435 – 1459) of the Bengal Sultanate. Old Dhaka is home to over 2000 buildings built between the 16th and 19th centuries, which form an integral part of Dhaka's cultural heritage. Modern Dhaka is often criticized as a concrete jungle. In the old part of the city, the fading grandeur of the Mughal era is evident in the crumbling, neglected caravanserai like Bara Katra and Choto Katra. Some structures like the Nimtali arch have been restored. The old city features narrow alleyways with high-walled lanes and houses with indoor courtyards. The early 20th century government quarter in Ramna includes stately colonial buildings set amidst gardens and parks. Among colonial buildings, the Curzon Hall stands out for "synthesizing imperial grandiosity with sporadic Mughal motifs". Amongst modernist buildings, the Grameenphone headquarters is described as "a paradigm setter for corporate Bangladesh". The Museum of Independence and its attached national monument were inspired by the "land-water mysticism of deltaic Bengal" and the "evocative expansiveness of a Roman forum or the geographical assemblage of an Egyptian mastaba sanctuary". Dhaka's Art Institute, designed by Muzharul Islam, was the pioneering building of Bengali regional modernism. The vast expanse of the national parliament complex was designed by Louis Kahn. It is celebrated as Dhaka's pre-eminent civic space. The national parliament complex comprises 200 acres (800,000 m2) in the heart of the city. The Kamalapur railway station was designed by American architect Robert Boughey. In the last few decades, Bangladesh's new wave of cultural architecture has been influenced by Bengali aesthetics and the environment. City Centre Bangladesh is currently the tallest building in the city. In 1849, the Kattra Press became the first printing press in the city. The name alludes to the katra, the Bengali word for caravanserai. In 1856, Dacca News became the first English-language newspaper in the city. The Dacca News Press was the first commercial printing press in the city. Books published in Dhaka stirred discourse in the social and literary circles of Bengal. The Bengal Library Catalogue records the expansion of the publishing industry during the 1860s. Between 1877 and 1895, there were 45 printing presses in Dhaka. Between 1863 and 1900, more than a hundred Islamic puthi were published in Dhaka. Bookshops sprang up in Chowkbazaar, Islampur, Mughaltuli, and Patuatuli. Albert Library was a den for leftwing activists. After partition, the number of publishing houses in Dhaka rose from 27 in 1947 to 88 in 1966. Prominent bookshops included Wheeler's Bookstall and Presidency Library. Banglabazaar has since become the hub of the book trade. Bookworm is a famous local book shop that has been located adjacent to the Prime Minister's Office for three decades until being ordered to relocate in 2022; it is now located in Justice Shahabuddin Ahmed Park. Dhaka is the centre of the national media in Bangladesh. It is home to the state-owned Bangladesh Television and Bangladesh Betar. In recent years, the number of privately owned television channels and radio stations has increased greatly. There are over two dozen Bengali language television channels in the private sector, including 24-hour news channels. Radio is also popular across the city. Dhaka is home to national newspapers, including Bengali newspapers like Prothom Alo, Ittefaq, Inqilab, Janakantha, and Jugantor; as well as English language newspapers The Daily Star, The Financial Express, The Business Standard, Dhaka Tribune, and New Age. Broadcast media based in Dhaka include Gaan Bangla, Banglavision, DBC News, Somoy TV, Independent TV and Ekattor. Dhaka has the largest number of schools, colleges and universities of any Bangladeshi city. The education system is divided into five levels: primary (from grades 1 to 5), junior (from grades 6 to 8), secondary (from grades 9 to 10), higher secondary (from grades 11 to 12) and tertiary. The five years of primary education concludes with a Primary School Completion (PSC) Examination, the three years of junior education concludes with Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination. Next, two years of secondary education concludes with a Secondary School Certificate (SSC) Examination. Students who pass this examination proceed to two years of higher secondary or intermediate training, which culminate in a Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSC) Examination. Education is mainly offered in Bengali. However, English is also widely taught and used. Many Muslim families send their children to attend part-time courses or even to pursue full-time religious education alongside other subjects, which is imparted in Bengali and Arabic in schools, colleges and madrasas. There are 52 universities in Dhaka. Dhaka College is the oldest institution for higher education in the city and among the earliest established in British India, founded in 1841. Since independence, Dhaka has seen the establishment of numerous public and private colleges and universities that offer undergraduate and graduate degrees as well as a variety of doctoral programs. The University of Dhaka is the oldest public university in the country which has more than 30,000 students and 1,800 faculty staff. It was established in 1921 being the first university in the region. The university has 23 research centres and 70 departments, faculties, and institutes. Eminent seats of higher education include Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU), Jagannath University and Sher-e-Bangla Agricultural University. Dhaka Medical College is one of the oldest and largest medical colleges in the country. Founded in 1875, the Dhaka Medical School was the first medical school in British East Bengal, which became Sir Salimullah Medical College in 1962. Other government medical colleges are Shaheed Suhrawardy Medical College, Mugda Medical College and Armed Forces Medical College, Dhaka. Two Nobel laureates are prominently associated with the city, including Amartya Sen who grew up in the city during the 1930s and 1940s, and attended St. Gregory's School; and Muhammad Yunus, who studied at Dhaka University, founded the Grameen Bank and lives in the city. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh Atomic Energy Centre, Dhaka Bangla Academy Bangladesh Academy of Sciences Bangladesh Enterprise Institute Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies Bangladesh Institute of Law and International Affairs Bangladesh Institute of Peace & Security Studies Centre for Policy Dialogue Centre on Integrated Rural Development for Asia and the Pacific International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh International Jute Study Group Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization Yunus Centre Cricket and football are the two most popular sports in Dhaka and across the nation. Teams are fielded in intra-city and national competitions by many schools, colleges and private entities. The Dhaka Metropolis cricket team represents Dhaka City in the National Cricket League, the oldest domestic first-class cricket competition in Bangladesh. The Dhaka Premier League is the only domestic List A cricket tournament now in Bangladesh. It gained List A status in 2013–14 season. In domestic Twenty20 cricket, Dhaka has a Bangladesh Premier League franchise known as Minister Dhaka. Dhaka has the distinction of having hosted the first official Test cricket match of the Pakistan cricket team in 1954 against India. The Bangabandhu National Stadium was formerly the main venue for domestic and international cricket matches, but now exclusively hosts football matches. It hosted the opening ceremony of the 2011 Cricket World Cup, while the Sher-e-Bangla National Cricket Stadium, exclusively used for cricket, hosted 6 matches of the tournament including two quarter-final matches. Dhaka has also hosted the South Asian Games three times, in 1985, 1993 and 2010. Dhaka is the first city to host the games three times. The Bangabandhu National Stadium was the main venue for all three editions. Dhaka also hosted the ICC Men's T20 World Cup, along with Chittagong and Sylhet, in 2014. In football, the Dhaka Derby between Mohammedan SC and Abahani Limited Dhaka is the biggest sports rivalry in the country. The two clubs have maintained their fierce rivalry over the years in the Bangladesh Football Premier League and previously in the historic Dhaka League, which is the second oldest football league in South Asia, officially commencing in 1948. The Bangabandhu National Stadium in Dhaka has been the home venue for the national football team since 2005. It has hosted the SAFF Championship on three occasions, with the first being the 2003 edition, which Bangladesh went on to win. The 1978 AFC Youth Championship was the first major international tournament hosted by the stadium. The National Sports Council, responsible for promoting sports activities across the nation, is based in Dhaka. Dhaka also has stadiums largely used for domestic events such as the Bangladesh Army Stadium, the Bir Sherestha Shaheed Shipahi Mostafa Kamal Stadium, the Dhanmondi Cricket Stadium, the Maulana Bhasani Hockey Stadium and the Outer Stadium Ground. The Dhaka University Ground and the BUET Sports Ground host many intercollegiate tournaments. There are two golf courses in Dhaka, Army Golf Club and Kurmitola Golf Club. Dhaka is among the most congested cities in the world, and traffic was estimated to cost the local economy US$3.9 billion per year in 2013. The average speed of a car travelling in Dhaka is estimated to be around 20 kilometres per hour (12 mph). Most residents travel by rickshaw and green-coloured auto rickshaws powered by compressed natural gas, often referred to by locals as "CNGs". Dhaka suffers some of the worst traffic congestion in the world. The city is connected to other parts of the country through highway and railway links. Five of Bangladesh's eight major national highways start from the city: N1, N2, N3, N5 and N8. Dhaka is also directly connected to the two longest routes of the Asian Highway Network: AH1 and AH2, as well as to the AH41 route. Highway links to the Indian cities of Kolkata, Agartala, Guwahati and Shillong have been established by the BRTC and private bus companies, which also run regular international bus services to those cities from Dhaka. As of 2022, the elevated expressway is still under construction. The Dhaka Elevated Expressway would run from Shahjalal International Airport-Kuril-Banani-Mohakhali-Tejgaon-Saatrasta-Moghbazar Rail Crossing-Khilgaon-Kamalapur-Golapbagh to Dhaka-Chittagong Highway at Kutubkhali Point. Dhaka Elevated Expressway is set to open partially in 2022. A second elevated expressway, Dhaka-Ashulia Elevated Expressway, is expected to be opened in 2026. Dhaka was introduced to Japanese automobiles in the late 1990s. This resulted in the car industry blooming, which also caused a rise in traffic on the streets of Dhaka. Cycle rickshaws and auto rickshaws are the main modes of transport within the metro area, with close to 400,000 rickshaws running each day: the highest number in any city in the world. However, only about 85,000 rickshaws are licensed by the city government. The government has overseen the replacement of two-stroke engine auto rickshaws with "green auto-rickshaws", which run on compressed natural gas. Limited numbers of taxis are available. It is planned to raise the total number of taxis to 18,000 gradually. Ride-sharing services like Uber and Pathao are popular modes of transportation. Buses carried about 1.9 million passengers per day in 2007. Public buses are operated by the state-run Bangladesh Road Transport Corporation (BRTC) and by numerous private companies and operators. BRTC buses are red, based initially on the Routemaster buses of London. There are three inter-district bus terminals in Dhaka, which are located in the city's Mohakhali, Saidabad, and Gabtoli areas. It is now planned to move three inter-district bus terminals outside the town. Highway links to the Indian cities of Kolkata, Agartala, Guwahati and Shillong have been established by the BRTC and private bus companies, which also run regular international bus services to those cities from Dhaka. Set to partially open in fall 2023, the Dhaka Bus Rapid Transit is a Bus Rapid Transit system that is currently in construction. It will consist of two lines, BRT Line 3, running from Gazipur to Dhaka Airport, and BRT Line 7, from Purbachal New Town to Narayanganj. Currently, only Line 3 is under construction, line 7 remains in the planning phase. The recommendation of a BRT system for Dhaka originally came from the World Bank. The Sadarghat River Port on the banks of the Buriganga River serves for the transport of goods and passengers upriver and to other ports in Bangladesh. Inter-city and inter-district motor vessels and passenger ferry services are used by many people to travel riverine regions of the country from the city. Water bus services are available on the Buriganga River and Hatirjheel and Gulshan lakes. Water buses of the Buriganga River ferry passengers on the Sadarghat to Gabtali route. Water taxis in Hatirjheel and Gulshan lakes provide connectivity via two routes, one route between Tejgaon and Gulshan and the other route between the Tejgaon and Rampura areas. Kamalapur railway station, situated on the northeast side of Motijheel, is the largest and busiest of the city's railway stations. It was designed by American architect Robert Boughey and was completed in 1969. The state-owned Bangladesh Railway provides suburban and national services, with regular express train services connecting Dhaka with other major urban areas, such as Chittagong, Rajshahi, Khulna, Sylhet and Rangpur. The Maitree Express provides a connection from Dhaka to Kolkata, one of the largest cities in India. In 2013, suburban services to Narayanganj and Gazipur cities were upgraded using diesel-electric multiple-unit trains. There is also a proposal to build an orbital rail system in collaboration with South Korea. Dhaka Metro Rail is a mass rapid transit system serving Dhaka, Bangladesh. Together with the city's planned light rapid transit (LRT) system, it is expected to reduce congestion in the capital. It is a part of the 20-year-long Strategic Transport Plan (STP) outlined by the Dhaka Transport Coordination Authority (DTCA). The first phase of Dhaka Metro's MRT Line 6 was inaugurated by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and commenced commercial operations on 28 December 2022, with metro services being available to general commuters for the first time in the country the very next day. The construction of MRT Line 6's second phase is scheduled to be completed by 2023. The network is planned to contain six lines. Currently, there is one partially completed line, two under construction, and four have been proposed. Before the opening of the Dhaka Metro Rail, Dhaka was the biggest city in the world without a mass rapid transit system. Unrelated to the metro, there is also a proposal for a subway in Dhaka. Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport (formally Zia International Airport), located 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) north of Dhaka city centre, is the largest and busiest international airport in the country. The airport has an area of 1,981 acres (802 ha). The airport has a capacity of handling 15 million passengers annually and is predicted by the Civil Aviation Authority, Bangladesh, to be sufficient to meet demand until 2026. In 2014, it handled 6.1 million passengers and 248,000 tonnes of cargo. The average aircraft movement per day is around 190 flights. It is the hub of all Bangladeshi airlines. Domestic service flies to Chittagong, Sylhet, Rajshahi, Cox's Bazar, Jessore, Barisal, and Saidpur (Rangpur), and international services fly to major cities in Asia, Europe and the Middle East. A third international terminal is under construction and is expected to be operational in 2023. According to the project design, the third terminal will have 12 boarding bridges and 12 conveyor belts. The terminal will have 115 check-in counters and 59 immigration desks. Another large-scale airport known as Bangabandhu international airport has been proposed to be built outside Dhaka. Water management in Dhaka faces numerous challenges such as flooding, poor service quality, groundwater depletion, inadequate sanitation, polluted river water, unplanned urban development, and the existence of large slums. The Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (Dhaka WASA) is "responsible for providing drinking water, sewerage, and stormwater drainage services to the city". The work of Dhaka WASA is funded by the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperatives. 87% of the city's growing water demand is currently sourced from groundwater (as of 2021). This is because the extreme contamination of rivers and lakes makes surface water treatment economically and technologically unfeasible. However, the groundwater table is falling (three metres per year, as of 2011) and hence Dhaka WASA is looking to expand surface water treatment and use. Dhaka only has one sewage treatment plant, the Pagla Sewerage Treatment Plant (PSTP) in Narayanganj. It can treat 120 mega litres per day. A second tratment plant, the Dasherkandi Sewage Treatment Plant, is currently under construction (as of 2023). The Bangladesh Urban Informal Settlements Survey 2016 included a representative sample of 588 households across small, medium and large slums in Dhaka. It showed that 68% of the households accessed piped water through a shared connection within the slum compound. The poorest households shared a waterpoint with 43 other households on average compared to 23 sharers among the richest households. In terms of sanitation, only 8% of the slum households had access to a flush toilet connected to a septic tank, while 78% used improved pit latrines and the remaining 10% depended on hanging latrines. Kolkata, India New York City, United States Guangzhou, China Bucharest, Romania Lima, Peru List of districts and suburbs of Dhaka List of places of worship in Dhaka city List of largest cities List of metropolitan areas in Asia List of most expensive cities for expatriate employees List of urban agglomerations in Asia Mia Shaheb Moidan Imam, Shah Husain (20 July 2018). "Dhaka: Where will it go from here?". The Daily Star (Opinion). Archived from the original on 2 March 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Dhaka, once the Venice of the East by virtue of being surrounded by four ebullient rivers, is now an urban behemoth. "The tales of urban street children:Is there anything we could do?". Dhaka Tribune. 10 December 2019. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "Are we willing to know more of Dhaka?". The Daily Star. 4 May 2018. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. Chowdhury, Sanjana (27 November 2021). "রিকশা বৃত্তান্ত: কবে, কোথা থেকে, কে প্রথম এই বাহনটি বাংলাদেশে আনেন". BBC (in Bengali). Retrieved 28 March 2024. "Hasan Mahmud states 3 reasons behind low voter turnout". The Daily Star. UNB. 2 February 2020. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2020. "Dhaka Metropolitan City Area". Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017. Partha Pratim Bhattacharjee; Mahbubur Rahman Khan (7 May 2016). "Govt to double size of Dhaka city area". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2017. "Dhaka City expands by more than double after inclusion of 16 union councils". bdnews24.com. 9 May 2016. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2017. "Dhaka, Bangladesh Map". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2009. "Dhaka (Bangladesh): City Districts and Subdistricts - Population Statistics, Charts and Map". City Population. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Population & Housing Census-2011" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. p. 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015. "Sub-national HDI - Area Database - Global Data Lab". hdi.globaldatalab.org. Archived from the original on 8 February 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "TelluBase—Dhaka Fact Sheet" (PDF). tellusant.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2023. "Evolving Urban Form: Dhaka | Newgeography.com". www.newgeography.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "District Statistics 2011, Dhaka" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. December 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 April 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. Choguill, C.L. (2012). New Communities for Urban Squatters: Lessons from the Plan That Failed in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Springer Science & Business Media. p. viii. ISBN 978-1-4613-1863-7. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Dhaka ranks world's sixth most populous city". Dhaka Tribune. 14 January 2022. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 15 January 2023. "Population & Housing Census-2011" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 17 May 2021. "The World's Most Densely Populated Cities". WorldAtlas. 4 October 2020. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Demographia World Urban Areas 17th Annual Edition: 202106 (PDF). Demographia. Demographia. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 2 February 2022. Ferreira, Luana (3 September 2021). "Here's How Many People Live In The Most Densely Populated City On Earth". Grunge.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2022. "From Jahangirnagar to Dhaka". Forum. The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "Islam Khan Chisti". Banglapedia. 18 June 2021. Archived from the original on 4 March 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2022. Khondker, Kamrun Nessa (December 2012). Mughal River Forts in Bangladesh (1575-1688): An Archaeological Appraisal (PDF) (PhD). School of History, Archaeology and Religion, Cardiff University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2022. Hough, Michael (2004) [First published 1995]. Cities and Natural Process: A Basis for Sustainability (2nd ed.). Psychology Press. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-415-29854-4. Retrieved 26 August 2017. Dani, Ahmad Hasan (1962) [First published 1956]. Dacca: A record of its changing fortunes (2nd ed.). Mrs. Safiya S. Dani. pp. 98, 118–119, 126. OCLC 987755973. "400 years of Dhaka". The Daily Star (Editorial). 1 December 2008. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2022. "Bangladesh CA Inaugurates Three-year Gala Celebrations of 400 Anniversary of Dhaka". VOA Bangla. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2022. 400 Years of Capital Dhaka and Beyond: Economy and culture. Vol. 2. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 2011. ISBN 9789845120128. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC - Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020. Rezaul Karim (24 February 2017). "Dhaka's economic activities unplanned: analysts". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 13 July 2019. Retrieved 13 July 2019. "Living like there is no past". The Daily Star. 17 June 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. "Mangal Shobhajatra on Pahela Baishakh". UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2023. https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/traditional-art-of-jamdani-weaving-00879 https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/rickshaws-and-rickshaw-painting-in-dhaka-01589 "Dhaka". Encyclopaedia Britannica. 26 June 2023. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2018. Dhaka's name is said to refer to the dhak tree, once common in the area, or to Dhakeshwari ("The Hidden Goddess"), whose shrine is located in the western part of the city. Ayan, Anindya J. (28 January 2018). "History of Dhaka's origin". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. In history, it is often believed that Raja Ballal Sen of the Sen Dynasty of Bengal founded the Dhakeshwari Temple in the 12th century to mark the place of his birth and to pay tribute to the patron goddess of this region. The name Dhaka is believed to have originated from Dhakeshwari in the same way Athens got its name from Athena, the patron goddess of the Greek city. "Islam Khan Chisti". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 2 February 2015. Retrieved 4 February 2013. Chowdhury, A.M. (23 April 2007). "Dhaka". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2007. Mamoon, Muntassir (2010) [First published 1993]. Dhaka: Smiriti Bismiritir Nogori. Anannya. p. 94. "Dhaka". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 4 February 2013. Dhaka City Corporation (5 September 2006). "Pre-Mughal Dhaka (before 1608)". Archived from the original on 10 April 2008. Retrieved 1 December 2015. "From Jahangirnagar to Dhaka". Forum. The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 8 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Shah Jahan's Dhaka visit before he became the Mughal emperor". 7 September 2023. Archived from the original on 8 September 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2023. Historical Background for the Establishment of Naib-Nazimship (Deputy Governorship for the four Divisions of Subah Bangla), Asiatic Society of Bangladesh Richard Maxwell Eaton (1996), The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204-1760, page 202, University of California Press Om Prakash, "Empire, Mughal", in John J. McCusker (ed.), History of World Trade Since 1450, vol. 1, Macmillan Reference USA, 2006, pp. 237–240, World History in Context. Retrieved 3 August 2017 John F. Richards (1995), The Mughal Empire, page 202, Cambridge University Press Indrajit Ray (2011). Bengal Industries and the British Industrial Revolution (1757-1857). Routledge. p. 174. ISBN 978-1-136-82552-1. "A discovery that may save Bara Katra". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Kraas, Frauke; Aggarwal, Surinder; Coy, Martin; Mertins, Günter, eds. (2013). Megacities: Our Global Urban Future. Springer. p. 60. ISBN 978-90-481-3417-5. "State of Cities: Urban Governance in Dhaka" (PDF). BRAC University. May 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 16 February 2015. Shay, Christopher. "Travel – Saving Dhaka's heritage". BBC. Archived from the original on 5 December 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Legends of Lalbagh". The Daily Star. 12 June 2015. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. Golam Rabbani (1997). Dhaka: From Mughal Outpost to Metropolis. Upl. pp. 14–19. ISBN 978-984-05-1374-1. Lloyd's Evening Post, 16–18 May 1764 Historical Background for the Establishment of Naib-Nazimship (Deputy Governorship for the four Divisions of Subah Bangla), Asiatic Society of Bangladesh Srangio, Sebastian (1 October 2010). "Dhaka: Saving Old Dhaka's Landmarks". The Caravan. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. "Worldview". Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2015. Taylor, James (1840). A Sketch of the Topography and Statistics of Dacca. Calcutta: G.H. Huttmann, Military Orphan Press. pp. 301–307. "Which India is claiming to have been colonizsed?". The Daily Star (Op-ed). 31 July 2015. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2015. Lalbagh Kella (Lalbagh Fort) Dhaka Bangladesh 2011 54.JPG "The rise and fall of the Dutch in Dhaka". The Daily Star. 5 February 2018. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "French, the". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Você fala Bangla?". Dhaka Tribune. 24 January 2014. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Portuguese influence in Bengal". The Asian Age. Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Ali, Ansar; Chaudhury, Sushil; Islam, Sirajul (2012). "Armenians, The". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "The extraordinary story of the Bangladesh Jews". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "History of the Greek community in Dhaka". The Daily Star. 11 January 2021. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Karim, Abdul (2012). "Iranians, The". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Out of place, out of time". Himal Southasian. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Railways, steamer services, postal departments and lower civil services "Saltpetre". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Salt Industry". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Americans, The". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Rare 1857 reports on Bengal uprisings". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 5 January 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2015. "From Elephants to Motor Cars". The Daily Star. 24 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Dhaka WASA". Dwasa.org.bd. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Railway". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Film, Feature". Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "History of Electricity in Bangladesh | Thcapriciousboy". Tusher.kobiraj.com. 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Ramna Racecourse". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Rahman Chowdhury, Abida (11 February 2014). "Dhaka through its streets". The Daily Star (Bangladesh). Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "A Short, Winding and Legendary Dhaka Road". The Daily Star (Bangladesh). 7 July 2018. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "The extraordinary story of the Bangladesh Jews". The Jewish Chronicle. 17 September 2015. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Rahman, Mohammad Afzalur (2 December 2022). "Dhaka before and after Partition". The Daily Star (Opinion). Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 16 April 2023. "Eastern Bengal and Assam - Encyclopedia". theodora.com. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "University of Dhaka and the partitioning of Bengal". The Daily Star. 25 August 2017. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "Was Dhaka University ever the "Oxford of the East"?". The Daily Star. 28 December 2014. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "'Oxford of the East' or the 'Mecca University'?". New Age. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Roy, Dipanwita (21 April 2007). "Vested Property Act: A story of deprivation and exploitation". Law & Our Rights. The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 16 April 2023. "How politics and architecture blended in Dhaka". The Daily Star (Opinion). 20 August 2018. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Ahmed, K. Anis (16 August 2017). "Opinion | Why do Bangladeshis Seem Indifferent to Partition?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Unthreading Partition: The politics of jute sharing between two Bengals". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 6 November 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Queen Elizabeth II in Bangladesh (1961)". YouTube. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Part II: Formulation of Urban and Transport Plan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 February 2018. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Sheikh Mujibur Rahman". Virtual Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Richards, John (July–September 2003). "Calcutta and Dhaka: A Tale of Two Cities" (PDF). Asian Affairs. 25 (3): 49–57. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 1 March 2015. Thorpe, Edgar (2012). The Pearson General Knowledge Manual 2012. Pearson Education India. p. A.125. ISBN 978-81-317-6190-8. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Jahan, Rounaq (2013). "Genocide in Bangladesh". In Totten, Samuel; Parsons, William Spencer (eds.). Centuries of Genocide: Essays and Eyewitness Accounts (4th ed.). Routledge. p. 254. ISBN 978-0-415-87191-4. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Nandi, Bibhuti Bhusan (2007). "Low-Intensity War". In Gupta, Jyoti Bhusan Das (ed.). Science, Technology, Imperialism, and War. Pearson Education India. p. 732. ISBN 978-81-317-0851-4. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Fall of Dhaka: Memories of a bloody December – Pakistan". Dawn. Pakistan. 16 December 2014. Archived from the original on 30 January 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Salik, Siddiq (1977). Witness to Surrender. Oxford University Press. p. 195. ISBN 0-19-577257-1. Jacob, J. F. R. (1997). Surrender at Dacca: Birth of a Nation. Manohar. pp. 146–147. ISBN 81-7304-189-X. "Dhaka Population 2020". Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Dhaka Declaration" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2015. Habib, Haroon (24 January 1998). "An economic initiative". Frontline. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2018. Hossain, Shahadat (January 2008). "Rapid Urban Growth and Poverty in Dhaka City" (PDF). Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology. 5 (1). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2016. "Dhaka: fastest growing megacity in the world". The World from PRX. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Beyond Hartals: Towards Democratic Dialogue in Bangladesh (PDF). United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Bangladesh. March 2005. ISBN 984-32-1424-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. Carbone, Nick (26 October 2011). "The 10 Fastest-Growing Cities of Tomorrow: 2. Dhaka, Bangladesh". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Dhaka, Bangladesh: Fastest Growing City in the World". CBS News. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "A Short City Profile on Dhaka City: Adaptation Issues for Climate Change??" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2018. "Welcome to the Traffic Capital of the World". The New Republic. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "PM opens country's first metro rail". The Daily Star. 28 December 2022. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 15 January 2023. Brouwer, Roy; Sharmin, Dilruba F.; Elliott, Susan; Liu, Jennifer; Khan, Mizan R. (2023). "Costs and benefits of improving water and sanitation in slums and non-slum neighborhoods in Dhaka, a fast-growing mega-city". Ecological Economics. 207: 107763. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107763. Majumder, Azad (19 May 2009). "Bangladesh river pollution threatens millions". Reuters. Retrieved 9 January 2020. "The river runs black: pollution from Bangladesh's tanneries – in pictures". the Guardian. 23 October 2015. Retrieved 9 January 2020. Hough, Michael (2004). Cities and natural process. Routledge. pp. 64–65. ISBN 0-415-29855-5. Murray, N.J.; Clemens, R.S.; Phinn, S.R.; Possingham, H.P.; Fuller, R.A. (2014). "Tracking the rapid loss of tidal wetlands in the Yellow Sea" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 12 (5): 267–272. Bibcode:2014FrEE...12..267M. doi:10.1890/130260. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. Sohn, Dong Wook; Moudon, Anne Vernez; Lee, Jeasun (4 April 2012). "The economic value of walkable neighborhoods". Urban Design International. 17 (2). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 115–128. doi:10.1057/udi.2012.1. ISSN 1357-5317. S2CID 109091026. Brouwer, Roy; Sharmin, Dilruba F.; Elliott, Susan; Liu, Jennifer; Khan, Mizan R. (2023). "Costs and benefits of improving water and sanitation in slums and non-slum neighborhoods in Dhaka, a fast-growing mega-city". Ecological Economics. 207: 107763. doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107763. Siddiqui, K.; Ahmed, J.; Siddique, K.; Huq, S.; Hossain, A.; Nazimud-Doula, S.; Rezawana, N. (2010). Social Formation in Dhaka, 1985-2005: A Longitudinal Study of Society in a Third World Megacity. Routledge. pp. 6, 12. ISBN 978-1-317-05400-9. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Kalabamu, Faustin T. (1987). "Rickshaws and the traffic problems of Dhaka". Habitat International. 11 (2). Elsevier BV: 123–131. doi:10.1016/0197-3975(87)90063-4. ISSN 0197-3975. Seabrook, Jeremy (1996). In the Cities of the South: Scenes from a Developing World. Verso Books. p. 221. ISBN 1-85984-081-7. World and Its Peoples. Marshall Cavendish Corporation. 2008. p. 489. ISBN 978-0-7614-7631-3. "Weatherbase: Historical Weather for Dhaka, Bangladesh". weatherbase.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2008. "Climate of Bangladesh" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. pp. 19–23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2018. "Normal Monthly Rainy Day" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2018. "Normal Monthly Humidity" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2018. "Bangladesh – Dacca" (PDF) (in Spanish). Centro de Investigaciones Fitosociológicas. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "Station 41923 Dhaka". Global station data 1961–1990—Sunshine Duration. Deutscher Wetterdienst. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2018. "Station ID for Dhaka is 41923". Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2018. "41923: Dhaka (Bangladesh)". ogimet.com. OGIMET. 15 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021. Hoque, Sonia Ferdous; Peters, Rebecca; Whitehead, Paul; Hope, Robert; Hossain, Mohammed Abed (2021). "River pollution and social inequalities in Dhaka, Bangladesh". Environmental Research Communications. 3 (9): 095003. Bibcode:2021ERCom...3i5003H. doi:10.1088/2515-7620/ac2458. ISSN 2515-7620. Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License "20 Best Places to Visit in Dhaka Division". 9 October 2020. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Mondal, M. Abdul Latif (27 September 2006). "Our Cities: 15th Anniversary Special". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 2 March 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2006. Sohara Mehroze Shachi (5 September 2018). "Bangladesh's Air Pollution Problem Grows, Brick by Brick". Undark. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. The kiln operations alone – while representing just 1 percent of the country's GDP – generate nearly 60 percent of the particulate pollution in Dhaka, according to Bangladesh's Department of Environment (DOE). "List of Ministries and Divisions". Cabinet Division. 20 November 2016. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016. "Navy Bases". Bangladesh Navy. Archived from the original on 27 May 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Locations of Bangladesh Air Force Bases". Join Bangladesh Air Force. Archived from the original on 19 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. Md Shahnawaz Khan Chandan (8 May 2015). "Reminiscing Dhaka's Legacy". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 22 June 2017. "Mayor Hanif's death anniversary today". The Daily Star. 28 November 2010. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2015. "Don't split Dhaka, Khoka urges govt". UNBConnect. 12 November 2011. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2012. Hasan Jahid Tusher (18 October 2011). "Dhaka set to split into two". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 13 February 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Islam, Md Asraful. "Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2015. "History of the DMP". Dhaka Metropolitan Police. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 18 October 2013. "DMP – New Initiatives". Dhaka Metropolitan Police. Archived from the original on 16 September 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2008. "What should we do for better civic services". The Daily Star. 23 January 2016. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2016. "The World According to GaWC 2020". Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 22 March 2021. "Dhaka City State of Environment" (PDF). Regional Resource centre for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations Environment Programme. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 24 January 2009. Lawson, Alistair (1 June 2002). "Good times for bourgeois Bangladeshis". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2006. McGee, Terry (27 September 2006). "Urbanization Takes on New Dimensions in Asia's Population Giants". Population Reference Bureau. Archived from the original on 14 February 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2006. "Does Dhaka need rickshaws?". BBC News. 20 July 1998. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2006. Robert Cervero (2000). Informal Transport in the Developing World. UN-HABITAT. p. 39. ISBN 92-1-131453-4. Dhaka City Corporation. "Dhaka City at a Glance". Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2015. "Poverty Alleviation: Yunus calls for major reforms in World Bank". The Daily Star. 5 November 2007. Archived from the original on 5 March 2008. Retrieved 17 December 2008. "Blind eye to urban poor to spell social disaster:Conference on the poor told". The Daily Star. 5 December 2007. Archived from the original on 23 July 2008. Retrieved 17 December 2008. "Town planning for Bangladesh: Vision 2020". The Daily Star. 8 November 2008. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 15 December 2008. "Bangladesh Dhaka Stock Exchange: Market Capitalization". CEIC Data. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "DS30 Index". Dhaka Stock Exchange. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "Dhaka population". World Population Review. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Dhaka Population 2022 (Demographics, Maps, Graphs)". World Population Review. Archived from the original on 18 February 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2022. Pepe Escobar (20 May 2006). "The accumulation of the wretched". Asia Times (Book review). Archived from the original on 31 October 2010. Retrieved 8 May 2010. Gruebner, Oliver; Sachs, Jonathan; Nockert, Anika; Frings, Michael; Khan, Md. Mobarak Hossain; Lakes, Tobia; Hostert, Patrick (25 June 2014). "Mapping the Slums of Dhaka from 2006 to 2010". Dataset Papers in Science. 2014. Hindawi Limited: 1–7. doi:10.1155/2014/172182. ISSN 2314-8497. "Govt ready to offer nationality to Urdu-speaking people: Moni". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 12 April 2011. "Socio-economic Problems of the Urdu Speaking Residents at Mohammadpur" (PDF). Democracy Watch. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 12 April 2011. Tasmia Persoob. "The Forgotten Community: Camp Based Urdu Speaking People in Bangladesh" (PDF). Jahangirnagar University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2011. "::Our Cities::15th Anniversary Special". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 2 March 2007. Retrieved 8 May 2010. Sanghamitra Saha (2001). A Linguist Visits Bangladesh: A Travelogue. International School of Dravidian Linguistics. p. 8. ISBN 978-81-85692-30-2. "Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 2012, Page 35" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Population Census 2011: Dhaka Table C-13" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014. "Dhaka". Banglapedia. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Mughal noir". India Today. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/uk/unesco-declares-jamdani-saris-intangible-cultural-heritage/articleshow/26927845.cms https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/traditional-art-of-jamdani-weaving-00879#:~:text=The%20Jamdani%20sari%20is%20a,highly%20respected%20for%20their%20skills. https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/traditional-art-of-jamdani-weaving-00879#:~:text=The%20Jamdani%20sari%20is%20a,highly%20respected%20for%20their%20skills. Ahmed, Nizamuddin (27 September 2006). "Happy 400th anniversary, Dhaka!". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 2 March 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2006. "Pohela Falgun celebrated". The Daily Star. 14 February 2011. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Shakrain festival". The Daily Star. 19 January 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 14 January 2019. Siddiqui, Kamal (2001). "Dhaka". In Lothar Beckel (ed.). Mega Cities. GEOSPACE Verlag. p. 130. ISBN 3-85313-051-8. Arnold, Alison (1999). The Garland Encyclopedia of World Music: The Indian Subcontinent. Routledge. pp. 858–859. ISBN 0-8240-4946-2. Hoque, Mofidul (2000). "Bangladesh". In Herbert, Ian; Leclercq, Nicole (eds.). The World of Theatre (2000 ed.). Routledge. p. 12. ISBN 0-415-23866-8. https://www.travelcenter.uk/blog/dhaka-the-rickshaw-capital-of-the-world/ https://www.indiatoday.in/magazine/offtrack/story/19931231-the-rickshaw-capital-756404-1993-12-30 https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/op-ed/181735/what-will-banning-rickshaws-achieve https://www.thedailystar.net/opinion/politics/news/ban-rickshaw-how-logical-it-1767535 https://ich.unesco.org/en/RL/rickshaws-and-rickshaw-painting-in-dhaka-01589 "From a school kitchen to a household name, the history of Fakhruddin Biryani". Dhaka Tribune. 26 January 2021. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Dhaka's biryani can be UNESCO world heritage, says food critic Matt Preston". bdnews24.com. 28 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "The official web site of the Dhaka Nawab Family: Things You Should Know..." www.nawabbari.com. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. Melvin Ember, Carol R. Ember (2002). Encyclopedia of Urban Cultures : Cayenne-Kyoto: Cities and Cultures Around the World. Grolier. p. 147. ISBN 0-7172-5698-7. "Treasures of Bangladeshi cuisine". The Daily Star. 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017. Retrieved 1 March 2017. "5 best Kabab places in Dhaka". The Business News. 23 October 2020. Archived from the original on 25 June 2023. Retrieved 25 June 2023. "A World of Inspiration at Bangladesh's 10 Best Restaurants". 20 January 2014. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Top five lasagnas in Dhaka". The Business Standard. 12 November 2021. Archived from the original on 3 July 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "OP-ED: 'Jilapi' vs 'Jalebi'". Dhaka Tribune. 26 April 2021. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Binat Bibi Mosque". ArchNet Digital Library. Archived from the original on 1 March 2006. Retrieved 18 September 2012. "From Jahangirnagar to Dhaka by Faruque Hasan in The Daily Star". Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2017. "Greening the concrete jungle". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "The story of Dhaka, as told through 25 buildings". The Daily Star (Bangladesh). 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "Is There Good Architecture in Dhaka?". Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. Ali, Meer Mobashsher; Rouf, Md Abdur (2012). "Jatiya Sangsad Bhaban". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. Adnan Zillur Morshed (24 July 2017). "A quiet masterpiece that serves as Dhaka's gateway". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "New Bangladesh: How Shatotto is Reimagining Architecture in Dhaka - Architizer Journal". 2 December 2019. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "How Partition impacted the Dhaka book trade". The Daily Star. 19 August 2022. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2022. "Bookworm Bangladesh: Three decades of Dhaka's famous outlet for English books". Dhaka Tribune. Archived from the original on 28 October 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Bookworm Bangladesh to vacate its home of three decades". bdnews24.com. Archived from the original on 28 October 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Bookworm Bangladesh to vacate shop after 30 years of serving readers". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 28 October 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. https://www.thedailystar.net/daily-star-books/news/the-bookstore-the-park-bookworm-opens-gulshan-2-3239736 "No arrest of Prothom Alo editor until bail hearing: HC". Bangla Tribune. 19 January 2020. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "The Daily Star Conference Hall". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. T. Neville Postlethwaite (1988). The Encyclopedia of Comparative Education and National Systems of Education. Pergamon Press. p. 130. ISBN 0-08-030853-8. Kamal Siddiqui (1990). "Growth of academic institutions". Social Formation in Dhaka City: A Study in Third World Urban Sociology. Dhaka: University Press Limited. p. 42. OCLC 23989900. "Dhaka teachers on violence charge". BBC News. 11 December 2007. Archived from the original on 14 December 2007. Retrieved 15 May 2008. "Univ. Facts". University of Dhaka. Archived from the original on 4 September 2006. Retrieved 10 September 2006. "History & act". Sher-e-Bangla Agricultural University. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 19 October 2011. Muhammad Shamsul Huq (1983). Higher Education and Employment in Bangladesh. UNESCO. p. 181. ISBN 92-803-1102-6. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 22 March 2021. Shahida Alam (2012), "Mitford Hospital", in Sirajul Islam and Ahmed A. Jamal (ed.), Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.), Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, archived from the original on 1 April 2017, retrieved 8 June 2017 "Back to the alma mater". The Financial Express. 5 February 2020. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. "Expat alumni of St Gregory's High School and College form not-for-profit organisation". The Daily Star. 22 July 2022. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. Mitra, Saheli (12 November 2021). "Amartya Sen's nostalgia: Jagat Kutir, his home in Dhaka". Get Bengal. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. Islam, Nazrul (4 January 1999). "Amartya Sen's Love/Hate for Dhaka". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2023. "The Nobel Peace Prize 2006". NobelPrize.org. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2023. Robert MacHenry, ed. (1993). "Bangladesh". The New Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica. p. 717. ISBN 0-85229-571-5. "NCL set to start today". The Daily Star. 22 March 2021. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Revamped Dhaka League ready for kick-off". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Dhaka Platoon sent packing". The Daily Star. 14 January 2020. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Stadium". ESPNcricinfo. 7 September 2006. Archived from the original on 25 June 2006. Retrieved 26 May 2006. "Cricket World Cup: Grand ceremony launches tournament". BBC Sport. 17 February 2011. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011. "ICC Cricket World Cup 2010/11 / Results". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2011. "11th South Asian Games to start in January 2010". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 11 February 2010. Retrieved 21 March 2009. "2014 T20 WC Fixtures". 27 October 2013. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2021. Al Musabbir Sadi (17 June 2007). "Tasty derby drawn". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 15 May 2008. Retrieved 21 February 2009. "Bangabandhu National Stadium to be decorated at a cost of Tk 96 cr – The Daily Industry". Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2023. জামান, নওশাদ. ফিরে দেখাঃ সাফ চ্যাম্পিয়নশিপ '০৩. প্যাভিলিয়ন. Archived from the original on 4 January 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2022. ঢাকার মাঠে সবচেয়ে বড় ফুটবল উৎসব. উৎপল শুভ্র :: Utp al Shuvro. Archived from the original on 23 July 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022. "Grounds – Bangladesh: Dhaka". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 6 October 2007. Retrieved 13 March 2008. Muhammad Abdur Rahim (1981). The History of the University of Dacca. University of Dacca. p. 161. OCLC 8765658. "Bangladesh Golf Federation Member list". Bangladesh Golf Federation. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. Haider, Mohammed Ziaul; Papri, Rabeya Sultana (11 May 2021). "Cost of traffic congestion in Dhaka Metropolitan City". Public Transport. 13 (2). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 287–299. doi:10.1007/s12469-021-00270-4. ISSN 1866-749X. S2CID 236563476. Lawson, Alastair (13 October 2003). "Passengers shun Dhaka-India bus". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2006. "Details of Bus Services". hcidhaka.gov.in. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. "No more push for PPP initiative". The Daily Star. 10 June 2011. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2011. "Delayed Dhaka Elevated Expressway: Now set to open in 2022 partially". The Daily Star. 6 September 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Dhaka-Ashulia Elevated Expressway to come into operation in 2026". The Daily Star. 25 September 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. Lawson, Alastair (10 May 2002). "Dhaka's beleaguered rickshaw wallahs". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 17 December 2008. "rickshaw: Dhaka". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 16 January 2009. Retrieved 17 December 2008. Cervero, Robert (2000). Informal Transport in the Developing World. Nairobi: UN Habitat. p. 25. ISBN 92-1-131453-4. Archived from the original on 20 January 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2018. Rizanuzzaman Laskar (4 March 2007). "Rickshaw pullers get licences". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 6 March 2007. Retrieved 25 January 2009. Rahman, Mushfiqur (2012). "Compressed Natural Gas". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ISBN 978-984-32-0576-6. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 17 January 2008. "Govt to import 5,000 taxis". The Daily Star. 10 May 2013. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013. "Uber taxis in Dhaka". The Daily Star (Editorial). 10 May 2013. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2016. "Cabinet nods guideline draft legalizing Uber, Pathao". Dhaka Tribune. 15 January 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. Jinat Jahan & Syeda Bushra Binte Amin (2013). "An Approach to Estimate Demand and Supply of Bus Service, in Particular, Road Section of Dhaka" (PDF). Journal of Bangladesh Institute of Planners. 6: 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2023. "Inter-district bus terminals to be moved outside Dhaka". Dhaka Tribune. 19 September 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. সেপ্টেম্বর-অক্টোবর নাগাদ শেষ হবে বিআরটি প্রকল্প. Banglanews24.com (in Bengali). 17 June 2023. Archived from the original on 12 July 2023. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Abdullah, Matin (13 April 2018). ৪৬ মেগা প্রকল্প বাস্তবায়নে শঙ্কা. Jugantor (in Bengali). Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. (2005). "Dhaka". Asian Highway Handbook. United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations Publications. p. 28. ISBN 92-1-120170-5. "Waterbus service launched on Sadarghat-Gabtali river route". Bangladesh Business News. 28 August 2010. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2017. "Water taxi services on Dhaka's Hatirjheel 'from Victory Day'". bdnews24.com. 6 December 2016. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2017. Habib, Kishwar; De Meulder, Bruno (2015). "Rallying Towards the Nation Theatre of Nation Building in Post-colonial Dhaka". In Bracken, Gregory (ed.). Asian Cities: Colonial to Global. Amsterdam University Press. p. 230. ISBN 978-90-485-2824-0. JSTOR j.ctt16d69sf.14. Marika McAdam (2004). Bangladesh. Lonely Planet. p. 66. ISBN 1-74059-280-8. Tuhin Shubhra Adhikary (4 September 2019). "Maitree to run 6 days a week". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "PM inaugurates Dhaka-Narayanganj DEMU train". bdnews24.com. 24 April 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013. Retrieved 1 May 2013. "Demu train service introduced on Dhaka-Joydebpur". Dhaka Tribune. 24 April 2013. Archived from the original on 18 December 2016. Retrieved 22 August 2013. Adhikary, Tuhin Shubhra (3 November 2021). "Dhaka circular rail: Worth the investment?". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2023. "Dhaka circular train likely by 2030". bangladeshpost.net. Archived from the original on 7 July 2023. Retrieved 7 July 2023. "About MRT Line-6". DHAKA MASS TRANSIT COMPANY LTD. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2017. "PM Hasina becomes first passenger to travel on Metro Rail with ticket". The Business Standard. 28 December 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Passengers gather at Dhaka metro stations at first light". bdnews24.com. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Datta Gupta, Titu (27 December 2022). "Metro magic is here, now". The Business Standard. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Brief History Of Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport". caab.gov.bd. Archived from the original on 7 February 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2023. Alam, Jobair Bin (2012). "Air Transport". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. ISBN 978-984-32-0576-6. Archived from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 17 January 2008. Byron, Rejaul Karim (28 August 2010). "New int'l airport to cost Tk 50,000cr". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 31 October 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2011. "Airport Development History". Civil Aviation Authority, Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 11 November 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2011. "CAAB initiates efforts to expand and upgrade HSIA To build a new airport for Dhaka". The Bangladesh Monitor. 1 April 2015. Archived from the original on 5 April 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2013. "Shahjalal airport set for upgrade in two months". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2015. "Biman's Destination: International Destinations". Biman Bangladesh Airlines. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013. "Dhaka – Zia International Airport (DAC)". World Executive. OE Interactive. Archived from the original on 24 April 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013. "Dhaka airport's Terminal 3 likely to be completed by June 2023". The Daily Star. 5 June 2021. Archived from the original on 9 August 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2021. Taqsem Khan (2011) The performance challenges of Dhaka WASA, in Global Water Intelligence: Focusing on performance, Global Water Summit 2011, p. 50-52. Mazumdar, Jaideep (17 November 2013). "A tale of two cities: Will Kolkata learn from her sister?". The Times of India. New Delhi. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "List Of Sister Cities – What Is A Sister City?". WorldAtlas. 12 March 2019. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2022. "Bucharest becomes Dhaka's sister city". The Business Standard. 15 March 2022. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2022. "Sister Cities: Similar Customs". 14 January 2018. Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2022. Sharuf Uddin Ahmed, ed. (1991). Dhaka -past present future. The Asiatic Society, Dhaka. ISBN 984-512-335-X. Karim, Abdul (1992). History of Bengal, Mughal Period (I). Rajshahi: Institute of Bangladesh Studies, University of Rajshahi. Pryer, Jane (2003). Poverty and Vulnerability in Dhaka Slums: The Urban Livelihood Study. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 0-7546-1864-1. OCLC 123337526. Rabbani, Golam (1997). Dhaka, from Mughal outpost to metropolis. University Press, Dhaka. ISBN 984-05-1374-5. Sarkar, Sir Jadunath (1948). History of Bengal (II). Dhaka: The University of Dhaka. Taifoor, S.M. (1956). Glimpses of Old Dacca. Dhaka: Pioneer Printing Press. Wikimedia Commons has media related to ঢাকা. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Dhaka. Capital Development Authority Archived 29 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Dhaka North City Corporation Dhaka South City Corporation Dhaka Transport Coordination Authority Dhaka Metropolitan Police website Dhaka History Portals:  Geography  Bangladesh  Asia Dhaka at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata