Haute-Corse (French: [ot kɔʁs] ; Corsican: Corsica suprana [ˈkorsiɡa suˈprana], Cismonte [tʃiˈzmɔntɛ] or Alta Corsica; English: Upper Corsica) is a department of France, consisting of the northern part of the island of Corsica. The corresponding departmental territorial collectivity merged with that of Corse-du-Sud on 1 January 2018, forming the single territorial collectivity of Corsica, with territorial elections coinciding with the dissolution of the separate councils. However, even though its administrative powers were ceded to the new territorial collectivity, it continues to remain an administrative department in its own right. In 2019, it had a population of 181,933. The department was formed on 1 January 1976, when the department of Corsica was divided into Upper Corsica (Haute-Corse) and Southern Corsica (Corse-du-Sud). The department corresponds exactly to the former department of Golo, which existed between 1793 and 1811. On 6 July 2003, a referendum on increased autonomy was voted down by a very thin majority: 50.98 percent against to 49.02 percent for. This was a major setback for French Minister of the Interior Nicolas Sarkozy, who had hoped to use Corsica as the first step in his decentralization policies. On 1 January 2018, Haute-Corse's administrative powers were partly ceded to the new territorial collectivity of Corsica. The department is surrounded on three sides by the Mediterranean Sea and on the south by the department of Corse-du-Sud. Rivers include the Abatesco, Golo and Tavignano. The most populous commune is Bastia, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 7 communes with more than 5,000 inhabitants: The people living in the department are called Supranacci. Most people of the department lives on coastal areas throughout highway. The current prefect of Haute-Corse is François Ravier, who took office on 3 June 2019. Bastia Calvi seen from Notre-Dame de la Serra Sant'Antonino, one of the most beautiful villages of France Désert des Agriates Restonica Gorge Cantons of the Haute-Corse department Communes of the Haute-Corse department Arrondissements of the Haute-Corse department Also Italian: [tʃiˈzmonte]. Prise de fonction de François Ravier, Préfet de la Haute-Corse, Haute-Corse official website, 4 June 2019. "Téléchargement du fichier d'ensemble des populations légales en 2021". The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies. 28 December 2023. Morgane Rubetti (1 December 2017). "Corse : cinq questions pour comprendre les élections territoriales". Le Figaro. Retrieved 2 December 2017. Populations légales 2019: 2B Haute-Corse, INSEE Population en historique depuis 1968, INSEE Nationale, Assemblée. "Assemblée nationale ~ Les députés, le vote de la loi, le Parlement français". Assemblée nationale. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Haute-Corse. (in French) Prefecture website (in English) Haute-Corse at Curlie (in English) Corsica Isula