The Ukrainian Football Association (Ukrainian: Українська асоціація футболу, romanized: Ukrayins'ka Asotsiatsiya Futbolu; UAF) is the governing body of football in Ukraine. Before 2019, it was known as the Football Federation of Ukraine (FFU; Ukrainian: Федерація Футболу України, romanized: Federatsiya Futbolu Ukrayiny). As a subject of the International Olympic Movement, UAF is a member of the National Olympic Committee of Ukraine. UAF is also member of international football organizations such as UEFA and FIFA. The Ukrainian Football Association governs all sport events and organizations associated with the game of football including irregular competitions of beach football, mini-football, street football and others. Its main features include football competitions including the Ukrainian Professional League, the Ukrainian Cup, the Amatory, the competitions among the youth (under-18), and also the Ukraine national football team. It also sets the regulations to the Premier League and the Professional Football League. It is headquartered in the national capital, Kyiv near the Olimpiyskiy National Sports Complex at the House of Football. The organization was established in 1991. Between 1932 and 1991 with the Football Federation of the Soviet Union there existed its direct predecessor, Football Federation of Ukraine (Ukrainian SSR). The Soviet federation of Ukraine also conducted own championship, cup competitions, competitions among amateur teams (collectives of physical culture), as well as had own national team which participated exclusively in Soviet competitions such as the Spartakiad of Peoples of the USSR. All-Ukrainian Football Union (1918) Football Section of the Ukrainian SSR (1932–1959) Football Federation of the Ukrainian SSR (1959–1991) Football Federation of Ukraine (1991–2019) Ukrainian Football Association (since May 2019) The first governing body was created in summer of 1918 in Kharkiv as All-Ukrainian Football Union by its constituent assembly. The chairman of the Union became V. Agiton, while a secreatary-treasurer – B. Shifrin. After the Bolshevik's occupation, in 1932 there was created the All-Ukrainian Football Section in Kharkiv and was part of the Ukrainian Council of Physical Culture that administered all types of sports. The first elected president was a Kharkiv football referee Oleksandr Yakovych Levitin who published a book "Game rules of football in questions and answers" (Ukrainian: "Правила гри у футбол у питаннях і відповідях"). In 1934 after the capital of the Ukrainian SSR was transferred from Kharkiv to Kyiv, there was moved the Council of Physical Culture along with its football section. Levitin was replaced for not being not really a correct person with another Kharkiv football specialist Ivan Serhiyovych Kosmachov. On 27 December 1934, on resolution of the All-Union Council of Physical Culture (VSFK) of the Soviet Union, there was established Football-Hockey section as the higher public organization in administration of football in the country and had to help the VSFK. During that period there started a struggle between people's commissariats and trade union for the right to lead the physical culture movement. Trade unions started actively create volunteer sports societies (the first were "Spartak" and "Lokomotiv"). However, already in 1936 took place big changes when the VSKF that existed at the Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Union was liquidated and instead at the Council of People's Commissariats (Sovnarkom) was created the All-Union Committee in affairs of Physical Culture and Sports (VKFK) which also contained a department of football and hockey as well as the public Football Section. In Ukraine was created the Ukrainian Committee in affairs of Physical Culture and Sports (UKFK) at the Ukrainian Council of People's Commissars and quartered in Kyiv. The committee supervised 15 oblasts committees along with the Committee of Moldavian ASSR quartered in Tiraspol. At the end of February 1937, at the Ukrainian Committee in affairs of Physical Culture and Sports was established the Football-Hockey Section which in mass media was better known as Football Section. The head of the section was appointed Samuyil Izepilyovych Khavchyn. With the Nazi Germany invasion of the Soviet Union, all Soviet government institutions were evacuated or liquidated. The Football-Hockey Section was reinstated in 1944 and headed by Stepan Dmytrovych Romanenko. In 1946 the VKFK was renamed into the Goskomsport (State Committee in affairs of Physical Culture and Sports) and a similar analogy took place in the Ukrainian SSR. In 1946 there took place a huge event when the Football-Hockey Section of Goskomsport of the Soviet Union was finally admitted to FIFA. In 1947 the Football Section separated from the Football-Hockey Section. In 1953 the Goskomsport was transferred to the Ministry of Healthcare as the Main Administration of Physical Culture and Sports, but the next year was reinstated once again. Due to such rapid changes, almost none of union republic were able adopt them therefore no changes ever took place at republican level. In 1954, the Football Section became a founding member of the Union of European Football Associations. Within the Goskomsport, the football department was renamed into the Football Administration. In 1955 to the presidium of Football Section from the Ukrainian SSR was admitted Mykola Balakin. On 6 March 1991 due to the efforts of Viktor Maksymovych Bannikov was established and legally reformed the Football Federation of Ukraine (FFU) as part of the Football Federation of the Soviet Union (FFSU). However, it fully was still controlled and subordinated to the Moscow's main governing body. On 24 August 1991 the Ukrainian parliament (Verkhovna Rada) by its Act of Declaration of Independence of Ukraine expressed its intent of casting away from Soviet Union and creation of a sovereign state – Ukraine. After these events the executive committee of Football Federation of the Ukrainian SSR made the decision to have a plenum in the beginning of December where the future of the growth of the national sport would be defined. However, until then the following events took place that contribute to a certain degree of confusion. In the beginning of the September a joined conference of the governing body of the federation and the national football society took place where it was announces to establish internal institutes which would subordinate to Moscow. In October a meeting between Viktor Bannikov and the president UEFA, Lennart Johansson, took place. The president of the European football union promised to fully support Ukraine of joining the European football organization. About the fact that on the world map appeared a new nation the world society realized on 1 December 1991 after the conduction of the All-national referendum. After all that, on 13 December in the big hall of the State Committee of Physical Culture and Sport (also later known as Ministry in affairs of the Youth, Sport, and Tourism) the Council of federations in one voice accepted the following declaration: In accordance with the All-national referendum of 1 December 1991 Ukraine has become an independent state. The Football Federation of Ukraine – sovereign, independent, public organization that does not belong to any federation of foreign states. The Federation takes full jurisdiction over the protection the rights of players, coaches, and the football specialists. The Football Federation is responsible to uphold the international norms and human rights without concern of a nationality or a religious beliefs. The Football Federation confirms its adherence to goals and principals of FIFA and UEFA statues affirms their execution. The Football Federation of Ukraine has executed all its obligations to the Soviet Football Union and declares of canceling its membership. — Football Federation of Ukraine, 13 December 1991 13 December is the day when the Football Federation of Ukraine was established. Some time at the end of February 1992 the Agence France-Presse spread information that the FIFA without waiting for its congress granted a status of provisional members to national federations of Ukraine, Georgia, Slovenia, and Croatia. According to its commentary, that was made in order for the associations of those four countries in advance build their relations with football unions of other countries, and their footballers participate in friendlies of national team levels. Soon at address of the Football Federation of Ukraine arrived relevant official documents not only from FIFA, but from UEFA that were signed by general secretaries of those organizations, Sepp Blatter and Gerhard Aigner. In his interview in that regard the FFU first president Viktor Bannikov noted, "The relate to the powers of our federation on implementing of all transferring rights and participation of national and club teams in international competitions. Questions about such powers were placed before the relevant authorities during my stay in Zürich in mid February. On 24 February we sent a request to the FIFA asking for an answer. The returning fax did not make us wait long." On 16 February 1992 there kicked off the 1992 Ukrainian Cup which became the first football tournament among professional teams since Ukraine revived its independence. The first round of the 1992 Higher League was scheduled on 6–7 March 1992. On 29 April 1992 the FFU scheduled its first international friendly with the Hungary national football team. The head coach of the national team was originally planned to appoint Valeriy Lobanovskyi, who at that time headed the UAE national football team. Viktor Bannikov did not fail to inform that to the shores of Persian Gulf was sent an invitation on the address of the Maître of domestic coaching corps, and Lobanovskyi gave a prior agreement. But he will be ready to lead the Ukraine national football team only at the end of the term of current contract, to which at that tie remained about a month. Thereby the first coach of national team had to be picked from the members of coaching council that included Anatoliy Puzach (Dynamo), Yevhen Kucherevskyi (Dnipro), Yevhen Lemeshko (Torpedo), Yukhym Shkolnykov (Bukovyna), Viktor Prokopenko (Chornomorets), and somewhat later they were joined by Valeriy Yaremcheko (Shakhtar). As mentioned by Yevhen Kotelnykov (vice-president at that time), the Ukrainian diaspora played a key role in helping the federation and the national team in particular from very beginning. It was diaspora that made possible for the national to play games in the United States. In 1992 the FFU delegation received an invitation to participate in the 48th FIFA Congress that was scheduled to take place in Zürich in the beginning of July. At that forum in particular was to be reviewed an issue of accepting Ukraine and some other newly created countries as permanent members of the International federation. The relevant documents were already reviewed in the FIFA headquarters and approved with minor remarks on some four points. Sometime later arrived a personal invitation for Viktor Bannikov to participate in extraordinary session of the UEFA Executive Committee along with the committee on conducting continental tournaments. It was about granting our country a possibility already in the next season to present one team in each of Eurocups subject to the terms presented by the European Union, creation of own league, availability of appropriate infrastructure to hold games of such levels, ensuring security while they are being held. In his turn the FFU president offered the International federation not to grant Russia a right automatically inherit the place of CIS national football team in qualification cycle of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and hold an additional tournament between national teams of former Soviet republics for the place in already formed during a draw the Group 5. The proposal was supported by Georgia and Armenia, but from Russians it caused an extremely negative reaction. For example, the RFU general secretary Vladimir Radionov accused the Ukrainian federation in scheming and regarded the idea of such tournament as a legally unreasonable attempt "run ahead of a locomotive". At the same time those neighbors of Ukraine were convinced that rights of former Union federation must be transferred to them. As the result, so it happened, although until the last moment, particularly the FIFA Executive Committee meeting in Stockholm and the congress, Viktor Bannikov tried to stand his ground. During the winter of 1995 new elections took place at the 2nd conference and against Bannikov ran former goalkeeper Hennadiy Lysenchuk, but he lost. At the XXII Congress in Zaporizhzhia, the Football Federation of Ukraine was renamed into the Ukrainian Association of Football. For that decision voted 79 Congress delegates. Viktor Bannikov (December 1991 – July 1996) Valeriy Pustovoytenko (July 1996 – August 2000), Prime Minister of Ukraine from 16 July 1997 to 30 November 1999 Hryhoriy Surkis (16 August 2000 – 2 September 2012), reelected in 2004 and 2007 Anatoliy Konkov (2 September 2012 – 6 March 2015) Andriy Pavelko (acting 26 January 2015 – 6 March 2015) Andriy Pavelko (6 March 2015 – 25 January 2024), reelected in 2017 since 13 March 2023 – 25 January 2024, presidential powers were suspended Oleh Protasov (acting 11 May 2023 – 24 January 2024) Andriy Shevchenko (since 25 January 2024) Yevhen Kotelnykov Serhiy Storozhenko Anatoliy Bidenko Oleksandr Bandurko Vadym Kostyuchenko Ihor Kochetov Nazar Kholodnytskyi Viktor Andrukhiv Viktor Bezsmertny Andriy Bondarenko Sergiy Vladyko Irek Hataullin Taras Herula 2023–2027 Hryhoriy Surkis – honored president Andriy Pavelko – member of the UEFA Executive Committee, deputy chairman of the UEFA committee on youth and amateur football, deputy chairman of the UEFA committee on futsal and beach football Yuriy Zapisotskyi – second vice-deputy chairman of the UEFA clubs' licensing committee Oleksiy Mykhailychenko – member of the UEFA national teams committee Vadym Kostyuchenko – member of the UEFA committee of "Hat-trick program" Volodymyr Heninson – member of the UEFA committee on stadiums and security Oleh Protasov – member of the UEFA committee on football Ihor Hryshchenko – inspector on ethics and disciplinary issues Andriy Bondarenko – member of the UEFA expert group on administrative issues Oleksandr Kadenko – member of the UEFA expert group on issues of mass football The main decisions of all-national importance are discussed at the meetings of the Congress of Football Federation of Ukraine (FFU). Congress also elects the president and vice-presidents (presidential cabinet) of federation and confirms several football government bodies such as presidium, executive committee, appellation committee, and others. The congress is more of a legislative body of government and sets goals and directions for the development of football in the country. All official meetings of various football government institutions take place at the "Building of Football" (Budynok futbolu) in Kyiv. All structural and organizational issues are executed by the Executive Committee (Vykonkom). The executive committee consists of about 30 people and includes the presidential cabinet of federation. To assist the executive committee there exists a presidium which organizes the meetings of the Vykonkom. The presidium composed of 16 people, among which are all the members of the presidential cabinet as well. The federation also has two judicial bodies of government: the control disciplinary committee (KDK) and the appellation committee. Those are small committees and are confirmed by the congress of Football Federation of Ukraine. Aside of the above-mentioned organizations there are numerous other committees and directorates that supplement in the organization of football events in Ukraine. Among the most important are the Committee of professional football, the Committee of national teams, the Committee of referees, the Expert Commission, the Council of a strategic development of professional football, and many others. There are also collective members of federation that include various public organizations such as regional federation, student associations, independent leagues, travel agencies, others. The importance of collective members is that every single one of them can delegate up to three its representatives to the Congress and announce its own candidates on the position of the president. Premier League of Ukraine Professional Football League of Ukraine Ukrainian Football Amateur Association (National championship among the regions, National cup) Association of football veterans Association of mini-football of Ukraine (Futsal) Association of beach football of Ukraine Football association of handicapped 27 regional football federations All-Ukrainian football association of students Children-Youth football league of Ukraine (Ukrainian National Youth Competition) League of Street Football Youth Football Union Committee of fitness education and sports of Ministry of Education Sports office of Ministry of Defense (CSK ZSU) Central Council of Sports Club "Spartak" of Trade-unions of Ukraine Central Council of Fitness Sports Club of Ukraine "Dynamo" Central Council of Fitness Sports Club of Ukraine "Kolos" Central Council of Fitness Sports Club "Ukraine" Association "Futbol-Zakhid" Association of referees of Ukraine Ukraina Football International Tourist agency "Sport Line Travel" Public association "Hrayemo za Ukrainu razom" (Play for Ukraine together) Association of Women Football (Ukrainian Women's League, WFPL) The list of recent congress meetings. Congresses take place every year. Each FFU collective member sends three delegates.   election year On 18 December 2014, in Kyiv took place the UAF Congress which expressed its vote of no confidence to president Anatoliy Konkov with "aye" 36 out of 47 collective members including 20 regional associations. The general director of FC Hoverla Uzhhorod, Ivan Shits, commented that some "collective members" are organizations of unknown origin. Following another congress in 2015, the general director of FC Shakhtar Donetsk Serhiy Palkin called it "a fake" explaining that among collective members is a random traveling agency that has as many delegates to the congress as the Ukrainian Premier League. After German weekly news magazine "Der Spiegel" published its investigation titled "How did the UEFA payments get to the British Virgin Islands?" the UAF addressed the State Bureau of Investigations, Prosecutor General's Office and the Internal Ministry of Ukraine filing a claim that Hryhorii Surkis, former president of the Football Federation of Ukraine, has committed a criminal offence stealing hundreds of millions Euro. According to "Der Spiegel", starting from 1999 (that is for almost 15 years) the UEFA has been transferring the money (in general €380 million) allocated for the Football Federation (now Ukrainian Association of Football) to Newport management Ltd. – an offshore entity. This company is registered in the British Virgin Islands and, according to the publication, is controlled by Hryhorii Surkis, who had been chairing the FFU from 2000 till 2012, and who's been a member of the UEFA executive committee for more than 10 years until February 2019). In March 2018 at the FFU Executive Committee the FFU first vice-president Oleksandr Bandurko was accused of wasting 2 million euros back in 2003 when he along with Hryhoriy Surkis announced construction of a training center for national team in suburb of Kyiv, Horenychi. On 19 February 2020 Andriy Pavelko was forced to sign his letter of resignation as a chairman of the FIFA Disciplinary Committee. In October 2022, owner of FC Rukh Lviv, Hryhoriy Kozlovskyi, accused the UAF president in the collapse of Ukrainian football. On 29 November 2022 both the UAF president Andriy Pavelko and general secretary Yuriy Zapisotskyi were placed in jail on the order of the Pecherska District Courty of Kyiv City. Their bond was set to 9,880 thousands hryvnias. On 17 February 2023 the Pechersk District Court of Kyiv City granted the request for removal from office the UAF president Andriy Pavelko. Earlier on 29 November 2022, Mr.Pavelko has been issued arrest by the court in connection with the disappearance of a million euros on a scheme with the construction of a factory of artificial coverings for football fields. Between 2018 and 2020, there were opened 12 criminal proceedings against Pavelko, but none were finalized. Coincidently Pavelko's lawyer is "kindred" (godparenting) with Artem Sytnyk (former National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine director). On 13 March 2023, the Pechersk District Court of Kyiv City extended suspension of the Pavelko's powers as a president of UAF. Unlike the previous court order that was adopted earlier in February and later was appealed, the new one was adopted to be executed immediately. Later the suspension for Pavelko was extended by the Shevchenko District Court of Lviv City. On 9 October 2023, the Zaporizhia Oblast Association of Football requested removal of Anatoliy Demyanenko from the office of UAF first vice-president and appointment of acting UAF general secretary. Soon thereafter two more regional football organizations (Zakarpattia Oblast and Kirovohrad Oblast) supported the request. The Ukrainian Association of Football posted couple of explanatory articles about its offshore company and its factory in Kramatarosk. Ukraine national football team Ukraine women's national football team Ukraine national under-21 football team (also known as the youth team, participates in qualifications for the Olympic tournament) Ukraine youth women national football team (under 19) Ukraine student football team Other national and junior football teams National team tournaments Valeri Lobanovsky Memorial Tournament Viktor Bannikov Memorial Tournament Others The association announced the suspension of Ukraine's first league on February 24, 2022, the day of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Regional football federations of Ukraine FFU Committee of Referees Іменем України. Як народжувалася наша збірна. sportarena.com. 29 April 2017 ФОТО. Ігор Грищенко увійшов до команди Андрія Шевченка. sport.ua. 25 January 2024 "Повернення довіри". Генсекретар УАФ Грищенко розповів про цілі нового керівництва організації на чолі з Шевченком. suspilne.media. 26 January 2024 National Olympic Federations (Subjects of the Olympic Movement Archived 4 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. National Olympic Committee of Ukraine "Первая лига СССР 18 октября 1969. Днепр (Днепропетровск) - Металлист (Харьков) 1:2 3 пд". Kolomiyets, A. Is it true that Football Federation of Ukraine is only 25 years? (Чи правда що Федерації футболу України лише 25 років?). Football Federation of Kyiv. History. Football Federation of Ukraine. The first pancake is always lumpy (Первый блин комом). Komanda newspaper (by Fanat). 1992 Ukrainian Cup. Ukrainian Football from Dmitriy Troshchiy 1992 Vyshcha Liha. Ukrainian Football from Dmitriy Troshchiy. We hacked window to America (Прорубили окно в Америку). Komanda newspaper (by Fanat) Hopes are new, but result is erstwhile (Надежды новые, результат прежний). Komanda newspaper (by Fanat) Конгресс переименовал ФФУ в УАФ. football.ua. 17 May 2019 НОВЫЙ ПРЕЗИДЕНТ ФЕДЕРАЦИИ ФУТБОЛА УКРАИНЫ. www.sport-express.ru. 2 July 1996 СМИ: Коньков отказался идти на выборы. www.ua-football.com. 23 January 2015 Андрія Павелка призначено виконуючим обов’язки президента ФФУ. www.ua-football.com. 23 January 2015 ОФІЦІЙНО! Суд продовжив відсторонення Павелка! Відомо, хто змінив його на посаді президента УАФ. footballhub.ua. 11 May 2023 Во главе с Павелко. 10 представителей Украины продолжат работу в структуре УЕФА до 2027 года. www.ua-football.com. 2 August 2023 "UEFA Executive Committee". UEFA. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2016. Association of Women Football is temporarily admitted to FFU (Ассоциация женского футбола временно принята в ФФУ). WFPL. 21 June 2017 (in Ukrainian)Hryhoriy Surkis is reelected the President of FFU (Григорія Суркіса переобрано президентом ФФУ). FFU Inform-service. 14 September 2007 (in Ukrainian)Historical decisions of the Congress (Історичні рішення Конгресу). FFU Inform-service. 14 September 2007 (in Ukrainian)Statement of the 9th FFU Congress (Постанова IX Конгресу ФФУ). FFU Inform-service. 14 September 2007 (in Ukrainian)FFU Congress: keeping the pace with FIFA and UEFA (Конгрес ФФУ: крокуємо у ногу з ФІФА та УЄФА). FFU Inform-service. 17 December 2008 Football country: new horizons (Футбольна країна: нові горизонти). FFU Inform-service. 17 December 2008 (in Russian) Staged chaos (Спланированный хаос). UA-Football. 17 December 2010 Новым главой ФФУ избран Коньков. Суркис стал почетным президентом. www.ua-football.com. 2 September 2012 There took place a meeting of the 16th FFU Congress (Відбулось засідання XVI Конгресу ФФУ). FFU inform service. 18 December 2014 Відбулося засідання позачергового XVII Конгресу ФФУ. ffu.org.ua. 6 March 2015 Конгресс ФФУ увеличил количество вице-президентов с трех до семи. football24.ua. 6 March 2015 Конгресс ФФУ утвердил новую редакцию устава. football24.ua. 11 March 2016 Sport Arena lists all decisions that were adopted today the 20th FFU Congress (Sport Arena перечисляет все решения, которые принял сегодня XX Конгресс Федерации футбола Украины). Sport Arena. 16 June 2017 Andriy Pavelko was reelected the FFU President (Андрій Павелко переобраний президентом ФФУ). Football24. 16 June 2017 Haponenko, O. 4 interesting changes to the FFU statute (4 цікаві зміни до Статуту ФФУ). Football24. 16 June 2017 Verbytskyi, I. Head of SAP Office, odious "regionals", and generous volunteer. Motley company out of 12 people that were placed in charge of Ukrainian football (Голова САП, одіозні реґіонали і щедрий волонтер. Строката компанія з 12-ти людей, які очолили український футбол). Football24. 16 June 2017 Протасов змінив Бандурко на посаді першого віце-президента ФФУ. sport.ua. 24 May 2018 Андрій Шевченко – новий президент Української асоціації футболу. sport.ua. 25 January 2024 Ребров і другий Шевченко! Обрано 1-го віцепрезидента і віцепрезидентів УАФ. sport.ua. 25 January 2024 Зінченко став чиновником. Затверджено новий склад виконкому УАФ. sport.ua. 25 January 2024 Конгрес ФФУ. П’єса без позитивних героїв. www.ua-football.com. 18 December 2014 Іван Шіц: Колективними членами ФФУ, є такі організації, про які лише на конгресах і чуємо. www.ua-football.com. 18 December 2014 Палкин: Это фэйковый Конгресс, который делает фэйковые выборы. www.ua-football.com. 7 March 2015 Buschmann, Rafael; Wulzinger, Michael (6 September 2019). "Ukrainian Brotherhood: How UEFA Payments Ended Up in the British Virgin Islands". Spiegel Online. Retrieved 19 December 2019. "Асоціація футболу звинуватила Суркіса у заволодінні 380 мільйонами євро". Економічна правда (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 19 December 2019. "УЄФА виділило майже 390 млн євро на рахунки Суркіса, а не ФФУ – Der Spiegel". Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 19 December 2019. ФФУ обвинила Бандурко в растрате 2 миллионов. sport.ua. 3 March 2018 FIFA, one too many. www.illustre.ch. 10 May 2020 ОПГ в УАФ© Президента української асоціації футболу назвали паханом. footballhub.ua. 24 October 2022 Арешт на два місяці або застава 9,88 млн грн – суд обрав запобіжний захід президенту УАФ Андрію Павелку. footballhub.ua 29 November 2022 ТЕРМІНОВО!!! Суд ухвалив рішення про відсторонення Павелка від посади президента УАФ. footballhub.ua. 17 February 2023 Арешт на два місяці або застава 9,88 млн грн – суд обрав запобіжний захід президенту УАФ Андрію Павелку. footballhub.ua. 29 November 2022 Порятунок для Павелка. Суд, у якому мали обрати запобіжний захід президенту УАФ, “замінували” лише для його справи. ЕКСКЛЮЗИВ. footballhub.ua. 25 November 2022 Корупційний чемпіон. Все про розкрадання футбольних грошей в УАФ Андрія Павелка. footballhub.ua. 10 November 2022 12 друзів Павелка. footballhub.ua. 18 October 2022 Журналісти показали, який вигляд мають футбольні майданчики, на які командою президента УАФ Павелка спускалися мільйонні кошти. footballhub.ua. 12 November 2022 НАБУ почало розслідування щодо можливих зловживань голови ФФУ Павелка. www.rbc.ua (archived). 14 June 2018 Football: The Andri Pavelko affair is a pebble in the shoe of the UEFA boss. www.lemonde.fr. 5 April 2023 ОФІЦІЙНО! Павелко ВІДСТОРОНЕНИЙ від посади президента УАФ. footballhub.ua. 13 March 2023 ОФІЦІЙНО! Суд знову відсторонив Андрія Павелка з посади президента УАФ. ВІДЕО. footballhub.ua. 2 August 2023 Суд продовжив усунення Павелка з посади голови УАФ на два місяці. sportarena.com. 2 August 2023 Запорізька обласна асоціація футболу вимагає відсторонити Демяненка від посади першого віце-президента УАФ. sportarena.com. 9 October 2023 Кінець для Павелка і Ко. Члени УАФ вимагають змін. ДОКУМЕНТ. footballhub.ua. 9 October 2023 Щодо відповіді ГС "Запорізька обласна асоціація футболу" на лист УАФ №1489 від 06.10.2023 року. zoff.zp.ua (archived). 9 October 2023 Боротьба з узурпатором. Павелка хочуть вигнати ще в двох областях. footballhub.ua. 9 October 2023 «СПРАВА NEWPORT»: СПРОБА ДИСКРЕДИТАЦІЇ УАФ. uaf.ua СПРАВА ЗАВОДУ З ВИРОБНИЦТВА ШТУЧНОГО ПОКРИТТЯ «ФФУ ПРОДАКШН». uaf.ua. "Ukraine's PL ends season after Russian invasion". ESPN.com. 27 April 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2022. Quick overview (in Russian) – co-memorated to the first match of the national team. (in Ukrainian) Andriyuk, K. Is everything in the today's FFU so ProZorro-transparent? (Чи все в нинішньому ФФУ так ProZorro?). Football 24. 22 June 2017 (in Russian) Voronyuk, S. FFU: Greetings from the Otherworld (ФФУ: Привет из потустороннего мира). Futbolnyi klub (by Sport-Ekspress in Ukraine). 11 July 2014 Football Federation of Ukraine – official website Ukraine at FIFA site Ukraine at UEFA site