Michael Dwayne Vick (born June 26, 1980) is an American former football quarterback who played in the National Football League (NFL) for 13 seasons. Regarded as having transformed the quarterback position with his rushing abilities, he is the NFL leader in quarterback rushing yards and was the league's first quarterback to rush for 1,000 yards in a season. Vick played college football at Virginia Tech, where he won the Archie Griffin Award as a freshman, and was selected first overall by the Atlanta Falcons in the 2001 NFL draft. During his six years with the Falcons, he was named to three Pro Bowls and led the team to two playoff runs, one division title, and an NFC Championship Game appearance. Vick's NFL career came to a halt in 2007 after he pleaded guilty for his involvement in a dog fighting ring and spent 21 months in federal prison. His arrest and subsequent conviction garnered Vick notoriety with the general public, which lasted throughout the rest of his career. He was released by the Falcons shortly before leaving prison. After serving his sentence, Vick signed with the Philadelphia Eagles for the 2009 season. As a member of the Eagles for five years, he had his greatest statistical season and led the team to a division title in 2010, earning him Comeback Player of the Year and a fourth Pro Bowl selection. In his final two seasons, Vick played for the New York Jets and Pittsburgh Steelers, primarily as a backup. He officially retired in 2017 after spending the 2016 season as a free agent. Vick was born in Newport News, Virginia as the third of four children to Brenda Vick and Michael Boddie, then unmarried teenagers. His mother worked two jobs, obtained public financial assistance and had help from her parents, while his father worked long hours in the shipyards as a sandblaster and spray-painter. They were married when Michael was about five years old, but the children elected to continue to use their "Vick" surname. The family lived in the Ridley Circle Homes, a public housing project in a financially depressed and crime-ridden neighborhood located in the East End section of the port city. Local residents interviewed in a 2007 newspaper article in the Richmond Times-Dispatch noted that "not much [had] changed" nearly a decade after Vick left. One resident said that there was drug dealing, drive-by shootings, and other killings in the neighborhood, and suggested that sports were a way out and a dream for many. In a 2001 interview, Vick told the Newport News Daily Press that when he was 10 or 11, "I would go fishing even if the fish weren't biting, just to get away from the violence and stress of daily life in the projects." Boddie's employment required a great deal of travel, but he taught football skills to his two sons at an early age. Vick was only three years old when his father, nicknamed "Bullet" for his speed during his own playing days, began teaching him the fundamentals. Michael subsequently taught the game to his younger brother, Marcus Vick. As he grew up, Vick went by the nickname "Ookie", and learned about football from Aaron Brooks, a second cousin who was four years older. Vick and Brooks spent a lot of time at the local Boys and Girls Club. "Sports kept me off the streets," Vick told Sporting News magazine in an interview published April 9, 2001. "It kept me from getting into what was going on, the bad stuff. Lots of guys I knew have had bad problems." Vick first came to prominence while at Homer L. Ferguson High School in Newport News. As a freshman, he impressed many with his athletic ability; he threw for over 400 yards in a game that year. Ferguson High School was closed in 1996 as part of a Newport News Public Schools building modernization program. Vick, as a sophomore, and coach Tommy Reamon both moved to Warwick High School.[citation needed] Vick was a three-year starter for the Warwick Raiders. Under Reamon's coaching, he passed for 4,846 yards with 43 touchdowns. He added 1,048 yards and 18 scores on the ground. As a senior, he passed for 1,668 yards, accounting for 10 passing and as many rushing touchdowns. During one game, he ran for six touchdowns and threw for three touchdowns.[citation needed] Reamon, who had helped guide Brooks from Newport News to the University of Virginia, helped Vick with his SATs and helped him and his family choose between Syracuse University and Virginia Tech. Reamon favored Virginia Tech, where he felt better guidance was available under Frank Beamer, who promised to redshirt him and provide the freshman needed time to develop. Reamon sold Michael on the school's proximity to family and friends, and Vick chose to attend Virginia Tech. As he left the Newport News public housing projects in 1998 with a college football scholarship in hand, Vick was seen in the Newport News community as a success story. In his first collegiate game, as a redshirt freshman, against James Madison in 1999, Vick scored three rushing touchdowns in just over one quarter of play. He made a spectacular flip to score his last touchdown but landed awkwardly on his ankle, forcing him to miss the remainder of the game and all of the following game. During the season, Vick led a last-minute game-winning drive against West Virginia in the annual Black Diamond Trophy game. He led the Hokies to an 11–0 undefeated season and to the Bowl Championship Series national title game in the Nokia Sugar Bowl against Florida State. Although Virginia Tech lost 46–29, Vick brought the team back from a 21-point deficit to take a brief lead. During the season, Vick appeared on the cover of an ESPN The Magazine issue. Vick led the NCAA in passing efficiency in 1999, a record for a freshman (180.4) and the third-highest all-time mark. Vick won both an ESPY Award as the nation's top college player and the first-ever Archie Griffin Award as college football's most valuable player. He won the Big East Offensive Player of the Year. He was invited to the 1999 Heisman Trophy presentation and finished third in the voting behind Ron Dayne and Joe Hamilton. Vick's third-place finish matched the highest finish ever by a freshman up to that point, first set by Herschel Walker in 1980. One highlight of Vick's 2000 season was his career high rushing total of 210 yards against Boston College in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts. Against West Virginia University in the Black Diamond Trophy game, Vick accounted for 288 total yards of offense and two touchdowns in a 48–20 win. The following week, Vick led the Hokies back from a 14–0 deficit to beat Syracuse at the Carrier Dome, where the Hokies had not won since 1986. Vick put the game away with a 55-yard run with 1:34 left. In the following game, against Pittsburgh, Vick was injured and had to miss the rest of the game. He also missed the game against Central Florida, and was unable to start against the Miami Hurricanes, who handed Virginia Tech their only loss of the season. Vick's final game while playing for Virginia Tech was against the Clemson Tigers in the Toyota Gator Bowl; Virginia Tech won and Vick was named the game's MVP. His football accomplishments in two seasons led to his induction in to the Virginia Tech Sports Hall of Fame in 2017. Vick finished sixth in Heisman Trophy voting for the 2000 season. Vick left Virginia Tech after his redshirt sophomore season. Aware that the rest of his family was still living in their three-bedroom apartment in the Ridley Circle Homes, Vick stated that he was going to buy his mother "a home and a car." ESPN later reported that Vick used some of his NFL and endorsement earnings to buy his mother a brand-new house in an upscale section of Suffolk, Virginia. At his Pro Day workout, Vick ran the 40-yard dash in 4.33 seconds; his time has been clocked as low as 4.25, the fastest-ever for an NFL quarterback. Vick was selected first in the 2001 NFL draft by the Atlanta Falcons, becoming the first African-American quarterback to be taken with the top pick. The San Diego Chargers had the number-one selection, but traded it to the Atlanta Falcons the day before the draft for the Falcons' first- and third-round picks in 2001. Vick was selected in the 30th round of the 2000 Major League Baseball Draft by the Colorado Rockies, despite not playing baseball since the eighth grade. He signed a six-year $62 million contract. Vick made his NFL debut against the San Francisco 49ers on September 9, 2001, and saw limited action. He completed his first NFL pass to wide receiver Tony Martin in the second quarter against the Carolina Panthers on September 23 and scored his first NFL touchdown on a two-yard rush in the fourth quarter to help the Falcons to a 24–16 victory. Vick made his first start against the Dallas Cowboys on November 11 and threw his first touchdown pass to tight end Alge Crumpler in a 20–13 victory. He accounted for 234 of Atlanta's 255 yards in the season finale against the St. Louis Rams on January 6, 2002. In two starts and eight total games played that season, Vick completed 50 of 113 passes for 785 yards with two touchdowns and three interceptions. He rushed 31 times for 289 yards (9.3 avg.) and one touchdown. Vick made 15 starts in 2002, missing one game against the New York Giants on October 13 with a sprained shoulder. He completed 231 of 421 passes for 2,936 yards and 16 touchdowns. He had 113 carries for 777 yards and eight rushing touchdowns. Vick set numerous single-game career highs during the season, including in passes completed, pass attempts, and passing yards. Vick also set a then-NFL record for most rushing yards by a quarterback in a single game with 173 against the Minnesota Vikings on December 1, broken by Colin Kaepernick (181) in 2013. He tied for third in team history for the best touchdown-to-interception ratio in a season. He had a streak of 177 passes without an interception as the Falcons finished with a 9–6–1 win-loss-tie record and reached the playoffs. On January 4, 2003, Vick led the Falcons to an upset victory over the heavily favored Green Bay Packers 27–7 in the Wild Card Round. The Falcons lost 20–6 to the Donovan McNabb-led Philadelphia Eagles in the National Football Conference Divisional Round the following week. Vick was named to his first Pro Bowl after the season. Vick suffered a fractured right fibula during a preseason game before the 2003 season against the Baltimore Ravens. He missed the first 11 games of the regular season, making his debut in week 13. Vick substituted for quarterback Doug Johnson during the third quarter in a game against the Houston Texans on November 30, completing 8 of 11 passes for 60 yards and rushing for 16 yards on three carries. He started his first game of the season against the Carolina Panthers on December 7 and amassed the third-highest rushing total by a quarterback in NFL history with 141 yards on 14 carries and one touchdown. The Falcons won the game 21–14. Vick ended the season with a 21–14 victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars on December 28 in which he completed 12 of 22 passes for 180 yards, two touchdowns, and an interception. Vick returned to form in 2004, passing for 2,313 yards, 14 touchdowns, and 12 interceptions. He also added 902 rushing yards and three touchdowns as the Falcons finished with an 11–5 record. On October 31, 2004, in a game against the Denver Broncos, he became the first quarterback to throw for more than 250 yards and rush for over 100 yards in the same game. Vick set an NFL postseason record for a quarterback with 119 rushing yards in the first round of the 2004 NFL playoffs; Atlanta beat the St. Louis Rams 47–17 in the Divisional Round, but lost the following week 27–10 to the Philadelphia Eagles in the NFC Championship. Vick, whose single-season rushing total was the third-highest for a quarterback in NFL history, was named to his second Pro Bowl after leading Atlanta to their third division title at the end of the season. He signed a nine-year $130 million extension on December 23. Vick finished second in the NFL MVP voting earning one first place vote, preventing Peyton Manning to be a unanimous choice. Vick made his third Pro Bowl after the 2005 season, during which he passed for 2,412 yards and 16 touchdowns while rushing for 597 rushing yards and six touchdowns. The Falcons, however, finished with an 8–8 record and missed the playoffs. In 2006, Vick became the first quarterback to ever rush for over 1,000 yards in a single season. He also set a record by rushing for 8.4 yards per carry. Vick and teammate Warrick Dunn became the first quarterback-running back duo to each surpass 1,000 rushing yards in a single season. Despite Vick's record-setting season, the Falcons finished with a 7–9 record and again missed the playoffs. In August 2007, hours after Vick pleaded guilty to federal charges in the Bad Newz Kennels dog fighting investigation, the NFL suspended him indefinitely without pay for violating its player conduct policy. In a letter to Vick, NFL commissioner Roger Goodell said the quarterback had admitted to conduct that was "not only illegal, but also cruel and reprehensible." While Vick was technically a first-time offender under the league's personal conduct policy, Goodell handed down a harsher suspension because Vick admitted he provided most of the money for the gambling side of the dog fighting operation. Goodell left open the possibility of reinstating Vick depending on how he cooperated with federal and state authorities. Goodell had barred Vick from reporting to training camp while the league conducted its own investigation into the matter. At his July 26 arraignment, the terms of his bail barred him from leaving Virginia before the November trial– effectively ending any realistic chance of Vick playing a down in 2007. On August 27, Falcons owner Arthur Blank said at a press conference that the Falcons would seek to recover a portion of Vick's signing bonus. He said the team had no immediate plans to cut Vick, citing salary-cap issues. It initially appeared that Goodell had cleared the way for the Falcons to release Vick, since he ruled that Vick's involvement in gambling activity breached his contract. On August 29, the Falcons sent a letter to Vick demanding that he reimburse them for $20 million of his $37 million bonus. The case was sent to arbitration, and on October 10, an arbitrator ruled that Vick had to reimburse the Falcons for $19.97 million. The arbitrator agreed with the Falcons' contention that Vick knew he was engaging in illegal activity when he signed his new contract in 2004, and that he had used the bonus money to pay for the operation. In February 2009, the Falcons revealed that they were considering trading Vick to another NFL team. Atlanta general manager Thomas Dimitroff said NFL rules allowed teams to trade the contractual rights to suspended players. The Falcons released Vick in early June, however, making him an unrestricted free agent. After his release from prison, Vick was mentored by former Indianapolis Colts coach Tony Dungy. The prospect of his return to professional football was the subject of much conjecture as his suspension and incarceration continued. In 2007, ESPN's John Clayton said few general managers were in a strong enough position to consider taking a chance on Vick, and even then most NFL owners would be concerned about a fan and media backlash. There was also no chance of Vick resurrecting his career in the Canadian Football League, he said. Following a furor in 2007 over Ricky Williams playing there while serving a suspension, the CFL banned players currently suspended by the NFL. In any case, Clayton said it would be nearly impossible for a convicted felon to get a Canadian work visa. He did think, however, that Vick would be "unstoppable" if he decided to play in the Arena Football League. Vick signed a one-year contract with the Philadelphia Eagles on August 13, 2009. The contract was worth $1.6 million, with no money guaranteed. It contained a team option for the 2010 season worth $5 million. Vick was allowed to participate in all team practices and meetings as well as the Eagles' last two preseason games. He was eligible to play in the third week of the regular season. Starting quarterback Donovan McNabb told reporters he gave coach Andy Reid the idea to sign Vick. Vick was activated to the 53-man roster in mid-September and played sparingly for the rest of the season as McNabb's backup. In week 13 against the Atlanta Falcons, Vick both threw and ran for a touchdown, his first scores since December 2006. Vick was voted by teammates as the winner of the Ed Block Courage Award in December. The award honors players who "exemplify commitment to the principles of sportsmanship and courage". "It means a great deal to me," Vick said at the time. "I was voted unanimously by my teammates. They know what I've been through. I've been through a lot. It's been great to come back and have an opportunity to play and be with a great group of guys. I'm just ecstatic about that and I enjoy every day." The Eagles finished the season with an 11–5 record, making the playoffs. In the team's NFC Wild Card Round game against the Dallas Cowboys on January 9, 2010, Vick threw the longest touchdown pass of his career to rookie Jeremy Maclin for a 76-yard touchdown. The Eagles lost the game 34–14. Reid named Donovan McNabb the Eagles' starter for the 2010 season, but McNabb was traded to the Washington Redskins and Kevin Kolb was named the starter. While relegated to a second-string role, Vick said he knew he could still play at a high level. Asked if he wanted the Eagles to pick up the second year of his contract, he said, "I hope so...I feel like I'm probably better than I ever was in my career, as far as the mental aspect of the game." The Eagles exercised his option for 2010 in March and Vick received a $1.5 million roster bonus. Reid named Vick the Eagles' starting quarterback on September 21 after Kolb suffered a concussion, and Vick performed well in his stead. In his second game as an Eagles starter versus the Jacksonville Jaguars, Vick led the Eagles to a 28–3 win, throwing for 291 yards and three touchdowns and rushing for another touchdown. He was named the NFC Offensive Player of the Month for September. Vick suffered a rib cartilage injury in a week 4 game against Washington, and was replaced by Kolb. Vick had passed for 49 yards with three carries for 17 yards in the game prior to the injury. In a Week 10 Monday Night Football matchup against the Washington on November 14, Vick passed for 333 yards and four touchdowns, while rushing for 80 yards and another two touchdowns. Vick threw an 88-yard touchdown pass to DeSean Jackson on the first play from scrimmage in the game, and went on to help lead the Eagles to a 59–28 victory. Vick was named the NFC Offensive Player of the Week following his performance, and the Pro Football Hall of Fame asked for his game jersey to display after he became the first player to pass for three touchdowns and rush for two touchdowns in the first half of a game. In a game later in the season against the New York Giants, Vick led a fourth-quarter rally to erase a 21-point deficit. He accounted for three touchdowns to tie the game with under two minutes left. DeSean Jackson returned the Giants' last punt of the game for a touchdown to win the game for the Eagles as time expired. Vick earned NFC Offensive Player of the Week for his game against the Giants. Vick finished the season with 3,018 passing yards, 21 touchdowns, and six interceptions with a passer rating of 100.2. He had 100 carries for 676 yards and nine touchdowns. Philadelphia finished with a 10–6 record in 2010 and made the playoffs, but lost to the eventual Super Bowl XLV champion Green Bay Packers 21–16 in the Wild Card Round. Vick made his fourth Pro Bowl after the season and was named the Eagles' starting quarterback. The Associated Press and Sporting News named him the NFL Comeback Player of the Year. He also won the Bert Bell Award on March 4, 2011. Vick finished second in the NFL Offensive Player of the Year with 11 first place votes and NFL MVP both awarded to Tom Brady who won MVP unanimously. In early 2011, the Eagles placed their franchise tag on Vick. He signed the one-year tender on March 2. On August 29, however, Vick and the Eagles announced they had agreed on a 6-year, $100 million contract with almost $40 million in guaranteed money. In Week 4, against the San Francisco 49ers, Vick had 416 passing yards, two passing touchdowns, and one interception to go along with eight carries for 75 rushing yards. The final game of the season was a 34–10 victory on January 1, 2012, at home against Washington. Vick completed 24 of 39 passes for 335 yards and three touchdowns. In the 2011 season, Vick appeared in and started 13 games. He finished with 3,303 passing yards, 18 passing touchdowns, and 14 interceptions to go along with 76 carries for 589 rushing yards and one rushing touchdown. Led by Vick, Philadelphia finished the 2011 season with an 8–8 record. The team began with a 4–8 record before winning four games in a row to finish the season. Vick came into week one of the 2012 season as the starter, despite a solid showing from rookie Nick Foles in the preseason. Vick led the Eagles to a 17–16 victory in week one against the Cleveland Browns despite throwing four interceptions. The Eagles won the following game against the Baltimore Ravens, but lost 27–6 in the third week of the season to the Arizona Cardinals. Facing former teammate Kevin Kolb, Vick completed only 17 of 37 passes with no touchdowns and two lost fumbles. The Eagles went on to beat the New York Giants, but then lost three straight games. After the third loss against the Atlanta Falcons on October 28, calls for coach Andy Reid to replace Vick with Foles intensified. Reid refused to make the move. The Eagles lost another game against the New Orleans Saints, and Vick remained the starting quarterback for a week 10 game against the Dallas Cowboys. Vick was injured in that game, which the Eagles lost, and was replaced by Foles. On December 3, after Vick had already been sidelined for three weeks, Reid officially named Foles the starter for the remainder of the season. After a Foles injury in week 16, Vick was named the starter for the season finale against the Giants in New York. Vick went 19 of 35 for 197 yards, a touchdown, and an interception, and also ran five times for 25 yards. The Eagles, however, lost the game 42–7, to end the season with a 1–5 division record and 4–12 overall record. On February 11, 2013, the Eagles and Vick agreed on a one-year restructured contract worth up to $10 million. New head coach Chip Kelly announced that Vick, Foles, and rookie Matt Barkley would compete for the starting job. After a stellar preseason, Vick was able to reclaim his starting job from Foles, who was named Vick's backup. Vick started out well, winning his first game against Washington and throwing his first career 400-yard game in a close loss to the San Diego Chargers, with four passing touchdowns, two rushing touchdowns, and no interceptions in the two-game stretch. After that, Vick suffered losses against the Kansas City Chiefs and Denver Broncos, where he threw for one touchdown and three interceptions in that stretch (all three were thrown against Kansas City). In a game against the New York Giants, Vick was 6 of 14 for 105 yards, when he suffered a hamstring injury. Nick Foles played stellar in his place, going 8–2 as starter, while throwing 27 touchdowns and only two interceptions with a 119.0 passer rating. Vick saw his only playing time in a 15–7 loss to the Giants, where he was 6 of 9 for 30 yards and an interception, but he again suffered an injury, this time to his quadriceps, and was replaced by rookie Matt Barkley, who played even worse. Foles returned the following week, and Vick spent the rest of the season as the backup, making only one more appearance in a blowout win over the Chicago Bears. Vick signed a one-year $5 million contract with the New York Jets on March 21, 2014, the same day the Jets released Mark Sanchez. The Eagles signed Sanchez one week later. Vick chose to wear #8 as a tribute to Steve Young, although several days later he decided to change it to No. 1, as #7 was already taken by Geno Smith. Vick became the first quarterback in franchise history to wear the number. During Week 5 against the San Diego Chargers, Vick came in relief of a struggling Geno Smith following halftime and finished the game with 47 passing yards as the Jets were shut out by the Chargers, 31–0. After seven consecutive losses, Rex Ryan named Vick the starter over Smith for the Week 9 game against the Kansas City Chiefs. Vick became the first quarterback to reach 6,000 rushing yards during Week 10 in a 20–13 win over the Pittsburgh Steelers, which was one of three games that Vick started for the season. On August 25, 2015, Vick signed a one-year contract with the Pittsburgh Steelers worth $970,000. His signing by the Steelers caused a social media backlash by many Steeler fans, with some saying that they would never support the team again. Fans who supported or were indifferent about the signing called such fans fair weather fans, and also cited that the Steelers have several players with questionable pasts, most notably Roethlisberger and James Harrison. The Animal Rescue League of Western Pennsylvania made a subtle jab at the team on Twitter by saying that they were now more proud to support the Pittsburgh Penguins and subsequently moved an upcoming fundraiser event from Heinz Field to Consol Energy Center. Steelers president Art Rooney II defended the Vick signing on KDKA-TV, saying that they felt that Vick had proven himself since being released from prison. The Steelers had considered signing Vick in 2009—both Vick and Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin are from the same part of Virginia and know each other well personally—but decided against it due to potential backlash since Vick at the time hadn't proven himself following his release from prison. In Week 3, Vick was brought into action against the St. Louis Rams after Roethlisberger sustained a knee injury that sidelined him for 4–6 weeks. In five weeks, Vick went 40 for 66 with two touchdowns and one interception, also rushing for 99 yards on 20 attempts. Vick suffered a hamstring injury in a win against the Arizona Cardinals and was replaced by Landry Jones. Vick would miss six games, and Roethlisberger eventually returned to his starting role. Vick would be inactive the remainder of the season, leading some sports commentators to speculate that Vick's playing career may be over. In 2016, Vick announced he would play one more season in the NFL. However, after not signing with a team all season, he officially announced his retirement from professional football on February 3, 2017. On June 12, 2017, Vick retired as an Atlanta Falcon. On June 28, 2017, Vick began participating in the newly formed American Flag Football League, serving as captain of Team Vick. The following year, he captained the Roadrunners, who ultimately lost to Chad Johnson's team in the AFFL semifinal 26–13. During their 2017 training camp, Vick joined his former coach Andy Reid as a coaching intern with the Kansas City Chiefs after stating his previous interest in coaching. After the Chiefs concluded their 2017 training camp, he become an NFL analyst on Fox NFL Kickoff on FS1. On April 25, 2018, Vick was hired as offensive coordinator for the Atlanta Legends of the Alliance of American Football. Vick said, regarding becoming a coach, "I didn't think I ever wanted to coach but talking about the game at Fox, I get excited like I'm out there playing again. But, it's still not touching individuals. When the opportunity came about, I felt like I could really make a difference and give back to the game. …Once I found out it was in Atlanta, I thought it was a home run." Shortly before the season began, head coach Kevin Coyle announced Vick would no longer serve as offensive coordinator, but would still remain with the team as a consultant. Between his selection by the Atlanta Falcons in the 2001 NFL Draft and early 2007, Vick was allegedly involved in several incidents: In early 2004, two men were arrested in Virginia for distributing marijuana. The truck they were driving was registered to Vick. Falcons coach Dan Reeves said he lectured Vick at that time on the importance of reputation, choosing the right friends, and staying out of trouble for the good of his team. On October 10, 2004, Vick and other members of his entourage, including employee Quanis Phillips, were at Atlanta's Hartsfield International Airport on their way to board an AirTran flight. While they were passing through a security checkpoint, a security camera caught Phillips and Todd Harris picking up an expensive-appearing watch which belonged to Alvin Spencer, a security screener. After watching the theft on a videotape, Spencer filed a police report. He claimed that Billy "White Shoes" Johnson, known as the Falcons' "fixer", interfered with the investigation. Although Vick's representatives declined to make him available for an Atlanta police inquiry, Spencer got the watch back six days later. In March 2005, Sonya Elliott filed a civil lawsuit against Vick alleging she contracted genital herpes from him in the autumn of 2002 and that he failed to inform her that he had the disease. Elliot further alleged that Vick had visited clinics under the alias "Ron Mexico" to get treatments and thus knew of his condition. On April 24, 2006, Vick's attorney, Lawrence Woodward, revealed that the lawsuit had been settled out of court under undisclosed terms. Many fans bought custom jerseys from NFL.com with Vick's #7 and the name "MEXICO" on the back. The NFL later banned customizing jerseys with the name Mexico. After a loss to the New Orleans Saints on November 26, 2006, in the Georgia Dome, Vick made an obscene gesture at fans in an apparent reaction to booing, holding up both hands with the middle finger extended. He was fined $10,000 by the NFL and agreed to donate another $10,000 to charity. Vick surrendered a water bottle that had a hidden compartment to security personnel at Miami International Airport on January 17, 2007. "The compartment was hidden by the bottle's label so that it appeared to be a full bottle of water when held upright," police said. Test results indicated there were no illegal substances in the water bottle and Vick was cleared of any wrongdoing. Vick announced that the water bottle was a jewelry stash box, and that the substance in question had been jewelry. On April 24, 2007, Vick was scheduled to lobby on Capitol Hill, hoping to persuade lawmakers to increase funding for after-school programs. Vick missed a connecting flight in Atlanta on Monday to Reagan National Airport in Arlington, Virginia. He failed to show up for another seat booked for him later that evening. On Tuesday morning, he did not attend his scheduled appearance at a congressional breakfast where he was to be honored for his foundation's work with after-school projects in Georgia and Virginia. Vick's mother, Brenda, accepted the award from the Afterschool Alliance. In 2007, Vick's father, Michael Boddie, made statements about possible dogfighting activities in 2001. Boddie told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution that around 2001, Vick was staging dogfights in the garage of the family's home in Newport News and kept fighting dogs in the family's backyard, including injured ones that the father nursed back to health. Boddie said his son had been urged to not engage in the activity, but continued. "This is Mike's thing," he said. "And he knows it." Within days, Vick's mother, Brenda Vick Boddie, told the Newport News Daily Press that "There was no dogfighting. There were no cages." A search warrant executed on April 25, 2007, as part of a drug investigation of Vick's cousin Davon Boddie led to discovery of evidence of unlawful dog fighting activities at a property owned by Vick in rural Surry County in southeastern Virginia, with extensive facilities for the activity. Media attention quickly grew as state officials investigated, soon joined by federal authorities. As separate state and federal investigations progressed, more details emerged about an interstate dog-fighting ring that involved drugs and gambling. Gruesome details of abuse, torture, and execution of under-performing dogs galvanized animal rights activists and expressions of public outrage. Vick and several others were indicted on federal and Virginia state felony charges related to the operation. In July 2007, Vick and three other men were indicted on federal felony charges of operating an unlawful interstate dog fighting venture known as "Bad Newz Kennels". Vick was accused of financing the operation, directly participating in dog fights and executions, and personally handling thousands of dollars in related gambling activities. Federal prosecutors indicated they intended to proceed under the provisions of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO), a United States federal law that provides for extended criminal penalties and a civil cause of action for acts performed as part of an ongoing criminal organization. By August 20, Vick and the other three co-defendants agreed to separate plea bargains for the federal charges. They were expected to each receive federal prison sentences of between one and five years. Four days later, Vick filed plea documents with the federal court. He pleaded guilty to "Conspiracy to Travel in Interstate Commerce in Aid of Unlawful Activities and to Sponsor a Dog in an Animal Fighting Venture". Vick admitted to providing most of the financing for the operation, and to participating directly in several dog fights in Virginia, Maryland, North Carolina, and South Carolina. He admitted to sharing in the proceeds from these dog fights. He further admitted that he knew his colleagues killed several dogs who did not perform well. Vick also admitted to taking part in the killings of 6–8 dogs, by hanging, beating, and drowning. The "victimization and killing of pit bulls" was considered an aggravating circumstance, allowing prosecutors to exceed the federal sentencing guidelines for the charge. Vick denied placing any side bets on the dogfights. On August 27, U.S. District Judge Henry E. Hudson accepted Vick's guilty plea, but reminded Vick that he (Hudson) was under no obligation to accept the prosecution's recommendation of a reduced sentence. While free on bail, Vick tested positive for marijuana in a random drug test. This was a violation of the conditions of his release while awaiting sentencing in federal court. Vick's positive urine sample was submitted on September 13, 2007, according to a document filed by a federal probation officer on September 26. As a result, Hudson ordered Vick confined to his Hampton, Virginia home between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. with electronic monitoring until his court hearing date in December. He was ordered to submit to random drug testing. In November, Vick turned himself in early to begin accruing time-served credit against his likely federal prison sentence. He was held at Northern Neck Regional Jail in Warsaw, Virginia awaiting sentencing on the federal convictions. On December 10, Vick appeared in U.S. District Court in Richmond for sentencing. Judge Hudson said he was "convinced that it was not a momentary lack of judgment" on Vick's part, and that Vick was a "full partner" in the dog fighting ring, and he was sentenced to serve 23 months in federal prison. Hudson noted that despite Vick's claim to have accepted responsibility for his actions, his failure to cooperate fully with federal officials, coupled with a failed drug test and a failed polygraph, showed that he had not taken full responsibility for "promoting, funding and facilitating this cruel and inhumane sporting activity". Vick was assigned to United States Penitentiary, Leavenworth, a federal prison facility in Leavenworth, Kansas, to serve his sentence. At the request of federal authorities before sentencing, Vick agreed to deposit nearly $1 million in an escrow account with attorneys to reimburse others for the costs of caring for the confiscated dogs, most of which were being offered for adoption on a selective basis under supervision of a court-appointed specialist. Experts said some of the animals would require special care for the rest of their lives. During the administration of his bankruptcy case, the U.S. Department of Labor complained that these funds were paid at least partially with unlawfully withdrawn monies that Vick held in trust for himself and eight other employees of MV7, a celebrity marketing company he owned. Separate Virginia charges against all four defendants in the dog-fighting case were brought following indictments by the Surry County grand jury when it met on September 25, 2007. The principal evidence considered was sworn statements of the defendants during their plea agreement process before the federal court. Vick was charged with two class-6 felonies, which each carried a maximum penalty of five years' imprisonment. Citing the high costs and transportation logistics of proceeding while Vick was still in federal prison, state prosecutor Gerald Poindexter decided to postpone Vick's trial in Surry County Circuit Court until after Vick's release from federal custody. Vick's attorneys sought to resolve the state charges sooner. On October 14, 2008, Vick's attorney Lawrence Woodward filed a motion to enter a plea via two-way electronic video with the Surry County Courts. Vick planned to plead guilty to state charges in an effort to get early release from federal prison and enter a halfway house. The request for a trial without Vick physically present was denied, but Poindexter agreed to hold the state trial while Vick was still in federal custody if Vick bore the costs of his transportation to Virginia and related expenses. Vick was transported to Virginia in November 2008 to face the state charges. He appeared before the Surry County Circuit Court on November 25 at a session held in neighboring Sussex County because the Surry court building was undergoing renovation. He submitted a guilty plea to a single Virginia felony charge for dog fighting, receiving a 3-year prison sentence suspended on condition of good behavior, and a $2,500 fine. In return for the plea agreement, the other charge was dropped. Michael Dwayne Vick, Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) ID# 33765-183, was released on July 20, 2009. In 2011, Vick lobbied for H.R. 2492, the Animal Fighting Spectator Prohibition Act, which would establish federal misdemeanor penalties for spectators of illegal animal fighting and make it a felony for adults to bring children to fights. The law passed in 2012. At the end of 2006, Sports Illustrated magazine estimated Vick's annual income between his NFL salary and endorsements at $25.4 million, ranking him just below NASCAR's Dale Earnhardt Jr. in a listing of highest earning athletes. Vick's finances suffered, however, from poor management, bad investments and lawsuits. Certified Financial Planner Michael Smith advised Vick from 2003 to 2005, but resigned after Vick took bad advice from friends, made ill-conceived investments, overspent, and otherwise undermined the wealth-building plan that Smith had created. Smith's plan was for Vick to have a net wealth of $100 million by 2010; by that date Vick was actually an estimated $20 million in debt.[citation needed] In 2006, a $45 million lawsuit was pending in a dispute with Vick's original sports agents. Several lucrative endorsement deals soured. After the dog fighting indictments were announced in July 2007, financial claims against Vick escalated. His financial affairs strained, Vick was unable to meet scheduled payments and other obligations. Within several months, he had been named in numerous lawsuits by banks and creditors for defaulting on loans, some of them related to business investments. The dog fighting property near Smithfield, Virginia had been liquidated earlier, and in November 2007, Vick attempted to sell another of his homes. In June 2008, when Vick's brother, Marcus, was arrested and jailed in Norfolk after a police chase, he listed his residence as a $1.39 million home owned by Vick in an exclusive riverfront community in Suffolk, Virginia. Construction of a new riverfront home took place on land Vick owned in another exclusive section of Suffolk. His attorneys later estimated that he was spending $30,000 a month to support seven friends and relatives, including his mother and brother, three children, and their mothers. On July 7, 2008, Vick sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Newport News after failing to "work out consensual resolutions with each of his creditors," according to court papers. The initial filing, which was incomplete, listed assets of less than $50 million and debts of between $10 million and $50 million. The seven largest creditors without collateral backing their claims were owed a total of $12.8 million. The three biggest unsecured creditors were Joel Enterprises Inc., owed $4.5 million for breach of contract; Atlanta Falcons, owed $3.75 million for a pro-rated signing bonus; and Royal Bank of Canada, owed $2.5 million in loans. Joel Enterprises of Richmond was listed as one of Vick's larger creditors. Sports agents Andrew Joel and Dave Lowman claimed Vick signed a contract with their firm in 2001, nine days before he announced he was leaving Virginia Tech early and declaring himself eligible for the NFL Draft. With his mother as a witness, Vick signed a five-year marketing agreement that anticipated a wide range of endorsement activities using Vick's name, likeness, voice, and reputation. Joel's cut was 25% of all deals, excluding Vick's NFL contract, according to the agreement. Vick attempted to end the relationship with Joel Enterprises a few weeks later, and entered into another relationship with other agents. In 2005, Joel Enterprises sued Vick in Richmond Circuit Court for $45 million in compensatory and punitive damages for breach of contract. After the Virginia Supreme Court denied a Vick motion and ruled that the civil trial could proceed in December 2006, the parties agreed to submit the dispute to binding arbitration for resolution instead of a formal civil court trial. The outcome of the case was an award of $4.5 million to Joel. The Atlanta Falcons sought to recover a portion of Vick's $37 million 2004 signing bonus. A reduced amount of $20 million was awarded to the Falcons in binding legal arbitration, which Vick disputed. The sides agreed to reduce the amount to between $6.5 and $7.5 million. The bankruptcy court was advised of this Vick-Falcons settlement agreement on April 3, 2009. On September 20, 2007, the Royal Bank of Canada filed a civil lawsuit in the U.S. District Court in Newport News against Vick for more than $2.3 million over a loan tied to real estate. The suit claimed Vick failed to meet a September 10 deadline to repay. On May 7, 2008, the court granted a motion for summary judgment against Vick for default and breach of a promissory note and ordered him to pay the bank more than $2.5 million. On September 26, 2007, 1st Source Bank, based in South Bend, Indiana, claimed damages of at least $2 million in a federal lawsuit, alleging Vick and Divine Seven LLC of Atlanta refused to pay for at least 130 vehicles acquired to be used as rental cars. The bank's Specialty Financing Group provided financing for rental car fleets. Wachovia Bank also filed a federal suit in October 2007 in Atlanta seeking about $940,000 from Vick and Gerald Frank Jenkins, a business partner. The bank claimed the two men and their business, Atlantic Wine & Package LLC, defaulted on a May 2006 loan of $1.3 million to set up a wine shop and restaurant. Jenkins, a retired surgeon who owned Atlantic Wine since 2004, brought Vick in as an investor. In May 2008, the U.S. District Court in Atlanta granted a summary judgment in favor of Wachovia. The judgment of $1.11 million included the initial principal balance, interest accrued, fees, overdrawn accounts, and legal fees. The order provided that further interest could be accrued. The United States Department of Labor filed another lawsuit in federal district court in Newport News on March 25, 2009, alleging Vick and others violated federal employee benefits laws by withdrawing $1.35 million from a retirement plan sponsored by MV7, one of Vick's companies. The money was held in trust under pension laws to fund retirement plans for nine MV7 employees. The Labor Department simultaneously filed a complaint in federal bankruptcy court to prevent Vick from discharging his alleged debt to the MV7 pension plan. The complaint alleged that some of the funds were used to pay restitution ordered in his dogfighting case. In August 2008, trustee W. Clarkson McDow Jr. was appointed to manage Vick's bankruptcy. The trustee noted in court documents that Vick "has limited ability to arrange his finances and limited ability to participate in the bankruptcy case on an in-person basis." McDow wrote in court documents that it appeared Vick had "routinely relied upon others to make financial decisions for him, giving them discretionary control over large sums of money". McDow named Mary Wong and David A. Talbot as people who had obtained broad written authority to act as his attorney-in-fact over all of his financial affairs. Vick had hired Wong, a business manager in Omaha, Nebraska, in the fall of 2007 on the recommendation of Falcons teammate Demorrio Williams. Wong helped cash in some of Vick's investments to provide restitution funds required by the federal court in his criminal case. According to a document filed by one of Vick's attorneys, she used a power of attorney from Vick to "wrongfully remove" at least another $900,000 from his various accounts. Court papers also alleged Wong "caused certain business entities owned by [Vick] to be transferred to her." Vick learned later that Wong had been permanently barred from working with any firm that traded on the New York Stock Exchange as the result of taking more than $150,000 from two elderly widows she met while working at Wells Fargo. Vick next turned to Talbot, a medical school graduate from Hackensack, New Jersey who claimed to have expertise in financial management. Vick later told the court he met Talbot in April 2008 through his brother, Marcus. Talbot was to be paid $15,000 per month and took possession of one of Vick's cars, an $85,000 Mercedes-Benz. Vick later discovered that Talbot's résumé contained numerous false statements. Talbot had been accused of defrauding church members in New Jersey. The New Jersey Attorney General started legal action against Talbot for securities fraud over an alleged scheme to defraud investors of more than $500,000 by offering them "asset enhancement contracts" to be used to build a new church. U.S. bankruptcy Judge Frank Santoro ordered that the Mercedes-Benz Vick gave Talbot be repossessed and sold, and that Talbot appear at a hearing on September 5. Paul K. Campsen, one of Vick's lawyers, told the court that Vick "has supported his mother, brother, fiancée and his two children" over the years. He said Vick's financial problems included average monthly expenses of $12,225 for several large homes his family and friends were living in and a monthly income of just $277.69. Vick's attorneys filed a first plan of reorganization through bankruptcy on November 12, 2008. Under the plan, Vick was to sell three of his six homes. Vick's expenses, meanwhile, included support payments of approximately $30,000 a month. They included $14,531 a month to his mother, $12,363 a month to his fiancée and two daughters, and $3,500 a month to his former girlfriend Tameka Taylor, with whom he had a child. Creditors challenged Vick's spending plan given his loss of salary and suspension from the NFL. Vick's attorneys told the judge on November 13 that Vick "has every reason to believe that upon his release, he will be reinstated into the NFL, resume his career and be able to earn a substantial living." After creditors objected to the initial reorganization plan, Vick appeared in person before Santoro at a hearing in Newport News on April 2, 2009. Santoro had decided not to allow testimony by video in March, saying he needed Vick in the courtroom to assess his demeanor and credibility. Vick testified that he intended to live a better life after prison. He said his crime was "heinous" and felt "true remorse". Near the end of the hearing, Santoro rejected the plan as unsound, saying that it was too strongly predicated on Vick's return to the NFL and the substantial projected income it would bring, neither of which was assured. The judge commended Vick for trying to work out his financial mess after years of poor choices, but told Vick the numbers did not add up. Santoro adjourned the case and told Vick to work with his advisers to create a new plan, suggesting Vick begin by liquidating one or both of his Virginia homes, as well as three of the cars he intended to keep, and "buy a house more within his means." Vick had testified that he felt obligated to provide for friends and family because of "where he had come from." Santoro told Vick that while that was commendable, "You cannot be everything to everybody. If you do, you're going to be nothing to anybody." On April 28, attorneys met with Santoro and said they made substantial progress on a revised plan. They reported having settled all disputes with Vick's creditors, including Joel. On August 27, Santoro approved the revised reorganization plan. It was supported by all of Vick's creditors but one who was owed $13,000. Every creditor was to be paid back in six years on the condition that an estimated $9 million in assets be liquidated. Vick was allowed annual living expenses of $300,000 under the plan. He could spend up to $3,500 a month for rent in Philadelphia and $750 for "utilities and miscellaneous". He was to pay $3,712 a month on the mortgage for his house in Hampton, Virginia, where his fiancée and two children lived, and could pay up to $1,355 per month in private school tuition for his children. Vick was also given up to $472 a month in car-related expenses. His mother was allowed $2,500 per month, and his former girlfriend Tameka Taylor was allotted $3,000 per month to support their son, Mitez. Vick was not required to pay creditors during his first season with the Eagles. Vick paid his agent, Joel Segal, $32,500 in 2010, $104,000 in 2011, and would pay him $160,000 each year from 2012 to 2015 for a total of $776,500. He paid bankruptcy lawyers $748,750 in 2010, $1 million in 2011, and a total of $2.6 million. During his career with the Falcons, Vick became a spokesperson for many companies. He had endorsement contracts with companies including Nike, EA Sports, Coca-Cola, Powerade, Kraft, Rawlings, Hasbro, and AirTran. Even before the animal cruelty case surfaced in 2007, however, Vick's corporate status had deteriorated. Among the negative incidents was his middle finger gesture to Atlanta football fans in 2006. Vick's first endorsement after being released from prison was a two-year deal on January 27, 2011, with Unequal Technologies, a company that produces football pads. Nike officially signed Vick again as an athlete on July 1, 2011. The company had been supplying him with complimentary gear since October 2009; his re-signing marked the first time[dubious – discuss] a sponsor had brought back an athlete after dropping him. In 2012, Vick launched a sports clothing line called V7 to be sold exclusively at Modell's. Part of the proceeds was to go to the Boys and Girls Club of Philadelphia. Vick has been a principal in two charitable foundations, the Michael Vick Foundation and The Vick Foundation. In June 2006, Vick, along with his brother Marcus and mother Brenda, established The Vick Foundation, a nonprofit organization to support at-risk youth with after-school programs in the Metro Atlanta and Hampton Roads areas. The announcement of the new organization came just before the start of the foundation's first fundraiser, the Michael Vick Golf Classic. The inaugural event was held at the prestigious Kingsmill Golf Course in James City County near Williamsburg, Virginia in partnership with The Virginia Tech Alumni Association Tidewater Chapter, and raised more than $80,000 for charity. According to its 2006 federal tax return, the Michael Vick Foundation provided 100 backpacks to poor children in Newport News and paid for an after-school program. After the Virginia Tech massacre on April 16, 2007, Vick and the United Way donated $10,000 to assist families affected. The Vick Foundation collected donations from communities in Atlanta and Virginia to be placed in the United In Caring Fund for Victims of the Virginia Tech Tragedy and a special fund at the United Way of Montgomery, Radford, and Floyd counties, which serves the Virginia Tech area. The Vick Foundation said the money would be used to provide help with funeral expenses, transportation for family members and other support services. List of NCAA major college football yearly passing leaders Dual-threat quarterback Racial issues faced by black quarterbacks List of left-handed quarterbacks Patterson, Kiahnna (December 21, 2022). "'To bless those who deserve a blessing': Newport News native, NFL star Michael Vick gives back for holidays". WAVY.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Squires, David (May 27, 2009). "DAD: VICK IS A BETTER MAN". Daily Press. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Michael Vick". JockBio.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2012. Retrieved June 4, 2007. Dohrmann, George; Evans, Farrell (November 26, 2007). "The Road To Bad Newz". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012. David, Ress (July 25, 2007). "Vick case puzzling". Richmond Times-Dispatch. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2021. Forster, Dave; Burke, Bill; Tucker, Kyle (May 26, 2007). "Is Michael Vick friendly to a fault?". The Virginian-Pilot. Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved June 4, 2007. "Michael Vick's NFL education has already gotten head start". Brainerd Dispatch. April 10, 2001. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Hupton, David Wyatt (September 6, 2014). "Vick Willing To Do Anything To Help Jets". Gang Green Nation. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Hudson, Jamar (October 8, 2007). "Hudson: Warwick learning lessons from Vick". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Alexander, Matt (October 26, 2015). "Syracuse drops elite status in 1999 after Michael Vick chooses Va. Tech over SU". The Daily Orange. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Adelson, Andrea (September 22, 2017). "'A highlight show:' The Michael Vick Virginia Tech experience". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Freshman's Debut Sparks the Hokies". The New York Times. Associated Press. September 5, 1999. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "1999 Virginia Tech Hokies Schedule and Results". College Football at Sports-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Plaschke, Bill (January 5, 2000). "Florida State Holds Off Vick and Virginia Tech, 46–29, for National Title". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Michael Vick". Virginia Tech Hokies Athletics. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Virginia Tech Magazine Feature 4". www.archive.vtmag.vt.edu. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Big East Offensive Player of the Year Winners". College Football at Sports-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "1999 Heisman Trophy Voting". College Football at Sports-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Teel, David (November 10, 2009). "Dec. 12, 1999: Vick humbled by Heisman experience". Daily Press. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Virginia Tech at Boston College Box Score, September 30, 2000". College Football at Sports-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Robertson, Jimmy (October 22, 2000). "Tech puts end to Carrier Dome hex". Virginia Tech Hokies Athletics. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved August 29, 2007. Bauer-Wolf, Jeremy (August 29, 2017). "Honoring star athletes without degrees". InsideHigherEd.com. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved January 19, 2022. "2000 Heisman Trophy Voting". College Football at Sports-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Wojciechowski, Gene (January 10, 2006). "Common lives, plenty of questions for Vick, Clarett". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Wonderlic test: NFL Combine IQ test is difficult. Take it for yourself". sbnation.com. March 3, 2018. Archived from the original on October 25, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Michael Fick, Combine Results, QB – Virginia". nflcombineresults.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Michael Vick Stats". pro-football-reference.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Boyer, Zac (February 26, 2012). "Robert Griffin III runs 4.38-second 40-yard-dash at NFL combine – Redskins Journal". Free Lance-Star. Fredericksburg, Virginia. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2012. "2001 NFL Draft Listing". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Wilner, Barry (January 11, 2005). "Manning NFL MVP again: 49 TDs, passing rating of 121.1 make Colts QB near-unanimous pick". The Decatur Daily. Archived from the original on May 23, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2007. Nguyen, Joe (June 10, 2020). "In 2000, the Rockies drafted Virginia Tech QB Michael Vick". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Spotrac.com. "Michael Vick". Spotrac.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. "Atlanta Falcons at San Francisco 49ers – September 9th, 2001". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Carolina Panthers at Atlanta Falcons – September 23rd, 2001". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Henry, George (September 24, 2001). "Michael Vick scores his first NFL touchdown". dailypress.com. Tribune Newspapers. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2012. "Dallas Cowboys at Atlanta Falcons – November 11th, 2001". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Atlanta Falcons at St. Louis Rams – January 6th, 2002". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Michael Vick 2001 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Henry, George (October 7, 2002). "Vick doubtful for Giants game". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2012. "Michael Vick 2002 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Inman, Cam (January 12, 2013). "Putting Kaepernick's rushing performance in franchise, league perspective". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2013. "2002 NFL Standings & Team Stats". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Wild Card – Atlanta Falcons at Green Bay Packers – January 4th, 2003". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Divisional Round – Atlanta Falcons at Philadelphia Eagles – January 11th, 2003". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "2002 NFL Pro Bowlers". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Scrutiny of Preseason After Injury to Vick". The New York Times. Associated Press. August 24, 2003. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Atlanta Falcons at Houston Texans – November 30th, 2003". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Henry, George (December 8, 2003). "Kick-Started: Vick Runs for 141 in OT Win". Washington Post. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Carolina Panthers at Atlanta Falcons – December 7th, 2003". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Jacksonville Jaguars at Atlanta Falcons – December 28th, 2003". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Michael Vick 2004 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "2004 Atlanta Falcons Rosters, Stats, Schedule, Team Draftees". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Herrmann, Jon (October 13, 2008). "A Look Back: A Delayed Glance at All That Was Lost". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Divisional Round – St. Louis Rams at Atlanta Falcons – January 15th, 2005". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "NFC Championship – Atlanta Falcons at Philadelphia Eagles – January 23rd, 2005". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2004 NFL Pro Bowlers". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Peyton takes place in history with his second straight MVP". Deserert News. Associated Press. January 11, 2005. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "2004 Awards Voting". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2005 NFL Pro Bowlers". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Michael Vick 2005 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Karimian, Arin (December 15, 2010). "Eagles' Michael Vick, Patriots' Tom Brady 1–2 in Pro Bowl voting". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 18, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2012. "2005 Atlanta Falcons Statistics & Players". Pro Football Reference. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. Simmons, Bill (November 4, 2012). "Breaking down the contrary views of Michael Vick". Grantland. ESPN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Best single-season rushing performances in NFL history". USA Today. December 18, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. "1,000-yard duo". Pro Football Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. "2006 Atlanta Falcons Statistics & Players". Pro Football Reference. Archived from the original on November 22, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. "NFL to Michael Vick c/o Joel Segal, President, Worldwide Entertainment" (PDF). ESPN. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 31, 2007. Retrieved November 7, 2007. "SCLC will not recognize Vick at Atlanta convention – NFL". ESPN. Associated Press. August 7, 2007. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Vick to be sentenced Dec. 10 after guilty plea". ESPN. Associated Press. August 27, 2007. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved November 7, 2007. Pasquarelli, Len (August 29, 2007). "Falcons asking for $20 million; experts say it could be only $3.5M". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 16, 2007. Retrieved November 7, 2007. "Arbitrator rules Falcons can recoup nearly $20 million in Vick bonus money". NFL.com. October 9, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved November 7, 2007. "Falcons trying to trade Vick". Daily Press. February 13, 2009. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2009. Werder, Ed (February 14, 2009). "Atlanta Falcons preparing to trade Michael Vick's rights". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "Tony Dungy Analyzes Vick, NFL And Leadership". NPR. August 6, 2010. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Clayton, John (August 16, 2007). "Clayton: Vick's NFL future could be bleak". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Mortensen, Chris; Paolantonio, Sal; Pasquarelli, Len (August 14, 2009). "Vick, Eagles agree to 2-year deal". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 7, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2009. Ford, Bob (December 8, 2009). "Bob Ford: McNabb in search of redemption, too". Philly.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved September 26, 2010. "Michael Vick 2009 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Philadelphia Eagles at Atlanta Falcons – December 6th, 2009". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Quaintance, Bob (December 23, 2009). "Michael Vick Receives the Ed Block Courage Award for 2009". Bleeding Green Nation. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Vick named Eagles' recipient of courage award". ESPN. Associated Press. December 23, 2009. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Vick wins Eagles' courage award". FOX Sports. Associated Press. December 23, 2009. Archived from the original on December 25, 2009. Retrieved December 23, 2009. "2009 Philadelphia Eagles Rosters, Stats, Schedule, Team Draftees, Injury Reports". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2009 NFL Standings & Team Stats". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Michael Vick Career Passing Touchdown Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Wild Card – Philadelphia Eagles at Dallas Cowboys – January 9th, 2010". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Paumgarten, Nick (April 9, 2010). "Andy Reid: The Ken Lewis of the N.F.C. East?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Andy Reid: Kolb will remain my starter". ProFootballTalk. September 12, 2010. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Reid: McNabb will return in 2010 as Eagles QB". ESPN. Associated Press. January 11, 2010. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Eagles pick up Vick's option for 2010". Sign On San Diego. Associated Press. March 9, 2010. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2010. Leahy, Sean (September 21, 2010). "Eagles name Michael Vick starting QB, bench Kevin Kolb". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved September 26, 2010. "Philadelphia Eagles at Jacksonville Jaguars – September 26th, 2010". Pro-Football-Reference.com. September 26, 2010. Archived from the original on May 12, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Goldman, Josh (September 29, 2010). "Vick, Allen Honored For September Play". PhiladelphiaEagles.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2010. Maaddi, Rob; Writer, AP Pro Football (October 4, 2010). "Eagles QB Vick has rib cartilage injury". San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Michael Vick to have MRI on chest, ribs". ESPN.com. Associated Press. October 3, 2010. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2010. Mosley, Matt (November 16, 2010). "Michael Vick crashes McNabb's party". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 16, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2010. "2010 NFL Week 10 Leaders & Scores". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Leahy, Sean (November 16, 2010). "NFL names Michael Vick NFC Offensive Player of the Week for second straight week". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2010. Branch, John (December 19, 2010). "Eagles Stun Giants on Game's Final Play". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2010 NFL Week 15 Leaders & Scores". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Michael Vick 2010 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2010 NFL Standings & Team Stats". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 2, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Wild Card – Green Bay Packers at Philadelphia Eagles – January 9th, 2011". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Stamm, Dan (December 28, 2010). "Vick to Start Pro Bowl". NBC – Philadelphia. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2011. "Michael Vick wins Comeback POY". ESPN.com. Associated Press. February 5, 2011. Archived from the original on February 9, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2011. Leahy, Sean (January 12, 2011). "Michael Vick wins Sporting News Comeback Player of Year award". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 16, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2011. "Maxwell Awards presented tonight at Harrah's in Atlantic City". Press of Atlantic City. March 4, 2011. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 4, 2011. "Patriots' Brady wins offensive POY in landslide". ESPN. February 2, 2011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Eagles Put Franchise Tag on Michael Vick". fanhouse.com. February 15, 2011. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved February 15, 2011. "Michael Vick signs franchise tender". ESPN.com. Associated Press. March 2, 2011. Archived from the original on March 4, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2011. "Vick, Eagles strike six-year, $100M deal, with $36M guaranteed". NFL.com. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "San Francisco 49ers at Philadelphia Eagles – October 2nd, 2011". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Washington Redskins at Philadelphia Eagles – January 1st, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. January 1, 2012. Archived from the original on December 26, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Michael Vick 2011 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 3, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "2011 NFL Standings & Team Stats". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Rosenthal, Gregg. "Andy Reid: Nick foles is Eagles' backup QB 'right now'". NFL.com. NFL Enterprises. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved December 21, 2012. "Philadelphia Eagles at Cleveland Browns – September 9th, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Baltimore Ravens at Philadelphia Eagles – September 16th, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. McLane, Jeff; Berman, Zach (September 23, 2012). "Eagles-Cardinals observations". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012. "Michael Vick 2012 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Verderame, Matt (October 29, 2012). "Eagles soundly beaten by Atlanta". SB Nation Philly. Archived from the original on November 28, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Grotz, Bob (November 13, 2012). "With pressure on, Eagles' Andy Reid putting his faith in Nick Foles". Delco Times. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Billick, Brian. "Andy Reid right to keep Michael Vick as Eagles' starter". NFL.com. NFL Enterprises. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012. "Philadelphia Eagles at New Orleans Saints – November 5th, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Dallas Cowboys at Philadelphia Eagles – November 11th, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Gelston, Dan (November 11, 2012). "Cowboys beat Eagles 38–23: Michael Vick injured, Tony Romo throws 2 touchdown passes". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012. Maadi, Rob (December 3, 2012). "Nick Foles named starter for rest of season by Eagles coach Andy Reid". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012. "Philadelphia Eagles at New York Giants – December 30th, 2012". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "2012 Philadelphia Eagles Rosters, Stats, Schedule, Team Draftees, Injury Reports". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Rosenthal, Gregg (February 11, 2013). "Michael Vick, Philadelphia Eagles restructure contract". NFL.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2013. Garafolo, Mike (February 11, 2013). "Eagles restructure Michael Vick's contract". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 12, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2013. Frank, Martin (August 20, 2013). "Michael Vick named starting quarterback for Eagles". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Philadelphia Eagles at Washington Redskins – September 9th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "San Diego Chargers at Philadelphia Eagles – September 15th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. "Kansas City Chiefs at Philadelphia Eagles – September 19th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 14, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Philadelphia Eagles at Denver Broncos – September 29th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Philadelphia Eagles at New York Giants – October 6th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Sessler, Marc (October 6, 2013). "Michael Vick exits Eagles' win with hamstring injury". NFL.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Nick Foles 2013 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "New York Giants at Philadelphia Eagles – October 27th, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Mihoces, Gary (October 27, 2013). "Vick-less Eagles offense struggles in loss to Giants". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Chicago Bears at Philadelphia Eagles – December 22nd, 2013". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Cimini, Rich (March 21, 2014). "Michael Vick to Jets for 1 year, $5M". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014. Mehta, Manish (March 28, 2014). "Eagles sign Mark Sanchez to one-year deal". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 16, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014. "Mike Vick PICKS #8 Tribute to Steve Young". TMZ. April 28, 2014. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Michael Vick to wear No. 1 with New York Jets". NFL.com. May 3, 2014. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "New York Jets at San Diego Chargers – October 5th, 2014". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Hanzus, Dan (October 27, 2014). "Michael Vick to start for New York Jets at Chiefs". NFL.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. McManus, Jane (November 9, 2014). "Vick first QB to 6,000 yards rushing". ESPN. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. Jones, Lindsey (August 25, 2015). "Michael Vick signs one-year contract with Steelers". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 27, 2015. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Fowler, Jeremy (August 26, 2015). "Not happy: Steelers fans protest Vick signing". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2021. Czebiniak, Madasyn (August 27, 2015). "Animal Rescue League moves fundraiser from Heinz Field in response to Vick signing". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on September 22, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Pompeani, Bob (August 27, 2015). "Steelers' Art Rooney II Weighs In On Signing Michael Vick". CBS – Pittsburgh. Archived from the original on August 28, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Bouchette, Ed (August 25, 2015). "Michael Vick signs with Steelers". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on August 27, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Hoffman, Benjamin (September 27, 2015). "Steelers' Ben Roethlisberger Likely to Miss 4 to 6 Weeks With Knee Injury". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Michael Vick 2015 Game Log". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Hubbuch, Bart (October 19, 2015). "Third-string QB puts final etch in Michael Vick's NFL tombstone". New York Post. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2021. "Michael Vick says he's retired after not playing 2016 season". ESPN. February 3, 2017. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved February 3, 2017. Bergman, Jeremy (February 3, 2017). "Former Falcons QB Mike Vick 'officially retired'". NFL.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2019. McQuade, Alec (June 12, 2017). "Falcons hold retirement ceremony for Michael Vick and Roddy White". 11alive.com. Retrieved June 26, 2019. Taylor, Tom (June 29, 2017). "Star-studded flag football league leans on NFL influences in debut". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 28, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. McFadden, Will (July 9, 2018). "Early Bird Report: Highlights of Michael Vick's flag football semifinal performance". Atlanta Falcons. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2019. McChesney, Alec (July 26, 2017). "Why Chiefs coach Andy Reid requested Michael Vick as a coaching intern". Kansas City Star. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2017. Parks, James (February 5, 2019). "Michael Vick set to begin career as OC of Atlanta's AAF team". 247Sports. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Conner, Matt (August 25, 2017). "Michael Vick leaves Chiefs for FOX Sports to be NFL analyst". Arrowhead Addict. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Culpepper, JuliaKate E. (April 25, 2018). "Michael Vick will lead offense of new pro football league team in Atlanta". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2019. "Michael Vick to be offensive coordinator on new Alliance of American football Atlanta team". WAGA. April 25, 2018. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2019. Kerr, Jeff (February 4, 2019). "Michael Vick is offensive coordinator of AAF team". Philadelphia Eagles. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Gardner, Steve (February 7, 2019). "Michael Vick out as Atlanta offensive coordinator in new football league". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 8, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2019. Judd, Alan (July 22, 2007). "In game of life, Vick blitzed by trouble". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on August 9, 2007. Retrieved July 31, 2007. Maske, Mark & Goo, Sara Kehaulani (March 13, 2005). "A Commonplace Case Complicated by Fame". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved August 25, 2007. "Michael Vick Hit With Sex Suit". The Smoking Gun. October 26, 2006. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2007. "Settlement reached in Michael Vick herpes case". NBCSports.MSNBC.com. Associated Press. April 26, 2006. Archived from the original on February 18, 2008. Retrieved July 24, 2007. "NFL no Fan of Vick's 'Ron Mexico' jerseys". NBC Sports. April 14, 2005. Archived from the original on October 1, 2011. Retrieved July 20, 2011. Glazer, Jay (November 29, 2006). "Obscene gesture will cost Vick $20K". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on January 27, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2007. "Vick will not face criminal charges over suspicious bottle". ESPN. Associated Press. January 22, 2007. Archived from the original on January 24, 2007. Retrieved August 25, 2007. "Vick: Water bottle was jewelry box". New York Daily News. Associated Press. March 22, 2007. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Vick misses lobbying appearance on Capitol Hill". ESPN. Associated Press. April 24, 2007. Archived from the original on September 11, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2007. "Vick's father says son has staged dogfights since 2001". Daily Press. August 23, 2007. Retrieved August 25, 2007.[permanent dead link] Holtzclaw, Mike (November 2, 2008). "Vick's mother defends son, slams her husband". Daily Press. Archived from the original on August 29, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Maske, Mark (July 18, 2007). "Falcons' Vick Indicted In Dogfighting Case". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2012. "Vick files plea agreement admitting to dogfighting". ESPN. Associated Press. August 24, 2007. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Mihoces, Gary (December 22, 2014). "Rebuilding an image is a process Michael Vick understands". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Epstein, Adam (2012). Sports Law (2nd ed.). South-Western College/West. p. 182. ISBN 978-1111971663. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2012. "Vick faces prison time after agreeing to plead guilty". ESPN. Associated Press. August 20, 2007. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2007. "Vick Agrees to Plead Guilty to Dogfighting Charges". Fox News. Associated Press. August 20, 2007. Archived from the original on November 19, 2007. Retrieved August 25, 2007. "Bad Newz Kennels" (PDF). U.S. Department of Agriculture. August 28, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 6, 2023. Retrieved September 21, 2023. "Vick pleads to dog fighting charge; says he didn't make 'side bets'". ESPN. Associated Press. August 24, 2007. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Vick pleads guilty, apologizes". CNN. August 27, 2007. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012. Retrieved December 11, 2012. "Michael Vick Tests Positive for Marijuana". Fox News. Associated Press. September 26, 2007. Archived from the original on June 22, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2012. Mihoces, Gary (September 27, 2007). "Michael Vick faces restrictions after positive marijuana test". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2012. "South Bend bank sues Falcons quarterback Vick". Indianapolis Business Journal. September 28, 2007. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Mihoces, Gary (November 20, 2007). "Michael Vick surrenders to federal authorities". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. Retrieved November 19, 2007. "Vick sentenced to 23 months for dogfighting". CNN. December 10, 2007. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Rankin, Bill; Ledbetter, D. Orlando (December 11, 2007). "Vick's Lies Boosted Prison Time". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved December 11, 2007. "Vick enters drug treatment program at Kansas prison". ESPN. Associated Press. January 7, 2008. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Report: Vick to pay for dog care". Yahoo! Sports. November 28, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2011. "Dogs in Vick case to be spayed, neutered. Judge also approves appointment of expert to decide animals' future". NBCSports.MSNBC.com. Associated Press. October 16, 2007. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved December 20, 2010. "Feds: Vick illegally spent pension funds". ESPN. Associated Press. March 25, 2009. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Vick pleads guilty, gets no new time". Richmond Times-Dispatch. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Geroux, Bill (June 26, 2008). "Surry prosecutor still pursues Vick". The News & Advance. Lynchburg, Virginia. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Chufo, Veronica Gorley (November 2, 2008). "Vick could end term in halfway house". Daily Press. Newport News, Virginia. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved November 2, 2008. McGlone, Tim (October 22, 2008). "Michael Vick plans guilty plea to state dogfighting charges". The Virginian-Pilot. Norfolk, Virginia. Archived from the original on October 24, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Forster, Dave (November 14, 2008). "Michael Vick's lawyers tell court he expects to return to NFL". The Virginian-Pilot. Norfolk, Virginia. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Topic Galleries". Daily Press. Retrieved February 7, 2010.[permanent dead link] Wickersham, Seth (August 26, 2011). "Wickersham: Michael Vick's 548 days behind bars". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Courson, Paul (July 19, 2011). "Michael Vick backs bill targeting dog fight spectators". CNN. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved July 20, 2011. McGlone, Tim (December 26, 2006). "Michael Vick still fighting hefty lawsuit over contract". Link757.com. Archived from the original on August 18, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2010. "ESPN reveals Vick hasn't been able to run from debt". The Morning Call. January 12, 2011. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Parent, Pam (July 21, 2011). "Five sports celebs who have lost endorsement deals because of questionable behavior". Yahoo! Sports. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2012. Rochelle, Bill (October 1, 2009). "Coyotes, True Temper, Panolam, Grace, Ion: Bankruptcy (Update)". Bloomberg. Bloomberg, L.P. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Bull, Andy (August 17, 2007). "VIck faces massive lawsuit". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2012. Halonen, Doug (March 26, 2009). "Former QB Vick Faces ERISA Lawsuit". Workforce. Crain Communications. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved December 26, 2012. Pasquarelli, Len (October 20, 2007). "Vick hoping to get $4.5 million for sale of lakefront Georgia home – NFL". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 22, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Bankruptcy : Bankruptcy News and Photos". Daily Press. November 2, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008.[permanent dead link] "Indicted NFL star Vick building home in Suffolk". WVEC. July 24, 2007. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2008. McCarty, Dawn (July 8, 2008). "Bloomberg bankruptcy story". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2010. "Jailed Ex-NFL star Vick files bankruptcy". Reuters. July 8, 2008. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Michael Vick still fighting hefty lawsuit over contract". HamptonRoads.com. December 26, 2006. Archived from the original on September 26, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2010. McGlone, Tim (April 3, 2009). "Michael Vick eyes return to field this season, lawyer says". Pilot Online. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Vick will pay Falcons $6.5 million to be released". NBCSports.MSNBC.com. March 31, 2009. Archived from the original on January 15, 2010. Retrieved February 7, 2010. "Piling on: Now bank is sacking Vick". Sporting News. September 26, 2007. Archived from the original on December 13, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Phelan, Jon (July 16, 2008). "Vick's money woes continue". Collegiate Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Lage, Larry (August 17, 2007). "Goodell discusses Vick case: Plea deal would be evaluated in relation to NFL's conduct policy". Inrich.com. Allen Park, Michigan: Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 23, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Bank says Vick defaulted on $2.5 million loan". NBCSports.MSNBC.com. September 26, 2007. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Felberbaum, Michael (May 8, 2008). "Imprisoned QB Vick Files For Bankruptcy Protection". The Ledger. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Trucker's Bank Plan from 1st Source Bank". 1stsource.com. Archived from the original on June 12, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Bank sues Michael Vick over $1.3 million wine shop loan". WVEC. Associated Press. October 16, 2007. Archived from the original on February 16, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Boye, Will (October 15, 2007). "Wachovia pursues Vick on $1.3 million business loan". Atlanta Business Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 3, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Paige, Woody (November 15, 2008). "Vick on inside, out of NFL life". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "CITY OF SANDY SPRINGS, GA – Regular Council Meeting Agenda" (PDF). SandySprings-GA.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Wachovia Sues Vick Over Unpaid Restaurant Loan". WSB Atlanta. October 15, 2007. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Wyche, Steve (March 15, 2007). "Restaurateur Vick opens new business endeavor". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on June 13, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Boye, Will (October 15, 2007). "Wachovia pursues Vick on $1.3 million business loan". Atlanta Business Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 2, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Solomon, Brian (May 14, 2008). "Disgraced NFL Star Michael Vick Nearly Free Of $20 Million Bankruptcy". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Rosenkrantz, Holly (March 25, 2009). "Michael Vick Sued by Government Over Pension Transfer". Bloomberg Business. Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Feds: Michael Vick illegally spent pension funds". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. March 25, 2009. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Ledbetter, D. Orlando (August 15, 2008). "Vick could lose control of cash". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Munson, Lester (August 15, 2008). "ESPN – Bad advice, bad decisions: the loss of Michael Vick's fortune – NFL". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 12, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Forster, Dave (August 30, 2008). "Michael Vick says he plans to play in NFL again". Hampton Roads. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Forster, Dave (August 23, 2008). "Vick adviser a no-show at Newport News bankruptcy hearing". Hampton Roads. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Dujardin, Peter (November 2, 2008). "VICK'S FAMILY MIGHT HAVE TO GIVE GIFT MONEY TO HIS CREDITORS". Daily Press. Retrieved April 5, 2023.[dead link] Vivlamore, Chris (August 20, 2008). "Documents show Vick losing $12,000 per month". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Case No. 08-50775-FJS. Chapter 11. Michael D. Vick, Debtor. Disclosure Statement With Respect to Debtor's First Amended Plan of Reorganization" (PDF). AP.org. November 12, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 23, 2008. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Judd, Alan (December 6, 2008). "Atlanta Falcons news". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010. Retrieved February 7, 2010. Naqi, Kelly (March 25, 2009). "Vick leaves federal lockup in Kansas". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Munson, Lester (April 3, 2009). "Even bankruptcy court isn't kind to Vick". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Vick ordered by judge to revise plan". ESPN. Associated Press. April 3, 2009. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. McGlone, Tim (April 4, 2009). "Bankruptcy judge rejects Michael Vick's reorganization plan". The Virginian-Pilot. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Redmon, Jeremy (April 5, 2009). "Taking a look behind the figures of Vick's rejected bankruptcy plan". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on April 9, 2009. Retrieved November 19, 2020. O'Dell, Larry (April 4, 2009). "Judge rejects Vick plan to emerge from bankruptcy". Richmond Times-Dispatch. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2010. "Judge OKs Vick's bankruptcy plan". ESPN.com. Associated Press. August 27, 2009. Archived from the original on January 5, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2011. Munson, Lester (December 2, 2010). "Michael Vick's focus: Defenses and debt". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved March 3, 2011. "Michael Vick, Forbes Top Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2007. Howard, Theresa (September 28, 2003). "Where have baseball players' endorsements gone?". USA Today. Retrieved June 2, 2007. Briggs, Bill (July 18, 2007). "NFL megastar Vick's endorsements in danger". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2007. "Fans Split On Vick's Finger Flip". WSBTV. November 28, 2006. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved July 31, 2007. "Michael Vick gets endorsement deal". ESPN.com. Associated Press. January 25, 2011. Archived from the original on January 29, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2011. Bacon, Shane (July 1, 2011). "Michael Vick and Nike join forces once again". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2011. "Eagles' Michael Vick launches sports clothing line". PhiladelphiaEagles.com. July 11, 2012. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Vick Foundation". Vick Foundation. Archived from the original on June 21, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. "Join the Team – Michael Vick Golf Classic". Join the Team. December 27, 2007. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. "Former QB Vick makes donation for victims families". ESPN. Associated Press. April 18, 2007. Archived from the original on September 9, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2007. Michael Vick at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Data from Wikidata Career statistics and player information from Pro Football Reference Michael Vick at IMDb