Glee (stylized as glee) is an American musical comedy-drama television series that aired on Fox in the United States from May 19, 2009, to March 20, 2015. It centers on the New Directions, a glee club at the fictional William McKinley High School, that is located in the American state of Ohio, which competes as a show choir while its disparate members deal with social issues, especially regarding sexuality, race, family, teen relationships and teamwork. The initial twelve-member cast included Matthew Morrison as club director and Spanish teacher Will Schuester, Jane Lynch as scheming cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester, Jayma Mays as the guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury, who has OCD, Jessalyn Gilsig as Will's wife Terri, and the eight original club members, including Dianna Agron as Quinn Fabray, a popular cheerleader who experiences a teenage pregnancy; Chris Colfer as Kurt Hummel, an effeminate, gay boy who feels conflicted by his sexuality and is bullied at school; Kevin McHale as Artie Abrams, who lives with a physical disability; Lea Michele as Rachel Berry, driven by her dreams of becoming a Broadway theatre star and the glee club's most obvious star singer; Cory Monteith as Finn Hudson, the school's star quarterback who sometimes appears not to be very smart; Amber Riley as Mercedes Jones, a black girl who endeavors to be recognized for her talents and dreams of being a vocal diva; Mark Salling as Noah Puckerman, a teenage delinquent in need of direction; and Jenna Ushkowitz as Tina Cohen-Chang, a shy, Korean-American goth who longs to be popular and sometimes experiences racism. The main cast was altered throughout the series, including the addition of Naya Rivera as Santana Lopez, a sardonic and cynical Latina cheerleader experiencing deep conflict over her sexuality, Harry Shum Jr. as Mike Chang, a soft-spoken Chinese-American dancer whose parents do not support his dreams, and Heather Morris as Brittany Pierce, a ditzy cheerleader who is secretly a math prodigy and comes to realize she is bisexual. The series was created by Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk, and Ian Brennan, the latter of whom first conceived of Glee as a film. The three wrote all of the show's episodes for the first two seasons, and Murphy and Falchuk initially served as the show's main directors. The pilot episode was broadcast on May 19, 2009, and the first season aired from September 9, 2009, to June 8, 2010. Subsequent seasons aired from September through May. The sixth and final season aired from January to March 2015. Glee features on-screen performance-based musical numbers that were selected by Murphy, who aimed to maintain a balance between show tunes and chart hits, and produced by Adam Anders and Peer Åström. Songs covered in the show were released through the iTunes Store during the week of broadcast, and a series of Glee albums have been released by Columbia Records. The music of Glee has been a commercial success, with over 36 million digital single sales and eleven million album sales worldwide through October 2011. The series' merchandise also includes DVD and Blu-ray releases, an iPad application, and karaoke games for the Wii home videogame console. There were live concert tours by the show's cast after the first and second seasons completed shooting; a concert film based on the 2011 tour, Glee: The 3D Concert Movie, was produced by Murphy and Fox and directed by Kevin Tancharoen. During its first season, Glee received generally favorable reviews from critics, with Metacritic's weighted average of 77 out of 100 based on 18 critical reviews. Glee has won many accolades. The season was nominated for 19 Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, six Satellite Awards and 57 other awards, with wins including the 2010 Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy, and Emmy awards for Jane Lynch, guest-star Neil Patrick Harris and Murphy's direction of the pilot episode. In 2011, the show once again won the Golden Globe for Best Television Series, and Jane Lynch and Chris Colfer won Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actress and Best Supporting Actor respectively, and Gwyneth Paltrow won the Emmy for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series. The show was also chosen by Fox to fill the coveted time slot that followed the network's coverage of Super Bowl XLV in 2011. In 2013, in the wake of Cory Monteith's death and after his tribute episode "The Quarterback" aired, Murphy announced that the sixth season would be the series' last. After 121 episodes and over 729 music performances, the series concluded on March 20, 2015. The series centers on a high school show choir, also known as a glee club, in the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima, Ohio. Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison) takes over the glee club after the former teacher Sandy Ryerson (Stephen Tobolowsky) is fired for inappropriate contact with a student. With a rag-tag group of misfit teenagers, Will attempts to restore the glee club to its former glory while tending to his developing feelings for his co-worker, guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays), as well as defending the glee club's existence from the conniving cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch). A major focus of the series is the students in the glee club: their relationships as couples, their love of singing and desire for popularity coming into conflict due to their membership in the low-status club, and the many vicissitudes of life in high school and as a teenager. The first season features the fictional high school show choir New Directions competing for the first time on the show choir circuit, winning at the Sectionals competition (episode 13) but losing at Regionals (season finale/episode 22), while its members and faculty deal with sex, relationships, homosexuality, teenage pregnancy, disabilities, acceptance and other social issues. The central characters are glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison), cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch), Will's wife Terri (Jessalyn Gilsig), guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays), and glee club members Rachel (Lea Michele), Finn (Cory Monteith), Artie (Kevin McHale), Kurt (Chris Colfer), Mercedes (Amber Riley), Tina (Jenna Ushkowitz), Puck (Mark Salling), and Quinn (Dianna Agron). The second season follows the club through wins at the Sectionals (episode 9) and Regionals (episode 16) competitions before losing at the Nationals competition in New York City (season finale/episode 22), while its members and faculty deal with relationships, religion, homophobia, bullying, rumors, teenage drinking, death and other social issues. The season's stories revolve around the same Glee club members as first season, with Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) and Brittany S. Pierce (Heather Morris) added to the main cast, along with Kurt's father Burt (Mike O'Malley). The third season follows the club through wins at Sectionals (episode 8) and Regionals competitions (episode 14), before they win the Nationals competition (episode 21) in Chicago. The characters deal with gender identity, adoption, domestic abuse, teenage suicide, bullying, disabilities, texting while driving, college and other social issues. Glee club members added to the main cast were Mike Chang (Harry Shum Jr.) and transfer student Blaine Anderson (Darren Criss), while Jessalyn Gilsig as Terri Schuester was written out of the series and Mike O'Malley as Burt returned to recurring status. The McKinley High class of 2012 graduates at the end of the season. The fourth season continues in Lima with a new generation of students but also follows some of the McKinley graduates from the third season, notably to the fictional New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts (NYADA) in New York City. The season follows the club through a loss at the Sectionals competition (episode 9) and subsequent reinstatement when the winning Dalton Academy Warblers were found to have used banned substances (human growth hormone) (episode 12) before winning at the Regionals competition (episode 22), which meant they would be attending their third consecutive National show choir competition. In the meantime, Rachel Berry and Kurt Hummel navigate NYADA and their lives as aspiring performers, plus their relationships with Finn and Blaine. Issues during the season include sex, bulimia, gender identity, child molestation, dyslexia, school violence, and pregnancy scares. Former main cast members Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays) and Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron) were credited as guest stars, while previously recurring glee club member Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet) was promoted to the main cast. The fifth season, unlike previous seasons, continues the school year begun in the previous season. The season shows the reigning champion glee club finishing second at Nationals competition (episode 11) before the club is permanently disbanded by Sue Sylvester, now school principal, for budgetary reasons (episode 12), leaving the focus on graduation. The show then jumps several months forward in time and deals entirely with the alumni's lives in New York City for the remainder of the season, including Rachel's successful Broadway debut. Throughout this season, the club and its alumni deal with relationships; death and mourning; body image, gay bashing, intimacy, and other social issues. Several main cast members dropped to recurring guest stars as of this season: Amber Riley as Mercedes, Mark Salling as Puck, Harry Shum Jr. as Mike and Heather Morris as Brittany. New main cast members included glee club members introduced in the fourth season: Melissa Benoist as Marley Rose, a kind teenager who develops an eating disorder; Alex Newell as Unique Adams, a shy, nerdy teenager who becomes more bold and glamorous after coming out as transgender; Blake Jenner as Ryder Lynn, a dyslexic teen; Jacob Artist as Jake Puckerman, a biracial teen struggling with anger issues; and Becca Tobin as Kitty Wilde, a Christian mean girl. Actor Cory Monteith died during summer before the fifth season was shot; his character, Finn Hudson, died off-screen in the season's third episode, "The Quarterback". The sixth and final season focuses on Rachel Berry, who returns to McKinley after her television pilot fails. She decides to reconstitute the glee club with all-new McKinley students and with Kurt's help. Will Schuester is now coaching rival club Vocal Adrenaline, while Blaine is coaching the Dalton Academy Warblers. All of the new main cast members from the fifth season have returned to guest star status in this final season when they appear, as well as Naya Rivera as Santana and Jenna Ushkowitz as Tina; Amber Riley as Mercedes rejoins the main cast, and Dot-Marie Jones as Coach Beiste joins the main cast for the first time. The cast members deal with gay marriage, gender identity, transitioning and other social issues. The newly reconstituted club wins the Nationals competition, Sue is fired as principal and Will is hired to be the principal of a McKinley High repurposed as a magnet arts school, with Sam as the new director of New Directions. The finale jumps five years into the future: Rachel has married Jesse St. James (Jonathan Groff), wins a Tony Award, and is a surrogate mother for Kurt and Blaine (who are themselves Broadway stars). Artie has directed Tina in a film, Mercedes is a highly successful recording artist, and Sue has just been re-elected Vice President of the United States. The McKinley auditorium is renamed after Finn. In casting Glee, Murphy sought out actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles. Instead of using traditional network casting calls, he spent three months on Broadway, where he found Matthew Morrison, who had previously starred on stage in Hairspray and The Light in the Piazza; Lea Michele, who starred in Spring Awakening; and Jenna Ushkowitz, who had been in the Broadway revival of The King and I. During their auditions, actors without any theatrical experience needed to demonstrate that they could also sing and dance. Chris Colfer had no previous professional experience, but Murphy wrote in the character Kurt Hummel for him. Jayma Mays auditioned with the song "Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me" from The Rocky Horror Show, while Cory Monteith initially submitted a tape of himself acting only, and was requested to submit a second, musical tape, in which he sang "a cheesy, '80s music-video-style version" of REO Speedwagon's "Can't Fight This Feeling". Kevin McHale came from a boy-band background, having previously been part of the group Not Like Them. He explained that the diversity of the cast's backgrounds reflects the range of different musical styles within the show itself: "It's a mix of everything: classic rock, current stuff, R&B. Even the musical theatre stuff is switched up. You won't always recognize it." Jane Lynch was originally supposed to have a recurring role as Sue Sylvester, but was made a series regular when a Damon Wayans pilot she was working on for ABC fell through. The cast is contracted for a potential three Glee films, with their contract stating that "[The actor] hereby grants Fox three exclusive, irrevocable options to engage [the actor] in up to, respectively, three feature-length motion pictures." Murphy said in December 2010 that he wasn't interested in doing a Glee movie "as a story", and added, "I might do it as a live concert thing." Glee: The 3D Concert Movie, filmed during the 2011 Glee Live! In Concert! tour, was released on August 12, 2011. Glee has featured as many as fifteen main roles with star billing, after starting with twelve. Morrison plays Will Schuester, McKinley High's Spanish teacher, who becomes glee-club director and hopes to restore it to its former glory. Lynch plays Sue Sylvester, head coach of the "Cheerios" cheerleading squad, and the Glee Club's nemesis. Mays appears as Emma Pillsbury, the school's mysophobic guidance counselor who has feelings for Will, and Jessalyn Gilsig plays Terri Schuester, Will's wife whom he eventually divorces after five years of marriage and the discovery that she has faked being pregnant instead of revealing she had suffered a false pregnancy.[citation needed] Michele plays Rachel Berry, talented star of the glee club whose ambition sometimes causes her to be insensitive toward others. Often bullied by the Cheerios and football players, she grows closer to them as the show progresses and begins an on-and-off relationship with Finn Hudson starting in season one; they become engaged in season three. Monteith played Finn, star quarterback of the school's football team who risks alienation by his friends after joining the glee club.[citation needed] Also in the club are Amber Riley as Mercedes Jones, a fashion-conscious diva who resents having to sing back-up but eventually finds her place in the choir; Colfer as Kurt Hummel, a fashionable gay man countertenor who is often bullied by the jocks in the school; McHale as Artie Abrams, a guitar player and paraplegic who longs to be seen for his personality rather than only his physical injuries; and Ushkowitz as Tina Cohen-Chang, a painfully shy Asian American student who fakes a speech impediment as a defense mechanism. Dianna Agron plays Quinn Fabray, Finn's cheerleader girlfriend, who later joins the glee club to keep an eye on him. Mark Salling plays Noah "Puck" Puckerman, a good friend of Finn's on the football team who at first disapproves of Finn joining the glee club, but later joins it himself. Naya Rivera and Heather Morris portray Cheerios and glee club vocalists Santana Lopez and Brittany Pierce respectively and were originally recurring actors, but were promoted to series regulars in the second season. Mike O'Malley, who plays Kurt's father Burt Hummel, also became a series regular on season two. Gilsig and O'Malley no longer appeared on the list of starring actors at the beginning of the third season, though O'Malley was a recurring guest star in at least six episodes during the season. Two actors were promoted to series regulars as of the third season: Harry Shum Jr. as football player and glee club member Mike Chang and Darren Criss as former Dalton Academy Warbler and new club member Blaine Anderson, both of whom started as recurring actors, Shum in the first season and Criss in the second. For the fourth season, Chord Overstreet, who started as a recurring actor in the second season, playing glee club member Sam Evans, was promoted to the main cast, while Agron and Mays were credited as recurring guest stars. Many of the original characters graduated from McKinley High at the end of the third season. Murphy said, "We didn't want to have a show where they were in high school for eight years. We really wanted to be true to that experience." Adult characters played by Matthew Morrison and Jane Lynch would remain to provide continuity to the series, though according to Falchuk, some students—Rachel, Finn and Kurt in particular—would likely remain on the show after they graduate. In May 2012, Murphy said that just because a character on the show graduates high school does not mean that they are leaving, "A lot of people have been writing Dianna's off the show, Amber's off the show — they're not off the show. I think Amber was talking about that bittersweet feeling of, 'I'll never be in the choir room with that exact group of people.' At least that's what she told me ... When I read that [tweet,] I said, 'I think people will misconstrue that.' She's excited about where her character is going. They all are. I wanted to do the right thing by all of them." He then continued: "They're all coming back. Anyone who is a regular is coming back. Everyone said yes." On June 28, 2013, the media reported that Morris, Riley, Salling, and Shum would be changing from starring status to guest starring roles for the fifth season, and on the following day that Jacob Artist, Melissa Benoist, Blake Jenner, Alex Newell, and Becca Tobin (who play Jake Puckerman, Marley Rose, Ryder Lynn, Wade "Unique" Adams, and Kitty Wilde, respectively), were all being promoted to the show's main cast. On July 13, 2013, Cory Monteith was found dead in his room at the Fairmont Pacific Rim hotel in Vancouver, British Columbia, after failing to check out. Staff were sent to his room where it was then that his body was discovered. An autopsy completed on July 15 indicated that he died of alcohol and heroin overdose. On July 20, 2013, Ryan Murphy said in various media outlets that Cory would have a tribute in season five's third episode, which would deal with the death of Monteith's character, Finn. On July 30, 2013, Mays confirmed that she would depart the show after the fifth season to work on other projects, but stated that she would be open to returning as a guest star in the future. On July 7, 2014, it was confirmed that Rivera and Ushkowitz would be placed on a recurring status for the sixth and final season. On August 28, a website revealed that Amber Riley would once again become a regular along with Dot-Marie Jones while Jayma Mays would be on a recurring status. Ian Brennan conceived Glee based on his own experience as a member of the Prospect High School show choir in Mount Prospect, Illinois. He initially envisioned Glee as a film, rather than a television series, and wrote the first draft in August 2005 with the aid of Screenwriting for Dummies. He completed the script in 2005, but could not generate interest in the project for several years. Mike Novick, a television producer and a friend of Brennan's from Los Angeles, was a member of the same gym as Ryan Murphy, and gave him a copy of Brennan's script. Murphy had been in a show choir in college and felt he could relate to the script. Murphy and his Nip/Tuck colleague Brad Falchuk suggested that Glee be produced as a television show. The script was entirely rewritten, and was picked up by Fox within fifteen hours of being received. Murphy attributed that, in part, to the network's success with American Idol. "It made sense for the network with the biggest hit in TV, which is a musical, to do something in that vein," he said. Murphy and Falchuk became the show's executive producers and showrunners, Brennan became a co-executive producer and Novick a producer. Brennan, Falchuk and Murphy started by writing "all the episodes". Glee is set at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima, Ohio. Murphy chose a Midwest setting as he himself grew up in Indiana, and recalled childhood visits to Ohio to the Kings Island theme park. Although set in Lima, the show is filmed at Paramount Studios and Helen Bernstein High School in Hollywood. Murphy has said that he has never seen a High School Musical film, to which Glee has been compared, and that his interest lay in creating a "postmodern musical", rather than "doing a show where people burst into song", drawing more heavily on the format of Chicago. Murphy intended the show to be a form of escapism. "There's so much on the air right now about people with guns, or sci-fi, or lawyers running around. This is a different genre, there's nothing like it on the air at the networks and cable. Everything's so dark in the world right now, that's why Idol worked. It's pure escapism," he said. Murphy intended to make a family show to appeal to adults as well as children, with adult characters starring equally alongside the teenage leads, and as of October 2009 he had already mapped out plans for the series covering three years of broadcast. The three creators—Murphy, Falchuk, and Brennan—plan the stories together. For the first two seasons, they were the only writers, and after taking joint credit for the pilot episode and the episode that opened the fall 2009 season, they began rotating taking a single auctorial credit, based in large part on the person "who's taken the lead in story breaking or who wrote a draft". Brennan noted that the writing process is "fast and loose, with the emphasis on fast", and quotes Murphy as having said, in terms of their roles in episode creation, "I'm sort of the brain. Brad's sort of the heart. Ian's sort of the funny bone", which Brennan says "is true in a lot of ways". Some of the characters are written more by one writer than by the others. Brennan writes most of Sue's material, and Falchuk frequently writes the scenes between Kurt and Burt Hummel, though Murphy contributes a great deal to Kurt. Starting with season three, a writing staff of six was hired: Ali Adler, Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa, Marti Noxon, Michael Hitchcock, Matt Hodgson and Ross Maxwell. The season's fourth episode, "Pot o' Gold", was written by Adler, the first not credited to the show's three creators. Adler and Noxon did not return for the show's fourth season and instead House writers Russel Friend and Garrett Lerner, and Stacy Traub were hired. The series features numerous song covers sung onscreen by the characters. Ryan Murphy was responsible for selecting all of the songs used, and has said that he strove to maintain a balance between chart hits and show tunes: "I want there to be something for everybody in every episode. That's a tricky mix, but that's very important—the balancing of that." According to Murphy, the song choices are integral to script development, "Each episode has a theme at its core. After I write the script, I will choose songs that help to move the story along." In a 2010 interview with Allison Kugel, Chris Colfer noted that "there have been a couple of times when I have gone to Ryan Murphy (Glee creator) and told him a couple of things that have happened to me, and then he writes it into the show. Or he'll ask me what song I would want to sing, in this situation or in that situation. I don't think any of us directly try to give input on the character or on the storyline, but they definitely steal things from us." For the second season, a shift toward using more Top 40 songs was seen, in an effort to appeal more to the 18–49 demographic. Murphy was surprised at the ease with which use of songs was approved by the record labels approached, and explained: "I think the key to it is they loved the tone of it. They loved that this show was about optimism and young kids, for the most part, reinterpreting their classics for a new audience." A minority of those approached refused to allow their music to be used, including Bryan Adams, Guns N' Roses and Coldplay; however, in June 2010, Coldplay reversed their decision, allowing Glee the rights to their catalog. Adams posted on his Twitter account that the producers of Glee had never requested permission from him and urged them to "pick up the phone". Composer and musician Billy Joel offered many of his songs for use on the show, and other artists have offered use of their songs for free. A series of Glee soundtrack albums have been released through Columbia Records. Songs featured on the show are available for digital download through iTunes up to two weeks before new episodes air, and through other digital outlets and mobile carriers a week later. Glee music producers Adam Anders and Peer Astrom have begun to add original music to the show, including two original songs, "Loser like Me" and "Get It Right", on the March 15, 2011, episode. Glee is choreographed by Zach Woodlee and features four to eight production numbers per episode. Once Murphy selects a song, rights are cleared with its publishers by music supervisor P. J. Bloom, and music producers Adam Anders and Peer Astrom rearrange it for the Glee cast. Numbers are pre-recorded by the cast, while Woodlee constructs the accompanying dance moves, which are then taught to the cast and filmed. Studio recordings of tracks are then made. The process begins six to eight weeks before each episode is filmed, and can end as late as the day before filming begins. Each episode costs at least $3 million to produce, and can take up to ten days to film as a result of the elaborate choreography. In late 2010, Bloom reported the process has been even shorter; "as quick as a few weeks". For the second season, the creators were offered listens of upcoming songs in advance by publishers and record labels, with production occurring even before song rights are cleared. Prior to the second episode's premiere, Glee's cast went on tour at several Hot Topic stores across the nation. The cast sang the U.S. national anthem at the third game of the 2009 World Series. Macy's invited them to perform at the 2009 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade, but host broadcaster NBC declined because Glee aired on a rival network. Ryan Murphy commented on the cast's exclusion: "I completely understand NBC's position, and look forward to seeing a Jay Leno float." The show's success sent the cast on a concert tour, Glee Live! In Concert! after the first season's wrapup. They visited Phoenix, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York. The cast also recorded a cover of Wham!'s "Last Christmas", which was released as a single in late 2009 but didn't appear in the show until "A Very Glee Christmas" on December 10, 2010. Morrison, Lynch, Michele, Monteith, and Colfer reprised their roles as Will, Sue, Rachel, Finn, and Kurt respectively for a cameo appearance in an episode of The Cleveland Show that aired January 16, 2011. Michele, Monteith, and Riley appeared as campers in the twenty-second season premiere of The Simpsons. Lynch, Colfer, Monteith, and Riley appeared at the 2010 MTV VMAs on September 12, 2010. When Agron, Michele, and Monteith posed for a set of risqué photos for the November 2010 edition of GQ magazine, Parents Television Council (PTC) criticized the show; PTC president Tim Winter commented that Glee has many young fans, and that "by authorizing this kind of near-pornographic display, the creators of the program have established their intentions on the show's direction. And it isn't good for families." The promotional posters for the first season have the show's stars using their right hands to make an "L" to fill in the L of the word Glee. The second season's promotional posters have the stars throwing slushies at the camera in pairs. The third season's promotional posters have the stars getting dodgeballs thrown at them by Sue Sylvester. While the cast concert tour, Glee Live! In Concert!, began on May 15, 2010, and presented concerts in four cities in the US that month, the second edition, with an almost-entirely new set list, toured for four weeks in the US and Canada from May 21 through June 18, 2011, and followed with twelve days in England and Ireland, from June 22 through July 3, 2011. The cast also performed on the seventh season of The X Factor on December 5, 2010. In 2020, celebrating the show's 11 year anniversary, Ryan Murphy made an Instagram post about his idea of re-doing the show's pilot with Lea Michele, Ben Platt, and Beanie Feldstein. Murphy eventually deleted the post. In 2021, Fox President Michael Thorn revealed he was interested in reviving past Fox programs, most notably 24 and Glee. In 2022, in an interview with Kevin McHale and Jenna Ushkowitz, Ryan Murphy revealed he was interested in re-examining the series as a brand through a reboot or a Broadway musical. The first season of Glee consists of twenty-two episodes. The pilot episode was originally broadcast on May 19, 2009. The series returned on September 9, 2009, airing an additional twelve episodes on Wednesdays in the 9:00 pm timeslot until December 9, 2009, for a total of thirteen episodes. On September 21, 2009, nine more episodes were ordered for the first season by Fox, and the first of these episodes was broadcast on April 13, 2010. These episodes aired on Tuesday evenings at 9:00 pm. On January 11, 2010, it was announced that Fox had commissioned a second season of the show. The second season began production in June 2010. Season two began on September 21, 2010, airing in the 8:00 pm time slot on Tuesdays, and consists of twenty-two episodes. The show was chosen by Fox to fill the coveted timeslot that followed the network's coverage of Super Bowl XLV in 2011, and the network originally planned to move the show to the 9:00 pm time slot on Wednesdays following the post–Super Bowl broadcast. However, Fox later revised its schedule, leaving Glee on Tuesdays in order to concentrate on building up its weaker Wednesday and Thursday line-ups. A third season was ordered by Fox on May 23, 2010, before the end of the first season. The early renewal of the show allowed the production team to cut costs and to plan ahead when writing scripts. The third season broadcasts remained in the show's Tuesday 8:00 pm time slot, and began airing on September 20, 2011. The show's fourth season changed both date and time of broadcast: it moved to Thursdays in the 9:00 pm time slot, and aired after that evening's 8:00 pm music competition "results" shows—The X Factor in the fall and American Idol in midseason. The show was renewed for both a fifth and sixth season at the same time, on April 19, 2013. Reruns were also syndicated to local US stations from 2013 to 2015. Glee has been syndicated for broadcast in many countries worldwide, including Australia, where cast members visited to promote the show prior to its September 2009 debut on Network Ten. Midway through season four, Glee was moved to Network Ten's digital channel Eleven due to poor ratings. It also airs in Canada on City and, previously, Global, New Zealand, Fiji, and Trinidad and Tobago. It is broadcast in South Africa, where Fox beams the episodes directly to the M-Net broadcast center in Johannesburg rather than delivering the tapes. Asian countries that broadcast Glee include Bangladesh, the Philippines, India, Malaysia, and Singapore. All the episodes of the series were announced to be arriving on Disney+ in Latin America in February 2021. In the United States, the series was made available on Disney+ and Hulu starting on June 1, 2022, following its December 2021 departure from Netflix after over seven years, as well as a year on Prime Video. In the United Kingdom, E4 broadcast the first two seasons of Glee, showing episodes months after they were first aired in the US. Sky 1 broadcast the series starting with the third season, airing episodes two days after their US broadcast. However, the show has come under a trademark dispute in the UK with the Glee Club, a small chain of independent live stand-up comedy and live music venues. In February 2014, a High Court judge ruled that the show "diluted and tarnished" the reputation of the comedy club chain. In a later ruling in July 2014, the High Court ordered Fox to use a different title for the show in the UK, saying there was a "likelihood of confusion" between the two brands. In February 2016, Fox lost an appeal against the decision. Three soundtrack albums were released to accompany Glee's first season: Glee: The Music, Volume 1, Glee: The Music, Volume 2 and Glee: The Music, Volume 3 Showstoppers. Two extended plays (EP) accompanied the episodes "The Power of Madonna" and "Journey to Regionals": Glee: The Music, The Power of Madonna and Glee: The Music, Journey to Regionals respectively. Glee: The Music, The Complete Season One, a compilation album featuring all 100 studio recordings from the first season, was released exclusively to the iTunes Store. Five soundtrack albums were released to accompany Glee's second season: Glee: The Music, The Christmas Album, featuring Christmas-themed songs, and Glee: The Music, Volume 4, were both released in November 2010; Glee: The Music, Volume 5, Glee: The Music Presents the Warblers, and Glee: The Music, Volume 6 were 2011 releases, in March, April, and May, respectively. An EP entitled Glee: The Music, The Rocky Horror Glee Show was released to accompany the Halloween episode, "The Rocky Horror Glee Show". Two EPs were released exclusively at the Target discount chain: Glee: The Music, Love Songs in the last week of 2010, and Glee: The Music, Dance Party in early September 2011. Glee has been released on several DVD and Blu-ray box-sets. Glee – Pilot Episode: Director's Cut features the pilot episode and a preview of the second episode, "Showmance". Glee – Volume 1: Road to Sectionals contains the first thirteen episodes of season one, and Glee – Volume 2: Road to Regionals contains the final nine episodes of the first season. Glee – The Complete First Season was released on September 13, 2010. Three boxed sets were released for the second season: Glee Season 2: Volume 1 containing the first ten episodes on January 25, 2011, and both Glee Season 2: Volume 2 with the final twelve episode and Glee: The Complete Second Season with all twenty-two on September 13, 2011. All three were released on DVD; only the complete season is available on Blu-ray. Little, Brown Books has published three Glee-related young adult novels, all of which were developed in collaboration with the show's producers and writers. All three have been written by Sophia Lowell; the first, Glee: The Beginning, was released in August 2010 and serves as a prequel to the events of the television series. Subsequent novels include Glee: Foreign Exchange, released in February 2011, and Glee: Summer Break, released in July 2011. Twentieth Century Fox Consumer Products have plans for a line of Glee-related merchandise including games, electrical products, greeting cards, apparel and stationery. Macy's carry a line of Glee-related clothing, and Claire's stock accessories. Halfbrick Studios published a Glee content version of the mobile game Band Stars by Six Foot Kid in collaboration with Fox Digital Entertainment on March 27, 2014, currently available on iOS platforms, but with plans to release to Android. The game is available for free download with some Glee content available immediately including Kurt Hummel and Will Schuester. 12 characters from the Glee TV show are available for purchase and download in two separate packs. Pack 1 contains: Rachel Berry, Mercedes Jones, Noah (Puck) Puckerman, Jake Puckerman and Quinn Fabray. Pack 2 contains: Artie Abrams, Tina Cohen-Chang, Blaine Anderson, Santana Lopez, Brittany Pierce and Unique Adams. The pilot episode of Glee averaged 9.62 million viewers, and the following eleven episodes attained between 6.10 and 7.65 million. The mid-season finale was watched by 8.13 million viewers, with the show returning in April 2010 to a season high of 13.66 million viewers. The following six episodes attained between 11.49 and 12.98 million viewers, falling to 8.99 million for the penultimate episode "Funk". Viewing figures rose to 11.07 million viewers for the season finale, giving Glee the highest finale rating for a new show in the 2009–10 television season. Only the first twenty episodes of the first season were accounted for when calculating the season average due to the final two episodes airing outside the traditional sweeps period. On February 6, 2011, after the Super Bowl, Glee received its highest ever ratings, with over 26.8 million tuning in to see the special episode, with a peak of 39.5 million. In 2011, Glee generated $2 million advertising revenue per half-hour. In 2012, the show was the fourth-highest revenue earning show of the year, with US$2.83 million ad revenue per half-hour, behind Two and a Half Men, The X Factor and American Idol. Glee received a Metacritic score of 78 out of 100 in its first season, based on reviews by eighteen critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". It was praised by several critics in year-end "best of" reviews in 2009. James Poniewozik of Time ranked it the eighth best television show of the year, commenting: "when Glee works—which is often—it is transcendent, tear-jerking and thrilling like nothing else on TV." Entertainment Weekly's Ken Tucker ranked it ninth, calling it "Hands down the year's most novel show [and] also its least likely success", Lisa Respers France of CNN wrote that while ordinarily Glee's premise would have been "a recipe for disaster", the show has "such quirky charm and bravado that it is impossible not to get swept up". Reviews for subsequent seasons on Metacritic, reflecting their initial episodes, were not quite as good—the second season's score was 76 out of 100 from eleven reviews, and the fourth season received a score of 73 out of 100 from six reviews. Even with these stellar reviews from a multitude of critics, Glee's later seasons lost millions of viewers. Nancy Gibbs of Time magazine wrote that she had heard the series described as "anti-Christian" by a youth minister, and commented: It is easy to see his point, if you look at the specifics. ... The students lie, they cheat, they steal, they lust, they lace the bake-sale cupcakes with pot in order to give the student body a severe case of the munchies. Nearly all the Ten Commandments get violated at one point or another, while the audience is invited to laugh at people's pain and folly and humiliation. ... It insults kids to suggest that simply watching Characters Behaving Badly onscreen means they'll take that as permission to do the same themselves. ... And it's set in high school, meaning it's about a journey not just to college and career but to identity and conviction, the price of popularity, the compromises we must make between what we want and what we need. Variety's Brian Lowry was critical of the show's early episodes, highlighting acting and characterization issues and deeming the adult cast "over-the-top buffoons", with the exception of Mays' Emma, who he felt offered "modest redemption". Though he praised Colfer and Michele's performances, Lowry wrote that the show's talent was squandered by its "jokey, cartoonish, wildly uneven tone", deeming the series a "one-hit wonder". Following the show's mid-season finale, Lowry wrote that while Glee "remains a frustrating mess at times", its "vibrant musical numbers and talented cast have consistently kept it on [his] TiVo must list" conceding that "even with its flaws, TV would be poorer without Glee." As Glee's initial success pulled in a large audience, John Doyle of The Globe and Mail wrote that the early shows "felt fresh, mainly because the motley crew of kids had a kind of square naïveté." Doyle notes that the early success took Glee away from its original characters and plot, focusing more on celebrity guests. "The gaiety is gone from Glee. You should have set it in its prime, mere months ago". Matthew Gilbert of Boston Globe similarly wrote that "It has become a powerful, promotional machine, long on hype and short on the human feeling—the glee—that once made it so addictive." The show's 754 musical performances, with each performance delivering an individual song or a mashup of two or more songs in a single performance, have led to commercial success, with over thirty-six million copies of Glee cast single releases purchased digitally, and over eleven million albums purchased worldwide through October 2011. In 2009, the Glee cast had twenty-five singles chart on the Billboard Hot 100, the most by any artist since The Beatles had thirty-one songs in the chart in 1964; in 2010, it placed eighty singles on the Billboard Hot 100, far outstripping the previous record. In February 2011, Glee surpassed Elvis Presley as the act with the most songs placed on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, though fewer than one-fourth of them have charted for more than one week. The cast performance of "Don't Stop Believin'" was certified gold on October 13, 2009, achieving over 500,000 digital sales, and on March 16, 2011, received platinum certification for having sales of over a million. The series' cover version had a positive effect on sales of Rihanna's "Take a Bow", which increased by 189 percent after the song was covered in the Glee episode "Showmance". However, there has also been critical condemnation of the cast performances. Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone commented that Matthew Morrison "couldn't rap his way out of a 98° rehearsal", and AllMusic's Andrew Leahey wrote that Cory Monteith and Dianna Agron "can't sing nearly as well as their co-stars". E! Online's Joal Ryan criticized the show for its "overproduced soundtrack" and complained that many songs rely too heavily on the pitch-correcting software Auto-Tune: "For every too-brief moment of Lea Michele sounding raw—and lovely—on a "What a Girl Wants", or Monteith singing a perfectly credible REO Speedwagon in the shower, there's Michele and Monteith sounding like 1990s-era Cher on "No Air", or Monteith sounding like the Monteith XRZ-200 on the out-of-the-shower version of "Can't Fight This Feeling". During the second season, Rob Sheffield for Rolling Stone noted the Britney Spears and Rocky Horror tribute episodes as examples when he lauded Glee and its choice of music. He praised Murphy for his selection and resurrection of "forgotten" pop songs and compared the show's uniqueness to "MTV in its prime" as the embodiment of popular culture. Some artists, including Slash, Kings of Leon and Foo Fighters, have declined to have their songs used on the show. Murphy has been publicly critical of these refusals, which has led to exchanges in the press between him and a number of artists. The cover of Sir Mix-a-Lot's "Baby Got Back" in the season four episode "Sadie Hawkins" was particularly criticized by Jonathan Coulton for borrowing the melody (and allegedly portions of the recording) of Coulton's rendition of the song without credit or permission. Other artists have come forward with allegations of plagiarism in light of this development. It was reported that musician Prince had not given permission for Glee to cover his hit "Kiss" before filming the performance of the cover. Gorillaz founder Damon Albarn said on CBC Radio One that he would not let the show cover any Gorillaz songs: "Firstly, write your own songs. Two, have your own identity and stop being the ... slaves of TV producers ... who don't give a shit about you." Fans of Glee are commonly referred to as "Gleeks", a portmanteau of "Glee" and "geek". In the summer of 2009, the cast stopped at select Hot Topic stores on a "Gleek Tour" to promote the series' debut. Also in 2009, Fox ran a "Biggest GLEEK" competition, measuring fans' Glee-related activity on social networking websites such as Facebook and MySpace, and found that the growth of the fanbase outpaced the network's science-fiction shows. In its initial seasons, Glee was one of TV's most tweeted-about shows. Fans have recreated many of its musical numbers in tribute to the show, sharing them on YouTube. Based on this trend, show producers included instrumental versions of some songs on the show's soundtracks. Similarly, Glee fans have created portmanteaus of character couples, such as "Finchel" for Finn and Rachel, "Samcedes" for Sam and Mercedes, "Klaine" for Kurt and Blaine, and "Brittana" for Brittany and Santana. This fact has been referenced in various second-season episodes, notably "Furt", which is itself a coinage for the new stepbrothers Finn and Kurt, and "Rumours". Glee has received a number of awards and nominations. In 2009, the series won five Satellite Awards: "Best Musical or Comedy TV Series", "Best Actor" and "Actress in a Musical or Comedy TV Series" for Morrison and Michele, "Best Supporting Actress" for Lynch and "Special Achievement for Outstanding Guest Star" for Kristin Chenoweth. In 2010, the show won a Golden Globe Award for "Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy". Morrison, Michele and Lynch also received acting nominations. The series was nominated for two Writers Guild of America Awards, with screenplays nominated in the "Comedy Series" and "New Series" categories. It also won a Peabody Award in 2009. The Glee cast won the "Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series" award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards. Paris Barclay and Ryan Murphy both received nominations for "Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series" at the Directors Guild of America Awards for their work on Glee. In July 2010, Glee received nineteen Emmy Award nominations, including "Outstanding Comedy Series", "Outstanding Lead Actor – Comedy Series" for Morrison and "Outstanding Lead Actress – Comedy Series" for Michele; it won four of these, including "Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series" for Lynch and "Outstanding Guest Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series" for Neil Patrick Harris. Paris Barclay was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy for Best Directing in a Comedy Series in 2010 for his episode "Wheels". On January 16, 2011, the show won a Golden Globe for "Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy" and both Lynch and Colfer won Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actress and Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series, Miniseries, or TV Film. In July 2011, Glee received twelve Emmy nominations and won two: Gwyneth Paltrow was named Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her portrayal of Holly Holliday, and the show won the Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series category. It received three Emmy nominations in July 2012, and four in July 2013. The whole cast was invited to sing at the White House by Michelle Obama in April 2010 for the annual Easter Egg Roll. Glee: The Concert Movie, a concert film based on the four-week North American segment of the 2011 Glee Live! In Concert! tour and featuring the cast of the series in performance and backstage, was released in the United States and the United Kingdom on August 12, 2011, for a two-week limited engagement. The film is directed by Kevin Tancharoen. In summer 2010, Channel 5 in the United Kingdom aired Don't Stop Believing, a reality talent show inspired by Glee's success. The series featured live shows in which established and new musical performance groups competed against each other, performing well-known songs in new arrangements, with viewers voting on the winner. Solo singers were also sought to join a group to represent the United Kingdom on the American glee club circuit. Five's controller Richard Woolfe stated: "There's an explosion in musical performance groups and Don't Stop Believing will tap into that exciting groundswell." The show was hosted by Emma Bunton, who told The Belfast Telegraph that she is a "huge fan" of Glee. The show's judges were former EastEnders actress Tamsin Outhwaite, Blue member Duncan James, singer Anastacia and High School Musical choreographer Charles "Chucky" Klapow. The Glee Project was a reality television series that served as an audition for the main series. Two seasons aired in the summers of 2011 and 2012. The winning prize was a seven-episode guest-starring role in Glee's third season, which was awarded to two contestants, Damian McGinty (Rory) and Samuel Larsen (Joe), with a two-episode role given to the two runner ups, Alex Newell (Wade/Unique) and Lindsay Pearce (Harmony). The Glee Project was renewed for a second season that ran from June 5 to August 14, 2012. This season the winner was Blake Jenner (Ryder), with Ali Stroker (Betty) as runner-up. The show was not renewed for a third season. On June 7, 2010, UK broadcaster Channel 4 aired Gleeful: The Real Show Choirs of America on its E4 station. The documentary explored the American show choir phenomenon which inspired Glee. Narrated by Nick Grimshaw, it went behind the scenes with real-life glee clubs and detailed celebrity show choir alumni including Lance Bass, Ashton Kutcher, Blake Lively and Anne Hathaway. It was selected as recommended viewing by The Guardian, with the comment: "it's a fascinating look at the real-life New Directions, and it's equally as crackers as its TV champion." The newspaper's Lucy Mangan reviewed the documentary positively, writing: "It will, one way or another, fill your heart to bursting", and commenting that: "Glee, it turns out, is not a gloriously ridiculous, highly polished piece of escapism. It is cinéma vérité." It was watched by 411,000 viewers, a 2.3% audience share. A three-episode documentary miniseries about the deaths of three Glee main cast members – and claiming to investigate the effect of the sudden fame they experienced due to the show on their personal lives – called The Price of Glee, was produced in 2022, with people related to the series finding it in poor taste.  Television portal Stanhope, Kate (November 20, 2014). "Fox Announces Premiere Dates for Glee's Goodbye, The Following's Return". TV Guide. Archived from the original on November 24, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2014. Gorman, Bill (October 17, 2013). "'Glee' Will End Next Season, Series Co-Creator Ryan Murphy Says". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2013. O'Keeffe, Kevin (March 20, 2015). "As Glee Comes to an End, The Show Returns to Its Origins". Mic. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 5 July 2015. "Deadline Hollywood". ZDeadline Hollywood. May 28, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Gorman, Bill (June 1, 2011). "2010–11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show Viewership Averages". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 25, 2011. Retrieved August 14, 2011. Gorman, Bill (May 24, 2012). "Complete List Of 2011–12 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'American Idol,' 'NCIS' & 'Dancing With The Stars'". Tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012. Bibel, Sarah (May 29, 2013). "Complete List Of 2012-13 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'NCIS,' 'The Big Bang Theory' & 'NCIS: Los Angeles'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013. "Full 2013-2014 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline. May 22, 2014. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2015). "Full 2014-15 TV Season Series Rankings: Football & 'Empire' Ruled". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2016. Kelly, Mike (May 17, 2009). "'Glee' series set in a Lima high school has Toledo connection too". The Blade. The Toledo Times. Archived from the original on February 2, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2009. Martin, Denise (April 26, 2009). "Video: 'Glee' team rewrites the school musical". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2009. Andreeva, Nellie (April 24, 2009). "Trio promoted to series regulars". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved May 20, 2009. Itzkoff, David (May 18, 2009). "Jane Lynch Brings Her Inner Mean Girl to 'Glee'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2009. Tyler, Matt (June 21, 2010). "Glee The Movie Coming Soon". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on September 2, 2010. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "'Glee' movies? Stars are already signed on for a trilogy". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. June 18, 2010. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved June 29, 2010. Trakin, Roy (December 16, 2010). "The Glee Effect". Hit Daily Double. Dennis Lavinthal. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2011. McClintock, Pamela (May 4, 2011). ""Glee The Movie 3D!," featuring the North American tour, will be released Aug. 12". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2011. Carter, Kelley L. (May 18, 2009). "Broadway star Morrison gets all keyed up for 'Glee'". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 19, 2009. Retrieved June 1, 2009. Abrams, Natalie (May 18, 2009). "Time to Get Happy with the Cast of Glee". E! Online. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved June 1, 2009. "Chris Colfer as Kurt Hummel". Fox. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2009. Wightman, Catriona (April 28, 2010). "Glee Rivera, Morris to become regulars". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 14, 2010. Retrieved June 28, 2010. Ghosh, Korbi (July 13, 2010). "GLEE Exclusive: Mike O'Malley Made Series Regular for Season 2, Plus More Show Intel..." GiveMeMyRemote.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2010. Stack, Tim (March 1, 2011). "Glee star Mike O'Malley talks his new pilot and rumors he's leaving the series: 'I would not have taken this job if they prevented me from continuing as Burt Hummel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2011. Ausiello, Michael (July 1, 2011). "Glee Exclusive: Darren Criss and Harry Shum Jr. In, Chord Overstreet Out!". TVLine. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on December 31, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011. Goldberg, Lesley (July 23, 2012). "Glee: Chord Overstreet Officially Returning as Series Regular". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 2, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2012. Fowler, Tara (June 19, 2011). "Glee creator: 'Original cast will graduate'". Digital Spy. Hachette Filipacchi UK. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved June 27, 2011. Oldenburg, Ann (June 20, 2011). "'Glee' kids to graduate next year". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Mitovich, Matt (July 24, 2011). "Glee Boss: Chris Colfer, Cory Monteith and Lea Michele Are Staying, But Sam Won't Be Back". TVLine. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on December 27, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "Murphy Talks the Fate of GLEE's Seniors". Broadway World. May 17, 2012. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved May 18, 2012. Ausiello, Michael (June 28, 2013). "UPDATED Glee Exclusive: 4 Original Cast Members Not Returning as Series Regulars for Season 5; Plus — Who's Getting Promoted?". TVLine. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on October 30, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. "Hollywood Star Found Dead in Vancouver" (Press release). Vancouver Police Department. July 13, 2013. Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Mandell, Andrea (July 14, 2013). "Cory Monteith dies in Vancouver at 31". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Dos Santos, Kristin (July 20, 2013). "Ryan Murphy Explains How Glee Will Return Without Cory Monteith: "Lea Michele Is the Strongest 26-Year-Old I Know"". E! Online. Archived from the original on October 28, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2013. Christopher Rogers (July 30, 2013). "Jayma Mays Leaving Glee — Actress Confirms Departure From FOX Series". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. "Naya Rivera: 'Glee' Season 6 — Is She Staying or Leaving? - TVLine". TVLine. July 7, 2014. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2014. "'Glee's' Final Season Details Revealed". The Hollywood Reporter. August 27, 2014. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2014. "Mount Prospect native helped create new Fox show 'Glee'". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on July 3, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2010. Arado, Matt (May 19, 2009). "Mount Prospect native helped create new Fox show 'Glee'". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2010. Fernandez, Maria Elena (April 26, 2009). "Will TV audiences watch with 'Glee'?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2009. Schneider, Michael (July 23, 2009). "Fox greenlights 'Glee' pilot". Variety. Archived from the original on October 14, 2009. Retrieved January 19, 2010. Silver, Curtis (December 7, 2009). "We're All Gleeks — 10 Questions for Glee Co-Creator Brad Falchuk". Wired. Condé Nast Publications. Archived from the original on December 25, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010. Kelly, Mike (May 17, 2009). "'Glee' series set in a Lima high school has Toledo connection too". The Blade. The Toledo Times. Archived from the original on September 7, 2009. Retrieved May 19, 2009. Heldenfels, Rich (May 6, 2009). "The Heldenfiles — Glee-ful Ohio". Akron Beacon Journal. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved June 2, 2009. Simpson, Melody (March 17, 2009). "Meet Cory Monteith & Naya Rivera of Glee". Hollywood the Write Way. Archived from the original on November 24, 2009. Retrieved June 3, 2009. Wyatt, Edward (May 15, 2009). "Not That High School Musical". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2009. Herrera, Monica (October 23, 2009). "Glee Rewrites the Script on TV Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2010. VanDerWerff, Emily (February 4, 2011). "Ian Brennan, co-creator of Glee". The A.V. Club. Onion, Inc. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (June 16, 2011). "Glee Hires First Writing Staff, Allison Adler Tapped As Co-EP, Marti Noxon To Consult". Deadline Hollywood. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on April 24, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2011. Ng, Philiana (September 15, 2011). "Glee: Ryan Murphy Reveals Details on 'The Glee Project' Finalists' Characters". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011. Adam Shankman (director), Ali Adler (writer) (November 1, 2011). "Pot o' Gold". Glee. Season 3. Episode 4. Fox. Kinon, Cristina (May 18, 2009). "'Glee' puts edgy spin on Top 40 tunes". The Daily News. Archived from the original on September 15, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2009. Wyatt, Edward (October 11, 2009). "From 'Cabaret' to Kanye, Songs of 'Glee' Are a Hit". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved October 27, 2009. Kugel, Allison (April 26, 2010). "Glee Star Chris Colfer Shares His Best Behind-the-Scenes Moments and Surreal Adventures". PR.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2011. Donahue, Ann (December 13, 2010). "'Glee' throws lifeline to music industry". Billboard. Los Angeles. Archived from the original on December 17, 2010. Retrieved December 16, 2010. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Peck, Tom (June 17, 2010). "Coldplay bows to irresistible force of 'Glee'". Independent. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. "Bryan Adams tells Glee Creator to "Pick up the Phone"!". Kingstonherald.com. June 24, 2010. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Malkin, Marc (July 29, 2009). "An Afternoon Filled With Glee". E! Online. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009. Retrieved August 3, 2009. Frankel, Daniel (January 13, 2009). "'Glee' gets songs for free". Variety. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved June 3, 2009. "'Glee': Music producer Adam Anders spills details on the show's upcoming original music – EXCLUSIVE". Entertainment Weekly. February 23, 2011. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2011. "Photo Flash: The GLEE 'GLEEK' Tour Hits The Road". Broadway World. August 20, 2009. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Ghosh, Korbi (October 16, 2009). "'Glee' cast to sing the national anthem at the World Series". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved February 21, 2010. Dos Santos, Kristin (October 12, 2009). "Glee Bumped From Macy's Parade". E! Online. Archived from the original on October 18, 2009. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Armstrong, Jennifer (October 13, 2009). "'Glee' creator Ryan Murphy responds to cast being pulled from Macy's parade". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 5, 2010. Retrieved November 25, 2009. Little, Lyneka (March 2, 2010). "Julianne Moore Gets Soapy; 'Glee' Tours; Holt Halts Hiroshima Book". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2010. Keck, William (January 7, 2010). "Glee is Moving to Cleveland". TV Guide. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved February 22, 2010. "Breaking News — STARS ALIGN IN SPRINGFIELD FOR SEASON 22 OF "THE SIMPSONS"". The Futon Critic. Archived from the original on 2012-02-01. Retrieved 2010-08-11. "Glee". TVGuide.com. September 9, 2010. Archived from the original on January 3, 2012. "PTC: Sexualized GQ Photo Shoot of "Glee" Cast Crosses the Line" (Press release). Parents Television Council. October 20, 2010. Archived from the original on December 11, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010. "Glee Live Tour 2011: Performance Dates". Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2011. "Glee cast on X Factor semi-finals". BBC Radio 1. BBC. November 25, 2010. Archived from the original on December 3, 2010. Retrieved November 25, 2010. Dugan Ramirez, Christina (May 22, 2020). "Ryan Murphy Wants to Film a Glee 'Do-Over' with Ben Platt and Beanie Feldstein". People. Retrieved November 22, 2022. White, Peter (September 8, 2021). "'24': "Active Creative Discussions" Underway To Bring Back Iconic Drama Series On Fox". Deadline. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Sharf, Zack (November 8, 2022). "Ryan Murphy Says 'Glee' Should've Ended After Cory Monteith's Death, but Now Asks: 'Should We Do a Reboot? A Broadway Musical?'". Variety. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Schneider, Michael (December 1, 2009). "'Glee' co-creator gets big Fox deal". Variety. Archived from the original on May 16, 2010. Retrieved December 5, 2009. "Fox Holds "Glee" Tryouts After "American Idol" Tuesday, May 19 – New One-Hour Musical Comedy Series to Preview Post-American Idol" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. March 5, 2009. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2009. Matt Mitovich (July 28, 2009). "Fox Moves Up Two Fall Premieres; Plus a Glee Video Preview". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 31, 2009. Retrieved July 28, 2009. Gorman, Bill (May 14, 2012). "Fox 2012–13 Primetime Schedule Announced: 'Touch' & 'Fringe' Friday, 'Bones' & 'Mob Doctor' Monday, 'Glee' To Thursday, 4 Comedy Tuesday". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2012. "Fox sings praises of "Glee" with full-season pickup" (Press release). The Futon Critic. September 21, 2009. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2009. "Fox Announces 2009–2010 Midseason Schedule" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. November 24, 2009. Archived from the original on October 13, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2009. "Gleeks Rejoice! Fox Picks Up Second Season of "Glee"" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. January 11, 2010. Archived from the original on June 4, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2010. Abrams, Natalie (January 11, 2010). "Glee Picked Up For Season 2". TV Guide. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2010. Gorman, Bill (July 13, 2010). "Fox Announces Fall Premiere Dates For 2010–11 Season". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on July 18, 2010. Retrieved July 13, 2010. "Showatch". The Futon Critic. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved August 14, 2011. Krakauer, Steve (May 17, 2010). "Smooth Transition? FOX Picks 'Glee' For Post-Super Bowl Slot". Mediaite. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved March 19, 2011. Rice, Lynette (November 19, 2010). "Fox moves 'American Idol' to Wednesdays and Thursdays". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2010. "FOX ANNOUNCES WINTER SCHEDULE CHANGES". Fox Flash. November 21, 2013. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2013. Adalian, Josef (November 19, 2010). "Fox Moves American Idol to Thursday, a Potentially Bad Sign for ABC and NBC Comedies". New York. New York Media Holdings. Archived from the original on December 25, 2011. Retrieved November 20, 2010. "Fox Announces Primetime Slate for 2011-2012 Season - ComingSoon.net". ComingSoon.net. May 16, 2010. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved July 7, 2011. Rice, Lynette (May 23, 2010). "'Glee' earns season 3 pickup from Fox (EW Exclusive)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved May 23, 2010. "School's Out on an All-New Season Finale of "Glee"". The Futon Critic. Retrieved May 18, 2012. Seidman, Robert (June 23, 2011). "FOX Announces 2011 Fall TV Premiere Dates". TV By the Numbers. Archived from the original on February 24, 2012. Retrieved June 23, 2011. "Glee club is back in session on the season premiere of Glee" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2011. Ausiello, Michael (May 14, 2012). "Fox Fall Schedule Revealed: Glee Shifts to Thursday, Touch Moves to Friday and More!". TVLine. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012. Goldberg, Lesley (April 19, 2013). "Fox Renews 'Glee' for Fifth and Sixth Seasons". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved April 20, 2013. Kondolojy, Amanda (May 13, 2013). "Fox 2013-14 Schedule Announced: 'Bones' On the Move + 'Sleepy Hollow' Monday, 'Glee' Gets Midseason Break & More (Updated)". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013. Knox, David (September 4, 2009). "Glee to visit Oz". TV Tonight. Archived from the original on December 9, 2009. Retrieved October 2, 2009. Vickery, Colin (February 22, 2013). "Channel 10 moves Glee to digital channel Eleven with poor ratings". news.com.au. News Limited. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 23, 2013. "Glee jumps from Global to City". TV Guide. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved January 6, 2014. Smith, Jacqueline (October 22, 2009). "A chorus of approval for 'Glee'". New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on September 18, 2011. Retrieved December 16, 2009. "Fuji Tv". Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2010. "CNC3 Television, Trinidad and Tobago". www.facebook.com. Archived from the original on 2021-05-31. Retrieved 2020-04-01. "CNC3 Television, Trinidad and Tobago". Facebook. Archived from the original on 2021-05-31. Retrieved 2020-04-01. CNC3TV (2012-02-12). "Glee is on!". @cnc3tv. Archived from the original on 2021-05-31. Retrieved 2020-04-01.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Glee beamed direct to M-Net". Screen Africa. September 30, 2009. Archived from the original on October 1, 2011. Retrieved October 5, 2009. "Star World". STAR World. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2010. "Glee coming to town". The Philippine Star. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2009. "Glee, The Vampire Diaries, KAMII and more coming to a small screen near you in 2010!". klue.com.my. November 2, 2009. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2010. "Glee Premieres 9th June On Channel 5". MediaCorp. Archived from the original on June 14, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Tan Weizhen and Ng Jing Yng (July 30, 2011). "Glee, Warren Buffett, and much more" (PDF). TODAY. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 7, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2011. Arros, Fernando (22 January 2021). "'Los elegidos de la gloria' y 'Glee' encabezan los estrenos de Disney Plus para febrero". La Tercera (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2021. Chapman, Wilson (May 20, 2022). "'Glee' Sets Return to Streaming on Hulu and Disney+". Variety. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Moore, Kasey (November 30, 2021). "'Glee' is Leaving Netflix US on December 1st, 2021". What's on Netflix. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Glee pilot date announced". E4. November 23, 2009. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2009. "Glee – Sky1 HD". Sky1. September 10, 2011. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2011. "Could hit TV show Glee be about to vanish from our screens after High Court ruling?". WalesOnline. February 7, 2014. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Quinn, Ben (8 February 2016). "20th Century Fox loses appeal in Glee trademark row". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 29 April 2016. ""Glee: The Music, Volume 1", in stores November 3" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. August 31, 2009. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved September 24, 2009. "Glee: The Music – Volume 2 – Glee Cast". JB Hi-Fi Online.com.au. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2010. "'Glee: The Music, Vol. 3 - Showstoppers' at Tommy2.net". 15 April 2010. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved April 19, 2010. "Glee: The Music, The Power of Madonna". Amazon. Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "Glee: The Music — Journey To Regionals". Barnes & Noble. Archived from the original on May 20, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Glee: The Music, The Complete Season One by Glee Cast". iTunes Store. September 14, 2010. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2010. "Glee: The Music, The Christmas Album". Billboard. e5 Global Media. Retrieved October 17, 2010. "Susan Boyle Glee cameo confirmed by Ryan Murphy". entertainment.stv.tv. STV Group plc. September 24, 2010. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2010. "Glee: The Music, Volume 4 Available November 30" (Press release). PR Newswire. November 9, 2010. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2010. "Glee Debuts Original Songs on Glee: The Music, Volume 5 Available March 8" (Press release). PR Newswire. February 22, 2011. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2011. "Glee: The Music Presents The Warblers Available April 19" (Press release). New York: Columbia Records. PR Newswire. March 23, 2011. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved March 23, 2011. "Glee: The Music, Volume 6 Available Monday, May 23 but 27 of may in Australia" (Press release). New York: Columbia Records. PR Newswire. May 3, 2011. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2011. "Glee: The Music — The Rocky Horror Glee Show". Barnes & Noble. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2010. "Glee Target Exclusive on Sale Now". GleeTheMusic.com. Sony Music Entertainment. Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2011. "Glee: The Music, Dance Party Now Available Exclusively at Target". GleeTheMusic.com. Sony Music Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2011. Lambert, David (September 4, 2009). "Glee — Exclusively at Walmart, Fox Announces a Pilot Episode: Director's Cut DVD". TV Shows on DVD. Archived from the original on November 24, 2009. Retrieved November 30, 2009. Lambert, David (October 7, 2009). "Glee DVD news: Official Announcement for Glee — Season 1, Volume 1: Road to the Sectionals". TV Shows on DVD. Archived from the original on November 24, 2009. Retrieved October 7, 2009. "Glee – Season 1, Volume 2 – Road to Regionals (DVD)". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2010. "Glee — Complete Season 1 (DVD)". Amazon.co.uk. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Lambert, David (December 30, 2010). "Glee – 'Season 2, Volume 1' DVD Press Release Arrives from Fox Home Entertainment". TV Shows on DVD. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved May 26, 2011. Lambert, David (June 29, 2011). "Glee – 'Season 2, Volume 2' DVD, and 'Complete 2nd Season' DVD and Blu-ray". TV Shows on DVD. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Sellers, John A. (June 10, 2010). "Little, Brown Launching 'Glee' Publishing Program". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on September 14, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Lowell, Sophia (3 August 2010). Glee: The Beginning: An Original Novel (Glee Original Novels) (Paperback). Little, Brown Books for Young Readers. ISBN 978-0316123594. Relaxnews (June 9, 2010). "First official 'Glee' novel due out in late summer". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2010. Lowell, Sophia (2011-07-05). Glee: Summer Break: An Original Novel (Glee (Quality)) (Paperback). ISBN 978-0316123600. Szalai, Georg (June 10, 2010). "'Glee' merchandise to hit stores in fall". The Hollywood Reporter. Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2011. Stanley, T.L. (June 8, 2010). "Dress yourself in 'Glee': TV shows go licensing crazy". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2010. "Glee Cast joins Band Stars". March 27, 2014. Archived from the original on May 12, 2014. Retrieved May 12, 2014. "Six Foot Kid". Archived from the original on 2014-05-12. Retrieved 2014-05-12. "Popular Band Stars App get the Ultimate Glee Makeover". March 27, 2014. Archived from the original on May 12, 2014. Retrieved May 12, 2014. Seidman, Robert (May 20, 2009). "Top Fox Primetime Shows, May 18–24, 2009". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 26, 2010. Retrieved September 2, 2009. Grieser, Andy (November 26, 2009). "TV Ratings: CBS' 'Criminal Minds' overshadows NBC's 'The Biggest Loser'". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on November 29, 2009. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Seidman, Robert (October 15, 2009). "Wednesday, October 14, 2009 Broadcast Final Finals". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 18, 2009. Retrieved October 15, 2009. Seidman, Robert (December 10, 2009). "Broadcast Finals: Glee rises to season high; Criminal Minds up; The Middle, Gary Unmarried down a tick". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved December 10, 2009. Gorman, Bill (April 14, 2010). "Broadcast Finals Tuesday: Dancing, Lost Adjusted Up; V Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved April 14, 2010. Gorman, Bill (May 26, 2010). "TV Ratings: Idol, Glee Tops; NCIS: LA, Good Wife Hit Lows". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 29, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Gorman, Bill (April 21, 2010). "Broadcast Finals Tuesday: Lost, Idol Adjusted Up; Glee, V Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 27, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2010. Gorman, Bill (June 2, 2010). "TV Ratings Tuesday: America's Got Talent Opens Up; But Hell's Kitchen + Glee Put Fox On Top". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 5, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2010. Porter, Rick (June 9, 2010). "TV ratings: 'Glee' finale solid, but NBA Finals win Tuesday". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2010. Gorman, Bill (June 9, 2010). "Tuesaday TV Ratings: NBA Finals Rise, Glee Finishes Strong". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved June 10, 2010. "Deadline.com: Full Series Rankings for The 2009–2010 Broadcast Season". Deadline Hollywood. May 27, 2010. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. "Sunday Final Ratings: Super Bowl Demos Galore, Plus 'Glee' 15 Minute Detail". Tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com. February 8, 2011. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Pomerantz, Dorothy (March 16, 2011). "TV's Biggest Moneymakers". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 19, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2013. Pomerantz, Dorothy (April 10, 2012). "TV's Biggest Moneymakers". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013. "Deadline Hollywood". ZDeadline Hollywood. May 28, 2010. Archived from the original on November 11, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Porter, Rick (September 22, 2010). "Tuesday ratings breakdown: Returning shows rule". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved September 23, 2010. Gorman, Bill (May 25, 2011). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'American Idol,' 'Dancing With The Stars' Adjusted Up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on December 25, 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2011. Gorman, Bill (June 1, 2011). "2010–11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show Viewership Averages". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved August 14, 2011. Seidman, Robert (September 21, 2011). "Tuesday Finals: 'New Girl,' 'Glee,' 'NCIS,' DWTS Results Adjusted Up; 'Body of Proof' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 21, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2011. Kondolojy, Amanda (May 23, 2012). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'American Idol', 'DWTS', 'AGT' Adjusted Up, 'Glee' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved May 23, 2012. Gorman, Bill (May 24, 2012). "Complete List Of 2011–12 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'American Idol,' 'NCIS' & 'Dancing With The Stars'". Tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2012. Kondolojy, Amanda. "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Glee' Adjusted Down, No 18-49 Adjustment for 'The X-Factor'". Tv by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Kondolojy, Amanda (May 10, 2013). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Big Bang Theory', 'Grey's Anatomy', 'American Idol', 'Vampire Diaries', 'Two and a Half Men', 'Wipeout', & 'Elementary' Adjusted Up; 'Glee' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Bibel, Sarah (May 29, 2013). "Complete List Of 2012-13 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'NCIS,' 'The Big Bang Theory' & 'NCIS: Los Angeles'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2013. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 27, 2013). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'The Big Bang Theory', 'The Michael J Fox Show' & 'The X Factor' Adjusted Up; 'The Crazy Ones' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved September 28, 2013. Bibel, Sara (May 14, 2014). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'The Voice', 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' & 'The Goldbergs' Adjusted Up; 'The Originals', 'Supernatural' & 'About A Boy' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 15, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. "Full 2013-2014 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Kondolojy, Amanda (January 12, 2015). "Friday Final Ratings: No Adjustments to 'Hawaii Five-0', 'Cristela' or 'Glee'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Kondolojy, Amanda (March 23, 2015). "Friday Final Ratings: No Adjustment for 'Glee', 'Grimm' or 'Last Man Standing' + Final NCAA Basketball Ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2015). "Full 2014-15 TV Season Series Rankings: Football & 'Empire' Ruled". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2016. "GLEE: SEASON 1 (2009-2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Glee: Season 1". Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2015. "GLEE: SEASON 2 (2010-2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Glee: Season 2". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 30, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2011. "GLEE: SEASON 3 (2011-2012)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "GLEE: SEASON 4 (2012-2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Season 4". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved May 26, 2015. "GLEE: SEASON 5 (2013-2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "GLEE: SEASON 6 (2015)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on December 3, 2017. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Glee Season One". Metacritic. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved November 25, 2009. Poniewozik, James (December 8, 2009). "The Top 10 Everything of 2009". Time. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2009. Tucker, Ken (December 21, 2009). "10 Best TV Series of 2009: Ken Tucker's Picks". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2009. Respers France, Lisa (December 23, 2009). "Some of the best of 2009's TV". CNN. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2010. "Glee: Season 2". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2013. "Glee: Season 4". Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2013. Gibbs, Nancy (December 7, 2009). "The Gospel of Glee". Time. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Lowry, Brian (May 14, 2009). "Glee". Variety. Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2009. Lowry, Brian (September 5, 2009). "Glee". Variety. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Lowry, Brian (December 29, 2009). "2009: No room for error". Variety. Retrieved December 31, 2009. Doyle, John (May 25, 2010). "These Days, I'm Watching Glee with Dread". The Globe and Mail. Canada: CTVglobemedia. Archived from the original on July 30, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2010. Gilbert, Matthew (October 26, 2010). "Lip-sunk". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. "Glee hits a musical milestone with an incredible 300 performances" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Company. October 26, 2011. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved October 27, 2011. Trust, Gary (December 29, 2009). "Best Of 2009: By-The-Numbers". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2010. Trust, Gary (December 22, 2010). "Chart Beat: Best Of 2010: Part 4". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 6, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2011. Trust, Gary (November 24, 2010). "Weekly Chart Notes: Rihanna, Gwyneth Paltrow, the Beatles". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2010. Serjeant, Jill (November 9, 2009). ""Glee" brings joy to beleaguered music industry". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2009. "RIAA Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2011. Leahey, Andrew. "Review: Glee: The Music, Vol. 1". Allmusic. Retrieved November 1, 2009. Ryan, Joal (October 23, 2009). "Glee's Great, but the Music Ain't". E! Online. Archived from the original on November 26, 2009. Retrieved November 19, 2009. Sheffield, Rob (November 11, 2010). "Sheffield: How 'Glee' Became a Pop-Culture Juggernaut". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010. Garvey, Marianne (March 18, 2011). "Glee Diss Alert! This Time It's Head Foo Fighter Dave Grohl Piling On". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 15, 2011. Retrieved March 19, 2011. Hudson, Laura (January 18, 2013). "Did Glee Rip Off a Jonathan Coulton Cover of 'Baby Got Back'?". Wired. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved January 19, 2013. Catalano, Michele (January 31, 2016). "Jonathan Coulton Vs. Glee And Fox Update: Last Laughs". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 8, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Hudson, Laura (January 26, 2013). "Jonathan Coulton Explains How Glee Ripped Off His Cover Song — And Why He's Not Alone". Wired. Archived from the original on October 7, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. "Exclusive! Prince Not Happy With "Glee" Over Use Of "Kiss"". Drfunkenberry.com. February 12, 2011. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved February 20, 2011. "Damon Albarn Slams 'Glee' on Q TV". CBC Radio One (published at YouTube). October 20, 2010. Archived from the original on December 27, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Schott, Ben (September 16, 2009). "Schott's Vocab". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 30, 2009. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Stelter, Brian (September 1, 2009). "A Long Wait Stirs Enthusiasm for Fox Show 'Glee'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Hiltbrand, David (November 18, 2009). "Gaga for Glee: Gleeks delight in online mimicry of TV show's musical numbers". Vancouver Sun. Canada: Pacific Newspaper Group. Archived from the original on November 21, 2009. Retrieved December 5, 2009. Arrow, Jennifer (November 23, 2010). "Glee-Dux: Do You Believe in True Bromance?". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Retrieved February 4, 2012. Mullins, Jenna (May 3, 2011). "Glee-Dux: We've Got All the Hot Gossip—and Then Some!". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved February 4, 2012. "2009 14th Annual Satellite Awards Nominees and Winners". International Press Academy. December 20, 2009. Archived from the original on December 2, 2009. Retrieved December 24, 2009. "Nominations & Winners". Golden Globes. Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on December 11, 2009. Retrieved January 18, 2010. "2010 WGA Awards TV Nominees Announced" (Press release). Writers Guild of America. December 14, 2009. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2009. 69th Annual Peabody Awards Archived 2014-09-12 at the Wayback Machine, May 2010. "View Winner | George Foster Peabody Awards". Peabodyawards.com. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. "Nominations announced for the 16th annual Screen Actors Guild awards" (Press release). Screen Actors Guild Awards. December 17, 2009. Retrieved December 24, 2009.[dead link] "Nominees for Directorial Achievement in Movies for Television/Mini-Series, Dramatic Series Night, Comedy Series, Musical Variety, Reality Programs, Daytime Serials, Children's Programs, Commercials" (Press release). Directors Guild of America. January 8, 2010. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved January 8, 2010. "Glee". Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved August 10, 2011. Paris Barclay - Awards - IMDb Archived November 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine "Nominations & Winners: 2010". Golden Globes. Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2011. "Glee cast to sing at the White House". BBC News. March 15, 2010. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2010. "About the Show". Channel 5. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Don't Stop Believing". Shine TV. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Emma Bunton interview". Channel 5. Archived from the original (video) on December 9, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2010. French, Dan (March 18, 2010). "Five plots 'Glee'-like reality series". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. McCabe, Maisie (May 17, 2010). "Bunton to present GroupM's 'Don't Stop Believing' on Five". Media Week. Haymarket Media Group. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Emma Bunton shows glee over Glee". The Belfast Telegraph. Independent News & Media. May 21, 2010. Archived from the original on December 25, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Kilkelly, Daniel (June 11, 2010). "Five's 'Don't Stop' judges revealed". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "The Glee Project". Oxygen. Oxygen Media. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2010. Slezak, Michael (August 21, 2011). "The Glee Project Season Finale Recap: And the Winner Is..." TVLine. Mail.com Media. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Gleeful: The Real Show Choirs of America". UK: Channel 4. Archived from the original on November 12, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Simon, Jane (June 7, 2010). "Gleeful: The real show choirs of America: E4, 10pm". Daily Mirror. UK: Trinity Mirror. Archived from the original on November 18, 2010. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Gleeful: The Real Show Choirs Of America". mirror.co.uk. British Sky Broadcasting. 6 June 2010. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Robinson, John; Stubbs, David; Wright, Jonathan; Nicholson, Rebecca; Hodgkinson, Will (June 7, 2010). "Watch this". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on June 11, 2010. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Mangan, Lucy (June 8, 2010). "Cable girl: Gleeful". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on July 15, 2010. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Deans, Jason (June 8, 2010). "TV ratings: Father & Son launches with 5.2m viewers". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on December 12, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Here's the First Ominous Trailer For 'The Price of Glee' Docuseries". Out. 2022-12-09. Retrieved 2022-12-13. Massoto, Erick (2022-12-12). "'Glee' Star Kevin McHale Reacts to 'The Price of Glee' Docuseries". Collider. Retrieved 2022-12-13. Wikiquote has quotations related to Glee. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Glee. Official website Glee at IMDb Glee episode list at TV Guide "Glee (American television program)" at the Encyclopædia Britannica