The largest cities of South Korea have an autonomous status equivalent to that of provinces. Seoul, the largest city and capital, is classified as a teukbyeolsi (Special City), while the next six-largest cities are classified as gwangyeoksi (Metropolitan Cities). Smaller cities are classified as si ("cities") and are under provincial jurisdiction, at the same level as counties. Article 10 of the Local Autonomy Act defines the standards under which a populated area may become a city: an area which is predominantly urbanised and has a population of at least 50,000; a gun which has an urbanised area with a population of at least 50,000; or a gun which has a total population of at least 150,000 and multiple urbanised areas each with a population of at least 20,000. Cases outside of these standards require specific legislation, such as the special bill by the National Assembly to designate Gyeryong as a city.[citation needed] Under Article 3 of the Local Autonomy Act, a city with a population of less than 500,000 may create administrative subdivisions in the form of dong in its urbanised area and eup or myeon in its rural area, while a city with a population of more than 500,000 may create administrative subdivisions in the form of non-autonomous gu. The national government can designate cities of at least 500,000 inhabitants as special status cities. This status expands the scope of administrative authority delegated from the provincial government to the city government. There is no legal standard for becoming a metropolitan city, but it was usually promoted to a metropolitan city when the population was close to 1,000,000. However, considering that there are four cities in Suwon, Changwon, Goyang, and Yongin that have a population of more than 1 million but have not become metropolitan cities, there is no further promotion.[citation needed] A big city is a city (other than a special city or a metropolitan city) that has a population greater than 500,000, and has been designated by an order of the national government under Article 198 of the Local Autonomy Act. Big municipal cities are given the power to subdivide themselves into non-autonomous districts (일반구; 一般區). However, some big municipal cities have chosen not to divide themselves into districts, such as Bucheon, Gimhae, Hwaseong, or Namyangju. Currently, South Korea has a total of 17 big cities. "Specific city" (특정시, 特定市) is an unofficial term for big city with municipal status.[citation needed] Due its legal status as an administrative city, Jeju City cannot be designated as a "big city" under the Local Autonomy Law, despite having an estimated population exceeding 500,000 as of 2022. The designation of "administrative city" was created by the law which granted special self-governing status to Jeju Province; that law specifically states that the Local Autonomy Act would not apply to administrative cities. As such, Jeju City does not enjoy special autonomy and only has the same legal powers as the much smaller Seogwipo City. The administrative authority of Jeju City is trying to expand the scope of administrative authority delegated from the provincial government to the city government. A special-status city is a subclass of big municipal city that has a population greater than 1,500,000. Notes The name "Seoul" does not originate from hanja. The official Chinese translation is written as 首爾/首尔, which is a transcription based on the pronunciation of "Seoul", but 漢城/汉城 remains frequently used. As an affix or abbreviation, the character gyeong (京), which means "capital", is used. Seoul was designated a "Special Independent City" (Teukbyeol-jayusi; 특별자유시; 特別自由市) separate from Gyeonggi Province on August 16, 1946; it became a "Special City" on August 15, 1949. This is a list cities of South Korea by population including provincial-level divisions: special city (특별시/特別市) and metropolitan cities (광역시/廣域市), and municipal-level division: cities (시/市). Other municipal-level divisions: counties (군/郡 which have populations under 50K) and districts (구/區) are not included. All population data are based on the South Korean population and housing census 2000–2020. 4 - Daegu 5 - Daejeon 6 - Gwangju 7 - Suwon 8 - Ulsan 9 - Changwon 12 - Seongnam Administrative divisions of South Korea List of largest cities List of South Korean regions by GDP "지방자치법" [Local Autonomy Act]. As Amended by Law No. 18661 of 28 December 2021. An English translation is available from the Korea Legislative Research Institute, but is out of date: "Local Autonomy Act". As Amended by Law No. 16057 of 24 December 2018. Article 7 of the 2018 version of the law is similar in content to Article 10 of the 2021 version of the law, aside from cross-references to other articles. Article 3, Local Autonomy Act (2021). Article 3 of the 2018 version of the law has similar provisions. Article 198, Local Autonomy Act (2021). Article 175 of the 2018 version of the law has similar provisions but is less detailed. "제주시 1월부터 법률상 자격없는 인구 50만 대도시". Jeju Sori. 23 December 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2022. See also "Special Act on the Establishment of Jeju Special Self-Governing Province and the Development of Free International City". As Amended by Law No. 17883 of 5 January 2021. Population Census, Korean Statistical Information Service, 2000–2020, Statistics Korea Includes former city Masan and Jinhae. Includes former county Hwaseong. Includes former county Cheongwon. Some villages of Cheongwon are out to merge with Sejong. Numbers before 2010 contain populations of those villages. Includes former county Bukjeju (North Jeju). Includes former county Gwangju. Includes former county Yeongi; Current Sejong city contains some villages from Gongju and former county Cheongwon, North Chungcheong, and the population statistics of Yeongi county did not contain populations of those villages. Includes former county Yangju. Includes former county Namjeju (South Jeju). Includes former county Dangjin. Includes former county Pocheon. Includes former county Yeoju. Some villages are out to merge with Sejong. Numbers before 2010 contain populations of those villages. Includes former Gyeryong branch office of Nonsan city. The Principal Cities of South Korea Korea.net-Facts about Korea Korea.net-Facts about Korea Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cities in South Korea. Largest cities in South Korea Korean Statistical Information Service (in Korean)