Donald John Trump (born June 14, 1946) is an American politician, media personality, and businessman who served as the 45th president of the United States from 2017 to 2021. Trump received a Bachelor of Science in economics from the University of Pennsylvania in 1968, and his father named him president of his real estate business in 1971. Trump renamed it the Trump Organization and reoriented the company toward building and renovating skyscrapers, hotels, casinos, and golf courses. After a series of business failures in the late twentieth century, he successfully launched side ventures that required little capital, mostly by licensing the Trump name. From 2004 to 2015, he co-produced and hosted the reality television series The Apprentice. He and his businesses have been plaintiff or defendant in more than 4,000 state and federal legal actions, including six business bankruptcies. Trump won the 2016 presidential election as the Republican Party nominee against Democratic Party nominee Hillary Clinton while losing the popular vote. During the campaign, his political positions were described as populist, protectionist, isolationist, and nationalist. His election and policies sparked numerous protests. He was the first U.S. president with no prior military or government experience. A special counsel investigation established that Russia had interfered in the 2016 election to favor Trump's campaign. Trump promoted conspiracy theories and made many false and misleading statements during his campaigns and presidency, to a degree unprecedented in American politics. Many of his comments and actions have been characterized as racially charged or racist and many as misogynistic. As president, Trump ordered a travel ban on citizens from several Muslim-majority countries, diverted military funding toward building a wall on the U.S.–Mexico border, and implemented a policy of family separations for migrants detained at the U.S. border. He weakened environmental protections, rolling back more than 100 environmental policies and regulations. He signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which cut taxes for individuals and businesses and rescinded the individual health insurance mandate penalty of the Affordable Care Act. He appointed Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett to the U.S. Supreme Court. He reacted slowly to the COVID-19 pandemic, ignored or contradicted many recommendations from health officials, used political pressure to interfere with testing efforts, and spread misinformation about unproven treatments. Trump initiated a trade war with China and withdrew the U.S. from the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, the Paris Agreement on climate change, and the Iran nuclear deal. He met with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un three times but made no progress on denuclearization. Trump refused to concede after losing the 2020 presidential election to Joe Biden, falsely claiming widespread electoral fraud, and attempted to overturn the results by pressuring government officials, mounting scores of unsuccessful legal challenges, and obstructing the presidential transition. On January 6, 2021, he urged his supporters to march to the U.S. Capitol, which many of them then attacked, resulting in multiple deaths and interrupting the electoral vote count. Trump is the only American president to have been impeached twice. After he tried to pressure Ukraine in 2019 to investigate Biden, he was impeached by the House of Representatives for abuse of power and obstruction of Congress. He was acquitted by the Senate in February 2020. The House impeached him again in January 2021 for incitement of insurrection. The Senate acquitted him in February. Scholars and historians rank Trump as one of the worst presidents in American history. Since leaving office, Trump has continued to dominate the Republican Party and is a candidate in the 2024 Republican presidential primaries. In 2023, a civil trial jury found that Trump sexually abused E. Jean Carroll. In 2024, a New York state court found Trump liable for financial fraud. Trump is appealing both judgments. He is also indicted in New York on 34 felony counts of falsifying business records, in Florida on 40 felony counts related to his mishandling of classified documents, in Washington, D.C., on four felony counts of conspiracy and obstruction for efforts to overturn the 2020 presidential election, and in Georgia on ten charges of racketeering and other felonies committed in an effort to overturn the state's 2020 election results. Trump pleaded not guilty to all charges. Donald John Trump was born on June 14, 1946, at Jamaica Hospital in Queens, New York City, the fourth child of Fred Trump and Mary Anne MacLeod Trump. Trump grew up with older siblings Maryanne, Fred Jr., and Elizabeth and younger brother Robert in the Jamaica Estates neighborhood of Queens, and attended the private Kew-Forest School from kindergarten through seventh grade. At age 13, he entered the New York Military Academy, a private boarding school. In 1964, he enrolled at Fordham University. Two years later, he transferred to the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, graduating in May 1968 with a Bachelor of Science in economics. In 2015, Trump's lawyer Michael Cohen threatened Trump's colleges, high school, and the College Board with legal action if they released Trump's academic records. While in college, Trump obtained four student draft deferments during the Vietnam War. In 1966, he was deemed fit for military service based on a medical examination, and in July 1968, a local draft board classified him as eligible to serve. In October 1968, he was classified 1-Y, a conditional medical deferment, and in 1972, he was reclassified 4-F due to bone spurs, permanently disqualifying him. In 1977, Trump married Czech model Ivana Zelníčková. They had three children: Donald Jr. (born 1977), Ivanka (1981), and Eric (1984). Ivana became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1988. The couple divorced in 1990, following Trump's affair with actress Marla Maples. Trump and Maples married in 1993 and divorced in 1999. They have one daughter, Tiffany (born 1993), who was raised by Marla in California. In 2005, Trump married Slovenian model Melania Knauss. They have one son, Barron (born 2006). Melania gained U.S. citizenship in 2006. Trump went to Sunday school and was confirmed in 1959 at the First Presbyterian Church in Jamaica, Queens. In the 1970s, his parents joined the Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, which belongs to the Reformed Church in America. The pastor at Marble, Norman Vincent Peale, ministered to the family until his death in 1993. Trump has described him as a mentor. In 2015, the church stated that Trump was not an active member. In 2019, he appointed his personal pastor, televangelist Paula White, to the White House Office of Public Liaison. In 2020, he said he identified as a non-denominational Christian. Trump has called golfing his "primary form of exercise" but usually does not walk the course. He believes exercise depletes the body's energy "like a battery, with a finite amount of energy". In 2015, Trump's campaign released a letter from his longtime personal physician, Harold Bornstein, stating that Trump would "be the healthiest individual ever elected to the presidency". In 2018, Bornstein said Trump had dictated the contents of the letter and that three Trump agents had seized his medical records in a February 2017 raid on the doctor's office. In 1982, Trump made the initial Forbes list of wealthy people for holding a share of his family's estimated $200 million net worth (equivalent to $631 million in 2023). His losses in the 1980s dropped him from the list between 1990 and 1995. After filing the mandatory financial disclosure report with the FEC in July 2015, he announced a net worth of about $10 billion. Records released by the FEC showed at least $1.4 billion in assets and $265 million in liabilities. Forbes estimated his net worth dropped by $1.4 billion between 2015 and 2018. In their 2023 billionaires ranking, Trump's net worth was estimated to be $2.5 billion (1,217th in the world). Journalist Jonathan Greenberg reported that Trump called him in 1984, pretending to be a fictional Trump Organization official named "John Barron". Greenberg said that Trump, speaking as "Barron", falsely asserted that he owned more than 90 percent of his father's business to get a higher ranking on the Forbes 400 list of wealthy Americans. Greenberg also wrote that Forbes had vastly overestimated Trump's wealth and wrongly included him on the 1982, 1983, and 1984 rankings. Trump has often said he began his career with "a small loan of one million dollars" from his father and that he had to pay it back with interest. He was a millionaire by age eight, borrowed at least $60 million from his father, largely failed to repay those loans, and received another $413 million (2018 dollars adjusted for inflation) from his father's company. In 2018, he and his family were reported to have committed tax fraud, and the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance started an investigation. His investments underperformed the stock and New York property markets. Forbes estimated in October 2018 that his net worth declined from $4.5 billion in 2015 to $3.1 billion in 2017 and his product-licensing income from $23 million to $3 million. Contrary to his claims of financial health and business acumen, Trump's tax returns from 1985 to 1994 show net losses totaling $1.17 billion. The losses were higher than those of almost every other American taxpayer. The losses in 1990 and 1991, more than $250 million each year, were more than double those of the nearest taxpayers. In 1995, his reported losses were $915.7 million (equivalent to $1.83 billion in 2023). In 2020, the New York Times obtained Trump's tax information extending over two decades. Its reporters found that Trump reported losses of hundreds of millions of dollars and had, since 2010, deferred declaring $287 million in forgiven debt as taxable income. His income mainly came from his share in The Apprentice and businesses in which he was a minority partner, and his losses mainly from majority-owned businesses. Much income was in tax credits for his losses, which let him avoid annual income tax payments or lower them to $750. During the 2010s, Trump balanced his businesses' losses by selling and borrowing against assets, including a $100 million mortgage on Trump Tower (due in 2022) and the liquidation of over $200 million in stocks and bonds. He personally guaranteed $421 million in debt, most of which is due by 2024. As of October 2021[update], Trump had over $1.3 billion in debts, much of which is secured by his assets. In 2020, he owed $640 million to banks and trust organizations, including Bank of China, Deutsche Bank, and UBS, and approximately $450 million to unknown creditors. The value of his assets exceeds his debt. Starting in 1968, Trump was employed at his father's real estate company, Trump Management, which owned racially segregated middle-class rental housing in New York City's outer boroughs. In 1971, he became president of the company and began using the Trump Organization as an umbrella brand. Between 1991 and 2009, he filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection for six of his businesses, the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan, the casinos in Atlantic City, New Jersey, and the Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts company. Trump attracted public attention in 1978 with the launch of his family's first Manhattan venture, the renovation of the derelict Commodore Hotel, adjacent to Grand Central Terminal. The financing was facilitated by a $400 million city property tax abatement arranged for Trump by his father who also, jointly with Hyatt, guaranteed a $70 million bank construction loan. The hotel reopened in 1980 as the Grand Hyatt Hotel, and that same year, Trump obtained rights to develop Trump Tower, a mixed-use skyscraper in Midtown Manhattan. The building houses the headquarters of the Trump Corporation and Trump's PAC and was Trump's primary residence until 2019. In 1988, Trump acquired the Plaza Hotel with a loan from a consortium of sixteen banks. The hotel filed for bankruptcy protection in 1992, and a reorganization plan was approved a month later, with the banks taking control of the property. In 1995, Trump defaulted on over $3 billion of bank loans, and the lenders seized the Plaza Hotel along with most of his other properties in a humiliating restructuring that allowed Trump to avoid personal bankruptcy. The lead bank's attorney said of the banks' decision that they "all agreed that he'd be better alive than dead." In 1996, Trump acquired and renovated the mostly vacant 71-story skyscraper at 40 Wall Street, later rebranded as the Trump Building. In the early 1990s, Trump won the right to develop a 70-acre (28 ha) tract in the Lincoln Square neighborhood near the Hudson River. Struggling with debt from other ventures in 1994, Trump sold most of his interest in the project to Asian investors, who financed the project's completion, Riverside South. In 1984, Trump opened Harrah's at Trump Plaza, a hotel and casino, with financing and management help from the Holiday Corporation. It was unprofitable, and Trump paid Holiday $70 million in May 1986 to take sole control. In 1985, Trump bought the unopened Atlantic City Hilton Hotel and renamed it Trump Castle. His wife Ivana managed it until 1988. Both casinos filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1992. Trump bought a third Atlantic City venue in 1988, the Trump Taj Mahal. It was financed with $675 million in junk bonds and completed for $1.1 billion, opening in April 1990. Trump filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in 1991. Under the provisions of the restructuring agreement, Trump gave up half his initial stake and personally guaranteed future performance. To reduce his $900 million of personal debt, he sold the Trump Shuttle airline; his megayacht, the Trump Princess, which had been leased to his casinos and kept docked; and other businesses. In 1995, Trump founded Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts (THCR), which assumed ownership of the Trump Plaza. THCR purchased the Taj Mahal and the Trump Castle in 1996 and went bankrupt in 2004 and 2009, leaving Trump with 10 percent ownership. He remained chairman until 2009. In 1985, Trump acquired the Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Florida. In 1995, he converted the estate into a private club with an initiation fee and annual dues. He continued to use a wing of the house as a private residence. Trump declared the club his primary residence in 2019, and the town determined in 2021 that he was legally entitled to live there as an employee of the club.[importance?] The Trump Organization began building and buying golf courses in 1999. It owns fourteen and manages another three Trump-branded courses worldwide. The Trump name has been licensed for consumer products and services, including foodstuffs, apparel, learning courses, and home furnishings. According to The Washington Post, there are more than 50 licensing or management deals involving Trump's name, and they have generated at least $59 million in revenue for his companies. By 2018, only two consumer goods companies continued to license his name. In September 1983, Trump purchased the New Jersey Generals, a team in the United States Football League. After the 1985 season, the league folded, largely due to Trump's strategy of moving games to a fall schedule (when they competed with the NFL for audience) and trying to force a merger with the NFL by bringing an antitrust suit against the organization. Trump and his Plaza Hotel hosted several boxing matches at the Atlantic City Convention Hall. In 1989 and 1990, Trump lent his name to the Tour de Trump cycling stage race, an attempt to create an American equivalent of European races such as the Tour de France or the Giro d'Italia. From 1986 to 1988, Trump purchased significant blocks of shares in various public companies while suggesting that he intended to take over the company and then sold his shares for a profit, leading some observers to think he was engaged in greenmail. The New York Times found that Trump initially made millions of dollars in such stock transactions, but "lost most, if not all, of those gains after investors stopped taking his takeover talk seriously". In 1988, Trump purchased the Eastern Air Lines Shuttle, financing the purchase with $380 million (equivalent to $979 million in 2023) in loans from a syndicate of 22 banks. He renamed the airline Trump Shuttle and operated it until 1992. Trump defaulted on his loans in 1991, and ownership passed to the banks. In 1992, Trump, his siblings Maryanne, Elizabeth, and Robert, and his cousin John W. Walter, each with a 20 percent share, formed All County Building Supply & Maintenance Corp. The company had no offices and is alleged to have been a shell company for paying the vendors providing services and supplies for Trump's rental units, then billing those services and supplies to Trump Management with markups of 20–50 percent and more. The owners shared the proceeds generated by the markups. The increased costs were used to get state approval for increasing the rents of Trump's rent-stabilized units. From 1996 to 2015, Trump owned all or part of the Miss Universe pageants, including Miss USA and Miss Teen USA. Due to disagreements with CBS about scheduling, he took both pageants to NBC in 2002. In 2007, Trump received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work as producer of Miss Universe. NBC and Univision dropped the pageants in June 2015. In 2004, Trump co-founded Trump University, a company that sold real estate seminars for up to $35,000[excessive detail?]. After New York State authorities notified the company that its use of "university" violated state law (as it was not an academic institution), its name was changed to the Trump Entrepreneur Initiative in 2010. In 2013, the State of New York filed a $40 million civil suit against Trump University, alleging that the company made false statements and defrauded consumers. In addition, two class actions were filed in federal court against Trump and his companies. Internal documents revealed that employees were instructed to use a hard-sell approach, and former employees testified that Trump University had defrauded or lied to its students. Shortly after he won the 2016 presidential election, Trump agreed to pay a total of $25 million to settle the three cases. The Donald J. Trump Foundation was a private foundation established in 1988. From 1987 to 2006, Trump gave his foundation $5.4 million which had been spent by the end of 2006. After donating a total of $65,000 in 2007–2008, he stopped donating any personal funds to the charity, which received millions from other donors, including $5 million from Vince McMahon. The foundation gave to health- and sports-related charities, conservative groups, and charities that held events at Trump properties. In 2016, The Washington Post reported that the charity committed several potential legal and ethical violations, including alleged self-dealing and possible tax evasion. Also in 2016, the New York Attorney General determined the foundation to be in violation of state law, for soliciting donations without submitting to required annual external audits, and ordered it to immediately cease its fundraising activities in New York. Trump's team announced in December 2016 that the foundation would be dissolved. In June 2018, the New York attorney general's office filed a civil suit against the foundation, Trump, and his adult children, seeking $2.8 million in restitution and additional penalties. In December 2018, the foundation ceased operation and disbursed its assets to other charities. In November 2019, a New York state judge ordered Trump to pay $2 million to a group of charities for misusing the foundation's funds, in part to finance his presidential campaign. Roy Cohn was Trump's fixer, lawyer, and mentor for 13 years in the 1970s and 1980s. According to Trump, Cohn sometimes waived fees due to their friendship. In 1973, Cohn helped Trump countersue the U.S. government for $100 million (equivalent to $686 million in 2023) over its charges that Trump's properties had racial discriminatory practices. Trump's counterclaims were dismissed, and the government's case went forward, ultimately resulting in a settlement. In 1975, an agreement was struck requiring Trump's properties to furnish the New York Urban League with a list of all apartment vacancies, every week for two years, among other things. Cohn introduced political consultant Roger Stone to Trump, who enlisted Stone's services to deal with the federal government. According to a review of state and federal court files conducted by USA Today in 2018, Trump and his businesses had been involved in more than 4,000 state and federal legal actions. While Trump has not filed for personal bankruptcy, his over-leveraged hotel and casino businesses in Atlantic City and New York filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection six times between 1991 and 2009. They continued to operate while the banks restructured debt and reduced Trump's shares in the properties. During the 1980s, more than 70 banks had lent Trump $4 billion. After his corporate bankruptcies of the early 1990s, most major banks, with the exception of Deutsche Bank, declined to lend to him. After the January 6 Capitol attack, the bank decided not to do business with Trump or his company in the future. Using ghostwriters, Trump has produced up to 19 books on business, financial, or political topics under his name. His first book, The Art of the Deal (1987), was a New York Times Best Seller. While Trump was credited as co-author, the entire book was written by Tony Schwartz. According to The New Yorker, "The book expanded Trump's renown far beyond New York City, making him an emblem of the successful tycoon." Trump has called the volume his second favorite book, after the Bible. Trump made cameo appearances in many films and television shows from 1985 to 2001. Trump had a sporadic relationship with the professional wrestling promotion WWE since the late 1980s. He appeared at WrestleMania 23 in 2007 and was inducted into the celebrity wing of the WWE Hall of Fame in 2013. Starting in the 1990s, Trump was a guest about 24 times on the nationally syndicated Howard Stern Show. He also had his own short-form talk radio program called Trumped! (one to two minutes on weekdays) from 2004 to 2008. From 2011 until 2015, he was a weekly unpaid guest commentator on Fox & Friends. From 2004 to 2015, Trump was co-producer and host of reality shows The Apprentice and The Celebrity Apprentice. Trump played a flattering, highly fictionalized version of himself as a superrich and successful chief executive who eliminated contestants with the catchphrase "You're fired". The shows remade his image for millions of viewers nationwide. With the related licensing agreements, they earned him more than $400 million which he invested in largely unprofitable businesses. In February 2021, Trump resigned from the Screen Actors Guild he had been a member of since 1989 rather than face a disciplinary committee hearing for inciting the January 6, 2021, mob attack on the U.S. Capitol and for his "reckless campaign of misinformation aimed at discrediting and ultimately threatening the safety of journalists". Two days later, the union permanently barred him from readmission. Trump's political party affiliation has changed numerous times. He registered as a Republican in 1987; a member of the Independence Party, the New York state affiliate of the Reform Party, in 1999; a Democrat in 2001; a Republican in 2009; unaffiliated in 2011; and a Republican in 2012. In 1987, Trump placed full-page advertisements in three major newspapers, expressing his views on foreign policy and on how to eliminate the federal budget deficit. He ruled out running for local office but not for the presidency. In 1988, he approached Lee Atwater, asking to be put into consideration to be Republican nominee George H. W. Bush's running mate. Bush found the request "strange and unbelievable". In 2000, Trump ran in the California and Michigan primaries for nomination as the Reform Party candidate for the 2000 presidential election but withdrew from the race in February 2000. A July 1999 poll matching him against likely Republican nominee George W. Bush and likely Democratic nominee Al Gore showed Trump with seven percent support. In 2011, Trump speculated about running against President Barack Obama in the 2012 election, making his first speaking appearance at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in February 2011 and giving speeches in early primary states. In May 2011, he announced he would not run. Trump's presidential ambitions were generally not taken seriously at the time. Trump's fame and provocative statements earned him an unprecedented amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in the Republican primaries. He adopted the phrase "truthful hyperbole", coined by his ghostwriter Tony Schwartz, to describe his public speaking style. His campaign statements were often opaque and suggestive, and a record number of them were false. The Los Angeles Times wrote, "Never in modern presidential politics has a major candidate made false statements as routinely as Trump has." Trump said he disdained political correctness and frequently made claims of media bias. Trump announced his candidacy in June 2015. His campaign was initially not taken seriously by political analysts, but he quickly rose to the top of opinion polls. He became the front-runner in March 2016 and was declared the presumptive Republican nominee in May. Hillary Clinton led Trump in national polling averages throughout the campaign, but, in early July, her lead narrowed. In mid-July Trump selected Indiana governor Mike Pence as his vice presidential running mate, and the two were officially nominated at the 2016 Republican National Convention. Trump and Clinton faced off in three presidential debates in September and October 2016. Trump twice refused to say whether he would accept the result of the election. Trump's political positions and his rhetoric were right-wing populist. Politico described them as "eclectic, improvisational and often contradictory", quoting a health-care policy expert at the American Enterprise Institute as saying that his political positions were "a total random assortment of whatever plays publicly". NBC News counted "141 distinct shifts on 23 major issues" during his campaign. Trump questioned the need for NATO and espoused views that were described as non-interventionist and protectionist. His campaign platform emphasized renegotiating U.S.–China relations and free trade agreements such as NAFTA and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, strongly enforcing immigration laws, and building a new wall along the U.S.–Mexico border. Other campaign positions included pursuing energy independence while opposing climate change regulations such as the Clean Power Plan and the Paris Agreement, modernizing and expediting services for veterans, repealing and replacing the Affordable Care Act, abolishing Common Core education standards, investing in infrastructure, simplifying the tax code while reducing taxes for all economic classes, and imposing tariffs on imports by companies that offshore jobs. He advocated a largely non-interventionist approach to foreign policy while increasing military spending, extreme vetting or banning immigrants from Muslim-majority countries to pre-empt domestic Islamic terrorism, and aggressive military action against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. He described NATO as "obsolete". Trump helped bring far-right fringe ideas, beliefs, and organizations into the mainstream. Trump was slow to disavow an endorsement from David Duke after he was questioned about it during a CNN interview on February 28, 2016. Duke enthusiastically supported Trump and said he and like-minded people voted for Trump because of his promises to "take our country back". In August 2016, Trump hired Steve Bannon, the executive chairman of Breitbart News—described by Bannon as "the platform for the alt-right"—as his campaign CEO. The alt-right movement coalesced around and supported Trump's candidacy, due in part to its opposition to multiculturalism and immigration. Trump's FEC-required reports listed assets above $1.4 billion and outstanding debts of at least $315 million. Trump did not release his tax returns, contrary to the practice of every major candidate since 1976 and his promises in 2014 and 2015 to do so if he ran for office. He said his tax returns were being audited, and that his lawyers had advised him against releasing them. After a lengthy court battle to block release of his tax returns and other records to the Manhattan district attorney for a criminal investigation, including two appeals by Trump to the U.S. Supreme Court, in February 2021 the high court allowed the records to be released to the prosecutor for review by a grand jury. In October 2016, portions of Trump's state filings for 1995 were leaked to a reporter from The New York Times. They show that Trump had declared a loss of $916 million that year, which could have let him avoid taxes for up to 18 years. On November 8, 2016, Trump received 306 pledged electoral votes versus 232 for Clinton, though, after elector defections on both sides, the official count was ultimately 304 to 227. Trump, the fifth person to be elected president while losing the popular vote, received nearly 2.9 million fewer votes than Clinton. He also was the only president who neither served in the military nor held any government office prior to becoming president. Trump's victory was a political upset. Polls had consistently shown Clinton with a nationwide—though diminishing—lead, as well as an advantage in most of the competitive states. Trump's support had been modestly underestimated, while Clinton's had been overestimated. Trump won 30 states, including Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, states which had been considered a blue wall of Democratic strongholds since the 1990s. Clinton won 20 states and the District of Columbia. Trump's victory marked the return of an undivided Republican government—a Republican White House combined with Republican control of both chambers of Congress. Trump's election victory sparked protests in major U.S. cities in the days following the election. On the day after Trump's inauguration, an estimated 2.6 million people worldwide, including an estimated half million in Washington, D.C., protested against Trump in the Women's Marches. Trump was inaugurated on January 20, 2017. During his first week in office, he signed six executive orders, which authorized: interim procedures in anticipation of repealing the Affordable Care Act ("Obamacare"), withdrawal from the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, reinstatement of the Mexico City policy, advancement of the Keystone XL and Dakota Access Pipeline construction projects, reinforcement of border security, and a planning and design process to construct a wall along the U.S. border with Mexico. Trump's daughter Ivanka and son-in-law Jared Kushner became his assistant and senior advisor, respectively. Before being inaugurated, Trump moved his businesses into a revocable trust run by his sons, Eric and Donald Jr., and a business associate. Though he said he would eschew "new foreign deals", the Trump Organization pursued expansions of its operations in Dubai, Scotland, and the Dominican Republic. Trump continued to profit from his businesses and to know how his administration's policies affected his businesses. He was sued for violating the Domestic and Foreign Emoluments Clauses of the U.S. Constitution, marking the first time that the clauses had been substantively litigated. One case was dismissed in lower court. Two were dismissed by the U.S. Supreme Court as moot after the end of Trump's term. Trump visited a Trump Organization property on 428 (nearly one in three) of the 1,461 days of his presidency and is estimated to have played 261 rounds of golf, one every 5.6 days. Trump took office at the height of the longest economic expansion in American history, which began in June 2009 and continued until February 2020, when the COVID-19 recession began. In December 2017, Trump signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. The bill had been passed by both Republican-controlled chambers of Congress without any Democratic votes. It reduced tax rates for businesses and individuals, with business tax cuts to be permanent and individual tax cuts set to expire after 2025, and eliminated the penalty associated with Affordable Care Act's individual mandate. The Trump administration claimed that the act would either increase tax revenues or pay for itself by prompting economic growth. Instead, revenues in 2018 were 7.6 percent lower than projected. Despite a campaign promise to eliminate the national debt in eight years, Trump approved large increases in government spending and the 2017 tax cut. As a result, the federal budget deficit increased by almost 50 percent, to nearly $1 trillion in 2019. Under Trump, the U.S. national debt increased by 39 percent, reaching $27.75 trillion by the end of his term, and the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio hit a post-World War II high. Trump also failed to deliver the $1 trillion infrastructure spending plan on which he had campaigned. Trump is the only modern U.S. president to leave office with a smaller workforce than when he took office, by 3 million people. Trump rejects the scientific consensus on climate change. He reduced the budget for renewable energy research by 40 percent and reversed Obama-era policies directed at curbing climate change. In June 2017, Trump announced the U.S. withdrawal from the Paris Agreement, making the U.S. the only nation to not ratify the agreement. Trump aimed to boost the production and exports of fossil fuels. Natural gas expanded under Trump, but coal continued to decline. Trump rolled back more than 100 federal environmental regulations, including those that curbed greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollution, and the use of toxic substances. He weakened protections for animals and environmental standards for federal infrastructure projects, and expanded permitted areas for drilling and resource extraction, such as allowing drilling in the Arctic Refuge. Trump's actions while president have been called "a very aggressive attempt to rewrite our laws and reinterpret the meaning of environmental protections". In January 2017, Trump signed Executive Order 13771, which directed that, for every new regulation, federal agencies "identify" two existing regulations for elimination, though it did not require elimination. He dismantled many federal regulations on health, labor, and the environment, among other topics. Trump signed 14 Congressional Review Act resolutions repealing federal regulations, including a bill that made it easier for severely mentally ill persons to buy guns. During his first six weeks in office, he delayed, suspended, or reversed ninety federal regulations, often "after requests by the regulated industries". The Institute for Policy Integrity found that 78 percent of Trump's proposals were blocked by courts or did not prevail over litigation. During his campaign, Trump vowed to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In office, he scaled back the Act's implementation through executive orders 13765 and 13813. Trump expressed a desire to "let Obamacare fail"; his administration cut the ACA enrollment period in half and drastically reduced funding for enrollment promotion. Trump falsely claimed he saved the coverage of pre-existing conditions provided by the ACA. In June 2018, the Trump administration joined 18 Republican-led states in arguing before the Supreme Court that the elimination of the financial penalties associated with the individual mandate had rendered the ACA unconstitutional. If they had succeeded, it would have eliminated health insurance coverage for up to 23 million Americans. During the 2016 campaign, Trump promised to protect funding for Medicare and other social safety-net programs, but in January 2020, he suggested he was willing to consider cuts to such programs. In response to the opioid epidemic, Trump signed legislation in 2018 to increase funding for drug treatments but was widely criticized for failing to make a concrete strategy. U.S. opioid overdose deaths declined slightly in 2018 but surged to a record 50,052 deaths in 2019. Trump barred organizations that provide abortions or abortion referrals from receiving federal funds. He said he supported "traditional marriage" but considered the nationwide legality of same-sex marriage a "settled" issue. In March 2017, his administration rolled back key components of the Obama administration's workplace protections against discrimination of LGBT people. Trump's attempted rollback of anti-discrimination protections for transgender patients in August 2020 was halted by a federal judge after the Supreme Court's ruling in July had extended employees' civil rights protections to gender identity and sexual orientation. Trump has said he is opposed to gun control in general, although his views have shifted over time. After several mass shootings during his term, he said he would propose legislation related to guns, but he abandoned that effort in November 2019. His administration took an anti-marijuana position, revoking Obama-era policies that provided protections for states that legalized marijuana. Trump is a long-time advocate of capital punishment. Under his administration, the federal government executed 13 prisoners, more than in the previous 56 years combined and after a 17-year moratorium. In 2016, Trump said he supported the use of interrogation torture methods such as waterboarding but later appeared to recant this due to the opposition of Defense Secretary James Mattis. Trump granted 237 requests for clemency, fewer than all presidents since 1900 with the exception of George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush. Only 25 of them had been vetted by the Justice Department's Office of the Pardon Attorney; the others were granted to people with personal or political connections to him, his family, and his allies, or recommended by celebrities. From 2017 to 2019, he pardoned, amongst others, former Navy sailor Kristian Saucier, who was convicted of taking classified photographs of classified areas inside a submarine; and right-wing commentator Dinesh D'Souza. Following a request by celebrity Kim Kardashian, Trump commuted the life sentence of Alice Marie Johnson, who had been convicted of drug trafficking. Trump also pardoned or reversed the sentences of three American servicemen convicted or accused of committing war crimes in Afghanistan or Iraq. In November and December 2020, Trump pardoned four Blackwater private security contractors convicted of killing Iraqi civilians in the 2007 Nisour Square massacre; white-collar criminals Michael Milken and Bernard Kerik; daughter Ivanka's father-in-law Charles Kushner; and five people convicted as a result of investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential elections. Among them were Michael Flynn; Roger Stone, whose 40-month sentence for lying to Congress, witness tampering, and obstruction he had already commuted in July; and Paul Manafort. In his last full day in office, Trump granted 73 pardons, including to Steve Bannon and Trump fundraiser Elliott Broidy, and commuted 70 sentences. On June 1, 2020, during the George Floyd protests, federal law-enforcement officials used batons, rubber bullets, pepper spray projectiles, stun grenades, and smoke to remove a largely peaceful crowd of protesters from Lafayette Square, outside the White House. Trump then walked to St. John's Episcopal Church, where protesters had set a small fire the night before; he posed for photographs holding a Bible, with senior administration officials later joining him in photos. Trump said on June 3 that the protesters were cleared because "they tried to burn down the church [on May 31] and almost succeeded", describing the church as "badly hurt". Religious leaders condemned the treatment of protesters and the photo opportunity itself. Many retired military leaders and defense officials condemned Trump's proposal to use the U.S. military against anti-police-brutality protesters. Trump's proposed immigration policies were a topic of bitter and contentious debate during the campaign. He promised to build a wall on the Mexico–U.S. border to restrict illegal movement and vowed Mexico would pay for it. He pledged to deport millions of illegal immigrants residing in the U.S., and criticized birthright citizenship for incentivizing "anchor babies". As president, he frequently described illegal immigration as an "invasion" and conflated immigrants with the criminal gang MS-13, though available research shows undocumented immigrants have a lower crime rate than native-born Americans. Trump attempted to drastically escalate immigration enforcement, including implementing harsher immigration enforcement policies against asylum seekers from Central America than any modern U.S. president. From 2018 onward, Trump deployed nearly 6,000 troops to the U.S.–Mexico border to stop most Central American migrants from seeking U.S. asylum. In 2020, his administration widened the public charge rule to further restrict immigrants who might use government benefits from getting permanent residency via green cards. Trump reduced the number of refugees admitted into the U.S. to record lows. When Trump took office, the annual limit was 110,000; Trump set a limit of 18,000 in the 2020 fiscal year and 15,000 in the 2021 fiscal year. Additional restrictions implemented by the Trump administration caused significant bottlenecks in processing refugee applications, resulting in fewer refugees accepted compared to the allowed limits. Following the 2015 San Bernardino attack, Trump proposed to ban Muslim foreigners from entering the U.S. until stronger vetting systems could be implemented. He later reframed the proposed ban to apply to countries with a "proven history of terrorism". On January 27, 2017, Trump signed Executive Order 13769, which suspended admission of refugees for 120 days and denied entry to citizens of Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen for 90 days, citing security concerns. The order took effect immediately and without warning, causing confusion and chaos at airports. Protests against the ban began at airports the next day. Legal challenges to the order resulted in nationwide preliminary injunctions. A March 6 revised order, which excluded Iraq and gave other exemptions, again was blocked by federal judges in three states. In a decision in June 2017, the Supreme Court ruled that the ban could be enforced on visitors who lack a "credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in the United States". The temporary order was replaced by Presidential Proclamation 9645 on September 24, 2017, which restricted travel from the originally targeted countries except Iraq and Sudan, and further banned travelers from North Korea and Chad, along with certain Venezuelan officials. After lower courts partially blocked the new restrictions, the Supreme Court allowed the September version to go into full effect on December 4, 2017, and ultimately upheld the travel ban in a June 2019 ruling. The Trump administration separated more than 5,400 children of migrant families from their parents at the U.S.–Mexico border, a sharp increase in the number of family separations at the border starting from the summer of 2017. In April 2018, the Trump administration announced a "zero tolerance" policy whereby every adult suspected of illegal entry would be criminally prosecuted. This resulted in family separations, as the migrant adults were put in criminal detention for prosecution, while their children were separated as unaccompanied alien minors. Administration officials described the policy as a way to deter illegal immigration. The policy of family separations was unprecedented in previous administrations and sparked public outrage. Trump falsely asserted that his administration was merely following the law, blaming Democrats, despite the separations being his administration's policy. Although Trump originally argued that the separations could not be stopped by an executive order, he acceded to intense public objection and signed an executive order on June 20, 2018, mandating that migrant families be detained together unless "there is a concern" doing so would pose a risk to the child. On June 26, 2018, Judge Dana Sabraw concluded that the Trump administration had "no system in place to keep track of" the separated children, nor any effective measures for family communication and reunification; Sabraw ordered for the families to be reunited and family separations stopped except in limited circumstances. After the federal-court order, the Trump administration separated more than a thousand migrant children from their families; the ACLU contended that the Trump administration had abused its discretion and asked Sabraw to more narrowly define the circumstances warranting separation. One of Trump's central campaign promises was to build a 1,000-mile (1,600 km) border wall to Mexico and have Mexico pay for it. By the end of his term, the U.S. had built "40 miles [64 km] of new primary wall and 33 miles [53 km] of secondary wall" in locations where there had been no barriers and 365 miles (587 km) of primary or secondary border fencing replacing dilapidated or outdated barriers. In 2018, Trump refused to sign any appropriations bill from Congress unless it allocated $5.6 billion in funds for the border wall, resulting in the federal government partially shutting down for 35 days from December 2018 to January 2019, the longest U.S. government shutdown in history. Around 800,000 government employees were furloughed or worked without pay. Trump and Congress ended the shutdown by approving temporary funding that provided delayed payments to government workers but no funds for the wall. The shutdown resulted in an estimated permanent loss of $3 billion to the economy, according to the Congressional Budget Office. About half of those polled blamed Trump for the shutdown, and Trump's approval ratings dropped. To prevent another imminent shutdown in February 2019, Congress passed and Trump signed a funding bill that included $1.375 billion for 55 miles (89 km) of bollard border fencing. Trump also declared a national emergency on the southern border, intending to divert $6.1 billion of funds Congress had allocated to other purposes. Trump vetoed a joint resolution to overturn the declaration, and the Senate voted against a veto override. Legal challenges to the diversion of $2.5 billion originally meant for the Department of Defense's drug interdiction efforts and $3.6 billion originally meant for military construction were unsuccessful. Trump described himself as a "nationalist" and his foreign policy as "America First". His foreign policy was marked by praise and support of populist, neo-nationalist, and authoritarian governments. Hallmarks of foreign relations during Trump's tenure included unpredictability and uncertainty, a lack of consistent policy, and strained and sometimes antagonistic relationships with European allies. He criticized NATO allies and privately suggested on multiple occasions that the U.S. should withdraw from NATO. Trump withdrew the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) negotiations, imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports, and launched a trade war with China by sharply increasing tariffs on 818 categories (worth $50 billion) of Chinese goods imported into the U.S. While Trump said that import tariffs are paid by China into the U.S. Treasury, they are paid by American companies that import goods from China. Although he pledged during the campaign to significantly reduce the U.S.'s large trade deficits, the trade deficit in July 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, "was the largest monthly deficit since July 2008". Following a 2017–2018 renegotiation, the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) became effective in July 2020 as the successor to NAFTA. The Trump administration, according to Reuters, "water[ed] down the toughest penalties the U.S. had imposed on Russian entities" after its 2014 annexation of Crimea. Trump withdrew the U.S. from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, citing alleged Russian non-compliance, and supported a potential return of Russia to the G7. Trump repeatedly praised and rarely criticized Russian president Vladimir Putin but opposed some actions of the Russian government. After he met Putin at the Helsinki Summit in 2018, Trump drew bipartisan criticism for accepting Putin's denial of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, rather than accepting the findings of U.S. intelligence agencies. Trump did not discuss alleged Russian bounties offered to Taliban fighters for attacking American soldiers in Afghanistan with Putin, saying both that he doubted the intelligence and that he was not briefed on it. Before and during his presidency, Trump repeatedly accused China of taking unfair advantage of the U.S. As president, Trump launched a trade war against China that was widely characterized as a failure, sanctioned Huawei for alleged ties to Iran, significantly increased visa restrictions on Chinese students and scholars, and classified China as a currency manipulator. Trump also juxtaposed verbal attacks on China with praise of Chinese Communist Party leader Xi Jinping, which was attributed to trade war negotiations. After initially praising China for its handling of COVID-19, he began a campaign of criticism starting in March 2020. Trump said he resisted punishing China for its human rights abuses against ethnic minorities in the Xinjiang region for fear of jeopardizing trade negotiations. In July 2020, the Trump administration imposed sanctions and visa restrictions against senior Chinese officials, in response to expanded mass detention camps holding more than a million of the country's Uyghur minority. In 2017, when North Korea's nuclear weapons were increasingly seen as a serious threat, Trump escalated his rhetoric, warning that North Korean aggression would be met with "fire and fury like the world has never seen". In 2017, Trump declared that he wanted North Korea's "complete denuclearization", and engaged in name-calling with leader Kim Jong Un. After this period of tension, Trump and Kim exchanged at least 27 letters in which the two men described a warm personal friendship. Trump met Kim three times: in Singapore in 2018, in Hanoi in 2019, and in the Korean Demilitarized Zone in 2019. Trump became the first sitting U.S. president to meet a North Korean leader or set foot on North Korean soil. Trump also lifted some U.S. sanctions against North Korea. However, no denuclearization agreement was reached, and talks in October 2019 broke down after one day. While conducting no nuclear tests since 2017, North Korea continued to build up its arsenal of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. U.S. troop numbers in Afghanistan increased from 8,500 in January 2017 to 14,000 a year later, reversing Trump's pre-election position critical of further involvement in Afghanistan. In February 2020, the Trump administration signed a conditional peace agreement with the Taliban, which called for the withdrawal of foreign troops in 14 months "contingent on a guarantee from the Taliban that Afghan soil will not be used by terrorists with aims to attack the United States or its allies" and for the U.S. to seek the release of 5,000 Taliban imprisoned by the Afghan government. By the end of Trump's term, 5,000 Taliban had been released, and, despite the Taliban continuing attacks on Afghan forces and integrating Al-Qaeda members into its leadership, U.S. troops had been reduced to 2,500. Trump supported many of the policies of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Under Trump, the U.S. recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights, leading to international condemnation including from the United Nations General Assembly, the European Union, and the Arab League. In 2020, the White House hosted the signing of the Abraham Accords, normalizing the foreign relations of Israel with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain. Trump actively supported the Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and in 2017 signed a $110 billion agreement to sell arms to Saudi Arabia. In 2018, the U.S. provided limited intelligence and logistical support for the intervention. Following the 2019 attack on Saudi oil facilities, which the U.S. and Saudi Arabia blamed on Iran, Trump approved the deployment of 3,000 additional U.S. troops, including fighter squadrons, two Patriot batteries, and a Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system, to Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Trump ordered missile strikes in April 2017 and April 2018 against the Assad regime in Syria, in retaliation for the Khan Shaykhun and Douma chemical attacks, respectively. In December 2018, Trump declared "we have won against ISIS", contradicting Department of Defense assessments, and ordered the withdrawal of all troops from Syria. The next day, Mattis resigned in protest, calling his decision an abandonment of the U.S.'s Kurdish allies who played a key role in fighting ISIS. In October 2019, after Trump spoke to Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, U.S. troops in northern Syria were withdrawn from the area and Turkey invaded northern Syria, attacking and displacing American-allied Kurds. Later that month, the U.S. House of Representatives, in a rare bipartisan vote of 354 to 60, condemned Trump's withdrawal of U.S. troops from Syria, for "abandoning U.S. allies, undermining the struggle against ISIS, and spurring a humanitarian catastrophe". In May 2018, Trump withdrew the U.S. from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, the 2015 agreement that lifted most economic sanctions against Iran in return for Iran agreeing to restrictions on its nuclear program. Analysts determined that, after the U.S. withdrawal, Iran moved closer to developing a nuclear weapon. On January 1, 2020, Trump ordered a U.S. airstrike that killed Iranian general Qasem Soleimani, who had planned nearly every significant operation by Iranian forces over the past two decades. Trump threatened to hit 52 Iranian sites if Iran retaliated. On January 8, Iran retaliated with ballistic missile strikes against two U.S. airbases in Iraq. Dozens of soldiers sustained traumatic brain injuries. Their injuries were downplayed by Trump, and they were initially denied Purple Hearts and the special benefits accorded to its recipients. On the same day, amid the heightened tensions between the United States and Iran, Iran accidentally shot down Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 after takeoff from Tehran airport.[relevant?] In August 2020, the Trump administration unsuccessfully attempted to trigger a mechanism that was part of the agreement that would have led to the return of UN sanctions against Iran. The Trump administration had a high turnover of personnel, particularly among White House staff. By the end of Trump's first year in office, 34 percent of his original staff had resigned, been fired, or been reassigned. As of early July 2018[update], 61 percent of Trump's senior aides had left and 141 staffers had left in the previous year. Both figures set a record for recent presidents—more change in the first 13 months than his four immediate predecessors saw in their first two years. Notable early departures included National Security Advisor Flynn (after just 25 days in office), and Press Secretary Sean Spicer. Close personal aides to Trump including Bannon, Hope Hicks, John McEntee, and Keith Schiller quit or were forced out. Some, including Hicks and McEntee, later returned to the White House in different posts. Trump publicly disparaged several of his former top officials, calling them incompetent, stupid, or crazy. Trump had four White House chiefs of staff, marginalizing or pushing out several. Reince Priebus was replaced after seven months by retired Marine general John F. Kelly. Kelly resigned in December 2018 after a tumultuous tenure in which his influence waned, and Trump subsequently disparaged him. Kelly was succeeded by Mick Mulvaney as acting chief of staff; he was replaced in March 2020 by Mark Meadows. On May 9, 2017, Trump dismissed FBI director James Comey. While initially attributing this action to Comey's conduct in the investigation about Hillary Clinton's emails, Trump said a few days later that he was concerned with Comey's roles in the ongoing Trump-Russia investigations, and that he had intended to fire Comey earlier. At a private conversation in February, Trump said he hoped Comey would drop the investigation into Flynn. In March and April, Trump asked Comey to "lift the cloud impairing his ability to act" by saying publicly that the FBI was not investigating him. Turnover was relatively high within the Trump Cabinet. Trump lost three of his 15 original cabinet members within his first year. Health and Human Services secretary Tom Price was forced to resign in September 2017 due to excessive use of private charter jets and military aircraft. Environmental Protection Agency administrator Scott Pruitt resigned in 2018 and Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke in January 2019 amid multiple investigations into their conduct. Trump was slow to appoint second-tier officials in the executive branch, saying many of the positions are unnecessary. In October 2017, there were still hundreds of sub-cabinet positions without a nominee. By January 8, 2019, of 706 key positions, 433 had been filled (61 percent) and Trump had no nominee for 264 (37 percent). Trump appointed 226 Article III judges, including 54 to the courts of appeals and three to the Supreme Court: Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. His Supreme Court nominees were noted as having politically shifted the Court to the right. In the 2016 campaign, he pledged that Roe v. Wade would be overturned "automatically" if he were elected and provided the opportunity to appoint two or three pro-life justices. He later took credit when Roe was overturned in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization; all three of his Supreme Court nominees voted with the majority. Trump disparaged courts and judges he disagreed with, often in personal terms, and questioned the judiciary's constitutional authority. His attacks on the courts drew rebukes from observers, including sitting federal judges, concerned about the effect of his statements on the judicial independence and public confidence in the judiciary. In December 2019, COVID-19 erupted in Wuhan, China, and spread worldwide within weeks. The first confirmed case in the U.S. was reported on January 20, 2020. The outbreak was officially declared a public health emergency by Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar on January 31, 2020. Trump initially ignored persistent public health warnings and calls for action from health officials within his administration and Secretary Azar. Throughout January and February he focused on economic and political considerations of the outbreak. In February 2020 Trump publicly asserted that the outbreak in the U.S. was less deadly than influenza, was "very much under control", and would soon be over. On March 19, 2020, Trump privately told Bob Woodward that he was deliberately "playing it down, because I don't want to create a panic". By mid-March, most global financial markets had severely contracted in response to the emerging pandemic. On March 6, Trump signed the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act, which provided $8.3 billion in emergency funding for federal agencies. On March 11, the World Health Organization (WHO) recognized COVID-19 as a pandemic, and Trump announced partial travel restrictions for most of Europe, effective March 13. That same day, he gave his first serious assessment of the virus in a nationwide Oval Office address, calling the outbreak "horrible" but "a temporary moment" and saying there was no financial crisis. On March 13, he declared a national emergency, freeing up federal resources. Trump falsely claimed that "anybody that wants a test can get a test", despite test availability being severely limited. On April 22, Trump signed an executive order restricting some forms of immigration. In late spring and early summer, with infections and deaths continuing to rise, he adopted a strategy of blaming the states rather than accepting that his initial assessments of the pandemic were overly optimistic or his failure to provide presidential leadership. Trump established the White House Coronavirus Task Force on January 29, 2020. Beginning in mid-March, Trump held a daily task force press conference, joined by medical experts and other administration officials, sometimes disagreeing with them by promoting unproven treatments. Trump was the main speaker at the briefings, where he praised his own response to the pandemic, frequently criticized rival presidential candidate Joe Biden, and denounced the press. On March 16, he acknowledged for the first time that the pandemic was not under control and that months of disruption to daily lives and a recession might occur. His repeated use of "Chinese virus" and "China virus" to describe COVID-19 drew criticism from health experts. By early April, as the pandemic worsened and amid criticism of his administration's response, Trump refused to admit any mistakes in his handling of the outbreak, instead blaming the media, Democratic state governors, the previous administration, China, and the WHO. The daily coronavirus task force briefings ended in late April, after a briefing at which Trump suggested the dangerous idea of injecting a disinfectant to treat COVID-19; the comment was widely condemned by medical professionals. In early May, Trump proposed the phase-out of the coronavirus task force and its replacement with another group centered on reopening the economy. Amid a backlash, Trump said the task force would "indefinitely" continue. By the end of May, the coronavirus task force's meetings were sharply reduced. Prior to the pandemic, Trump criticized the WHO and other international bodies, which he asserted were taking advantage of U.S. aid. His administration's proposed 2021 federal budget, released in February, proposed reducing WHO funding by more than half. In May and April, Trump accused the WHO of "severely mismanaging" COVID-19, alleged without evidence that the organization was under Chinese control and had enabled the Chinese government's concealment of the pandemic's origins, and announced that he was withdrawing funding for the organization. These were seen as attempts to distract from his own mishandling of the pandemic. In July 2020, Trump announced the formal withdrawal of the U.S. from the WHO effective July 2021. The decision was widely condemned by health and government officials as "short-sighted", "senseless", and "dangerous". In April 2020, Republican-connected groups organized anti-lockdown protests against the measures state governments were taking to combat the pandemic; Trump encouraged the protests on Twitter, even though the targeted states did not meet the Trump administration's guidelines for reopening. In April 2020, he first supported, then later criticized, Georgia Governor Brian Kemp's plan to reopen some nonessential businesses. Throughout the spring he increasingly pushed for ending the restrictions to reverse the damage to the country's economy. Trump often refused to mask at public events, contrary to his administration's April 2020 guidance to wear masks in public and despite nearly unanimous medical consensus that masks are important to preventing spread of the virus. By June, Trump had said masks were a "double-edged sword"; ridiculed Biden for wearing masks; continually emphasized that mask-wearing was optional; and suggested that wearing a mask was a political statement against him personally. Trump's contradiction of medical recommendations weakened national efforts to mitigate the pandemic. In June and July, Trump said several times that the U.S. would have fewer cases of coronavirus if it did less testing, that having a large number of reported cases "makes us look bad". The CDC guideline at the time was that any person exposed to the virus should be "quickly identified and tested" even if they are not showing symptoms, because asymptomatic people can still spread the virus. In August 2020 the CDC quietly lowered its recommendation for testing, advising that people who have been exposed to the virus, but are not showing symptoms, "do not necessarily need a test". The change in guidelines was made by HHS political appointees under Trump administration pressure, against the wishes of CDC scientists. The day after this political interference was reported, the testing guideline was changed back to its original recommendation. Despite record numbers of COVID-19 cases in the U.S. from mid-June onward and an increasing percentage of positive test results, Trump largely continued to downplay the pandemic, including his false claim in early July 2020 that 99 percent of COVID-19 cases are "totally harmless". He began insisting that all states should resume in-person education in the fall despite a July spike in reported cases. Trump repeatedly pressured federal health agencies to take actions he favored, such as approving unproven treatments or speeding up vaccine approvals. Trump administration political appointees at HHS sought to control CDC communications to the public that undermined Trump's claims that the pandemic was under control. CDC resisted many of the changes, but increasingly allowed HHS personnel to review articles and suggest changes before publication. Trump alleged without evidence that FDA scientists were part of a "deep state" opposing him and delaying approval of vaccines and treatments to hurt him politically. On October 2, 2020, Trump tweeted that he had tested positive for COVID-19, part of a White House outbreak. Later that day Trump was hospitalized at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, reportedly due to fever and labored breathing. He was treated with antiviral and experimental antibody drugs and a steroid. He returned to the White House on October 5, still infectious and unwell. During and after his treatment he continued to downplay the virus. In 2021, it was revealed that his condition had been far more serious; he had dangerously low blood oxygen levels, a high fever, and lung infiltrates, indicating a severe case. By July 2020, Trump's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic had become a major issue in the presidential election. Biden sought to make the pandemic the central issue. Polls suggested voters blamed Trump for his pandemic response and disbelieved his rhetoric concerning the virus, with an Ipsos/ABC News poll indicating 65 percent of respondents disapproved of his pandemic response. In the final months of the campaign, Trump repeatedly claimed that the U.S. was "rounding the turn" in managing the pandemic, despite increasing cases and deaths. A few days before the November 3 election, the U.S. reported more than 100,000 cases in a single day for the first time. After he assumed office, Trump was the subject of increasing Justice Department and congressional scrutiny, with investigations covering his election campaign, transition, and inauguration, actions taken during his presidency, along with his private businesses, personal taxes, and charitable foundation. There were 30 investigations of Trump, including ten federal criminal investigations, eight state and local investigations, and twelve congressional investigations. In April 2019, the House Oversight Committee issued subpoenas seeking financial details from Trump's banks, Deutsche Bank and Capital One, and his accounting firm, Mazars USA. Trump then sued the banks, Mazars, and committee chair Elijah Cummings to prevent the disclosures. In May, DC District Court judge Amit Mehta ruled that Mazars must comply with the subpoena, and judge Edgardo Ramos of the Southern District Court of New York ruled that the banks must also comply. Trump's attorneys appealed the rulings. In September 2022, the committee and Trump agreed to a settlement about Mazars, and the accounting firm began turning over documents. During the 2016 presidential election campaign, American Media, Inc. (AMI), the parent company of the National Enquirer, and a company set up by Cohen paid Playboy model Karen McDougal and adult film actress Stormy Daniels for keeping silent about their alleged affairs with Trump between 2006 and 2007. Cohen pleaded guilty in 2018 to breaking campaign finance laws, saying he had arranged both payments at the direction of Trump to influence the presidential election. Trump denied the affairs and claimed he was not aware of Cohen's payment to Daniels, but he reimbursed him in 2017. Federal prosecutors asserted that Trump had been involved in discussions regarding non-disclosure payments as early as 2014. Court documents showed that the FBI believed Trump was directly involved in the payment to Daniels, based on calls he had with Cohen in October 2016. Federal prosecutors closed the investigation in 2019, but the Manhattan District Attorney subpoenaed the Trump Organization and AMI for records related to the payments and Trump and the Trump Organization for eight years of tax returns. In November 2022, The New York Times reported that Manhattan prosecutors were "newly optimistic about building a case" against Trump. In January 2017, American intelligence agencies—the CIA, the FBI, and the NSA, represented by the Director of National Intelligence—jointly stated with "high confidence" that the Russian government interfered in the 2016 presidential election to favor the election of Trump. In March 2017, FBI Director James Comey told Congress, "[T]he FBI, as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating the Russian government's efforts to interfere in the 2016 presidential election. That includes investigating the nature of any links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian government, and whether there was any coordination between the campaign and Russia's efforts." Many suspicious links between Trump associates and Russian officials and spies were discovered and the relationships between Russians and "team Trump" were widely reported by the press. Manafort, one of Trump's campaign managers, worked from December 2004 to February 2010 to help pro-Russian politician Viktor Yanukovych win the Ukrainian presidency. Other Trump associates, including Flynn and Stone, were connected to Russian officials. Russian agents were overheard during the campaign saying they could use Manafort and Flynn to influence Trump. Members of Trump's campaign and later his White House staff, particularly Flynn, were in contact with Russian officials both before and after the November election. On December 29, 2016, Flynn talked with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak about sanctions that were imposed that same day; Flynn later resigned in the midst of controversy over whether he misled Pence. Trump told Kislyak and Sergei Lavrov in May 2017 he was unconcerned about Russian interference in U.S. elections. Trump and his allies promoted a conspiracy theory that Ukraine, rather than Russia, interfered in the 2016 election—which was also promoted by Russia to frame Ukraine. After the Democratic National Committee was hacked, Trump first claimed it withheld "its server" from the FBI (in actuality there were more than 140 servers, of which digital copies were given to the FBI); second, that CrowdStrike, the company that investigated the servers, was Ukraine-based and Ukrainian-owned (in actuality, CrowdStrike is U.S.-based, with the largest owners being American companies); and third that "the server" was hidden in Ukraine. Members of the Trump administration spoke out against the conspiracy theories. In July 2016, the FBI launched an investigation, codenamed Crossfire Hurricane, into possible links between Russia and the Trump campaign. After Trump fired FBI director James Comey in May 2017, the FBI opened a counterintelligence investigation into Trump's personal and business dealings with Russia. Crossfire Hurricane was transferred to the Mueller investigation, but deputy attorney general Rod Rosenstein ended the investigation into Trump's direct ties to Russia while giving the bureau the false impression that Mueller would pursue the matter. In May 2017, Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed Robert Mueller, a former director of the FBI, special counsel for the Department of Justice (DOJ), ordering him to "examine 'any links and/or coordination between the Russian government' and the Trump campaign". He privately told Mueller to restrict the investigation to criminal matters "in connection with Russia's 2016 election interference". The special counsel also investigated whether Trump's dismissal of James Comey as FBI director constituted obstruction of justice and the Trump campaign's possible ties to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Qatar, Israel, and China. Trump sought to fire Mueller and shut down the investigation multiple times but backed down after his staff objected or after changing his mind. In March 2019, Mueller concluded his investigation and gave his report to Attorney General William Barr. Two days later, Barr sent a letter to Congress purporting to summarize the report's main conclusions. A federal court, as well as Mueller himself, said Barr mischaracterized the investigation's conclusions and, in so doing, confused the public. Trump repeatedly and falsely claimed that the investigation exonerated him; the Mueller report expressly stated that it did not exonerate him. A redacted version of the report was publicly released in April 2019. It found that Russia interfered in 2016 to favor Trump's candidacy and hinder Clinton's. Despite "numerous links between the Russian government and the Trump campaign", the report found that the prevailing evidence "did not establish" that Trump campaign members conspired or coordinated with Russian interference. The report revealed sweeping Russian interference and detailed how Trump and his campaign welcomed and encouraged it, believing "[they] would benefit electorally from information stolen and released through Russian efforts". The report also detailed multiple acts of potential obstruction of justice by Trump but did not make a "traditional prosecutorial judgment" on whether Trump broke the law, suggesting that Congress should make such a determination. Investigators decided they could not "apply an approach that could potentially result in a judgment that the President committed crimes" as an Office of Legal Counsel opinion stated that a sitting president could not be indicted, and investigators would not accuse him of a crime when he cannot clear his name in court. The report concluded that Congress, having the authority to take action against a president for wrongdoing, "may apply the obstruction laws". The House of Representatives subsequently launched an impeachment inquiry following the Trump–Ukraine scandal, but did not pursue an article of impeachment related to the Mueller investigation. Several Trump associates pleaded guilty or were convicted in connection with Mueller's investigation and related cases, including Manafort, convicted on eight felony counts, deputy campaign manager Rick Gates, foreign policy advisor Papadopoulos, and Flynn. Cohen pleaded guilty to lying to Congress about Trump's 2016 attempts to reach a deal with Russia to build a Trump Tower in Moscow. Cohen said he had made the false statements on behalf of Trump, who was identified as "Individual-1" in the court documents. In February 2020, Stone was sentenced to 40 months in prison for lying to Congress and witness tampering regarding his attempts to learn more about hacked Democratic emails during the 2016 election. The sentencing judge said Stone "was prosecuted for covering up for the president". In August 2019, a whistleblower filed a complaint with the Inspector General of the Intelligence Community about a July 25 phone call between Trump and President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy, during which Trump had pressured Zelenskyy to investigate CrowdStrike and Democratic presidential candidate Biden and his son Hunter. The whistleblower said that the White House had attempted to cover up the incident and that the call was part of a wider campaign by the Trump administration and Trump attorney Rudy Giuliani that may have included withholding financial aid from Ukraine in July 2019 and canceling Pence's May 2019 Ukraine trip. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi initiated a formal impeachment inquiry on September 24. Trump then confirmed that he withheld military aid from Ukraine, offering contradictory reasons for the decision. On September 25, the Trump administration released a memorandum of the phone call which confirmed that, after Zelenskyy mentioned purchasing American anti-tank missiles, Trump asked him to discuss investigating Biden and his son with Giuliani and Barr. The testimony of multiple administration officials and former officials confirmed that this was part of a broader effort to further Trump's personal interests by giving him an advantage in the upcoming presidential election. In October, William B. Taylor Jr., the chargé d'affaires for Ukraine, testified before congressional committees that soon after arriving in Ukraine in June 2019, he found that Zelenskyy was being subjected to pressure directed by Trump and led by Giuliani. According to Taylor and others, the goal was to coerce Zelenskyy into making a public commitment investigating the company that employed Hunter Biden, as well as rumors about Ukrainian involvement in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. He said it was made clear that until Zelenskyy made such an announcement, the administration would not release scheduled military aid for Ukraine and not invite Zelenskyy to the White House. On December 13, the House Judiciary Committee voted along party lines to pass two articles of impeachment: one for abuse of power and one for obstruction of Congress. After debate, the House of Representatives impeached Trump on both articles on December 18. During the trial in January 2020, the House impeachment managers presented their case for three days. They cited evidence to support charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress and asserted that Trump's actions were exactly what the founding fathers had in mind when they created the Constitution's impeachment process. Responding over the next three days, Trump's lawyers did not deny the facts as presented in the charges but said Trump had not broken any laws or obstructed Congress. They argued that the impeachment was "constitutionally and legally invalid" because Trump was not charged with a crime and that abuse of power is not an impeachable offense. On January 31, the Senate voted against allowing subpoenas for witnesses or documents; 51 Republicans formed the majority for this vote. The impeachment trial was the first in U.S. history without witness testimony. Trump was acquitted of both charges by the Republican majority, 52–48 on abuse of power and 53–47 on obstruction of Congress. Senator Mitt Romney was the only Republican who voted to convict Trump on one charge, the abuse of power. Following his acquittal, Trump fired impeachment witnesses and other political appointees and career officials he deemed insufficiently loyal. Breaking with precedent, Trump filed to run for a second term with the FEC within a few hours of assuming the presidency. He held his first reelection rally less than a month after taking office and officially became the Republican nominee in August 2020. In his first two years in office, Trump's reelection committee reported raising $67.5 million and began 2019 with $19.3 million in cash. By July 2020, the Trump campaign and the Republican Party had raised $1.1 billion and spent $800 million, losing their cash advantage over Biden. The cash shortage forced the campaign to scale back advertising spending. Trump campaign advertisements focused on crime, claiming that cities would descend into lawlessness if Biden won the presidency. Trump repeatedly misrepresented Biden's positions and shifted to appeals to racism. Starting in spring 2020, Trump began to sow doubts about the election, claiming without evidence that the election would be rigged and that the expected widespread use of mail balloting would produce massive election fraud. In July, Trump raised the idea of delaying the election. When, in August, the House of Representatives voted for a $25 billion grant to the U.S. Postal Service for the expected surge in mail voting, Trump blocked funding, saying he wanted to prevent any increase in voting by mail. He repeatedly refused to say whether he would accept the results of the election and commit to a peaceful transition of power if he lost. Biden won the election on November 3, receiving 81.3 million votes (51.3 percent) to Trump's 74.2 million (46.8 percent) and 306 Electoral College votes to Trump's 232. At 2 a.m. the morning after the election, with the results still unclear, Trump declared victory. After Biden was projected the winner days later, Trump stated that "this election is far from over" and baselessly alleged election fraud. Trump and his allies filed many legal challenges to the results, which were rejected by at least 86 judges in both the state and federal courts, including by federal judges appointed by Trump himself, finding no factual or legal basis. Trump's unsubstantiated allegations of widespread voting fraud were also refuted by state election officials. After Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) director Chris Krebs contradicted Trump's fraud allegations, Trump dismissed him on November 17. On December 11, the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear a case from the Texas attorney general that asked the court to overturn the election results in four states won by Biden. Trump withdrew from public activities in the weeks following the election. He initially blocked government officials from cooperating in Biden's presidential transition. After three weeks, the administrator of the General Services Administration declared Biden the "apparent winner" of the election, allowing the disbursement of transition resources to his team. Trump still did not formally concede while claiming he recommended the GSA begin transition protocols. The Electoral College formalized Biden's victory on December 14. From November to January, Trump repeatedly sought help to overturn the results of the election, personally pressuring various Republican local and state office-holders, Republican state and federal legislators, the Justice Department, and Vice President Pence, urging various actions such as replacing presidential electors, or a request for Georgia officials to "find" votes and announce a "recalculated" result. On February 10, 2021, Georgia prosecutors opened a criminal investigation into Trump's efforts to subvert the election in Georgia. Trump did not attend Biden's inauguration, leaving Washington for Florida hours before. In December 2020, Newsweek reported the Pentagon was on red alert, and ranking officers had discussed what they would do if Trump decided to declare martial law. The Pentagon responded with quotes from defense leaders that the military has no role to play in the outcome of elections. When Trump moved supporters into positions of power at the Pentagon after the November 2020 election, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley and CIA director Gina Haspel became concerned about the threat of a possible coup attempt or military action against China or Iran. Milley insisted that he should be consulted about any military orders from Trump, including the use of nuclear weapons, and he instructed Haspel and NSA director Paul Nakasone to monitor developments closely. On January 6, 2021, while congressional certification of the presidential election results was taking place in the U.S. Capitol, Trump held a noon rally at the Ellipse, Washington, D.C.. He called for the election result to be overturned and urged his supporters to "take back our country" by marching to the Capitol to "show strength" and "fight like hell". Many supporters did, joining a crowd already there. Around 2:15 p.m. the mob broke into the building, disrupting certification and causing the evacuation of Congress. During the violence, Trump watched TV and posted messages on Twitter without asking the rioters to disperse. At 6 p.m., Trump tweeted that the rioters should "go home with love & in peace", calling them "great patriots" and "very special" and repeating that the election was stolen from him. After the mob was removed from the Capitol, Congress reconvened and confirmed the Biden election win in the early hours of the following morning. According to the Department of Justice, more than 140 police officers were injured, and five people died. In March 2023, Trump collaborated with incarcerated rioters on a song to benefit the prisoners, and, in June, he said that, if elected, he would pardon a large number of them. On January 11, 2021, an article of impeachment charging Trump with incitement of insurrection against the U.S. government was introduced to the House. The House voted 232–197 to impeach Trump on January 13, making him the first U.S. president to be impeached twice. Ten Republicans voted for the impeachment—the most members of a party ever to vote to impeach a president of their own party. On February 13, following a five-day Senate trial, Trump was acquitted when the Senate voted 57–43 for conviction, falling ten votes short of the two-thirds majority required to convict; seven Republicans joined every Democrat in voting to convict, the most bipartisan support in any Senate impeachment trial of a president or former president. Most Republicans voted to acquit Trump, although some held him responsible but felt the Senate did not have jurisdiction over former presidents (Trump had left office on January 20; the Senate voted 56–44 that the trial was constitutional); included in the latter group was Mitch McConnell. At the end of his term, Trump went to live at his Mar-a-Lago club. As provided for by the Former Presidents Act, he established an office there to handle his post-presidential activities. Trump's false claims concerning the 2020 election were commonly referred to as the "big lie" in the press and by his critics. In May 2021, Trump and his supporters attempted to co-opt the term, using it to refer to the election itself. The Republican Party used Trump's false election narrative to justify the imposition of new voting restrictions in its favor. As late as July 2022, Trump was still pressuring state legislators to overturn the 2020 election by rescinding the state's electoral votes for Biden. Trump resumed his campaign-style rallies with an 85-minute speech at the annual North Carolina Republican Party convention on June 6, 2021. On June 26, he held his first public rally since the January 6 rally that preceded the riot at the Capitol. Unlike other former presidents, Trump continued to dominate his party; he has been described as a modern-day party boss. He continued fundraising, raising more than twice as much as the Republican Party itself, hinted at a third candidacy, and profited from fundraisers many Republican candidates held at Mar-a-Lago. Much of his focus was on how elections are run and on ousting election officials who had resisted his attempts to overturn the 2020 elections results. In the 2022 midterm elections he endorsed over 200 candidates for various offices, most of whom supported his false claim that the 2020 presidential election was stolen from him. In February 2021, Trump registered a new company, Trump Media & Technology Group (TMTG), for providing "social networking services" to U.S. customers. In March 2024, TMTG merged with special-purpose acquisition company Digital World Acquisition and became a public company. In February 2022, TMTG launched Truth Social, a social-media platform. As of March 2023[update], Trump Media, which had taken $8 million from Russia-connected entities, was being investigated by federal prosecutors for possible money laundering. Trump is the subject of numerous probes into his actions and business dealings before, during and after his presidency. In February 2021, the district attorney for Fulton County, Georgia, Fani Willis, announced a criminal probe into Trump's phone calls to Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger. The New York State Attorney General's Office is conducting criminal investigations into Trump's business activities in conjunction with the Manhattan District Attorney's Office. By May 2021, a special grand jury was considering indictments. In July 2021, New York prosecutors charged the Trump Organization with a "15 year 'scheme to defraud' the government". In January 2023, the organization's chief financial officer, Allen Weisselberg, was sentenced to five months in jail and five years probation for tax fraud after a plea deal. When Trump left the White House in January 2021, he took government documents and material with him to Mar-a-Lago. By May 2021, the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), the federal agency that preserves government records, realized that important documents had not been turned over to them at the end of Trump's term and asked his office to locate them. In January 2022, they retrieved 15 boxes of White House records from Mar-a-Lago. NARA later informed the Department of Justice that some of the retrieved documents were classified material. The Justice Department began an investigation in April 2022 and convened a grand jury. The Justice Department sent Trump a subpoena for additional material on May 11. On June 3, Justice Department officials visited Mar-a-Lago and received some classified documents from Trump's lawyers. One of the lawyers signed a statement affirming that all material marked as classified had been returned to the government. Later that month an additional subpoena was sent requesting surveillance footage from Mar-a-Lago, which was provided. On August 8, 2022, FBI agents searched Trump's residence, office, and storage areas at Mar-a-Lago to recover government documents and material Trump had taken with him when he left office in violation of the Presidential Records Act, reportedly including some related to nuclear weapons. The search warrant, authorized by U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland and approved by a federal magistrate judge, and the written inventory of the seized items were made public on August 12. The text of the search warrant indicates an investigation of potential violations of the Espionage Act and obstruction of justice laws. The items taken in the search included 11 sets of classified documents, four of them tagged as "top secret" and one as "top secret/SCI", the highest level of classification. On November 18, 2022, Garland appointed a special counsel, federal prosecutor Jack Smith, to oversee the federal criminal investigations into Trump retaining government property at Mar-a-Lago and examining Trump's role in the events leading up to the January 6, 2021, Capitol attack. On December 19, 2022, the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack recommended criminal charges against Trump for obstructing an official proceeding, conspiracy to defraud the United States, and inciting or assisting an insurrection. On March 30, 2023, a New York grand jury indicted Trump on 34 felony counts of falsifying business records. On April 4, he surrendered and was arrested and arraigned; he pleaded not guilty on all counts and was released. The trial is scheduled to begin on March 25, 2024. On June 8, the Justice Department indicted Trump in Miami federal court for 31 counts of "willfully retaining national defense information under the Espionage Act", one count of making false statements, and, jointly with a personal aide, single counts of conspiracy to obstruct justice, withholding government documents, corruptly concealing records, concealing a document in a federal investigation and scheming to conceal their efforts. Trump pleaded not guilty to all charges. In July a superseding indictment added three additional criminal charges, bringing the number of charges in the case to 40. The trial is scheduled to begin on May 20, 2024. On August 1, a Washington, D.C., federal grand jury indicted Trump on four counts for his efforts to overturn the 2020 election results. He was charged with conspiring with unnamed co-conspirators to defraud the U.S., obstruct the certification of the Electoral College vote, and deprive people of the civil right to have their votes counted, as well as obstructing an official proceeding. Trump pleaded not guilty. On August 14, a Fulton County, Georgia, grand jury indicted Trump on 13 charges for – among other felonies – racketeering after Trump campaign officials accessed voting machines with election officials. On August 24, Trump surrendered, was placed under arrest and processed at Fulton County Jail and released on bail. He posted the mug shot on Twitter and on his campaign website with a fundraising pitch. On August 31, he pleaded not guilty. On March 13, 2024, the judge dismissed three of the 13 charges against Trump without dismissing the "overt acts tied to charges". In September 2022, the New York State Attorney General filed a civil fraud case against Trump, his three oldest children, and the Trump Organization. In December 2021, the Attorney General's office had subpoenaed Trump to produce documents related to his business. In April 2022, a New York state judge held Trump in contempt of court for failing to comply with the subpoena and imposed a fine of $10,000 per day until he does. Trump was deposed in August and invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination more than 400 times. The judge presiding over the civil suit ruled in September 2023 that Trump, his adult sons and the Trump Organization repeatedly committed fraud and ordered their New York business certificates canceled and their business entities sent into receivership for dissolution. In February 2024, the court found Trump liable, ordered him to pay a penalty of more than $350 million plus interest, for a total exceeding $450 million, and barred him from serving as an officer or director of any New York corporation or legal entity for three years. Trump said he would appeal the verdict. The judge also ordered the company to be overseen by the monitor appointed by the court in 2023 and an independent director of compliance, and that any "restructuring and potential dissolution" would be the decision of the monitor. In May 2023, a New York jury in a federal lawsuit brought by journalist E. Jean Carroll found Trump liable for sexual abuse and defamation and ordered him to pay her $5 million. Trump asked the district court for a new trial or a reduction of the damage award, arguing that the jury had not found him liable for rape, and also, in a separate lawsuit, countersued Carroll for defamation. The judge for the two lawsuits ruled against Trump in July and August. Trump appealed both decisions to an appeals court. On January 26, 2024, the jury in the defamation case ordered Trump to pay Carroll $83.3 million in damages. Trump said he would appeal the verdict. On November 15, 2022, Trump announced his candidacy for the 2024 United States presidential election and set up a fundraising account. In March 2023, the campaign began diverting 10 percent of the donations to Trump's leadership PAC which had paid $16 million for his legal bills by June 2023. In December 2023, the Colorado Supreme Court ruled that Trump was disqualified from holding office until the U.S. Supreme Court reversed the decision via Trump v. Anderson in March 2024. C-SPAN ranked Trump fourth-lowest overall in their Presidential Historians Survey 2021, with Trump rated lowest in the leadership characteristics categories for moral authority and administrative skills. The Siena College Research Institute's 2022 survey ranked Trump 43rd out of 45 presidents. He was ranked last on background, integrity, intelligence, foreign policy accomplishments, and executive appointments, and second-last on ability to compromise, executive ability, and present overall view. He was ranked near the bottom in all categories except for luck, willingness to take risks, and party leadership. Trump was the only president never to reach a 50 percent approval rating in the Gallup poll dating to 1938. His approval ratings showed a record-high partisan gap: 88 percent among Republicans and 7 percent among Democrats. Until September 2020, the ratings were unusually stable, reaching a high of 49 percent and a low of 35 percent. Trump finished his term with an approval rating between 29 and 34 percent—the lowest of any president since modern polling began—and a record-low average of 41 percent throughout his presidency. In Gallup's annual poll asking Americans to name the man they admire the most, Trump placed second to Obama in 2017 and 2018, tied with Obama for first in 2019, and placed first in 2020. Since Gallup started conducting the poll in 1948, Trump is the first elected president not to be named most admired in his first year in office. A Gallup poll in 134 countries comparing the approval ratings of U.S. leadership between 2016 and 2017 found that Trump led Obama in job approval in only 29 countries, most of them non-democracies; approval of U.S. leadership plummeted among allies and G7 countries. Overall ratings were similar to those in the last two years of the George W. Bush presidency. By mid-2020, only 16 percent of international respondents to a 13-nation Pew Research poll expressed confidence in Trump, lower than Russia's Vladimir Putin and China's Xi Jinping. As a candidate and as president, Trump frequently made false statements in public remarks to an extent unprecedented in American politics. His falsehoods became a distinctive part of his political identity. Trump's false and misleading statements were documented by fact-checkers, including at The Washington Post, which tallied 30,573 false or misleading statements made by Trump over his four-year term. Trump's falsehoods increased in frequency over time, rising from about six false or misleading claims per day in his first year as president to 16 per day in his second, 22 per day in his third, and 39 per day in his final year. Some of Trump's falsehoods were inconsequential, such as his claim of the "biggest inaugural crowd ever". Others had more far-reaching effects, such as his promotion of unproven antimalarial drugs as a treatment for COVID-19, causing a U.S. shortage of these drugs and panic-buying in Africa and South Asia. Other misinformation, such as misattributing a rise in crime in England and Wales to the "spread of radical Islamic terror", served Trump's domestic political purposes. As a matter of principle, Trump does not apologize for his falsehoods. Despite the frequency of Trump's falsehoods, the media rarely referred to them as lies. The first time The Washington Post did so was in August 2018, when it declared that some of Trump's misstatements concerning hush money paid to Stormy Daniels and Playboy model Karen McDougal were lies. In 2020, Trump was a significant source of disinformation on mail-in voting and the COVID-19 pandemic. His attacks on mail-in ballots and other election practices served to weaken public faith in the integrity of the 2020 presidential election, while his disinformation about the pandemic delayed and weakened the national response to it. James Pfiffner, professor of policy and government at George Mason University, wrote in 2019 that Trump lies differently from previous presidents, because he offers "egregious false statements that are demonstrably contrary to well-known facts"; these lies are the "most important" of all Trump lies. By calling facts into question, people will be unable to properly evaluate their government, with beliefs or policy irrationally settled by "political power"; this erodes liberal democracy, wrote Pfiffner. Before and throughout his presidency, Trump promoted numerous conspiracy theories, including Obama birtherism, the Clinton body count conspiracy theory, the conspiracy theory movement QAnon, the Global warming hoax theory, Trump Tower wiretapping allegations, a John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theory involving Rafael Cruz, linking talk show host Joe Scarborough to the death of a staffer, alleged foul-play in the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, alleged Ukrainian interference in U.S. elections, and that Osama bin Laden was alive and Obama and Biden had members of Navy SEAL Team 6 killed. In at least two instances, Trump clarified to press that he believed the conspiracy theory in question. During and since the 2020 presidential election, Trump has promoted various conspiracy theories for his defeat including dead people voting, voting machines changing or deleting Trump votes, fraudulent mail-in voting, throwing out Trump votes, and "finding" suitcases full of Biden votes. Research suggests Trump's rhetoric caused an increased incidence of hate crimes. During his 2016 campaign, he urged or praised physical attacks against protesters or reporters. Numerous defendants investigated or prosecuted for violent acts and hate crimes, including participants of the January 6, 2021, storming of the U.S. Capitol, cited Trump's rhetoric in arguing that they were not culpable or should receive leniency. A nationwide review by ABC News in May 2020 identified at least 54 criminal cases from August 2015 to April 2020 in which Trump was invoked in direct connection with violence or threats of violence mostly by white men and primarily against minorities. Trump's social media presence attracted worldwide attention after he joined Twitter in 2009. He tweeted frequently during the 2016 election campaign and as president until Twitter banned him in the final days of his term. Trump often used Twitter to communicate directly with the public and sideline the press. In June 2017, a White House press secretary said that Trump's tweets were official presidential statements. Trump often announced terminations of administration officials over Twitter. After years of criticism for allowing Trump to post misinformation and falsehoods, Twitter began to tag some of his tweets with fact-checking warnings in May 2020. In response, Trump tweeted that "Social Media Platforms totally silence conservative[] voices" and that he would "strongly regulate[] or close them down". In the days after the storming of the Capitol, Trump was banned from Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and other platforms. The loss of his social media presence diminished his ability to shape events and prompted a dramatic decrease in the volume of misinformation shared on Twitter. Trump's early attempts to re-establish a social media presence were unsuccessful. In February 2022, he launched social media platform Truth Social where he only attracted a fraction of his Twitter following. Elon Musk, the new owner of Twitter, reinstated Trump's Twitter account in November 2022. Trump sought media attention throughout his career, sustaining a "love–hate" relationship with the press. In the 2016 campaign, Trump benefited from a record amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in the Republican primaries. The New York Times writer Amy Chozick wrote in 2018 that Trump's media dominance enthralled the public and created "must-see TV." As a candidate and as president, Trump frequently accused the press of bias, calling it the "fake news media" and "the enemy of the people". In 2018, journalist Lesley Stahl recounted Trump's saying he intentionally discredited the media "so when you write negative stories about me no one will believe you". As president, Trump mused about revoking the press credentials of journalists he viewed as critical. His administration moved to revoke the press passes of two White House reporters, which were restored by the courts. The Trump White House held about a hundred formal press briefings in 2017, declining by half during 2018 and to two in 2019. Trump also deployed the legal system to intimidate the press. In early 2020, the Trump campaign sued The New York Times, The Washington Post, and CNN for defamation in opinion pieces about Russian election interference. Legal experts said that the lawsuits lacked merit and were not likely to succeed. By March 2021, the lawsuits against The New York Times and CNN had been dismissed. Many of Trump's comments and actions have been considered racist. In national polling, about half of respondents said that Trump is racist; a greater proportion believed that he emboldened racists. Several studies and surveys found that racist attitudes fueled Trump's political ascent and were more important than economic factors in determining the allegiance of Trump voters. Racist and Islamophobic attitudes are a powerful indicator of support for Trump. In 1975, he settled a 1973 Department of Justice lawsuit that alleged housing discrimination against black renters. He has also been accused of racism for insisting a group of black and Latino teenagers were guilty of raping a white woman in the 1989 Central Park jogger case, even after they were exonerated by DNA evidence in 2002. As of 2019, he maintained this position. In 2011, when he was reportedly considering a presidential run, he became the leading proponent of the racist "birther" conspiracy theory, alleging that Barack Obama, the first black U.S. president, was not born in the U.S. In April, he claimed credit for pressuring the White House to publish the "long-form" birth certificate, which he considered fraudulent, and later said this made him "very popular". In September 2016, amid pressure, he acknowledged that Obama was born in the U.S. In 2017, he reportedly expressed birther views privately. According to an analysis in Political Science Quarterly, Trump made "explicitly racist appeals to whites" during his 2016 presidential campaign. In particular, his campaign launch speech drew widespread criticism for claiming Mexican immigrants were "bringing drugs, they're bringing crime, they're rapists". His later comments about a Mexican-American judge presiding over a civil suit regarding Trump University were also criticized as racist. Trump's comments on the 2017 Unite the Right rally, condemning "this egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence on many sides" and stating that there were "very fine people on both sides", were widely criticized as implying a moral equivalence between the white supremacist demonstrators and the counter-protesters. In a January 2018 discussion of immigration legislation, Trump reportedly referred to El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, and African nations as "shithole countries". His remarks were condemned as racist. In July 2019, Trump tweeted that four Democratic congresswomen—all from minorities, three of whom are native-born Americans—should "go back" to the countries they "came from". Two days later the House of Representatives voted 240–187, mostly along party lines, to condemn his "racist comments". White nationalist publications and social media praised his remarks, which continued over the following days. Trump continued to make similar remarks during his 2020 campaign. Trump has a history of insulting and belittling women when speaking to media and on social media. He made lewd comments, disparaged women's physical appearances, and referred to them using derogatory epithets. At least 26 women publicly accused Trump of rape, kissing, and groping without consent; looking under women's skirts; and walking in on naked teenage pageant contestants. Trump has denied all of the allegations. In October 2016, two days before the second presidential debate, a 2005 "hot mic" recording surfaced in which Trump was heard bragging about kissing and groping women without their consent, saying that "when you're a star, they let you do it. You can do anything. ... Grab 'em by the pussy." The incident's widespread media exposure led to Trump's first public apology during the campaign and caused outrage across the political spectrum. Trump has been the subject of comedy and caricature on television, in films, and in comics. He was named in hundreds of hip hop songs from 1989 until 2015; most of these cast Trump in a positive light, but they turned largely negative after he began running for office. Presidential elections in the U.S. are decided by the Electoral College. Each state names a number of electors equal to its representation in Congress and (in most states) all electors vote for the winner of their state's popular vote. Sheehey, Maeve (June 30, 2021). "Trump debuts at 41st in C-SPAN presidential rankings". Politico. Retrieved March 31, 2023. "American Presidents: Greatest and Worst". Siena College Research Institute. June 22, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Certificate of Birth". Department of Health – City of New York – Bureau of Records and Statistics. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2018 – via ABC News. "Trump's parents and siblings: What do we know of them?". BBC News. October 3, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 33. Horowitz, Jason (September 22, 2015). "Donald Trump's Old Queens Neighborhood Contrasts With the Diverse Area Around It". The New York Times. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 38. "Two Hundred and Twelfth Commencement for the Conferring of Degrees" (PDF). University of Pennsylvania. May 20, 1968. pp. 19–21. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 19, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Viser, Matt (August 28, 2015). "Even in college, Donald Trump was brash". The Boston Globe. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Ashford, Grace (February 27, 2019). "Michael Cohen Says Trump Told Him to Threaten Schools Not to Release Grades". The New York Times. Retrieved June 9, 2019. Montopoli, Brian (April 29, 2011). "Donald Trump avoided Vietnam with deferments, records show". CBS News. Retrieved July 17, 2015. "Donald John Trump's Selective Service Draft Card and Selective Service Classification Ledger". National Archives. March 14, 2019. Retrieved September 23, 2019. – via Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Whitlock, Craig (July 21, 2015). "Questions linger about Trump's draft deferments during Vietnam War". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 2, 2017. Eder, Steve; Philipps, Dave (August 1, 2016). "Donald Trump's Draft Deferments: Four for College, One for Bad Feet". The New York Times. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Blair 2015, p. 300. "Ivana Trump becomes U.S. citizen". The Lewiston Journal. Associated Press. May 27, 1988. p. 10D. Retrieved August 21, 2015 – via Google web. Baron, James (December 12, 1990). "Trumps Get Divorce; Next, Who Gets What?". The New York Times. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Hafner, Josh (July 19, 2016). "Get to know Donald's other daughter: Tiffany Trump". USA Today. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Brown, Tina (January 27, 2005). "Donald Trump, Settling Down". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 7, 2017. "Donald Trump Fast Facts". CNN. July 2, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Gunter, Joel (March 2, 2018). "What is the Einstein visa? And how did Melania Trump get one?". BBC News. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Barron, James (September 5, 2016). "Overlooked Influences on Donald Trump: A Famous Minister and His Church". The New York Times. Retrieved October 13, 2016. Scott, Eugene (August 28, 2015). "Church says Donald Trump is not an 'active member'". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Schwartzman, Paul (January 21, 2016). "How Trump got religion – and why his legendary minister's son now rejects him". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 81. Peters, Jeremy W.; Haberman, Maggie (October 31, 2019). "Paula White, Trump's Personal Pastor, Joins the White House". The New York Times. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Jenkins, Jack; Mwaura, Maina (October 23, 2020). "Exclusive: Trump, confirmed a Presbyterian, now identifies as 'non-denominational Christian'". Religion News Service. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved September 29, 2021. "Donald Trump says he gets most of his exercise from golf, then uses cart at Turnberry". Golf News Net. July 14, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Rettner, Rachael (May 14, 2017). "Trump thinks that exercising too much uses up the body's 'finite' energy". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Marquardt, Alex; Crook, Lawrence III (May 1, 2018). "Exclusive: Bornstein claims Trump dictated the glowing health letter". CNN. Retrieved May 20, 2018. Schecter, Anna (May 1, 2018). "Trump doctor Harold Bornstein says bodyguard, lawyer 'raided' his office, took medical files". NBC News. Retrieved June 6, 2019. 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved February 29, 2024. O'Brien, Timothy L. (October 23, 2005). "What's He Really Worth?". The New York Times. Retrieved February 25, 2016. Diamond, Jeremy; Frates, Chris (July 22, 2015). "Donald Trump's 92-page financial disclosure released". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Walsh, John (October 3, 2018). "Trump has fallen 138 spots on Forbes' wealthiest-Americans list, his net worth down over $1 billion, since he announced his presidential bid in 2015". Business Insider. Retrieved October 12, 2021. "Profile Donald Trump". Forbes. 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Greenberg, Jonathan (April 20, 2018). "Trump lied to me about his wealth to get onto the Forbes 400. Here are the tapes". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Stump, Scott (October 26, 2015). "Donald Trump: My dad gave me 'a small loan' of $1 million to get started". CNBC. Retrieved November 13, 2016. Barstow, David; Craig, Susanne; Buettner, Russ (October 2, 2018). "11 Takeaways From The Times's Investigation into Trump's Wealth". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2018. Barstow, David; Craig, Susanne; Buettner, Russ (October 2, 2018). "Trump Engaged in Suspect Tax Schemes as He Reaped Riches From His Father". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2018. "From the Tower to the White House". The Economist. February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 29, 2016. Mr Trump's performance has been mediocre compared with the stockmarket and property in New York. Swanson, Ana (February 29, 2016). "The myth and the reality of Donald Trump's business empire". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Alexander, Dan; Peterson-Whithorn, Chase (October 2, 2018). "How Trump Is Trying—And Failing—To Get Rich Off His Presidency". Forbes. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Buettner, Russ; Craig, Susanne (May 7, 2019). "Decade in the Red: Trump Tax Figures Show Over $1 Billion in Business Losses". The New York Times. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Friedersdorf, Conor (May 8, 2019). "The Secret That Was Hiding in Trump's Taxes". The Atlantic. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Buettner, Russ; Craig, Susanne; McIntire, Mike (September 27, 2020). "Long-concealed Records Show Trump's Chronic Losses And Years Of Tax Avoidance". The New York Times. Retrieved September 28, 2020. Alexander, Dan (October 7, 2021). "Trump's Debt Now Totals An Estimated $1.3 Billion". Forbes. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Alexander, Dan (October 16, 2020). "Donald Trump Has at Least $1 Billion in Debt, More Than Twice The Amount He Suggested". Forbes. Retrieved October 17, 2020. Mahler, Jonathan; Eder, Steve (August 27, 2016). "'No Vacancies' for Blacks: How Donald Trump Got His Start, and Was First Accused of Bias". The New York Times. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Rich, Frank (April 30, 2018). "The Original Donald Trump". New York. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Blair 2015, p. 250. Qiu, Linda (June 21, 2016). "Yep, Donald Trump's companies have declared bankruptcy...more than four times". PolitiFact. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Nevius, James (April 3, 2019). "The winding history of Donald Trump's first major Manhattan real estate project". Curbed. Kessler, Glenn (March 3, 2016). "Trump's false claim he built his empire with a 'small loan' from his father". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 84. Geist, William E. (April 8, 1984). "The Expanding Empire of Donald Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Jacobs, Shayna; Fahrenthold, David A.; O'Connell, Jonathan; Dawsey, Josh (September 3, 2021). "Trump Tower's key tenants have fallen behind on rent and moved out. But Trump has one reliable customer: His own PAC". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Haberman, Maggie (October 31, 2019). "Trump, Lifelong New Yorker, Declares Himself a Resident of Florida". The New York Times. Retrieved January 24, 2020. "Trump Revises Plaza Loan". New York Times. November 4, 1992. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "Trump's Plaza Hotel Bankruptcy Plan Approved". The New York Times. Reuters. December 12, 1992. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Stout, David; Gilpin, Kenneth N. (April 12, 1995). "Trump Is Selling Plaza Hotel To Saudi and Asian Investors". The New York Times. Retrieved July 18, 2019. Segal, David (January 16, 2016). "What Donald Trump's Plaza Deal Reveals About His White House Bid". The New York Times. Retrieved May 3, 2022. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 298. Bagli, Charles V. (June 1, 2005). "Trump Group Selling West Side Parcel for $1.8 billion". The New York Times. Retrieved May 17, 2016. McQuade, Dan (August 16, 2015). "The Truth About the Rise and Fall of Donald Trump's Atlantic City Empire". Philadelphia. Retrieved March 21, 2016. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 128. Saxon, Wolfgang (April 28, 1986). "Trump Buys Hilton's Hotel in Atlantic City". The New York Times. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 137. "Trump's Castle and Plaza file for bankruptcy". UPI. March 9, 1992. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Glynn, Lenny (April 8, 1990). "Trump's Taj – Open at Last, With a Scary Appetite". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2016. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 135. "Company News; Taj Mahal is out of Bankruptcy". The New York Times. October 5, 1991. Retrieved May 22, 2008. O'Connor, Claire (May 29, 2011). "Fourth Time's A Charm: How Donald Trump Made Bankruptcy Work For Him". Forbes. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Norris, Floyd (June 7, 1995). "Trump Plaza casino stock trades today on Big Board". The New York Times. Retrieved December 14, 2014. Tully, Shawn (March 10, 2016). "How Donald Trump Made Millions Off His Biggest Business Failure". Fortune. Retrieved May 6, 2018. Peterson-Withorn, Chase (April 23, 2018). "Donald Trump Has Gained More Than $100 Million On Mar-a-Lago". Forbes. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Dangremond, Sam; Kim, Leena (December 22, 2017). "A History of Mar-a-Lago, Donald Trump's American Castle". Town & Country. Retrieved July 3, 2018. Durkee, Allison (May 7, 2021). "Trump Can Legally Live At Mar-A-Lago, Palm Beach Says". Forbes. Retrieved March 7, 2024. Garcia, Ahiza (December 29, 2016). "Trump's 17 golf courses teed up: Everything you need to know". CNN Money. Retrieved January 21, 2018. "Take a look at the golf courses owned by Donald Trump". Golfweek. July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Anthony, Zane; Sanders, Kathryn; Fahrenthold, David A. (April 13, 2018). "Whatever happened to Trump neckties? They're over. So is most of Trump's merchandising empire". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Martin, Jonathan (June 29, 2016). "Trump Institute Offered Get-Rich Schemes With Plagiarized Lessons". The New York Times. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Williams, Aaron; Narayanswamy, Anu (January 25, 2017). "How Trump has made millions by selling his name". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 12, 2017. Markazi, Arash (July 14, 2015). "5 things to know about Donald Trump's foray into doomed USFL". ESPN. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Morris, David Z. (September 24, 2017). "Donald Trump Fought the NFL Once Before. He Got Crushed". Fortune. Retrieved June 22, 2018. O'Donnell & Rutherford 1991, p. 137–143. Hogan, Kevin (April 10, 2016). "The Strange Tale of Donald Trump's 1989 Biking Extravaganza". Politico. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Mattingly, Phil; Jorgensen, Sarah (August 23, 2016). "The Gordon Gekko era: Donald Trump's lucrative and controversial time as an activist investor". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Peterson, Barbara (April 13, 2017). "The Crash of Trump Air". Daily Beast. Retrieved May 17, 2023. "10 Donald Trump Business Failures". Time. October 11, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2023. Blair, Gwenda (October 7, 2018). "Did the Trump Family Historian Drop a Dime to the New York Times?". Politico. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Koblin, John (September 14, 2015). "Trump Sells Miss Universe Organization to WME-IMG Talent Agency". The New York Times. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Nededog, Jethro (September 14, 2015). "Donald Trump just sold off the entire Miss Universe Organization after buying it 3 days ago". Business Insider. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Rutenberg, Jim (June 22, 2002). "Three Beauty Pageants Leaving CBS for NBC". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2016. de Moraes, Lisa (June 22, 2002). "There She Goes: Pageants Move to NBC". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 14, 2016. Zara, Christopher (October 26, 2016). "Why the heck does Donald Trump have a Walk of Fame star, anyway? It's not the reason you think". Fast Company. Retrieved June 16, 2018. Puente, Maria (June 29, 2015). "NBC to Donald Trump: You're fired". USA Today. Retrieved July 28, 2015. Cohan, William D. (December 3, 2013). "Big Hair on Campus: Did Donald Trump Defraud Thousands of Real Estate Students?". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Barbaro, Michael (May 19, 2011). "New York Attorney General Is Investigating Trump's For-Profit School". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Lee, Michelle Ye Hee (February 27, 2016). "Donald Trump's misleading claim that he's 'won most of' lawsuits over Trump University". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 27, 2016. McCoy, Kevin (August 26, 2013). "Trump faces two-front legal fight over 'university'". USA Today. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Barbaro, Michael; Eder, Steve (May 31, 2016). "Former Trump University Workers Call the School a 'Lie' and a 'Scheme' in Testimony". The New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2018. Montanaro, Domenico (June 1, 2016). "Hard Sell: The Potential Political Consequences of the Trump University Documents". NPR. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Eder, Steve (November 18, 2016). "Donald Trump Agrees to Pay $25 Million in Trump University Settlement". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2016. Tigas, Mike; Wei, Sisi (May 9, 2013). "Nonprofit Explorer". ProPublica. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Fahrenthold, David A. (September 1, 2016). "Trump pays IRS a penalty for his foundation violating rules with gift to aid Florida attorney general". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Fahrenthold, David A. (September 10, 2016). "How Donald Trump retooled his charity to spend other people's money". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Pallotta, Frank (August 18, 2022). "Investigation into Vince McMahon's hush money payments reportedly turns up Trump charity donations". CNN. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Solnik, Claude (September 15, 2016). "Taking a peek at Trump's (foundation) tax returns". Long Island Business News. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Cillizza, Chris; Fahrenthold, David A. (September 15, 2016). "Meet the reporter who's giving Donald Trump fits". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Fahrenthold, David A. (October 3, 2016). "Trump Foundation ordered to stop fundraising by N.Y. attorney general's office". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 17, 2023. Jacobs, Ben (December 24, 2016). "Donald Trump to dissolve his charitable foundation after mounting complaints". The Guardian. Retrieved December 25, 2016. Thomsen, Jacqueline (June 14, 2018). "Five things to know about the lawsuit against the Trump Foundation". The Hill. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Goldmacher, Shane (December 18, 2018). "Trump Foundation Will Dissolve, Accused of 'Shocking Pattern of Illegality'". The New York Times. Retrieved May 9, 2019. Katersky, Aaron (November 7, 2019). "President Donald Trump ordered to pay $2M to collection of nonprofits as part of civil lawsuit". ABC News. Retrieved November 7, 2019. "Judge orders Trump to pay $2m for misusing Trump Foundation funds". BBC News. November 8, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Mahler, Jonathan; Flegenheimer, Matt (June 20, 2016). "What Donald Trump Learned From Joseph McCarthy's Right-Hand Man". The New York Times. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Kranish, Michael; O'Harrow, Robert Jr. (January 23, 2016). "Inside the government's racial bias case against Donald Trump's company, and how he fought it". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Dunlap, David W. (July 30, 2015). "1973: Meet Donald Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Brenner, Marie (June 28, 2017). "How Donald Trump and Roy Cohn's Ruthless Symbiosis Changed America". Vanity Fair. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Donald Trump: Three decades, 4,095 lawsuits". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2018. Winter, Tom (June 24, 2016). "Trump Bankruptcy Math Doesn't Add Up". NBC News. Retrieved February 26, 2020. Flitter, Emily (July 17, 2016). "Art of the spin: Trump bankers question his portrayal of financial comeback". Reuters. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Smith, Allan (December 8, 2017). "Trump's long and winding history with Deutsche Bank could now be at the center of Robert Mueller's investigation". Business Insider. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Riley, Charles; Egan, Matt (January 12, 2021). "Deutsche Bank won't do any more business with Trump". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Buncombe, Andrew (July 4, 2018). "Trump boasted about writing many books – his ghostwriter says otherwise". The Independent. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Mayer, Jane (July 18, 2016). "Donald Trump's Ghostwriter Tells All". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 19, 2017. O'Neil, Luke (June 2, 2020). "What do we know about Trump's love for the Bible?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 11, 2020. LaFrance, Adrienne (December 21, 2015). "Three Decades of Donald Trump Film and TV Cameos". The Atlantic. Dawsey, Josh (January 16, 2017). "Trump's obsession with WrestleMania and fake drama". Politico. Retrieved January 28, 2022. Kelly, Chris; Wetherbee, Brandon (December 9, 2016). "Heel in Chief". Slate. Retrieved March 5, 2019. Kranish & Fisher 2017, p. 166. Silverman, Stephen M. (April 29, 2004). "The Donald to Get New Wife, Radio Show". People. Retrieved November 19, 2013. Tedeschi, Bob (February 6, 2006). "Now for Sale Online, the Art of the Vacation". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2018. Montopoli, Brian (April 1, 2011). "Donald Trump gets regular Fox News spot". CBS News. Retrieved July 7, 2018. Grossmann, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (September 9, 2016). "How the conservative media is taking over the Republican Party". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 19, 2018. Grynbaum, Michael M.; Parker, Ashley (July 16, 2016). "Donald Trump the Political Showman, Born on 'The Apprentice'". The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2018. Nussbaum, Emily (July 24, 2017). "The TV That Created Donald Trump". The New Yorker. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Poniewozik, James (September 28, 2020). "Donald Trump Was the Real Winner of 'The Apprentice'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Rao, Sonia (February 4, 2021). "Facing expulsion, Trump resigns from the Screen Actors Guild: 'You have done nothing for me'". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Harmata, Claudia (February 7, 2021). "Donald Trump Banned from Future Re-Admission to SAG-AFTRA: It's 'More Than a Symbolic Step'". People. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Gillin, Joshua (August 24, 2015). "Bush says Trump was a Democrat longer than a Republican 'in the last decade'". PolitiFact. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Trump Officially Joins Reform Party". CNN. October 25, 1999. Retrieved December 26, 2020. Oreskes, Michael (September 2, 1987). "Trump Gives a Vague Hint of Candidacy". The New York Times. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Butterfield, Fox (November 18, 1987). "Trump Urged To Head Gala Of Democrats". The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Meacham, Jon (2016). Destiny and Power: The American Odyssey of George Herbert Walker Bush. Random House Publishing Group. p. 326. ISBN 9780812979473. Winger, Richard (December 25, 2011). "Donald Trump Ran For President in 2000 in Several Reform Party Presidential Primaries". Ballot Access News. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Clift, Eleanor (July 18, 2016). "The Last Time Trump Wrecked a Party". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Nagourney, Adam (February 14, 2000). "Reform Bid Said to Be a No-Go for Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2020. Holland, Keating (July 16, 1999). "Poll: Independent candidate would not fare well against Gore, Bush". CNN. Retrieved October 2, 2023. MacAskill, Ewen (May 16, 2011). "Donald Trump bows out of 2012 US presidential election race". The Guardian. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Bobic, Igor; Stein, Sam (February 22, 2017). "How CPAC Helped Launch Donald Trump's Political Career". HuffPost. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Linkins, Jason (February 11, 2011). "Donald Trump Brings His 'Pretend To Run For President' Act To CPAC". HuffPost. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Cillizza, Chris (June 14, 2016). "This Harvard study is a powerful indictment of the media's role in Donald Trump's rise". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Flitter, Emily; Oliphant, James (August 28, 2015). "Best president ever! How Trump's love of hyperbole could backfire". Reuters. Retrieved October 1, 2021. McCammon, Sarah (August 10, 2016). "Donald Trump's controversial speech often walks the line". NPR. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "The 'King of Whoppers': Donald Trump". FactCheck.org. December 21, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2019. Holan, Angie Drobnic; Qiu, Linda (December 21, 2015). "2015 Lie of the Year: the campaign misstatements of Donald Trump". PolitiFact. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Farhi, Paul (February 26, 2016). "Think Trump's wrong? Fact checkers can tell you how often. (Hint: A lot.)". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Stelter, Brian (September 26, 2016). "The weekend America's newspapers called Donald Trump a liar". CNN. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Finnegan, Michael (September 25, 2016). "Scope of Trump's falsehoods unprecedented for a modern presidential candidate". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Walsh, Kenneth T. (August 15, 2016). "Trump: Media Is 'Dishonest and Corrupt'". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Blake, Aaron (July 6, 2016). "Donald Trump is waging war on political correctness. And he's losing". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Lerner, Adam B. (June 16, 2015). "The 10 best lines from Donald Trump's announcement speech". Politico. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Graham, David A. (May 13, 2016). "The Lie of Trump's 'Self-Funding' Campaign". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 7, 2018. Reeve, Elspeth (October 27, 2015). "How Donald Trump Evolved From a Joke to an Almost Serious Candidate". The New Republic. Retrieved July 23, 2018. Bump, Philip (March 23, 2016). "Why Donald Trump is poised to win the nomination and lose the general election, in one poll". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Nussbaum, Matthew (May 3, 2016). "RNC Chairman: Trump is our nominee". Politico. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Hartig, Hannah; Lapinski, John; Psyllos, Stephanie (July 19, 2016). "Poll: Clinton and Trump Now Tied as GOP Convention Kicks Off". NBC News. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "2016 General Election: Trump vs. Clinton". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. Retrieved November 8, 2016. Levingston, Ivan (July 15, 2016). "Donald Trump officially names Mike Pence for VP". CNBC. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "Trump closes the deal, becomes Republican nominee for president". Fox News. July 19, 2016. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "US presidential debate: Trump won't commit to accept election result". BBC News. October 20, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2016. "The Republican Party has lurched towards populism and illiberalism". The Economist. October 31, 2020. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Borger, Julian (October 26, 2021). "Republicans closely resemble autocratic parties in Hungary and Turkey – study". The Guardian. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Chotiner, Isaac (July 29, 2021). "Redefining Populism". The New Yorker. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Noah, Timothy (July 26, 2015). "Will the real Donald Trump please stand up?". Politico. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Timm, Jane C. (March 30, 2016). "A Full List of Donald Trump's Rapidly Changing Policy Positions". NBC News. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Rucker, Philip; Costa, Robert (March 21, 2016). "Trump questions need for NATO, outlines noninterventionist foreign policy". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 24, 2021. "Trump's promises before and after the election". BBC. September 19, 2017. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Johnson, Jenna (April 12, 2017). "Trump on NATO: 'I said it was obsolete. It's no longer obsolete.'". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Edwards, Jason A. (2018). "Make America Great Again: Donald Trump and Redefining the U.S. Role in the World". Communication Quarterly. 66 (2): 176. doi:10.1080/01463373.2018.1438485. On the campaign trail, Trump repeatedly called North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 'obsolete'. Bierman, Noah (August 22, 2016). "Donald Trump helps bring far-right media's edgier elements into the mainstream". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Scott, Eugene (March 3, 2016). "Trump denounces David Duke, KKK". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Nelson, Libby (August 12, 2017). ""Why we voted for Donald Trump": David Duke explains the white supremacist Charlottesville protests". Vox. Retrieved August 18, 2018. Cummings, William (August 15, 2017). "Former KKK leader David Duke praises Trump for his 'courage'". USA Today. Retrieved August 18, 2018. Wilson, Jason (November 15, 2016). "Clickbait scoops and an engaged alt-right: everything to know about Breitbart News". The Guardian. Retrieved November 18, 2016. Weigel, David (August 20, 2016). "'Racialists' are cheered by Trump's latest strategy". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Krieg, Gregory (August 25, 2016). "Clinton is attacking the 'Alt-Right' – What is it?". CNN. Retrieved August 25, 2016. Pierce, Matt (September 20, 2020). "Q&A: What is President Trump's relationship with far-right and white supremacist groups?". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Executive Branch Personnel Public Financial Disclosure Report (U.S. OGE Form 278e)" (PDF). U.S. Office of Government Ethics. July 15, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 23, 2015. Retrieved December 21, 2023 – via Bloomberg Businessweek. Rappeport, Alan (May 11, 2016). "Donald Trump Breaks With Recent History by Not Releasing Tax Returns". The New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Qiu, Linda (October 5, 2016). "Pence's False claim that Trump 'hasn't broken' tax return promise". PolitiFact. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Isidore, Chris; Sahadi, Jeanne (February 26, 2016). "Trump says he can't release tax returns because of audits". CNN. Retrieved March 1, 2023. de Vogue, Ariane (February 22, 2021). "Supreme Court allows release of Trump tax returns to NY prosecutor". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Gresko, Jessica (February 22, 2021). "Supreme Court won't halt turnover of Trump's tax records". Associated Press. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Eder, Steve; Twohey, Megan (October 10, 2016). "Donald Trump Acknowledges Not Paying Federal Income Taxes for Years". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Schmidt, Kiersten; Andrews, Wilson (December 19, 2016). "A Historic Number of Electors Defected, and Most Were Supposed to Vote for Clinton". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Desilver, Drew (December 20, 2016). "Trump's victory another example of how Electoral College wins are bigger than popular vote ones". Pew Research Center. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Crockett, Zachary (November 11, 2016). "Donald Trump will be the only US president ever with no political or military experience". Vox. Retrieved January 3, 2017. Goldmacher, Shane; Schreckinger, Ben (November 9, 2016). "Trump pulls off biggest upset in U.S. history". Politico. Retrieved November 9, 2016. Cohn, Nate (November 9, 2016). "Why Trump Won: Working-Class Whites". The New York Times. Retrieved November 9, 2016. Phillips, Amber (November 9, 2016). "Republicans are poised to grasp the holy grail of governance". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Logan, Brian; Sanchez, Chris (November 10, 2016). "Protests against Donald Trump break out nationwide". Business Insider. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Colson, Thomas (November 11, 2016). "Trump says protesters have 'passion for our great country' after calling demonstrations 'very unfair'". Business Insider. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Przybyla, Heidi M.; Schouten, Fredreka (January 21, 2017). "At 2.6 million strong, Women's Marches crush expectations". USA Today. Retrieved January 22, 2017. Quigley, Aidan (January 25, 2017). "All of Trump's executive actions so far". Politico. Retrieved January 28, 2017. V.V.B (March 31, 2017). "Ivanka Trump's new job". The Economist. Retrieved April 3, 2017. Schmidt, Michael S.; Lipton, Eric; Savage, Charlie (January 21, 2017). "Jared Kushner, Trump's Son-in-Law, Is Cleared to Serve as Adviser". The New York Times. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Geewax, Marilyn (January 20, 2018). "Trump Has Revealed Assumptions About Handling Presidential Wealth, Businesses". NPR. Retrieved October 2, 2021. "Donald Trump: A list of potential conflicts of interest". BBC. April 18, 2017. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Venook, Jeremy (August 9, 2017). "Trump's Interests vs. America's, Dubai Edition". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 2, 2021. In Focus: The Emoluments Clauses of the U.S. Constitution (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service. August 19, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2021. LaFraniere, Sharon (January 25, 2018). "Lawsuit on Trump Emoluments Violations Gains Traction in Court". The New York Times. Retrieved January 25, 2018. de Vogue, Ariane; Cole, Devan (January 25, 2021). "Supreme Court dismisses emoluments cases against Trump". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Bump, Philip (January 20, 2021). "Trump's presidency ends where so much of it was spent: A Trump Organization property". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Van Dam, Andrew (January 8, 2021). "Trump will have the worst jobs record in modern U.S. history. It's not just the pandemic". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 2, 2021. Smialek, Jeanna (June 8, 2020). "The U.S. Entered a Recession in February". The New York Times. Retrieved June 10, 2020. Long, Heather (December 15, 2017). "The final GOP tax bill is complete. Here's what is in it". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Andrews, Wilson; Parlapiano, Alicia (December 15, 2017). "What's in the Final Republican Tax Bill". The New York Times. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Gale, William G. (February 14, 2020). "Did the 2017 tax cut—the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act—pay for itself?". Brookings Institution. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Long, Heather; Stein, Jeff (October 25, 2019). "The U.S. deficit hit $984 billion in 2019, soaring during Trump era". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 10, 2020. Sloan, Allan; Podkul, Cezary (January 14, 2021). "Donald Trump Built a National Debt So Big (Even Before the Pandemic) That It'll Weigh Down the Economy for Years". ProPublica. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Bliss, Laura (November 16, 2020). "How Trump's $1 Trillion Infrastructure Pledge Added Up". Bloomberg News. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Parker, Ashley; Davenport, Coral (May 26, 2016). "Donald Trump's Energy Plan: More Fossil Fuels and Fewer Rules". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Samenow, Jason (March 22, 2016). "Donald Trump's unsettling nonsense on weather and climate". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Trump proposes cuts to climate and clean-energy programs". National Geographic Society. May 3, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2023. Dennis, Brady (November 7, 2017). "As Syria embraces Paris climate deal, it's the United States against the world". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Gardner, Timothy (December 3, 2019). "Senate confirms Brouillette, former Ford lobbyist, as energy secretary". Reuters. Retrieved December 15, 2019. Brown, Matthew (September 15, 2020). "Trump's fossil fuel agenda gets pushback from federal judges". Associated Press. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Lipton, Eric (October 5, 2020). "'The Coal Industry Is Back,' Trump Proclaimed. It Wasn't". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Subramaniam, Tara (January 30, 2021). "From building the wall to bringing back coal: Some of Trump's more notable broken promises". CNN. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Popovich, Nadja; Albeck-Ripka, Livia; Pierre-Louis, Kendra (January 20, 2021). "The Trump Administration Rolled Back More Than 100 Environmental Rules. Here's the Full List". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Plumer, Brad (January 30, 2017). "Trump wants to kill two old regulations for every new one issued. Sort of". Vox. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Thompson, Frank W. (October 9, 2020). "Six ways Trump has sabotaged the Affordable Care Act". Brookings Institution. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Arnsdorf, Isaac; DePillis, Lydia; Lind, Dara; Song, Lisa; Syed, Moiz; Osei, Zipporah (November 25, 2020). "Tracking the Trump Administration's "Midnight Regulations"". ProPublica. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Poydock, Margaret (September 17, 2020). "President Trump has attacked workers' safety, wages, and rights since Day One". Economic Policy Institute. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Baker, Cayli (December 15, 2020). "The Trump administration's major environmental deregulations". Brookings Institution. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Grunwald, Michael (April 10, 2017). "Trump's Secret Weapon Against Obama's Legacy". Politico Magazine. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Lipton, Eric; Appelbaum, Binyamin (March 5, 2017). "Leashes Come Off Wall Street, Gun Sellers, Polluters and More". The New York Times. Retrieved January 29, 2022. "Trump-Era Trend: Industries Protest. Regulations Rolled Back. A Dozen Examples". The New York Times. March 5, 2017. Retrieved January 29, 2022 – via DocumentCloud. "Roundup: Trump-Era Agency Policy in the Courts". Institute for Policy Integrity. April 25, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Kodjak, Alison (November 9, 2016). "Trump Can Kill Obamacare With Or Without Help From Congress". NPR. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Pear, Robert (January 20, 2017). "Trump Issues Executive Order Scaling Back Parts of Obamacare". The New York Times. Retrieved January 23, 2017. Luhby, Tami (October 13, 2017). "What's in Trump's health care executive order?". CNN. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Nelson, Louis (July 18, 2017). "Trump says he plans to 'let Obamacare fail'". Politico. Retrieved September 29, 2017. Young, Jeffrey (August 31, 2017). "Trump Ramps Up Obamacare Sabotage With Huge Cuts To Enrollment Programs". HuffPost. Retrieved September 29, 2017. Luthra, Shefali (January 14, 2020). "Trump's claim that he 'saved' pre-ex conditions 'part fantasy, part delusion'". PolitiFact. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (June 26, 2020). "Trump Administration Asks Supreme Court to Strike Down Affordable Care Act". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Katkov, Mark (June 26, 2020). "Obamacare Must 'Fall,' Trump Administration Tells Supreme Court". NPR. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Rappeport, Alan; Haberman, Maggie (January 22, 2020). "Trump Opens Door to Cuts to Medicare and Other Entitlement Programs". The New York Times. Retrieved January 24, 2020. Mann, Brian (October 29, 2020). "Opioid Crisis: Critics Say Trump Fumbled Response To Another Deadly Epidemic". NPR. Retrieved December 13, 2020. "Abortion: How do Trump and Biden's policies compare?". BBC News. September 9, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2023. de Vogue, Ariane (November 15, 2016). "Trump: Same-sex marriage is 'settled', but Roe v Wade can be changed". CNN. Retrieved November 30, 2016. O'Hara, Mary Emily (March 30, 2017). "LGBTQ Advocates Say Trump's New Executive Order Makes Them Vulnerable to Discrimination". NBC News. Retrieved July 30, 2017. Luthi, Susannah (August 17, 2020). "Judge halts Trump's rollback of transgender health protections". Politico. Retrieved November 8, 2023. Krieg, Gregory (June 20, 2016). "The times Trump changed his positions on guns". CNN. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Dawsey, Josh (November 1, 2019). "Trump abandons proposing ideas to curb gun violence after saying he would following mass shootings". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Bures, Brendan (February 21, 2020). "Trump administration doubles down on anti-marijuana position". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Wolf, Zachary B. (July 27, 2019). "Trump returns to the death penalty as Democrats turn against it". CNN. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Honderich, Holly (January 16, 2021). "In Trump's final days, a rush of federal executions". BBC. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Tarm, Michael; Kunzelman, Michael (January 15, 2021). "Trump administration carries out 13th and final execution". Associated Press. Retrieved January 30, 2022. McCarthy, Tom (February 7, 2016). "Donald Trump: I'd bring back 'a hell of a lot worse than waterboarding'". The Guardian. Retrieved February 8, 2016. "Ted Cruz, Donald Trump Advocate Bringing Back Waterboarding". ABC News. February 6, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Hassner, Ron E. (2020). "What Do We Know about Interrogational Torture?". International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence. 33 (1): 4–42. doi:10.1080/08850607.2019.1660951. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Gramlich, John (January 22, 2021). "Trump used his clemency power sparingly despite a raft of late pardons and commutations". Pew Research Center. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Vogel, Kenneth P. (March 21, 2021). "The Road to Clemency From Trump Was Closed to Most Who Sought It". The New York Times. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Olorunnipa, Toluse; Dawsey, Josh (December 24, 2020). "Trump wields pardon power as political weapon, rewarding loyalists and undermining prosecutors". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Lucas, Ryan (March 9, 2018). "Trump Pardons Ex-Navy Sailor Sentenced For Photos of Submarine". NPR. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Rucker, Philip; Dawsey, Josh; Wagner, John (May 31, 2018). "Trump pardons conservative pundit Dinesh D'Souza, suggests others also could receive clemency". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2020. Wagner, John; Horwitz, Sari (June 6, 2018). "Trump has commuted the life sentence of Alice Marie Johnson, a woman whose case was championed by Kim Kardashian". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Philipps, Dave (November 16, 2019). "Trump's Pardons for Servicemen Raise Fears That Laws of War Are History". The New York Times. Retrieved December 23, 2020. Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S. (December 22, 2020). "Trump Pardons Two Russia Inquiry Figures and Blackwater Guards". The New York Times. Retrieved December 23, 2020. Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie; Shear, Michael D. (February 18, 2020). "Trump Commutes Corruption Sentence of Governor Rod Blagojevich of Illinois". The New York Times. Retrieved February 18, 2020. Kelly, Amita; Lucas, Ryan; Romo, Vanessa (December 23, 2020). "Trump Pardons Roger Stone, Paul Manafort And Charles Kushner". NPR. Retrieved March 21, 2021. Johnson, Kevin; Jackson, David; Wagner, Dennis (January 19, 2021). "Donald Trump grants clemency to 144 people (not himself or family members) in final hours". USA Today. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Leonnig, Carol D.; Zapotosky, Matt; Dawsey, Josh; Tan, Rebecca (June 2, 2020). "Barr personally ordered removal of protesters near White House, leading to use of force against largely peaceful crowd". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 3, 2020. Bump, Philip (June 2, 2020). "Timeline: The clearing of Lafayette Square". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 6, 2020. Gittleson, Ben; Phelps, Jordyn (June 3, 2020). "Police use munitions to forcibly push back peaceful protesters for Trump church visit". ABC News. Retrieved June 29, 2021. Shear, Michael D.; Rogers, Katie (June 3, 2020). "Trump and Aides Try to Change the Narrative of the White House Protests". The New York Times. Retrieved June 29, 2021. Stableford, Dylan; Wilson, Christopher (June 3, 2020). "Religious leaders condemn teargassing protesters to clear street for Trump". Yahoo! News. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "Scores of retired military leaders publicly denounce Trump". AP News. June 6, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "Donald Trump's Mexico wall: Who is going to pay for it?". BBC. February 6, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. "Donald Trump emphasizes plans to build 'real' wall at Mexico border". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. August 19, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2015. Oh, Inae (August 19, 2015). "Donald Trump: The 14th Amendment is Unconstitutional". Mother Jones. Retrieved November 22, 2015. Fritze, John (August 8, 2019). "A USA Today analysis found Trump used words like 'invasion' and 'killer' at rallies more than 500 times since 2017". USA Today. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Gomez, Alan (January 31, 2018). "Trump painted a dark picture of immigrants, despite the facts". USA Today. Retrieved February 1, 2018. Haslett, Cheyenne (January 15, 2019). "Fact Check: Trump's claims on undocumented immigrant crime rates. Here's what the numbers show". ABC News. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Johnson, Kevin R. (2017). "Immigration and civil rights in the Trump administration: Law and policy making by executive order". Santa Clara Law Review. 57 (3): 611–665. Retrieved June 1, 2020. Johnson, Kevin R.; Cuison-Villazor, Rose (May 2, 2019). "The Trump Administration and the War on Immigration Diversity". Wake Forest Law Review. 54 (2): 575–616. Retrieved June 1, 2020. Mitchell, Ellen (January 29, 2019). "Pentagon to send a 'few thousand' more troops to southern border". The Hill. Retrieved June 4, 2020. Snow, Anita (February 25, 2020). "Crackdown on immigrants who use public benefits takes effect". AP News. Retrieved June 4, 2020. "Donald Trump has cut refugee admissions to America to a record low". The Economist. November 4, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2020. Kanno-Youngs, Zolan; Shear, Michael D. (October 1, 2020). "Trump Virtually Cuts Off Refugees as He Unleashes a Tirade on Immigrants". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Hesson, Ted (October 11, 2019). "Trump ending U.S. role as worldwide leader on refugees". Politico. Retrieved June 25, 2020. Pilkington, Ed (December 8, 2015). "Donald Trump: ban all Muslims entering US". The Guardian. Retrieved October 10, 2020. Johnson, Jenna (June 25, 2016). "Trump now proposes only Muslims from terrorism-heavy countries would be banned from U.S." The Washington Post. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Walters, Joanna; Helmore, Edward; Dehghan, Saeed Kamali (January 28, 2017). "US airports on frontline as Donald Trump's travel ban causes chaos and protests". The Guardian. Retrieved July 19, 2017. "Protests erupt at airports nationwide over immigration action". CBS News. January 28, 2017. Retrieved March 22, 2021. Barrett, Devlin; Frosch, Dan (February 4, 2017). "Federal Judge Temporarily Halts Trump Order on Immigration, Refugees". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Levine, Dan; Rosenberg, Mica (March 15, 2017). "Hawaii judge halts Trump's new travel ban before it can go into effect". Reuters. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Trump signs new travel ban directive". BBC News. March 6, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Sherman, Mark (June 26, 2017). "Limited version of Trump's travel ban to take effect Thursday". Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. Retrieved August 5, 2017. Laughland, Oliver (September 25, 2017). "Trump travel ban extended to blocks on North Korea, Venezuela and Chad". The Guardian. Retrieved October 13, 2017. Hurley, Lawrence (December 4, 2017). "Supreme Court lets Trump's latest travel ban go into full effect". Reuters. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Wagner, Meg; Ries, Brian; Rocha, Veronica (June 26, 2018). "Supreme Court upholds travel ban". CNN. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Pearle, Lauren (February 5, 2019). "Trump administration admits thousands more migrant families may have been separated than estimated". ABC News. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Spagat, Elliot (October 25, 2019). "Tally of children split at border tops 5,400 in new count". AP News. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Shear, Michael D. (June 16, 2018). "How Trump Came to Enforce a Practice of Separating Migrant Families". The New York Times. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Savage, Charlie (June 20, 2018). "Explaining Trump's Executive Order on Family Separation". The New York Times. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Domonoske, Camila; Gonzales, Richard (June 19, 2018). "What We Know: Family Separation And 'Zero Tolerance' At The Border". NPR. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Epstein, Jennifer (June 18, 2018). "Donald Trump's family separations bedevil GOP as public outrage grows". The Sydney Morning Herald. The Washington Post. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld (June 15, 2018). "Separated at the Border From Their Parents: In Six Weeks, 1,995 Children". The New York Times. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Sarlin, Benjy (June 15, 2018). "Despite claims, GOP immigration bill would not end family separation, experts say". NBC News. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Nixon, Ron (May 29, 2018). "Trump Officials, Moving to Break Up Migrant Families, Blame Democrats". The New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Beckwith, Ryan Teague (June 20, 2018). "Here's What President Trump's Immigration Order Actually Does". Time. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Shear, Michael D.; Goodnough, Abby; Haberman, Maggie (June 20, 2018). "Trump Retreats on Separating Families, but Thousands May Remain Apart". The New York Times. Retrieved June 20, 2018. Hansler, Jennifer (June 27, 2018). "Judge says government does a better job of tracking 'personal property' than separated kids". CNN. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Walters, Joanna (June 27, 2018). "Judge orders US to reunite families separated at border within 30 days". The Guardian. Retrieved May 30, 2020. Timm, Jane C. (January 13, 2021). "Fact check: Mexico never paid for it. But what about Trump's other border wall promises?". NBC News. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Farley, Robert (February 16, 2021). "Trump's Border Wall: Where Does It Stand?". FactCheck.org. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Davis, Julie Hirschfeld; Tackett, Michael (January 2, 2019). "Trump and Democrats Dig in After Talks to Reopen Government Go Nowhere". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2019. Gambino, Lauren; Walters, Joanna (January 26, 2019). "Trump signs bill to end $6bn shutdown and temporarily reopen government". The Guardian. Reuters. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Pramuk, Jacob (January 25, 2019). "Trump signs bill to temporarily reopen government after longest shutdown in history". CNBC. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Fritze, John (January 24, 2019). "By the numbers: How the government shutdown is affecting the US". USA Today. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Mui, Ylan (January 28, 2019). "Government shutdown cost the economy $11 billion: CBO". CNBC. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Bacon, Perry Jr. (January 25, 2019). "Why Trump Blinked". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Pramuk, Jacob; Wilkie, Christina (February 15, 2019). "Trump declares national emergency to build border wall, setting up massive legal fight". CNBC. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Carney, Jordain (October 17, 2019). "Senate fails to override Trump veto over emergency declaration". The Hill. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Quinn, Melissa (December 11, 2019). "Supreme Court allows Trump to use military funds for border wall construction". CBS News. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Trump v. Sierra Club, No. 19A60, 588 U.S. ___ (2019) Allyn, Bobby (January 9, 2020). "Appeals Court Allows Trump To Divert $3.6 Billion In Military Funds For Border Wall". NPR. Retrieved September 19, 2022. El Paso Cty. v. Trump, 982 F.3d 332 (5th Cir. December 4, 2020). Cummings, William (October 24, 2018). "'I am a nationalist': Trump's embrace of controversial label sparks uproar". USA Today. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Bennhold, Katrin (June 6, 2020). "Has 'America First' Become 'Trump First'? Germans Wonder". The New York Times. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Carothers, Thomas; Brown, Frances Z. (October 1, 2018). "Can U.S. Democracy Policy Survive Trump?". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Retrieved October 19, 2019. McGurk, Brett (January 22, 2020). "The Cost of an Incoherent Foreign Policy: Trump's Iran Imbroglio Undermines U.S. Priorities Everywhere Else". Foreign Affairs. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Swanson, Ana (March 12, 2020). "Trump Administration Escalates Tensions With Europe as Crisis Looms". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Baker, Peter (May 26, 2017). "Trump Says NATO Allies Don't Pay Their Share. Is That True?". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Barnes, Julian E.; Cooper, Helene (January 14, 2019). "Trump Discussed Pulling U.S. From NATO, Aides Say Amid New Concerns Over Russia". The New York Times. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Bradner, Eric (January 23, 2017). "Trump's TPP withdrawal: 5 things to know". CNN. Retrieved March 12, 2018. Inman, Phillip (March 10, 2018). "The war over steel: Trump tips global trade into new turmoil". The Guardian. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Lawder, David; Blanchard, Ben (June 15, 2018). "Trump sets tariffs on $50 billion in Chinese goods; Beijing strikes back". Reuters. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Singh, Rajesh Kumar (August 2, 2019). "Explainer: Trump's China tariffs – Paid by U.S. importers, not by China". Reuters. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Crutsinger, Martin (September 3, 2020). "US trade deficit surges in July to highest in 12 years". AP News. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Rodriguez, Sabrina (April 24, 2020). "North American trade deal to take effect on July 1". Politico. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Zengerle, Patricia (January 16, 2019). "Bid to keep U.S. sanctions on Russia's Rusal fails in Senate". Reuters. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Whalen, Jeanne (January 15, 2019). "In rare rebuke of Trump administration, some GOP lawmakers advance measure to oppose lifting Russian sanctions". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Bugos, Shannon (September 2019). "U.S. Completes INF Treaty Withdrawal". Arms Control Association. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Panetta, Grace (June 14, 2018). "Trump reportedly claimed to leaders at the G7 that Crimea is part of Russia because everyone there speaks Russian". Business Insider. Retrieved February 13, 2020. Baker, Peter (August 10, 2017). "Trump Praises Putin Instead of Critiquing Cuts to U.S. Embassy Staff". The New York Times. Retrieved June 7, 2020. Nussbaum, Matthew (April 8, 2018). "Trump blames Putin for backing 'Animal Assad'". Politico. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Nord Stream 2: Trump approves sanctions on Russia gas pipeline". BBC News. December 21, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Diamond, Jeremy; Malloy, Allie; Dewan, Angela (March 26, 2018). "Trump expelling 60 Russian diplomats in wake of UK nerve agent attack". CNN. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Zurcher, Anthony (July 16, 2018). "Trump-Putin summit: After Helsinki, the fallout at home". BBC. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Calamur, Krishnadev (July 16, 2018). "Trump Sides With the Kremlin, Against the U.S. Government". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Fox, Lauren (July 16, 2018). "Top Republicans in Congress break with Trump over Putin comments". CNN. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Savage, Charlie; Schmitt, Eric; Schwirtz, Michael (May 17, 2021). "Russian Spy Team Left Traces That Bolstered C.I.A.'s Bounty Judgment". The New York Times. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Bose, Nandita; Shalal, Andrea (August 7, 2019). "Trump says China is 'killing us with unfair trade deals'". Reuters. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Hass, Ryan; Denmark, Abraham (August 7, 2020). "More pain than gain: How the US-China trade war hurt America". Brookings Institution. Retrieved October 4, 2021. "How China Won Trump's Trade War and Got Americans to Foot the Bill". Bloomberg News. January 11, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Disis, Jill (October 25, 2020). "Trump promised to win the trade war with China. He failed". CNN. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Bajak, Frank; Liedtke, Michael (May 21, 2019). "Huawei sanctions: Who gets hurt in dispute?". USA Today. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "Trump's Trade War Targets Chinese Students at Elite U.S. Schools". Time. June 3, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Meredith, Sam (August 6, 2019). "China responds to US after Treasury designates Beijing a 'currency manipulator'". CNBC. Retrieved August 6, 2019. Sink, Justin (April 11, 2018). "Trump Praises China's Xi's Trade Speech, Easing Tariff Tensions". IndustryWeek. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Nakamura, David (August 23, 2019). "Amid trade war, Trump drops pretense of friendship with China's Xi Jinping, calls him an 'enemy'". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 25, 2020. Ward, Myah (April 15, 2020). "15 times Trump praised China as coronavirus was spreading across the globe". Politico. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Mason, Jeff; Spetalnick, Matt; Alper, Alexandra (March 18, 2020). "Trump ratchets up criticism of China over coronavirus". Reuters. Retrieved October 25, 2020. "Trump held off sanctioning Chinese over Uighurs to pursue trade deal". BBC News. June 22, 2020. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Verma, Pranshu; Wong, Edward (July 9, 2020). "U.S. Imposes Sanctions on Chinese Officials Over Mass Detention of Muslims". The New York Times. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Taylor, Adam; Meko, Tim (December 21, 2017). "What made North Korea's weapons programs so much scarier in 2017". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Windrem, Robert; Siemaszko, Corky; Arkin, Daniel (May 2, 2017). "North Korea crisis: How events have unfolded under Trump". NBC News. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Borger, Julian (September 19, 2017). "Donald Trump threatens to 'totally destroy' North Korea in UN speech". The Guardian. Retrieved June 8, 2020. McCausland, Phil (September 22, 2017). "Kim Jong Un Calls President Trump 'Dotard' and 'Frightened Dog'". NBC News. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "Transcript: Kim Jong Un's letters to President Trump". CNN. September 9, 2020. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy (September 9, 2020). "'A magical force': New Trump-Kim letters provide window into their 'special friendship'". CNN. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Baker, Peter; Crowley, Michael (June 30, 2019). "Trump Steps Into North Korea and Agrees With Kim Jong-un to Resume Talks". The New York Times. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Rappeport, Alan (March 22, 2019). "Trump Overrules Own Experts on Sanctions, in Favor to North Korea". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Sanger, David E.; Sang-Hun, Choe (June 12, 2020). "Two Years After Trump-Kim Meeting, Little to Show for Personal Diplomacy". The New York Times. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Tanner, Jari; Lee, Matthew (October 5, 2019). "North Korea Says Nuclear Talks Break Down While U.S. Says They Were 'Good'". Associated Press. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Herskovitz, Jon (December 28, 2020). "Kim Jong Un's Nuclear Weapons Got More Dangerous Under Trump". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Warrick, Joby; Denyer, Simon (September 30, 2020). "As Kim wooed Trump with 'love letters', he kept building his nuclear capability, intelligence shows". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Jaffe, Greg; Ryan, Missy (January 21, 2018). "Up to 1,000 more U.S. troops could be headed to Afghanistan this spring". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Gordon, Michael R.; Schmitt, Eric; Haberman, Maggie (August 20, 2017). "Trump Settles on Afghan Strategy Expected to Raise Troop Levels". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2021. George, Susannah; Dadouch, Sarah; Lamothe, Dan (February 29, 2020). "U.S. signs peace deal with Taliban agreeing to full withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Mashal, Mujib (February 29, 2020). "Taliban and U.S. Strike Deal to Withdraw American Troops From Afghanistan". The New York Times. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Kiely, Eugene; Farley, Robert (August 17, 2021). "Timeline of U.S. Withdrawal from Afghanistan". FactCheck.org. Retrieved August 31, 2021. Sommer, Allison Kaplan (July 25, 2019). "How Trump and Netanyahu Became Each Other's Most Effective Political Weapon". Haaretz. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Nelson, Louis; Nussbaum, Matthew (December 6, 2017). "Trump says U.S. recognizes Jerusalem as Israel's capital, despite global condemnation". Politico. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Romo, Vanessa (March 25, 2019). "Trump Formally Recognizes Israeli Sovereignty Over Golan Heights". NPR. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Gladstone, Rick; Landler, Mark (December 21, 2017). "Defying Trump, U.N. General Assembly Condemns U.S. Decree on Jerusalem". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2017. Huet, Natalie (March 22, 2019). "Outcry as Trump backs Israeli sovereignty over Golan Heights". Euronews. Reuters. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Crowley, Michael (September 15, 2020). "Israel, U.A.E. and Bahrain Sign Accords, With an Eager Trump Playing Host". The New York Times. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Phelps, Jordyn; Struyk, Ryan (May 20, 2017). "Trump signs $110 billion arms deal with Saudi Arabia on 'a tremendous day'". ABC News. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Holland, Steve; Bayoumy, Yara (March 20, 2018). "Trump praises U.S. military sales to Saudi as he welcomes crown prince". Reuters. Retrieved June 2, 2021. Chiacu, Doina; Ali, Idrees (March 21, 2018). "Trump, Saudi leader discuss Houthi 'threat' in Yemen: White House". Reuters. Retrieved June 2, 2021. Stewart, Phil; Ali, Idrees (October 11, 2019). "U.S. says deploying more forces to Saudi Arabia to counter Iran threat". Reuters. Retrieved October 4, 2021. "Syria war: Trump's missile strike attracts US praise – and barbs". BBC News. April 7, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017. Joyce, Kathleen (April 14, 2018). "US strikes Syria after suspected chemical attack by Assad regime". Fox News. Retrieved April 14, 2018. Landler, Mark; Cooper, Helene; Schmitt, Eric (December 19, 2018). "Trump withdraws U.S. Forces From Syria, Declaring 'We Have Won Against ISIS'". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2018. Borger, Julian; Chulov, Martin (December 20, 2018). "Trump shocks allies and advisers with plan to pull US troops out of Syria". The Guardian. Retrieved December 20, 2018. Cooper, Helene (December 20, 2018). "Jim Mattis, Defense Secretary, Resigns in Rebuke of Trump's Worldview". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2018. McKernan, Bethan; Borger, Julian; Sabbagh, Dan (October 9, 2019). "Turkey launches military operation in northern Syria". The Guardian. Retrieved September 28, 2021. O'Brien, Connor (October 16, 2019). "House condemns Trump's Syria withdrawal". Politico. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Edmondson, Catie (October 16, 2019). "In Bipartisan Rebuke, House Majority Condemns Trump for Syria Withdrawal". The New York Times. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Lederman, Josh; Lucey, Catherine (May 8, 2018). "Trump declares US leaving 'horrible' Iran nuclear accord". Associated Press. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Landler, Mark (May 8, 2018). "Trump Abandons Iran Nuclear Deal He Long Scorned". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Hennigan, W.J. (November 24, 2021). "'They're Very Close.' U.S. General Says Iran Is Nearly Able to Build a Nuclear Weapon". Time. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Crowley, Michael; Hassan, Falih; Schmitt, Eric (January 2, 2020). "U.S. Strike in Iraq Kills Qassim Suleimani, Commander of Iranian Forces". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2020. Baker, Peter; Bergman, Ronen; Kirkpatrick, David D.; Barnes, Julian E.; Rubin, Alissa J. (January 11, 2020). "Seven Days in January: How Trump Pushed U.S. and Iran to the Brink of War". The New York Times. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Daniel, Douglas K.; Lemire, Jonathan (January 5, 2020). "Trump says 52 targets already lined up if Iran retaliates". Associated Press. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Horton, Alex; Lamothe, Dan (December 8, 2021). "Army awards more Purple Hearts for troops hurt in Iranian attack that Trump downplayed". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 8, 2021. Ward, Alex (January 9, 2020). "Evidence is mounting that Iran accidentally shot down the Ukraine flight". Vox. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Nichols, Michelle (February 18, 2021). "U.S. rescinds Trump White House claim that all U.N. sanctions had been reimposed on Iran". Reuters. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Trimble, Megan (December 28, 2017). "Trump White House Has Highest Turnover in 40 Years". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Wise, Justin (July 2, 2018). "AP: Trump admin sets record for White House turnover". The Hill. Retrieved July 3, 2018. "Trump White House sets turnover records, analysis shows". NBC News. Associated Press. July 2, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2018. Keith, Tamara (March 7, 2018). "White House Staff Turnover Was Already Record-Setting. Then More Advisers Left". NPR. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Tenpas, Kathryn Dunn; Kamarck, Elaine; Zeppos, Nicholas W. (March 16, 2018). "Tracking Turnover in the Trump Administration". Brookings Institution. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Rogers, Katie; Karni, Annie (April 23, 2020). "Home Alone at the White House: A Sour President, With TV His Constant Companion". The New York Times. Retrieved May 5, 2020. Cillizza, Chris (June 19, 2020). "Donald Trump makes terrible hires, according to Donald Trump". CNN. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Keith, Tamara (March 6, 2020). "Mick Mulvaney Out, Mark Meadows in As White House Chief Of Staff". NPR. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie (July 28, 2017). "Reince Priebus Pushed Out After Rocky Tenure as Trump Chief of Staff". The New York Times. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Fritze, John; Subramanian, Courtney; Collins, Michael (September 4, 2020). "Trump says former chief of staff Gen. John Kelly couldn't 'handle the pressure' of the job". USA Today. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Stanek, Becca (May 11, 2017). "President Trump just completely contradicted the official White House account of the Comey firing". The Week. Retrieved May 11, 2017. Schmidt, Michael S.; Apuzzo, Matt (June 7, 2017). "Comey Says Trump Pressured Him to 'Lift the Cloud' of Inquiry". The New York Times. Retrieved November 2, 2021. "Statement for the Record Senate Select Committee on Intelligence James B. Comey" (PDF). United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. United States Government. June 8, 2017. p. 7. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Jones-Rooy, Andrea (November 29, 2017). "The Incredibly And Historically Unstable First Year Of Trump's Cabinet". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Hersher, Rebecca; Neely, Brett (July 5, 2018). "Scott Pruitt Out at EPA". NPR. Retrieved July 5, 2018. Eilperin, Juliet; Dawsey, Josh (December 15, 2018). "Ryan Zinke resigns as interior secretary amid multiple investigations". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved January 3, 2019. Keith, Tamara (October 12, 2017). "Trump Leaves Top Administration Positions Unfilled, Says Hollow Government By Design". NPR. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "Tracking how many key positions Trump has filled so far". The Washington Post. January 8, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Gramlich, John (January 13, 2021). "How Trump compares with other recent presidents in appointing federal judges". Pew Research Center. Retrieved May 30, 2021. Kumar, Anita (September 26, 2020). "Trump's legacy is now the Supreme Court". Politico. [Trump's justices] will likely outlive Trump. They will likely ensure a conservative tilt for decades to come. And they will likely mark one of the most dramatic ideological turnarounds the court has seen in such a short timespan in generations. Farivar, Masood (December 24, 2020). "Trump's Lasting Legacy: Conservative Supermajority on Supreme Court". Voice of America. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Chinni, Dante (May 28, 2023). "The data behind the Supreme Court's shift to the right". NBC News. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Biskupic, Joan (2023). Nine Black Robes: Inside the Supreme Court's Drive to the Right and Its Historic Consequences. Harper Collins. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Quay, Grayson (June 25, 2022). "Trump takes credit for Dobbs decision but worries it 'won't help him in the future'". The Week. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Liptak, Adam (June 24, 2022). "In 6-to-3 Ruling, Supreme Court Ends Nearly 50 Years of Abortion Rights". New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Kapur, Sahil (May 17, 2023). "Trump: 'I was able to kill Roe v. Wade'". NBC News. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Phillip, Abby; Barnes, Robert; O'Keefe, Ed (February 8, 2017). "Supreme Court nominee Gorsuch says Trump's attacks on judiciary are 'demoralizing'". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 6, 2021. In His Own Words: The President's Attacks on the Courts (Report). Brennan Center for Justice. June 5, 2017. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Shepherd, Katie (November 8, 2019). "Trump 'violates all recognized democratic norms,' federal judge says in biting speech on judicial independence". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 – 11 March 2020". World Health Organization. March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Coronavirus disease 2019". World Health Organization. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Holshue, Michelle L.; et al. (March 5, 2020). "First Case of 2019 Novel Coronavirus in the United States". The New England Journal of Medicine. 382 (10): 929–936. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001191. PMC 7092802. PMID 32004427. Hein, Alexandria (January 31, 2020). "Coronavirus declared public health emergency in US". Fox News. Retrieved October 2, 2020. Cloud, David S.; Pringle, Paul; Stokols, Eli (April 19, 2020). "How Trump let the U.S. fall behind the curve on coronavirus threat". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 21, 2020. Lipton, Eric; Sanger, David E.; Haberman, Maggie; Shear, Michael D.; Mazzetti, Mark; Barnes, Julian E. (April 11, 2020). "He Could Have Seen What Was Coming: Behind Trump's Failure on the Virus". The New York Times. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Kelly, Caroline (March 21, 2020). "Washington Post: US intelligence warned Trump in January and February as he dismissed coronavirus threat". CNN. Retrieved April 21, 2020. Watson, Kathryn (April 3, 2020). "A timeline of what Trump has said on coronavirus". CBS News. Retrieved January 27, 2021. "Trump deliberately played down virus, Woodward book says". BBC News. September 10, 2020. Retrieved September 18, 2020. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Stuart, Elizabeth (September 9, 2020). "'Play it down': Trump admits to concealing the true threat of coronavirus in new Woodward book". CNN. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Partington, Richard; Wearden, Graeme (March 9, 2020). "Global stock markets post biggest falls since 2008 financial crisis". The Guardian. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Heeb, Gina (March 6, 2020). "Trump signs emergency coronavirus package, injecting $8.3 billion into efforts to fight the outbreak". Business Insider. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Coronavirus: What you need to know about Trump's Europe travel ban". The Local. March 12, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Karni, Annie; Haberman, Maggie (March 12, 2020). "In Rare Oval Office Speech, Trump Voices New Concerns and Old Themes". The New York Times. Retrieved March 18, 2020. Liptak, Kevin (March 13, 2020). "Trump declares national emergency – and denies responsibility for coronavirus testing failures". CNN. Retrieved March 18, 2020. Valverde, Miriam (March 12, 2020). "Donald Trump's Wrong Claim That 'Anybody' Can Get Tested For Coronavirus". Kaiser Health News. Retrieved March 18, 2020. "Trump's immigration executive order: What you need to know". Al Jazeera. April 23, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Shear, Michael D.; Weiland, Noah; Lipton, Eric; Haberman, Maggie; Sanger, David E. (July 18, 2020). "Inside Trump's Failure: The Rush to Abandon Leadership Role on the Virus". The New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "Trump creates task force to lead U.S. coronavirus response". CBS News. January 30, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2020. Karni, Annie (March 23, 2020). "In Daily Coronavirus Briefing, Trump Tries to Redefine Himself". The New York Times. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Baker, Peter; Rogers, Katie; Enrich, David; Haberman, Maggie (April 6, 2020). "Trump's Aggressive Advocacy of Malaria Drug for Treating Coronavirus Divides Medical Community". The New York Times. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Berenson, Tessa (March 30, 2020). "'He's Walking the Tightrope.' How Donald Trump Is Getting Out His Message on Coronavirus". Time. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Dale, Daniel (March 17, 2020). "Fact check: Trump tries to erase the memory of him downplaying the coronavirus". CNN. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Scott, Dylan (March 18, 2020). "Trump's new fixation on using a racist name for the coronavirus is dangerous". Vox. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Georgiou, Aristos (March 19, 2020). "WHO expert condemns language stigmatizing coronavirus after Trump repeatedly calls it the "Chinese virus"". Newsweek. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Beavers, Olivia (March 19, 2020). "US-China relationship worsens over coronavirus". The Hill. Retrieved March 19, 2020. Lemire, Jonathan (April 9, 2020). "As pandemic deepens, Trump cycles through targets to blame". AP News. Retrieved May 5, 2020. "Coronavirus: Outcry after Trump suggests injecting disinfectant as treatment". BBC News. April 24, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Aratani, Lauren (May 5, 2020). "Why is the White House winding down the coronavirus taskforce?". The Guardian. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "Coronavirus: Trump says virus task force to focus on reopening economy". BBC News. May 6, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Liptak, Kevin (May 6, 2020). "In reversal, Trump says task force will continue 'indefinitely' – eyes vaccine czar". CNN. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Acosta, Jim; Liptak, Kevin; Westwood, Sarah (May 29, 2020). "As US deaths top 100,000, Trump's coronavirus task force is curtailed". CNN. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Ollstein, Alice Miranda (April 14, 2020). "Trump halts funding to World Health Organization". Politico. Retrieved September 7, 2020. Cohen, Zachary; Hansler, Jennifer; Atwood, Kylie; Salama, Vivian; Murray, Sara (July 7, 2020). "Trump administration begins formal withdrawal from World Health Organization". CNN. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "Coronavirus: Trump moves to pull US out of World Health Organization". BBC News. July 7, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Wood, Graeme (April 15, 2020). "The WHO Defunding Move Isn't What It Seems". The Atlantic. Retrieved September 7, 2020. Phillips, Amber (April 8, 2020). "Why exactly is Trump lashing out at the World Health Organization?". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Wilson, Jason (April 17, 2020). "The rightwing groups behind wave of protests against Covid-19 restrictions". The Guardian. Retrieved April 18, 2020. Andone, Dakin (April 16, 2020). "Protests Are Popping Up Across the US over Stay-at-Home Restrictions". CNN. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Shear, Michael D.; Mervosh, Sarah (April 17, 2020). "Trump Encourages Protest Against Governors Who Have Imposed Virus Restrictions". The New York Times. Retrieved April 19, 2020. Chalfant, Morgan; Samuels, Brett (April 20, 2020). "Trump support for protests threatens to undermine social distancing rules". The Hill. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Lemire, Jonathan; Nadler, Ben (April 24, 2020). "Trump approved of Georgia's plan to reopen before bashing it". AP News. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Kumar, Anita (April 18, 2020). "Trump's unspoken factor on reopening the economy: Politics". Politico. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Danner, Chas (July 11, 2020). "99 Days Later, Trump Finally Wears a Face Mask in Public". New York. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Blake, Aaron (June 25, 2020). "Trump's dumbfounding refusal to encourage wearing masks". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Higgins-Dunn, Noah (July 14, 2020). "Trump says U.S. would have half the number of coronavirus cases if it did half the testing". CNBC. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Bump, Philip (July 23, 2020). "Trump is right that with lower testing, we record fewer cases. That's already happening". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Feuer, Will (August 26, 2020). "CDC quietly revises coronavirus guidance to downplay importance of testing for asymptomatic people". CNBC. Retrieved August 26, 2020. "The C.D.C. changes testing guidelines to exclude those exposed to virus who don't exhibit symptoms". The New York Times. August 26, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Valencia, Nick; Murray, Sara; Holmes, Kristen (August 26, 2020). "CDC was pressured 'from the top down' to change coronavirus testing guidance, official says". CNN. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Gumbrecht, Jamie; Gupta, Sanjay; Valencia, Nick (September 18, 2020). "Controversial coronavirus testing guidance came from HHS and didn't go through CDC scientific review, sources say". CNN. Retrieved September 18, 2020. Blake, Aaron (July 6, 2020). "President Trump, coronavirus truther". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Rabin, Roni Caryn; Cameron, Chris (July 5, 2020). "Trump Falsely Claims '99 Percent' of Virus Cases Are 'Totally Harmless'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Sprunt, Barbara (July 7, 2020). "Trump Pledges To 'Pressure' Governors To Reopen Schools Despite Health Concerns". NPR. Retrieved July 10, 2020. McGinley, Laurie; Johnson, Carolyn Y. (June 15, 2020). "FDA pulls emergency approval for antimalarial drugs touted by Trump as covid-19 treatment". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 7, 2021. LaFraniere, Sharon; Weiland, Noah; Shear, Michael D. (September 12, 2020). "Trump Pressed for Plasma Therapy. Officials Worry, Is an Unvetted Vaccine Next?". The New York Times. Retrieved September 13, 2020. Diamond, Dan (September 11, 2020). "Trump officials interfered with CDC reports on Covid-19". Politico. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Sun, Lena H. (September 12, 2020). "Trump officials seek greater control over CDC reports on coronavirus". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 14, 2020. McGinley, Laurie; Johnson, Carolyn Y.; Dawsey, Josh (August 22, 2020). "Trump without evidence accuses 'deep state' at FDA of slow-walking coronavirus vaccines and treatments". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Liptak, Kevin; Klein, Betsy (October 5, 2020). "A timeline of Trump and those in his orbit during a week of coronavirus developments". CNN. Retrieved October 3, 2020. Ballhaus, Rebecca; Bender, Michael C. (October 4, 2020). "Trump Didn't Disclose First Positive Covid-19 Test While Awaiting a Second Test on Thursday". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 4, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2021. Olorunnipa, Toluse; Dawsey, Josh (October 5, 2020). "Trump returns to White House, downplaying virus that hospitalized him and turned West Wing into a 'ghost town'". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 5, 2020. Thomas, Katie; Kolata, Gina (October 2, 2020). "President Trump Received Experimental Antibody Treatment". The New York Times. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Weiland, Noah; Haberman, Maggie; Mazzetti, Mark; Karni, Annie (February 11, 2021). "Trump Was Sicker Than Acknowledged With Covid-19". The New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Edelman, Adam (July 5, 2020). "Warning signs flash for Trump in Wisconsin as pandemic response fuels disapproval". NBC News. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Strauss, Daniel (September 7, 2020). "Biden aims to make election about Covid-19 as Trump steers focus elsewhere". The Guardian. Retrieved November 4, 2021. Karson, Kendall (September 13, 2020). "Deep skepticism for Trump's coronavirus response endures: POLL". ABC News. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Impelli, Matthew (October 26, 2020). "Fact Check: Is U.S. 'Rounding the Turn' On COVID, as Trump Claims?". Newsweek. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Maan, Anurag (October 31, 2020). "U.S. reports world record of more than 100,000 COVID-19 cases in single day". Reuters. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Woodward, Calvin; Pace, Julie (December 16, 2018). "Scope of investigations into Trump has shaped his presidency". AP News. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Buchanan, Larry; Yourish, Karen (September 25, 2019). "Tracking 30 Investigations Related to Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2020. Fahrenthold, David A.; Bade, Rachael; Wagner, John (April 22, 2019). "Trump sues in bid to block congressional subpoena of financial records". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 1, 2019. Savage, Charlie (May 20, 2019). "Accountants Must Turn Over Trump's Financial Records, Lower-Court Judge Rules". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Merle, Renae; Kranish, Michael; Sonmez, Felicia (May 22, 2019). "Judge rejects Trump's request to halt congressional subpoenas for his banking records". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Flitter, Emily; McKinley, Jesse; Enrich, David; Fandos, Nicholas (May 22, 2019). "Trump's Financial Secrets Move Closer to Disclosure". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Hutzler, Alexandra (May 21, 2019). "Donald Trump's Subpoena Appeals Now Head to Merrick Garland's Court". Newsweek. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Broadwater, Luke (September 17, 2022). "Trump's Former Accounting Firm Begins Turning Over Documents to Congress". The New York Timesdate=September 17, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Ellison, Sarah; Farhi, Paul (December 12, 2018). "Publisher of the National Enquirer admits to hush-money payments made on Trump's behalf". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Bump, Philip (August 21, 2018). "How the campaign finance charges against Michael Cohen implicate Trump". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 25, 2019. Neumeister, Larry; Hays, Tom (August 22, 2018). "Cohen pleads guilty, implicates Trump in hush-money scheme". AP News. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Nelson, Louis (March 7, 2018). "White House on Stormy Daniels: Trump 'denied all these allegations'". Politico. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Singman, Brooke (August 22, 2018). "Trump insists he learned of Michael Cohen payments 'later on', in 'Fox & Friends' exclusive". Fox News. Retrieved August 23, 2018. Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt (December 7, 2018). "Court filings directly implicate Trump in efforts to buy women's silence, reveal new contact between inner circle and Russian". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 7, 2018. Allen, Jonathan; Stempel, Jonathan (July 18, 2019). "FBI documents point to Trump role in hush money for porn star Daniels". Reuters. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Mustian, Jim (July 19, 2019). "Records detail frenetic effort to bury stories about Trump". AP News. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Mustian, Jim (July 19, 2019). "Why no hush-money charges against Trump? Feds are silent". AP News. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Protess, Ben; Rashbaum, William K. (August 1, 2019). "Manhattan D.A. Subpoenas Trump Organization Over Stormy Daniels Hush Money". The New York Times. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Rashbaum, William K.; Protess, Ben (September 16, 2019). "8 Years of Trump Tax Returns Are Subpoenaed by Manhattan D.A." The New York Times. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Bromwich, Jonah E.; Protess, Ben; Rashbaum, William K. (November 21, 2022). "Manhattan Prosecutors Move to Jump-Start Criminal Inquiry Into Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Rosenberg, Matthew (July 6, 2017). "Trump Misleads on Russian Meddling: Why 17 Intelligence Agencies Don't Need to Agree". The New York Times. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Sanger, David E. (January 6, 2017). "Putin Ordered 'Influence Campaign' Aimed at U.S. Election, Report Says". The New York Times. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Berman, Russell (March 20, 2017). "It's Official: The FBI Is Investigating Trump's Links to Russia". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 7, 2017. Harding, Luke (November 15, 2017). "How Trump walked into Putin's web". The Guardian. Retrieved May 22, 2019. McCarthy, Tom (December 13, 2016). "Trump's relationship with Russia – what we know and what comes next". The Guardian. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Bump, Philip (March 3, 2017). "The web of relationships between Team Trump and Russia". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Phillips, Amber (August 19, 2016). "Paul Manafort's complicated ties to Ukraine, explained". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Risen, James (January 26, 2019). "Roger Stone Made His Name as a Dirty Trickster, but the Trump-Russia Cover-Up May Finally Bring Him Down". The Intercept. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Nesbit, Jeff (August 2, 2016). "Donald Trump's Many, Many, Many, Many Ties to Russia". Time. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Williams, Katie Bo (May 24, 2017). "NYT: Russians discussed using Manafort, Flynn to influence Trump". The Hill. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Graham, David A. (November 15, 2019). "We Still Don't Know What Happened Between Trump and Russia". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Parker, Ned; Landay, Jonathan; Strobel, Warren (May 18, 2017). "Exclusive: Trump campaign had at least 18 undisclosed contacts with Russians: sources". Reuters. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Murray, Sara; Borger, Gloria; Diamond, Jeremy (February 14, 2017). "Flynn resigns amid controversy over Russia contacts". CNN. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Harris, Shane; Dawsey, Josh; Nakashima, Ellen (September 27, 2019). "Trump told Russian officials in 2017 he wasn't concerned about Moscow's interference in U.S. election". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Barnes, Julian E.; Rosenberg, Matthew (November 22, 2019). "Charges of Ukrainian Meddling? A Russian Operation, U.S. Intelligence Says". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Pelley, Scott (February 16, 2020). "Why President Trump asked Ukraine to look into a DNC "server" and CrowdStrike". CBS News. Retrieved February 18, 2020. Apuzzo, Matt; Goldman, Adam; Fandos, Nicholas (May 16, 2018). "Code Name Crossfire Hurricane: The Secret Origins of the Trump Investigation". New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Dilanian, Ken (September 7, 2020). "FBI agent who helped launch Russia investigation says Trump was 'compromised'". NBC News. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Pearson, Nick (May 17, 2018). "Crossfire Hurricane: Trump Russia investigation started with Alexander Downer interview". Nine News. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Schmidt, Michael S. (August 30, 2020). "Justice Dept. Never Fully Examined Trump's Ties to Russia, Ex-Officials Say". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Rosenstein to testify in Senate on Trump-Russia probe". Reuters. May 27, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Vitkovskaya, Julie (June 16, 2017). "Trump Is Officially under Investigation. How Did We Get Here?". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Keating, Joshua (March 8, 2018). "It's Not Just a "Russia" Investigation Anymore". Slate. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S. (April 10, 2018). "Trump Sought to Fire Mueller in December". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Breuninger, Kevin (March 22, 2019). "Mueller probe ends: Special counsel submits Russia report to Attorney General William Barr". CNBC. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt (April 30, 2019). "Mueller complained that Barr's letter did not capture 'context' of Trump probe". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 30, 2019. Hsu, Spencer S.; Barrett, Devlin (March 5, 2020). "Judge cites Barr's 'misleading' statements in ordering review of Mueller report redactions". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Savage, Charlie (March 5, 2020). "Judge Calls Barr's Handling of Mueller Report 'Distorted' and 'Misleading'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Yen, Hope; Woodward, Calvin (July 24, 2019). "AP FACT CHECK: Trump falsely claims Mueller exonerated him". Associated Press. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Main points of Mueller report". Agence France-Presse. January 16, 2012. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Ostriker, Rebecca; Puzzanghera, Jim; Finucane, Martin; Datar, Saurabh; Uraizee, Irfan; Garvin, Patrick (April 18, 2019). "What the Mueller report says about Trump and more". The Boston Globe. Retrieved April 22, 2019. Law, Tara (April 18, 2019). "Here Are the Biggest Takeaways From the Mueller Report". Time. Retrieved April 22, 2019. Lynch, Sarah N.; Sullivan, Andy (April 18, 2018). "In unflattering detail, Mueller report reveals Trump actions to impede inquiry". Reuters. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Mazzetti, Mark (July 24, 2019). "Mueller Warns of Russian Sabotage and Rejects Trump's 'Witch Hunt' Claims". The New York Times. Retrieved March 4, 2020. Bump, Philip (May 30, 2019). "Trump briefly acknowledges that Russia aided his election – and falsely says he didn't help the effort". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Polantz, Katelyn; Kaufman, Ellie; Murray, Sara (June 19, 2020). "Mueller raised possibility Trump lied to him, newly unsealed report reveals". CNN. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt (April 17, 2019). "Mueller report lays out obstruction evidence against the president". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Farley, Robert; Robertson, Lori; Gore, D'Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale; Fichera, Angelo; McDonald, Jessica (April 18, 2019). "What the Mueller Report Says About Obstruction". FactCheck.org. Retrieved April 22, 2019. Mascaro, Lisa (April 18, 2019). "Mueller drops obstruction dilemma on Congress". AP News. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Segers, Grace (May 29, 2019). "Mueller: If it were clear president committed no crime, "we would have said so"". CBS News. Retrieved June 2, 2019. Cheney, Kyle; Caygle, Heather; Bresnahan, John (December 10, 2019). "Why Democrats sidelined Mueller in impeachment articles". Politico. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Blake, Aaron (December 10, 2019). "Democrats ditch 'bribery' and Mueller in Trump impeachment articles. But is that the smart play?". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Zapotosky, Matt; Bui, Lynh; Jackman, Tom; Barrett, Devlin (August 21, 2018). "Manafort convicted on 8 counts; mistrial declared on 10 others". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 21, 2018. "Rick Gates: ex-Trump aide sentenced to 45 days in prison for lying to FBI". The Guardian. December 17, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Polantz, Katelyn (November 26, 2018). "George Papadopoulos to start 14-day prison sentence Monday". CNN. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Mangan, Dan (July 30, 2018). "Trump and Giuliani are right that 'collusion is not a crime.' But that doesn't matter for Mueller's probe". CNBC. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Mueller investigation: No jail time sought for Trump ex-adviser Michael Flynn". BBC. December 5, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Barrett, Devlin; Zapotosky, Matt; Helderman, Rosalind S. (November 29, 2018). "Michael Cohen, Trump's former lawyer, pleads guilty to lying to Congress about Moscow project". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 12, 2018. Weiner, Rachel; Zapotosky, Matt; Jackman, Tom; Barrett, Devlin (February 20, 2020). "Roger Stone sentenced to three years and four months in prison, as Trump predicts 'exoneration' for his friend". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Bump, Philip (September 25, 2019). "Trump wanted Russia's main geopolitical adversary to help undermine the Russian interference story". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2019. Cohen, Marshall; Polantz, Katelyn; Shortell, David; Kupperman, Tammy; Callahan, Michael (September 26, 2019). "Whistleblower says White House tried to cover up Trump's abuse of power". CNN. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Fandos, Nicholas (September 24, 2019). "Nancy Pelosi Announces Formal Impeachment Inquiry of Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Forgey, Quint (September 24, 2019). "Trump changes story on withholding Ukraine aid". Politico. Retrieved October 1, 2019. Graham, David A. (September 25, 2019). "Trump's Incriminating Conversation With the Ukrainian President". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Santucci, John; Mallin, Alexander; Thomas, Pierre; Faulders, Katherine (September 25, 2019). "Trump urged Ukraine to work with Barr and Giuliani to probe Biden: Call transcript". ABC News. Retrieved October 1, 2019. "Document: Read the Whistle-Blower Complaint". The New York Times. September 24, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Shear, Michael D.; Fandos, Nicholas (October 22, 2019). "Ukraine Envoy Testifies Trump Linked Military Aid to Investigations, Lawmaker Says". The New York Times. Retrieved October 22, 2019. LaFraniere, Sharon (October 22, 2019). "6 Key Revelations of Taylor's Opening Statement to Impeachment Investigators". The New York Times. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Siegel, Benjamin; Faulders, Katherine; Pecorin, Allison (December 13, 2019). "House Judiciary Committee passes articles of impeachment against President Trump". ABC News. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Gregorian, Dareh (December 18, 2019). "Trump impeached by the House for abuse of power, obstruction of Congress". NBC News. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Kim, Seung Min; Wagner, John; Demirjian, Karoun (January 23, 2020). "Democrats detail abuse-of-power charge against Trump as Republicans complain of repetitive arguments". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 27, 2020. Shear, Michael D.; Fandos, Nicholas (January 18, 2020). "Trump's Defense Team Calls Impeachment Charges 'Brazen' as Democrats Make Legal Case". The New York Times. Retrieved January 30, 2020. Herb, Jeremy; Mattingly, Phil; Raju, Manu; Fox, Lauren (January 31, 2020). "Senate impeachment trial: Wednesday acquittal vote scheduled after effort to have witnesses fails". CNN. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Bookbinder, Noah (January 9, 2020). "The Senate has conducted 15 impeachment trials. It heard witnesses in every one". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 8, 2020. Wilkie, Christina; Breuninger, Kevin (February 5, 2020). "Trump acquitted of both charges in Senate impeachment trial". CNBC. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Baker, Peter (February 22, 2020). "Trump's Efforts to Remove the Disloyal Heightens Unease Across His Administration". The New York Times. Retrieved February 22, 2020. Morehouse, Lee (January 31, 2017). "Trump breaks precedent, files as candidate for re-election on first day". KTVK. Phoenix, Arizona. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved February 19, 2017. Graham, David A. (February 15, 2017). "Trump Kicks Off His 2020 Reelection Campaign on Saturday". The Atlantic. Retrieved February 19, 2017. Martin, Jonathan; Burns, Alexander; Karni, Annie (August 24, 2020). "Nominating Trump, Republicans Rewrite His Record". The New York Times. Retrieved August 25, 2020. Balcerzak, Ashley; Levinthal, Dave; Levine, Carrie; Kleiner, Sarah; Beachum, Lateshia (February 1, 2019). "Donald Trump's campaign cash machine: big, brawny and burning money". Center for Public Integrity. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Goldmacher, Shane; Haberman, Maggie (September 7, 2020). "How Trump's Billion-Dollar Campaign Lost Its Cash Advantage". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Egkolfopoulou, Misyrlena; Allison, Bill; Korte, Gregory (September 14, 2020). "Trump Campaign Slashes Ad Spending in Key States in Cash Crunch". Bloomberg News. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Haberman, Maggie; Corasaniti, Nick; Karni, Annie (July 21, 2020). "As Trump Pushes into Portland, His Campaign Ads Turn Darker". The New York Times. Retrieved July 25, 2020. Bump, Philip (August 28, 2020). "Nearly every claim Trump made about Biden's positions was false". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Dale, Daniel; Subramaniam, Tara; Lybrand, Holmes (August 31, 2020). "Fact check: Trump makes more false claims about Biden and protests". CNN. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Hopkins, Dan (August 27, 2020). "Why Trump's Racist Appeals Might Be Less Effective In 2020 Than They Were In 2016". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Kumar, Anita (August 8, 2020). "Trump aides exploring executive actions to curb voting by mail". Politico. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Saul, Stephanie; Epstein, Reid J. (August 31, 2020). "Trump Is Pushing a False Argument on Vote-by-Mail Fraud. Here Are the Facts". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Trump Defends 'Delay the Election' Tweet, Even Though He Can't Do It". The New York Times. July 30, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Bogage, Jacob (August 12, 2020). "Trump says Postal Service needs money for mail-in voting, but he'll keep blocking funding". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Sonmez, Felicia (July 19, 2020). "Trump declines to say whether he will accept November election results". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Browne, Ryan; Starr, Barbara (September 25, 2020). "As Trump refuses to commit to a peaceful transition, Pentagon stresses it will play no role in the election". CNN. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Presidential Election Results: Biden Wins". The New York Times. December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. "2020 US Presidential Election Results: Live Map". ABC News. December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Holder, Josh; Gabriel, Trip; Paz, Isabella Grullón (December 14, 2020). "Biden's 306 Electoral College Votes Make His Victory Official". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "With results from key states unclear, Trump declares victory". Reuters. November 4, 2020. Retrieved November 10, 2020. King, Ledyard (November 7, 2020). "Trump revives baseless claims of election fraud after Biden wins presidential race". USA Today. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Helderman, Rosalind S.; Viebeck, Elise (December 12, 2020). "'The last wall': How dozens of judges across the political spectrum rejected Trump's efforts to overturn the election". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Blake, Aaron (December 14, 2020). "The most remarkable rebukes of Trump's legal case: From the judges he hand-picked". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Woodward, Calvin (November 16, 2020). "AP Fact Check: Trump conclusively lost, denies the evidence". AP News. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Trump fires election security official who contradicted him". BBC News. November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Liptak, Adam (December 11, 2020). "Supreme Court Rejects Texas Suit Seeking to Subvert Election". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Smith, David (November 21, 2020). "Trump's monumental sulk: president retreats from public eye as Covid ravages US". The Guardian. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Lamire, Jonathan; Miller, Zeke (November 9, 2020). "Refusing to concede, Trump blocks cooperation on transition". AP News. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Timm, Jane C.; Smith, Allan (November 14, 2020). "Trump is stonewalling Biden's transition. Here's why it matters". NBC News. Retrieved November 26, 2020. Rein, Lisa (November 23, 2020). "Under pressure, Trump appointee Emily Murphy approves transition in unusually personal letter to Biden". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Naylor, Brian; Wise, Alana (November 23, 2020). "President-Elect Biden To Begin Formal Transition Process After Agency OK". NPR. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Ordoñez, Franco; Rampton, Roberta (November 26, 2020). "Trump Is In No Mood To Concede, But Says Will Leave White House". NPR. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Gardner, Amy (January 3, 2021). "'I just want to find 11,780 votes': In extraordinary hour-long call, Trump pressures Georgia secretary of state to recalculate the vote in his favor". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Kumar, Anita; Orr, Gabby; McGraw, Meridith (December 21, 2020). "Inside Trump's pressure campaign to overturn the election". Politico. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Cohen, Marshall (November 5, 2021). "Timeline of the coup: How Trump tried to weaponize the Justice Department to overturn the 2020 election". CNN. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Haberman, Maggie; Karni, Annie (January 5, 2021). "Pence Said to Have Told Trump He Lacks Power to Change Election Result". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Fausset, Richard; Hakim, Danny (February 10, 2021). "Georgia Prosecutors Open Criminal Inquiry Into Trump's Efforts to Subvert Election". The New York Times. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Haberman, Maggie (January 20, 2021). "Trump Departs Vowing, 'We Will Be Back in Some Form'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Arkin, William M. (December 24, 2020). "Exclusive: Donald Trump's martial-law talk has military on red alert". Newsweek. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Cohen, Marshall; Stuart, Elizabeth; Starr, Barbara (July 14, 2021). "'They're not going to f**king succeed': Top generals feared Trump would attempt a coup after election, according to new book". CNN. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Breuninger, Kevin (July 15, 2021). "Top U.S. Gen. Mark Milley feared Trump would attempt a coup after his loss to Biden, new book says". CNBC. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Stuart, Elizabeth (September 14, 2021). "Woodward/Costa book: Worried Trump could 'go rogue,' Milley took top-secret action to protect nuclear weapons". CNN. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Schmidt, Michael S. (September 14, 2021). "Fears That Trump Might Launch a Strike Prompted General to Reassure China, Book Says". The New York Times. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Savage, Charlie (January 10, 2021). "Incitement to Riot? What Trump Told Supporters Before Mob Stormed Capitol". The New York Times. Retrieved January 11, 2021. "Donald Trump Speech "Save America" Rally Transcript January 6". Rev. January 6, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Tan, Shelley; Shin, Youjin; Rindler, Danielle (January 9, 2021). "How one of America's ugliest days unraveled inside and outside the Capitol". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 2, 2021. Panetta, Grace; Lahut, Jake; Zavarise, Isabella; Frias, Lauren (December 21, 2022). "A timeline of what Trump was doing as his MAGA mob attacked the US Capitol on Jan. 6". Business Insider. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Gregorian, Dareh; Gibson, Ginger; Kapur, Sahil; Helsel, Phil (January 6, 2021). "Congress confirms Biden's win after pro-Trump mob's assault on Capitol". NBC News. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Rubin, Olivia; Mallin, Alexander; Steakin, Will (January 4, 2022). "By the numbers: How the Jan. 6 investigation is shaping up 1 year later". ABC News. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Cameron, Chris (January 5, 2022). "These Are the People Who Died in Connection With the Capitol Riot". The New York Times. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Terkel, Amanda (May 11, 2023). "Trump says he would pardon a 'large portion' of Jan. 6 rioters". NBC. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Naylor, Brian (January 11, 2021). "Impeachment Resolution Cites Trump's 'Incitement' of Capitol Insurrection". NPR. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Fandos, Nicholas (January 13, 2021). "Trump Impeached for Inciting Insurrection". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Blake, Aaron (January 13, 2021). "Trump's second impeachment is the most bipartisan one in history". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Levine, Sam; Gambino, Lauren (February 13, 2021). "Donald Trump acquitted in impeachment trial". The Guardian. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Fandos, Nicholas (February 13, 2021). "Trump Acquitted of Inciting Insurrection, Even as Bipartisan Majority Votes 'Guilty'". The New York Times. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Watson, Kathryn; Quinn, Melissa; Segers, Grace; Becket, Stefan (February 10, 2021). "Senate finds Trump impeachment trial constitutional on first day of proceedings". CBS News. Retrieved February 18, 2021. Segers, Grace; McDonald, Cassidy (February 14, 2021). "McConnell says Trump was "practically and morally responsible" for riot after voting not guilty". CBS News. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Spencer, Terry (January 28, 2021). "Palm Beach considers options as Trump remains at Mar-a-Lago". Associated Press. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Wolfe, Jan (January 27, 2021). "Explainer: Why Trump's post-presidency perks, like a pension and office, are safe for the rest of his life". Reuters. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Quinn, Melissa (January 27, 2021). "Trump opens "Office of the Former President" in Florida". CBS News. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Solender, Andrew (May 3, 2021). "Trump Says He'll Appropriate 'The Big Lie' To Refer To His Election Loss". Forbes. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Wolf, Zachary B. (May 19, 2021). "The 5 key elements of Trump's Big Lie and how it came to be". CNN. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Balz, Dan (May 29, 2021). "The GOP push to revisit 2020 has worrisome implications for future elections". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 18, 2021. Bender, Michael C.; Epstein, Reid J. (July 20, 2022). "Trump Recently Urged a Powerful Legislator to Overturn His 2020 Defeat in Wisconsin". The New York Times. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Karni, Annie; Haberman, Maggie (June 5, 2021). "At Once Diminished and Dominating, Trump Begins His Next Act". The New York Times. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Orr, Gabby; Warren, Michael (June 6, 2021). "Trump dwells on 2020 during North Carolina event aimed at helping Republicans in 2022". CNN. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Peters, Jeremy W. (June 26, 2021). "Trump, Seeking to Maintain G.O.P. Sway, Holds First Rally Since Jan. 6". The New York Times. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Goldmacher, Shane (April 17, 2022). "Mar-a-Lago Machine: Trump as a Modern-Day Party Boss". The New York Times. Retrieved July 31, 2022. Paybarah, Azi (August 2, 2022). "Where Trump's Endorsement Record Stands Halfway through Primary Season". The New York Times. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Castleman, Terry; Mason, Melanie (August 5, 2022). "Tracking Trump's endorsement record in the 2022 primary elections". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 6, 2022. Lyons, Kim (December 6, 2021). "SEC investigating Trump SPAC deal to take his social media platform public". The Verge. Retrieved December 30, 2021. "Trump Media & Technology Group Corp". Bloomberg. Retrieved December 30, 2021. Harwell, Drew (March 26, 2024). "Trump Media soars in first day of public tradings". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Bhuyian, Johana (February 21, 2022). "Donald Trump's social media app launches on Apple store". The Guardian. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Lowell, Hugo (March 15, 2023). "Federal investigators examined Trump Media for possible money laundering, sources say". The Guardian. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Durkee, Alison (March 15, 2023). "Trump's Media Company Reportedly Under Federal Investigation For Money Laundering Linked To Russia". Forbes. Retrieved March 15, 2023. Baker, Peter (September 19, 2022). "The Story So Far: Where 6 Investigations Into Donald Trump Stand". The New York Times. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Mangan, Dan (February 10, 2021). "Georgia DA opens criminal probe of Trump call urging secretary of state to find votes". CNBC. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Harding, Luke; Holpuch, Amanda (May 19, 2021). "New York attorney general opens criminal investigation into Trump Organization". The Guardian. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Jacobs, Shayna; Fahrenthold, David A. (May 25, 2021). "Prosecutor in Trump criminal probe convenes grand jury to hear evidence, weigh potential charges". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Sisak, Michael R. (May 25, 2021). "New grand jury seated for next stage of Trump investigation". Associated Press. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Protess, Ben; Rashbaum, William K.; Bromwich, Jonah E. (July 1, 2021). "Trump Organization Is Charged in 15-Year Tax Scheme". The New York Times. Retrieved July 1, 2021. Anuta, Joe (January 10, 2023). "Ex-Trump Org. CFO Allen Weisselberg sentenced to 5 months in jail for tax fraud". Politico. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Lybrand, Holmes; Cohen, Marshall; Rabinowitz, Hannah (August 12, 2022). "Timeline: The Justice Department criminal inquiry into Trump taking classified documents to Mar-a-Lago". CNN. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Montague, Zach; McCarthy, Lauren (August 9, 2022). "The Timeline Related to the F.B.I.'s Search of Mar-a-Lago". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Haberman, Maggie; Thrush, Glenn (August 13, 2022). "Trump Lawyer Told Justice Dept. That Classified Material Had Been Returned". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Thrush, Glenn; Haberman, Maggie; Protess, Ben (August 11, 2022). "Trump Search Said to Be Part of Effort to Find Highly Classified Material". The New York Times. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Barrett, Devlin; Dawsey, Josh; Stein, Perry; Harris, Shane (August 12, 2022). "FBI searched Trump's home to look for nuclear documents and other items, sources say". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Barrett, Devlin; Dawsey, Josh (August 12, 2022). "Agents at Trump's Mar-a-Lago seized 11 sets of classified documents, court filing shows". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Haberman, Maggie; Thrush, Glenn; Savage, Charlie (August 12, 2022). "Files Seized From Trump Are Part of Espionage Act Inquiry". The New York Times. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Swan, Betsy; Cheney, Kyle; Wu, Nicholas (August 12, 2022). "FBI search warrant shows Trump under investigation for potential obstruction of justice, Espionage Act violations". Politico. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Thrush, Glenn; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie; Feuer, Alan (November 18, 2022). "Garland Names Special Counsel for Trump Inquiries". The New York Times. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Tucker, Eric; Balsamo, Michael (November 18, 2022). "Garland names special counsel to lead Trump-related probes". AP News. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Feuer, Alan (December 19, 2022). "It's Unclear Whether the Justice Dept. Will Take Up the Jan. 6 Panel's Charges". The New York Times. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Scannell, Kara; Miller, John; Herb, Jeremy; Cole, Devan (March 31, 2023). "Donald Trump indicted by Manhattan grand jury on 34 counts related to fraud". CNN. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Marimow, Ann E. (April 4, 2023). "Here are the 34 charges against Trump and what they mean". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Sangal, Aditi; Vales, Leinz; Vogt, Adrienne (April 5, 2023). "The latest on Trump's historic indictment and felony charges". CNN. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Stein, Perry; Dormido, Hannah; Wagner, John; Jacobs, Shayna (August 28, 2023). "All the times Trump's trials conflict with the 2024 election campaign". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Barrett, Devlin; Dawsey, Josh; Stein, Perry; Alemany, Jacqueline (June 9, 2023). "Trump Put National Secrets at Risk, Prosecutors Say in Historic Indictment". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 10, 2023. Greve, Joan E.; Lowell, Hugo (June 14, 2023). "Trump pleads not guilty to 37 federal criminal counts in Mar-a-Lago case". The Guardian. Retrieved June 14, 2023. "5 revelations from new Trump charges". The Hill. July 28, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Barrett, Devlin; Hsu, Spencer S.; Stein, Perry; Dawsey, Josh; Alemany, Jacqueline (August 2, 2023). "Trump charged in probe of Jan. 6, efforts to overturn 2020 election". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Sneed, Tierney; Rabinowitz, Hannah; Polantz, Katelyn; Lybrand, Holmes (August 3, 2023). "Donald Trump pleads not guilty to January 6-related charges". CNN. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Lowell, Hugo; Wicker, Jewel (August 15, 2023). "Donald Trump and allies indicted in Georgia over bid to reverse 2020 election loss". The Guardian. Retrieved December 22, 2023. Drenon, Brandon (August 25, 2023). "What are the charges in Trump's Georgia indictment?". BBC News. Retrieved December 22, 2023. Pereira, Ivan; Barr, Luke/ (August 25, 2023). "Trump mug shot released by Fulton County Sheriff's Office". ABC News. Retrieved August 25, 2023. Rabinowitz, Hannah (August 31, 2023). "Trump pleads not guilty in Georgia election subversion case". CNN. Retrieved August 31, 2023. Bailey, Holly (March 13, 2024). "Georgia judge dismisses six charges in Trump election interference case". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Scannell, Kara (September 21, 2022). "New York attorney general files civil fraud lawsuit against Trump, some of his children and his business". CNN. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Rashbaum, William K.; Bromwich, Jonah E. (January 3, 2022). "New York A.G. Seeks to Question Trump Children in Fraud Inquiry". The New York Times. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Moghe, Sonia; Scannell, Kara (April 25, 2022). "Judge holds former President Trump in civil contempt for failing to comply with document subpoenas from New York attorney general". CNN. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Bromwich, Jonah E.; Protess, Ben; Rashbaum, William K. (August 10, 2022). "Trump Invokes Fifth Amendment, Attacking Legal System as Troubles Mount". The New York Times. Retrieved August 11, 2011. Kates, Graham (September 26, 2023). "Donald Trump and his company "repeatedly" violated fraud law, New York judge rules". CBS News. Bromwich, Jonah E.; Protess, Ben (February 17, 2024). "Trump Fraud Trial Penalty Will Exceed $450 Million". The New York Times. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Sullivan, Becky; Bernstein, Andrea; Marritz, Ilya; Lawrence, Quil (May 9, 2023). "A jury finds Trump liable for battery and defamation in E. Jean Carroll trial". NPR. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Orden, Erica (July 19, 2023). "Trump loses bid for new trial in E. Jean Carroll case". Politico. Retrieved August 13, 2023. Reiss, Adam; Gregorian, Dareh (August 7, 2023). "Judge tosses Trump's counterclaim against E. Jean Carroll, finding rape claim is 'substantially true'". NBC News. Retrieved August 13, 2023. Stempel, Jonathan (August 10, 2023). "Trump appeals dismissal of defamation claim against E. Jean Carroll". Reuters. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Stempel, Jonathan; Cohen, Luc (January 27, 2024). "Donald Trump ordered to pay E. Jean Carroll $83.3 million, will appeal verdict". Reuters. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Arnsdorf, Isaac; Scherer, Michael (November 15, 2022). "Trump, who as president fomented an insurrection, says he is running again". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Schouten, Fredreka (November 16, 2022). "Questions about Donald Trump's campaign money, answered". CNN. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Goldmacher, Shane; Haberman, Maggie (June 25, 2023). "As Legal Fees Mount, Trump Steers Donations Into PAC That Has Covered Them". The New York Times. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Sherman, Mark (March 4, 2024). "Supreme Court restores Trump to ballot, rejecting state attempts to ban him over Capitol attack". Associated Press. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Brockell, Gillian (June 30, 2021). "Historians just ranked the presidents. Trump wasn't last". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 1, 2021. "Presidential Historians Survey 2021". C-SPAN. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Jones, Jeffrey M. (January 18, 2021). "Last Trump Job Approval 34%; Average Is Record-Low 41%". Gallup. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Klein, Ezra (September 2, 2020). "Can anything change Americans' minds about Donald Trump? The eerie stability of Trump's approval rating, explained". Vox. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Enten, Harry (January 16, 2021). "Trump finishes with worst first term approval rating ever". CNN. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Most Admired Man and Woman". Gallup. December 28, 2006. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Budryk, Zack (December 29, 2020). "Trump ends Obama's 12-year run as most admired man: Gallup". The Hill. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Panetta, Grace (December 30, 2019). "Donald Trump and Barack Obama are tied for 2019's most admired man in the US". Business Insider. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Datta, Monti (September 16, 2019). "3 countries where Trump is popular". The Conversation. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Rating World Leaders: 2018 The U.S. vs. Germany, China and Russia". Gallup. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Page 9 Wike, Richard; Fetterolf, Janell; Mordecai, Mara (September 15, 2020). "U.S. Image Plummets Internationally as Most Say Country Has Handled Coronavirus Badly". Pew Research Center. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Kessler, Glenn; Kelly, Meg; Rizzo, Salvador; Lee, Michelle Ye Hee (January 20, 2021). "In four years, President Trump made 30,573 false or misleading claims". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Dale, Daniel (June 5, 2019). "Donald Trump has now said more than 5,000 false things as president". Toronto Star. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Dale, Daniel; Subramiam, Tara (March 9, 2020). "Fact check: Donald Trump made 115 false claims in the last two weeks of February". CNN. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Glasser, Susan B. (August 3, 2018). "It's True: Trump Is Lying More, and He's Doing It on Purpose". The New Yorker. Retrieved January 10, 2019. Konnikova, Maria (January 20, 2017). "Trump's Lies vs. Your Brain". Politico. Retrieved March 31, 2018. Kessler, Glenn; Kelly, Meg; Rizzo, Salvador; Shapiro, Leslie; Dominguez, Leo (January 23, 2021). "A term of untruths: The longer Trump was president, the more frequently he made false or misleading claims". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Qiu, Linda (January 21, 2017). "Donald Trump had biggest inaugural crowd ever? Metrics don't show it". PolitiFact. Retrieved March 30, 2018. Rein, Lisa (March 6, 2017). "Here are the photos that show Obama's inauguration crowd was bigger than Trump's". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 8, 2017. Wong, Julia Carrie (April 7, 2020). "Hydroxychloroquine: how an unproven drug became Trump's coronavirus 'miracle cure'". The Guardian. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Spring, Marianna (May 27, 2020). "Coronavirus: The human cost of virus misinformation". BBC News. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Rowland, Christopher (March 23, 2020). "As Trump touts an unproven coronavirus treatment, supplies evaporate for patients who need those drugs". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 24, 2020. Parkinson, Joe; Gauthier-Villars, David (March 23, 2020). "Trump Claim That Malaria Drugs Treat Coronavirus Sparks Warnings, Shortages". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Zurcher, Anthony (November 29, 2017). "Trump's anti-Muslim retweet fits a pattern". BBC News. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Allen, Jonathan (December 31, 2018). "Does being President Trump still mean never having to say you're sorry?". NBC News. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Greenberg, David (January 28, 2017). "The Perils of Calling Trump a Liar". Politico. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Bauder, David (August 29, 2018). "News media hesitate to use 'lie' for Trump's misstatements". Associated Press. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Kessler, Glenn (August 22, 2018). "Not just misleading. Not merely false. A lie". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Guynn, Jessica (October 5, 2020). "From COVID-19 to voting: Trump is nation's single largest spreader of disinformation, studies say". USA Today. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Bergengruen, Vera; Hennigan, W.J. (October 6, 2020). "'You're Gonna Beat It.' How Donald Trump's COVID-19 Battle Has Only Fueled Misinformation". Time. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Siders, David (May 25, 2020). "Trump sees a 'rigged election' ahead. Democrats see a constitutional crisis in the making". Politico. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Riccardi, Nicholas (September 17, 2020). "AP Fact Check: Trump's big distortions on mail-in voting". AP News. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Pfiffner, James P. (2019). "The Lies of Donald Trump: A Taxonomy". In Lamb, Charles M.; Neiheisel, Jacob R. (eds.). Presidential Leadership and the Trump Presidency: Executive Power and Democratic Government (PDF). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 17–40. ISBN 978-3-030-18979-2. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Baker, Peter; Astor, Maggie (May 26, 2020). "Trump Pushes a Conspiracy Theory That Falsely Accuses a TV Host of Murder". The New York Times. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Fichera, Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale (October 20, 2020). "Trump's Long History With Conspiracy Theories". FactCheck.org. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Subramaniam, Tara; Lybrand, Holmes (October 15, 2020). "Fact-checking the dangerous bin Laden conspiracy theory that Trump touted". CNN. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Haberman, Maggie (February 29, 2016). "Even as He Rises, Donald Trump Entertains Conspiracy Theories". The New York Times. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Bump, Philip (November 26, 2019). "President Trump loves conspiracy theories. Has he ever been right?". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Reston, Maeve (July 2, 2020). "The Conspiracy-Theorist-in-Chief clears the way for fringe candidates to become mainstream". CNN. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Perkins, Tom (November 18, 2020). "The dead voter conspiracy theory peddled by Trump voters, debunked". The Guardian. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Cohen, Li (January 15, 2021). "6 conspiracy theories about the 2020 election – debunked". CBS News. Retrieved September 13, 2021. McEvoy, Jemima (December 17, 2020). "These Are The Voter Fraud Claims Trump Tried (And Failed) To Overturn The Election With". Forbes. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Kunzelman, Michael; Galvan, Astrid (August 7, 2019). "Trump words linked to more hate crime? Some experts think so". Associated Press. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Feinberg, Ayal; Branton, Regina; Martinez-Ebers, Valerie (March 22, 2019). "Analysis | Counties that hosted a 2016 Trump rally saw a 226 percent increase in hate crimes". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 7, 2021. White, Daniel (February 1, 2016). "Donald Trump Tells Crowd To "Knock the Crap Out Of" Hecklers". Time. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Koerner, Claudia (October 18, 2018). "Trump Thinks It's Totally Cool That A Congressman Assaulted A Journalist For Asking A Question". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved October 19, 2018. Tracy, Abigail (August 8, 2019). ""The President of the United States Says It's Okay": The Rise of the Trump Defense". Vanity Fair. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Helderman, Rosalind S.; Hsu, Spencer S.; Weiner, Rachel (January 16, 2021). "'Trump said to do so': Accounts of rioters who say the president spurred them to rush the Capitol could be pivotal testimony". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Levine, Mike (May 30, 2020). "'No Blame?' ABC News finds 54 cases invoking 'Trump' in connection with violence, threats, alleged assaults". ABC News. Retrieved February 4, 2021. Conger, Kate; Isaac, Mike (January 16, 2021). "Inside Twitter's Decision to Cut Off Trump". The New York Times. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Madhani, Aamer; Colvin, Jill (January 9, 2021). "A farewell to @realDonaldTrump, gone after 57,000 tweets". Associated Press. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Landers, Elizabeth (June 6, 2017). "White House: Trump's tweets are 'official statements'". CNN. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Diehm, Jan; Petulla, Sam; Wolf, Zachary B. (October 21, 2019). "Who has left Trump's administration and orbit?". CNN. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Dwoskin, Elizabeth (May 27, 2020). "Twitter labels Trump's tweets with a fact check for the first time". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Dwoskin, Elizabeth (May 27, 2020). "Trump lashes out at social media companies after Twitter labels tweets with fact checks". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Fischer, Sara; Gold, Ashley (January 11, 2021). "All the platforms that have banned or restricted Trump so far". Axios. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Timberg, Craig (January 14, 2021). "Twitter ban reveals that tech companies held keys to Trump's power all along". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Alba, Davey; Koeze, Ella; Silver, Jacob (June 7, 2021). "What Happened When Trump Was Banned on Social Media". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Dwoskin, Elizabeth; Timberg, Craig (January 16, 2021). "Misinformation dropped dramatically the week after Twitter banned Trump and some allies". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Harwell, Drew; Dawsey, Josh (June 2, 2021). "Trump ends blog after 29 days, infuriated by measly readership". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Harwell, Drew; Dawsey, Josh (November 7, 2022). "Trump once reconsidered sticking with Truth Social. Now he's stuck". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Mac, Ryan; Browning, Kellen (November 19, 2022). "Elon Musk Reinstates Trump's Twitter Account". The New York Times. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Parnes, Amie (April 28, 2018). "Trump's love-hate relationship with the press". The Hill. Retrieved July 4, 2018. Chozick, Amy (September 29, 2018). "Why Trump Will Win a Second Term". The New York Times. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Hetherington, Marc; Ladd, Jonathan M. (May 1, 2020). "Destroying trust in the media, science, and government has left America vulnerable to disaster". Brookings Institution. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Thomsen, Jacqueline (May 22, 2018). "'60 Minutes' correspondent: Trump said he attacks the press so no one believes negative coverage". The Hill. Retrieved May 23, 2018. Stelter, Brian; Collins, Kaitlan (May 9, 2018). "Trump's latest shot at the press corps: 'Take away credentials?'". CNN Money. Archived from the original on October 8, 2022. Retrieved May 9, 2018. Grynbaum, Michael M. (December 30, 2019). "After Another Year of Trump Attacks, 'Ominous Signs' for the American Press". The New York Times. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Geltzer, Joshua A.; Katyal, Neal K. (March 11, 2020). "The True Danger of the Trump Campaign's Defamation Lawsuits". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Folkenflik, David (March 3, 2020). "Trump 2020 Sues 'Washington Post,' Days After 'N.Y. Times' Defamation Suit". NPR. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Flood, Brian; Singman, Brooke (March 6, 2020). "Trump campaign sues CNN over 'false and defamatory' statements, seeks millions in damages". Fox News. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Wise, Justin (March 8, 2020). "Trump escalates fight against press with libel lawsuits". The Hill. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Darcy, Oliver (November 12, 2020). "Judge dismisses Trump campaign's lawsuit against CNN". CNN. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Klasfeld, Adam (March 9, 2021). "Judge Throws Out Trump Campaign's Defamation Lawsuit Against New York Times Over Russia 'Quid Pro Quo' Op-Ed". Law and Crime. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Multiple sources: Lopez, German (February 14, 2019). "Donald Trump's long history of racism, from the 1970s to 2019". Vox. Retrieved June 15, 2019. Desjardins, Lisa (January 12, 2018). "Every moment in Trump's charged relationship with race". PBS NewsHour. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Dawsey, Josh (January 11, 2018). "Trump's history of making offensive comments about nonwhite immigrants". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Weaver, Aubree Eliza (January 12, 2018). "Trump's 'shithole' comment denounced across the globe". Politico. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Stoddard, Ed; Mfula, Chris (January 12, 2018). "Africa calls Trump racist after 'shithole' remark". Reuters. Retrieved October 1, 2019. "Trump: 'I am the least racist person there is anywhere in the world' – video". The Guardian. July 30, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2021. Cummins, William (July 31, 2019). "A majority of voters say President Donald Trump is a racist, Quinnipiac University poll finds". USA Today. Retrieved December 21, 2023. "Harsh Words For U.S. Family Separation Policy, Quinnipiac University National Poll Finds; Voters Have Dim View Of Trump, Dems On Immigration". Quinnipiac University Polling Institute. July 3, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2018. McElwee, Sean; McDaniel, Jason (May 8, 2017). "Economic Anxiety Didn't Make People Vote Trump, Racism Did". The Nation. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Lopez, German (December 15, 2017). "The past year of research has made it very clear: Trump won because of racial resentment". Vox. Retrieved January 14, 2018. Lajevardi, Nazita; Oskooii, Kassra A. R. (2018). "Old-Fashioned Racism, Contemporary Islamophobia, and the Isolation of Muslim Americans in the Age of Trump". Journal of Race, Ethnicity, and Politics. 3 (1): 112–152. doi:10.1017/rep.2017.37. Bohlen, Celestine (May 12, 1989). "The Park Attack, Weeks Later: An Anger That Will Not Let Go". The New York Times. Retrieved March 5, 2024. John, Arit (June 23, 2020). "From birtherism to 'treason': Trump's false allegations against Obama". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 17, 2023. Farley, Robert (February 14, 2011). "Donald Trump says people who went to school with Obama never saw him". PolitiFact. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Madison, Lucy (April 27, 2011). "Trump takes credit for Obama birth certificate release, but wonders 'is it real?'". CBS News. Retrieved May 9, 2011. Keneally, Meghan (September 18, 2015). "Donald Trump's History of Raising Birther Questions About President Obama". ABC News. Retrieved August 27, 2016. Haberman, Maggie; Rappeport, Alan (September 16, 2016). "Trump Drops False 'Birther' Theory, but Floats a New One: Clinton Started It". The New York Times. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Haberman, Maggie; Martin, Jonathan (November 28, 2017). "Trump Once Said the 'Access Hollywood' Tape Was Real. Now He's Not Sure". The New York Times. Retrieved June 11, 2020. Schaffner, Brian F.; Macwilliams, Matthew; Nteta, Tatishe (March 2018). "Understanding White Polarization in the 2016 Vote for President: The Sobering Role of Racism and Sexism". Political Science Quarterly. 133 (1): 9–34. doi:10.1002/polq.12737. Reilly, Katie (August 31, 2016). "Here Are All the Times Donald Trump Insulted Mexico". Time. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Wolf, Z. Byron (April 6, 2018). "Trump basically called Mexicans rapists again". CNN. Retrieved June 28, 2022. Steinhauer, Jennifer; Martin, Jonathan; Herszenhorn, David M. (June 7, 2016). "Paul Ryan Calls Donald Trump's Attack on Judge 'Racist', but Still Backs Him". The New York Times. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Merica, Dan (August 26, 2017). "Trump: 'Both sides' to blame for Charlottesville". CNN. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Johnson, Jenna; Wagner, John (August 12, 2017). "Trump condemns Charlottesville violence but doesn't single out white nationalists". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Kessler, Glenn (May 8, 2020). "The 'very fine people' at Charlottesville: Who were they?". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Holan, Angie Dobric (April 26, 2019). "In Context: Donald Trump's 'very fine people on both sides' remarks (transcript)". PolitiFact. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Beauchamp, Zack (January 11, 2018). "Trump's "shithole countries" comment exposes the core of Trumpism". Vox. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Weaver, Aubree Eliza (January 12, 2018). "Trump's 'shithole' comment denounced across the globe". Politico. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Wintour, Patrick; Burke, Jason; Livsey, Anna (January 13, 2018). "'There's no other word but racist': Trump's global rebuke for 'shithole' remark". The Guardian. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Rogers, Katie; Fandos, Nicholas (July 14, 2019). "Trump Tells Congresswomen to 'Go Back' to the Countries They Came From". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Mak, Tim (July 16, 2019). "House Votes To Condemn Trump's 'Racist Comments'". NPR. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Simon, Mallory; Sidner, Sara (July 16, 2019). "Trump said 'many people agree' with his racist tweets. These white supremacists certainly do". CNN. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Choi, Matthew (September 22, 2020). "'She's telling us how to run our country': Trump again goes after Ilhan Omar's Somali roots". Politico. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Rothe, Dawn L.; Collins, Victoria E. (November 17, 2019). "Turning Back the Clock? Violence against Women and the Trump Administration". Victims & Offenders. 14 (8): 965–978. doi:10.1080/15564886.2019.1671284. Shear, Michael D.; Sullivan, Eileen (October 16, 2018). "'Horseface,' 'Lowlife,' 'Fat, Ugly': How the President Demeans Women". The New York Times. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Prasad, Ritu (November 29, 2019). "How Trump talks about women – and does it matter?". BBC News. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Fieldstadt, Elisha (October 9, 2016). "Donald Trump Consistently Made Lewd Comments on 'The Howard Stern Show'". NBC News. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Nelson, Libby; McGann, Laura (June 21, 2019). "E. Jean Carroll joins at least 21 other women in publicly accusing Trump of sexual assault or misconduct". Vox. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Rupar, Aaron (October 9, 2019). "Trump faces a new allegation of sexually assaulting a woman at Mar-a-Lago". Vox. Retrieved April 27, 2020. Osborne, Lucy (September 17, 2020). "'It felt like tentacles': the women who accuse Trump of sexual misconduct". The Guardian. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Timm, Jane C. (October 7, 2016). "Trump caught on hot mic making lewd comments about women in 2005". NBC News. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Burns, Alexander; Haberman, Maggie; Martin, Jonathan (October 7, 2016). "Donald Trump Apology Caps Day of Outrage Over Lewd Tape". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2016. Hagen, Lisa (October 7, 2016). "Kaine on lewd Trump tapes: 'Makes me sick to my stomach'". The Hill. Retrieved October 8, 2016. McCann, Allison (July 14, 2016). "Hip-Hop Is Turning On Donald Trump". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Blair, Gwenda (2015) [2001]. The Trumps: Three Generations That Built an Empire. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-5011-3936-9. Kranish, Michael; Fisher, Marc (2017) [2016]. Trump Revealed: The Definitive Biography of the 45th President. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-5011-5652-6. O'Donnell, John R.; Rutherford, James (1991). Trumped!. Crossroad Press Trade Edition. ISBN 978-1-946025-26-5. ​​​​​ Library resources about Donald Trump Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Donald Trump Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Archive of Donald Trump's tweets Appearances on C-SPAN Donald Trump at IMDb Donald Trump on the Internet Archive Donald Trump's page on whitehouse.gov Portals:  Biography  Business  Conservatism  Politics  United States Donald Trump at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata