Traditional Russian units of measurement were standardized and used in Imperial Russia and after the Russian Revolution, but were abandoned after 21 July 1925, when the Soviet Union adopted the metric system, per the order of the Council of People's Commissars. The Tatar system is very similar to the Russian one, but some names are different.[citation needed] The Polish system is also very close to the Russian. The system existed since Kievan Rus', but under Peter the Great, the Russian units were redefined relative to the English system. Until Peter the Great the system also used Cyrillic numerals, and only in the 18th century did Peter the Great replace it with the Hindu–Arabic numeral system. The basic unit was the Russian ell, called the arshin, which came into use in the 16th century. It was standardized by Peter the Great in the 18th century to measure exactly twenty-eight English inches (71.12 cm). Thus, 80 vershoks = 20 pyad's = 5 arshins = 140 English inches (355.60 cm). A pyad' (пядь, "palm", "five") or chyetvyert' (че́тверть, "quarter") is a hand span, the distance between ends of the spread thumb and index finger.[citation needed] Alternative units: Swung sazhen' (маховая сажень, makhovaya sazhen', distance between tips of arms stretched sidewards) = 1.76 m Skewed, or oblique sazhen' (косая сажень, kosaya sazhen', distance between tip of a raised arm and a tip of an opposite leg slightly put away) = 2.48 m / 2.4892 m to be exact, since 1 Kosaya Sazhen is equal to 3.5 Arshins which is equal to 98 inches Double vyersta or border vyersta, (межевая верста, mezhevaya vyersta), used to measure land plots and distances between settlements = 2 vyerstas (comes from an older standard for vyersta) Desyatina (десяти́на, "a tenth" or "ten"), approximately one hectare Treasury/official desyatina (казённая десяти́на, kazyonnaya desyatina) = 10,925.4 m2 = 117,600 sq ft = 2.7 acres = 2,400 square sazhen' Proprietor's (владе́льческая десяти́на, vladel'cheskaya desyatina) = 14,567.2 m2 = 156,800 sq ft = 3,200 square sazhen' 3 proprietor's desyatinas = 4 official desyatinas Soha (соха, "big plow") As in many ancient systems of measurement the Russian distinguishes between dry and liquid measurements of capacity. Note that the chyetvyert' appears in both lists with vastly differing values. Two systems of weight were in use, an ordinary one in common use, and an apothecaries' system. The pood was first mentioned in a number of documents of the twelfth century.[citation needed] It may still be encountered in documents dealing with agricultural production (especially with reference to cereals), and has been revived in determining weights when casting bells in belfries following the rebirth of the Orthodox Churches in the former Soviet lands. The Imperial Russian apothecaries' weight was defined by setting the grain (Russian: гран) to be exactly seven-fifths of a dolya. The only unit name shared between the two was the funt (pound), but the one in the apothecaries' system is exactly seven-eighths of the ordinary funt. The obsolete units of measurement survived in Russian culture in a number of idiomatic expressions and proverbs, for example: Слышно за версту: (It) can be heard a verst away – about something very loud Бешеной собаке семь вёрст не крюк: 7 versts is not a detour for a mad dog – about excessive energy or hassle Милому дружку семь вёрст не околица: 7 verst is not too far for a darling friend Верста коломенская: Kolomna verst – about a very tall and slim person (in this case the reference is to the verst pole road mark: verstovoy stolb) Косая сажень в плечах: A slanted sazhen in the shoulders – about a strong, wide-shouldered person Мерить всех на свой аршин: To gauge everybody by the same [literally: one's own] yardstick Проглотить аршин: To swallow an arshin (yardstick) – about standing very straight and still От горшка два вершка: Two vershok above the pot – a very young child Сто пудов: a hundred poods – a very large amount. In modern colloquial Russian it is used in a generic meanings of "very much" and "very", as well as "most surely". The adjective stopudovy and the adverb stopudovo derive from this expression, although it is more likely a mangled contraction of "100%" (stoprocentny). Семь пядей во лбу: Seven pyad across the forehead – very smart Не семь пядей во лбу: Not seven pyad across the forehead – not so smart Мал золотник, да до́рог: A zolotnik is small, but expensive: when quality rather than quantity is important Идти семимильными шагами: To walk in 7-mile steps – any kind of very fast progress, e.g., of improvement Узнать, почём фунт лиха: To learn how much a pound of likho costs – to experience something bad Ни пяди земли (не уступить): Do not give up (even) a pyad of land Съесть пуд соли (вместе с кем-либо): To eat a 'pood' of salt (with somebody) – to have a long common experience with somebody (with the implication "to know someone well") Petrograd Standard Шостьин Н. А. Очерки истории русской метрологии XI – начала XX века. М.: 1975. Cardarelli, F. (2004). Encyclopaedia of Scientific Units, Weights and Measures: Their SI Equivalences and Origins (2nd ed.). Springer. pp. 120–124. ISBN 1-85233-682-X. English-Russian-English dictionary of slang, jargon and Russian names. 2012 Russian system of measures of length (brief description) by V. A. Belobrov The role of Peter the Great in the development of Russian system of measures of length by V. A. Belobrov