Long Road in the Dunes (Latvian: Ilgais ceļš kāpās, Russian: Долгая дорога в дюнах, romanized: Dolgaya doroga v dyunakh) is a 1981 Soviet Latvian seven-part TV melodrama, directed by Aloizs Brenčs. The original series was shot in Latvian by the Riga Film Studio, and an additional version was released with Russian voiceovers. The action takes place in Latvia and covers the period from 1939 to the present day. The events that took place in the country had different influences on the fate of the heroes. But all of them were led through life by love scattered and collected, forced to suffer cruelly and made the happiest in the world. The love story of Artūrs Banga, the son of a fisherman, and Marta Ozola, who carried their feelings through all the difficulties and sorrows of the military and post-WWII years. Lilita Ozoliņa as Marta Ozola (Russian voiceover by Valentina Talyzina) Juozas Kiselius as Artūrs Banga (Latvian voiceover by Rolands Zagorskis, Russian voiceover by Aleksei Pankin) Romualdas Ramanauskas as Rihards Lozbergs (Latvian voiceover by Ģirts Jakovļevs, Russian voiceover by Valery Ryzhakov) Eduards Pāvuls as Jēkabs Ozols, Marta's father (Russian voiceover by Vladimir Safronov) Ārijs Geikins as Innkeeper Āboltiņš Aare Laanemets as Laimonis Kalniņš Dzidra Ritenberga as Erna Harijs Liepiņš as Lawyer Osvalds Kreizis Evgeny Zharikov as Otto Grīnbergs / Alexander Efimov Merle Talvik as Ilga Ivan Ryzhov as Mityay Akimych Lyubov Sokolova as Anisya, Mityay's wife (Latvian voiceover by Velta Krūze) Pauls Butkēvičs as Heinrihs Strautnieks (Russian voiceover by Boris Bystrov) Velta Līne as Maiga Arnis Līcītis as Dr. Lorans (uncredited) Initially, the role of Marta was to be given to actress Vija Artmane. Episodes 6 and 7 were filmed in the village of Yalguba, Karelian ASSR as a substitute for the deportee village in Siberia. 100 великих латвийцев за 150 лет // 2004 "За советский фильм вступилась Элита Вейдемане". Archived from the original on 2016-07-16. Retrieved 2017-04-09. Дороги, которые мы выбираем // Ostankino Roads that we choose, Ostankino Лилита и Ялгуба "Gazeta 2.0". archive.is (in Russian). 2012-11-10. Archived from the original on 2014-02-20. Retrieved 2019-01-20. Long Road in the Dunes at IMDb v t e v t e v t e