Richard John Santorum Sr. (/sænˈtɔːrəm/ san-TOR-əm; born May 10, 1958) is an American politician, attorney, author, and political commentator who represented Pennsylvania in the United States Senate from 1995 to 2007. He was the Senate's third-ranking Republican during the final six years of his tenure. He also ran unsuccessfully for President of the United States in the 2012 Republican primaries, finishing second to Mitt Romney. Santorum was elected to the United States Senate from Pennsylvania in 1994. He served two terms until losing his 2006 reelection bid. A Roman Catholic, Santorum is a social conservative who opposes abortion and same-sex marriage and embraced a cultural warrior image during his Senate tenure. While serving as a senator, Santorum authored the Santorum Amendment, which would have promoted the teaching of intelligent design. He was a leading sponsor of the 2003 federal law known as the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. In the years following his departure from the Senate, Santorum has worked as a consultant, private practice lawyer, and news contributor. He ran for the Republican nomination in the 2012 U.S. presidential election. Before suspending his campaign on April 10, 2012, Santorum exceeded expectations by winning 11 primaries and caucuses and receiving nearly four million votes, making him the runner-up to eventual nominee Mitt Romney. Santorum ran for president again in 2016, but ended his campaign in February 2016 after a poor showing in the Iowa caucuses. In January 2017, he became a CNN senior political commentator. However, he was terminated from his contract with CNN in May 2021 due to comments he made about Native Americans a few weeks prior which were deemed "dismissive". Richard John Santorum was born in Winchester, Virginia. He is the second of the three children of Aldo Santorum (1923–2011), a clinical psychologist who immigrated to the United States at age seven from Riva, Trentino, Italy, and Catherine (Dughi) Santorum (1918–2019), an administrative nurse who was of Italian and Irish ancestry. Santorum grew up in Berkeley County, West Virginia, and Butler County, Pennsylvania. In West Virginia, his family lived in an apartment provided by the Veterans Administration. Santorum attended elementary school at Butler Catholic School and then went on to Butler Senior High School. He was nicknamed "Rooster", supposedly for both a cowlick strand of hair and an assertive nature, particularly on important political issues. After his parents transferred to the Naval Station Great Lakes in northern Illinois, Santorum attended the Roman Catholic Carmel High School in Mundelein, Illinois, for one year, graduating in 1976. Santorum attended Pennsylvania State University for his undergraduate studies, serving as chairman of the university's College Republicans chapter and graduating with a B.A. degree with honors in political science in 1980. While at Penn State, Santorum joined the Tau Epsilon Phi fraternity. He then completed a one-year M.B.A. program at the University of Pittsburgh's Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, graduating in 1981. In 1986, Santorum received a J.D. degree with honors from Dickinson School of Law. Santorum first became actively involved in politics in the 1970s through volunteering for Senator John Heinz, a Republican from Pennsylvania. Additionally, while in law school, Santorum was an administrative assistant to Republican state senator Doyle Corman, serving as Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Senate Local Government Committee from 1981 to 1984, then Executive Director of the Senate Transportation Committee. After graduating, Santorum was admitted to the Pennsylvania bar and practiced law for four years at the Pittsburgh law firm Kirkpatrick & Lockhart, a firm known for raising political candidates and lobbyists (later named K&L Gates). As an associate, he successfully lobbied on behalf of the World Wrestling Federation to deregulate professional wrestling, arguing that it should be exempt from federal anabolic steroid regulations because it was entertainment, not a sport. Santorum left his private law practice in 1990 after his election to the House of Representatives. Having been groomed by Kirkpatrick & Lockhart, Santorum decided Democratic congressman Doug Walgren was vulnerable, and took up residence in Walgren's district. Needing money and political support, he courted GOP activist and major donor Elsie Hillman, the chair of the state Republican Party. In 1990, at age 32, Santorum was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives to represent Pennsylvania's 18th congressional district, located in the eastern suburbs of Pittsburgh. He scored a significant upset in the heavily Democratic district, defeating seven-term Democratic incumbent Doug Walgren by a 51%–49% margin. During his campaign Santorum repeatedly criticized Walgren for living outside the district for most of the year. Although the 18th District was redrawn for the 1992 elections, and the new district had a 3:1 ratio of registered Democrats to Republicans, Santorum still won reelection with 61% of the vote. In 1993, Santorum was one of 17 House Republicans who sided with most Democrats to support legislation that prohibited employers from permanently replacing striking employees. He also joined a minority of Republicans to vote against the North American Free Trade Agreement that year. As a member of the Gang of Seven, Santorum was involved in exposing members of Congress involved in the House banking scandal. Santorum served in the United States Senate representing Pennsylvania from 1995 to 2007. From 2001 until 2007, he was the Senate's third-ranking Republican. He was first elected to the Senate during the 1994 Republican takeover, narrowly defeating incumbent Democrat Harris Wofford, 49% to 47%. The theme of Santorum's 1994 campaign signs was "Join the Fight!" During the race, he was considered an underdog, as his opponent was 32 years his senior. He was reelected in 2000, defeating U.S. Congressman Ron Klink by a 52–46% margin. In his reelection bid of 2006, he lost to Democrat Bob Casey, Jr. by a 59–41% margin. After his election to the Senate in 1994, Santorum sought to "practice what [he] preached" and hired five people for his staff who were on welfare, food stamps, or other government aid. In 1996, Santorum served as Chairman of the Republican Party Task Force on Welfare Reform, and contributed to legislation that became the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act. Santorum was an author and the floor manager of the bill. In 1996, Santorum endorsed moderate Republican Arlen Specter in his short-lived campaign for president. Reporters have observed that though Santorum and Specter differed on social policy, Specter provided him with key political staff for his successful run in 1994. The National Taxpayers Union, a fiscal conservative organization, gave Santorum an "A−" score for his votes on fiscal issues, meaning that he was one of "the strongest supporters of responsible tax and spending policies" during his tenure, and ranked fifth in the group's rankings out of 50 senators who served at the same time. In 2002, Santorum was a co-sponsor of that year's attempt to pass the Workplace Religious Freedom Act (WRFA). The bill had first been introduced in the Senate by Senator John Kerry (D-MA) in 1996, having been introduced in the House by Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D-NY) in 1994. Although Santorum was in the Senate at the time, he was not a sponsor of the bill when it was introduced in 1996, or when it was reintroduced in 1997 and 1999. Once signed on as a co-sponsor, Santorum remained so throughout his tenure in the Senate. Santorum founded the Congressional Working Group on Religious Freedom in 2003. The group included members of both the Senate and the House of Representatives, and met monthly to address issues such as the Workplace Religious Freedom Act, tax-exempt status for churches, the CARE act, international religious freedom, and antisemitism. Santorum added to the 2001 No Child Left Behind bill a provision that would have provided more freedom to schools in teaching about the origins of life, including the teaching of the pseudoscience of intelligent design alongside evolution. The bill, with the Santorum Amendment included, passed the Senate 91–8 and was hailed as a victory by intelligent design promoters, but before it became law, scientific and educational groups successfully urged its conference committee to strike the Santorum Amendment from the final version. Intelligent design supporters in Congress then preserved the language of the Santorum Amendment in the conference committee report of the bill's legislative history. The Discovery Institute and other intelligent design proponents point to this report as "a clear endorsement by Congress of the importance of teaching a variety of scientific views about the theory of evolution." In 2002, Santorum called intelligent design "a legitimate scientific theory that should be taught in science classes", but by 2005 he had adopted the Teach the Controversy approach. He told National Public Radio, "I'm not comfortable with intelligent design being taught in the science classroom. What we should be teaching are the problems and holes ... in the theory of evolution." Later that year, Santorum resigned from the advisory board of the Christian-rights Thomas More Law Center after the Center's lawyers lost a case representing a school board that had required the teaching of intelligent design. Santorum, who had previously supported the school board's policy, indicated he had not realized that certain members of the board had been motivated by religious beliefs. Santorum critics said he was backtracking from his earlier position because he was facing a tough reelection fight in 2006. When asked in November 2011 about his views on evolution, Santorum stated that he believes that evolution occurred on a tiny, micro level. Santorum introduced the National Weather Service Duties Act of 2005, which aimed to prohibit the National Weather Service from releasing weather data to the public without charge where private-sector entities perform the same function commercially. The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association was organizing a lobbying effort in opposition to the legislation, but it never passed committee. The motivations for the bill were controversial, as employees of AccuWeather, a commercial weather company based in Pennsylvania, donated $10,500 to Santorum and his PAC. The liberal advocacy group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington cited the bill as one of several reasons for listing Santorum as one of its "most corrupt politicians". In support of the bill, Santorum criticized the National Weather Service in September 2005, saying its evacuation warnings for Hurricane Katrina were "insufficient". Santorum supports the War on Terror and shares the views of neoconservatives and the Bush Doctrine in regard to foreign policy. He felt the War in Iraq was justified and in 2006 declared that weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) had been found in Iraq. Santorum made the declaration regarding WMDs based in part on declassified portions of the U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command. The report stated that coalition forces had recovered approximately 500 weapons munitions that contain degraded or vacant mustard or sarin nerve agent casings. The specific weapons he referred to were chemical munitions dating back to the Iran–Iraq War that were buried in the early 1990s. The report stated that while agents had degraded to an unknown degree, they remained dangerous and possibly lethal. Officials of the Department of Defense, CIA intelligence analysts, and the White House have all explicitly stated that these expired casings were not part of the WMDs threat that the Iraq War was launched to contain. Santorum has said the war on terror can be won and is optimistic about U.S. involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan in the long term. He has defended the treatment of prisoners in Guantanamo Bay, including waterboarding, and stated that John McCain, who opposes the practice, "doesn't understand how enhanced interrogation works." Santorum called the War in Afghanistan "a very winnable operation" in 2012, dismissing efforts for withdrawal by 2014. He similarly criticized President Obama's foreign policy, saying he was "not focused on trying to win the war" in Afghanistan, and said he was against any withdrawal in Iraq in 2012, saying, "We want victory." Santorum supports U.S. political intervention and economic sanctions against state sponsors of terrorism. He views "Islamic fascism" in Iran as the center of the "world's conflict", and his geopolitical strategy for peace involves the United States promoting "a strong Lebanon, a strong Israel, and a strong Iraq." He sponsored the Syria Accountability Act of 2003 to require Syria to cease all activity with Lebanon and end all support for terrorism. In 2005, Santorum sponsored the Iran Freedom and Support Act, which appropriated $10 million aimed at regime change in Iran. The Act passed with overwhelming support. Santorum voted against the Lautenberg amendment, which would have closed the loophole that allows companies like Halliburton to do business with Iran through their foreign affiliates. Santorum reflected on his last year in the Senate as one spent talking a lot about Iran and was characterized by The Atlantic Wire as an "extreme hawk" in his approach to Iran. Santorum stated that Iran was the creator of Hezbollah and the driving force of Hamas. He said Iran was at the center of "much of the world's conflict" but he was opposed to direct military action against the country in 2006. Santorum was one of only two senators who voted against confirming Robert Gates as Secretary of Defense. He said his objection was to Gates's support for talking with Iran and Syria, because it would be an error to talk with radical Islamists. Santorum became chairman of the Senate Republican Conference in 2000, the party's third-ranking leadership position in the Senate. In that role, he directed Senate Republicans' communications operations and was a frequent party spokesperson. He was the youngest member of the Senate leadership and the first Pennsylvanian to hold such a prominent position since Senator Hugh Scott was Republican leader in the 1970s. In addition, Santorum served on the Senate Agriculture Committee; the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs; the Senate Special Committee on Aging; and the Senate Finance Committee, of which he was the chairman of the Subcommittee on Social Security and Family Policy. He also sat at the candy desk for ten years. In January 2005, Santorum announced his intention to run for Senate Republican Whip, the second-highest post in the Republican caucus after the 2006 election, saying he expected the incumbent whip, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, to run for Senate Republican leader to succeed Bill Frist of Tennessee, who was planning to retire. As a result of Santorum's loss in the 2006 election, this plan was never realized. Beginning in 1995, Republicans leaders such as Tom DeLay and Grover Norquist initiated an order to place Republicans in lobbying firm jobs and exclude Democrats. In addition, the initiative pressured lobbying firms to contribute to Republican campaigns by withholding access to lawmakers from firms that did not comply. The initiative became politically toxic for Republicans when the Jack Abramoff scandal broke in late 2004. Although some sources indicate that Santorum played a key role in the K Street Project, he has denied any involvement. In November 2005, several months after the indictments of Abramoff and DeLay, Santorum told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, "The K Street project is purely to make sure we have qualified applicants for positions that are in town. From my perspective, it's a good government thing." A few months later, however, Santorum emphatically denied any connection with either the K Street Project or Norquist, saying: "I had absolutely nothing to do—never met, never talked, never coordinated, never did anything—with Grover Norquist and the quote K Street Project." In January 2012, The Washington Post's "Fact Checker" concluded that "we can't prove definitively whether or not Santorum collaborated on the K Street Project", saying that it "depend[ed] on how you define the initiative". In 2006, Santorum sought reelection to a third Senate term. He ran unopposed in the Republican Party. His seat was considered among the most vulnerable for Republicans and was a prime target of the Democratic Party in the 2006 elections. George W. Bush had a 38% approval rating in Pennsylvania in 2006. Mary Isenhour, a Democratic strategist, reflected on Santorum's campaign and his connection to the unpopular president, "In 2006, we were doubly blessed—we could run against George W. Bush and Rick Santorum". Santorum chose to campaign alongside George W. Bush and called him a "terrific president", hurting his popularity. Also problematic was Santorum's 2004 endorsement of his Republican Senate colleague Arlen Specter over conservative Congressman Pat Toomey in the primary for Pennsylvania's other Senate seat. Many socially and fiscally conservative Republicans considered the endorsement a betrayal of their cause. Santorum's opponent was Democratic State Treasurer Bob Casey, Jr., the son of popular former governor Robert Casey, Sr. Casey was well known for his opposition to abortion, negating one of Santorum's key issues. For most of the campaign, Santorum trailed Casey by 15 points or more in polls. Green Party candidate Carl Romanelli failed to gain ballot access in the race, further hurting Santorum's chances. Reportedly, several of Santorum's supporters had funded and petitioned for Romanelli to siphon away Democrats from Casey. Santorum was mired in controversy and spent much of his time on the campaign defending his past statements and positions. He faced criticism from Casey and others for several statements in his book It Takes a Family, including his denunciation of 1960s "radical feminism", which he said had made it "socially affirming to work outside the home" at the expense of child care. In the book, Santorum also compared pro-choice Americans to "German Nazis." John Brabender, an adviser to Santorum's Senate and presidential races, reflected back on the book's controversies and said Santorum was warned that sections could bring political damage, and Santorum was not willing to change much of it simply to gain moderate supporters. In addition, a past article Santorum wrote to The Catholic Online in which he linked liberalism and moral relativism in American society, particularly within seminaries, to the Roman Catholic Church sex abuse scandal resurfaced in 2005. He wrote, "It is no surprise that Boston, a seat of academic, political and cultural liberalism in America, lies at the center of the storm." His remarks were heavily criticized, especially in Massachusetts, and he was asked for an explanation. Santorum did not retract his statement and defended his premise that it was "no surprise that the center of the Catholic Church abuse took place in very liberal, or perhaps the nation's most liberal area, Boston." Casey also raised the question of Santorum's association with the K Street Project. Santorum said he spent "maybe a month a year" at his Pennsylvania home, raising allegations of hypocrisy as he had denounced his former opponent Doug Walgren for living away from his House district. Critics also complained that Pennsylvania taxpayers were paying 80% of the tuition for five of Santorum's children to attend an online "cyber school"—a benefit available only to Pennsylvania residents—when all his children lived in Virginia. The Penn Hills School District, which covered the tuition costs for the cyber school through local taxes, unsuccessfully filed a complaint against Santorum for reimbursement in 2005, but won reimbursement from the state in September 2006 in the amount of $55,000. In response, Santorum asked county officials to remove the homestead tax exemption from his Penn Hills property, saying he was entitled to it but chose not to take it because of the political dispute. Since 2006, Santorum has been home-schooling his seven children. Santorum responded to the dispute saying that his children should not be implicated in the "politics of personal destruction". One of his children appeared in a 2006 reelection campaign ad, saying, "My dad's opponents have criticized him for moving us to Washington so we could be with him more." Santorum ran a television ad suggesting that Casey's supporters had been under investigation for various crimes. The negative ad backfired, as The Scranton Times-Tribune found that all but a few of Casey's contributors donated when he was running for other offices, and none were investigated for anything. In fact, two of the persons cited in Santorum's campaign ad actually contributed to Santorum in 2006, and one died in 2004. Santorum's campaign countered that those donations were not kept and had been donated to educational institutions. Toward the end of his campaign, Santorum shifted his theme to the threat of radical Islam. In October 2006 he gave a "Gathering Storm" speech, invoking British Prime Minister Winston Churchill's description of Europe prior to World War II. As evidence that Islamists were waging a more-than-300-year-old crusade against the Western world, Santorum pointed to September 11, 1683, the date of the Battle of Vienna. Casey responded, "No one believes terrorists are going to be more likely to attack us because I defeat Rick Santorum." Noting that he had been "even more hawkish" during this time period than President Bush, Santorum later said, "Maybe that wasn't the smartest political strategy, spending the last few months running purely on national security". A heated debate between the candidates occurred on October 11, 2006. Bill Toland of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette described both candidates' performances during the debate as "unstatesmanlike". In the November 7, 2006, election, Santorum lost by over 700,000 votes, receiving 41% of the vote to Casey's 59%. This was the largest margin of defeat for a sitting senator in the 2006 cycle, and the largest margin of defeat for an incumbent senator since 1980. In January 2007, Santorum joined the Ethics and Public Policy Center, a D.C.-based conservative think tank, as director of its America's Enemies Program focusing on foreign threats to the United States, including Islamic fascism, Venezuela, North Korea and Russia. In February 2007, he signed a deal to become a contributor on the Fox News Channel, offering commentary on politics and public policy. In March 2007 he joined Eckert Seamans, where he primarily practiced law in the firm's Pittsburgh and Washington, D.C., offices, providing business and strategic counseling services to the firm's clients. In 2007, he joined the Board of Directors of Universal Health Services, a hospital management company based in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania. He also began writing an op-ed column, "The Elephant in the Room", for The Philadelphia Inquirer. Santorum earned $1.3 million in 2010 and the first half of 2011. The largest portion of his earnings—$332,000—came from his work as a consultant for industry interest groups, including Consol Energy and American Continental Group. Santorum also earned $395,414 in corporate director's fees and stock options from Universal Health Services and $217,385 in income from the Ethics and Public Policy Center. In 2010 he was paid $23,000 by The Philadelphia Inquirer for his work as a columnist. In January 2017, Santorum became a CNN senior political commentator. In April 2021, he claimed at an April 23 Young America's Foundation event that "There isn't much Native American culture in American culture. We came here and created a blank slate. We birthed a Nation. From nothing. I mean there was nothing here." Santorum's comments, which were described as racist, led to calls for CNN to terminate his contract, which the network did days later. Before the 2006 election, Santorum was frequently mentioned as a possible 2008 presidential candidate. Such speculation faded when, during the 2006 campaign and in light of unimpressive poll numbers in his Senate race, he declared that, if reelected, he would serve a full term. After he lost, Santorum once again ruled out a presidential run. On February 1, 2008, Santorum said he would vote for Mitt Romney in the 2008 Republican presidential primary. Santorum criticized John McCain, questioning his anti-abortion voting record and conservative values. Santorum later said he endorsed Romney because he saw him as the "best chance to stop John McCain", whom he considered too moderate. In September 2008, Santorum expressed support for McCain as the nominee, citing McCain's choice of Sarah Palin as his running mate as a step in the right direction. Santorum was mentioned as a candidate for governor of Pennsylvania in 2010. At one point, he was said to have "quietly but efficiently put his fingerprints on a wide array of conservative causes in the state." Santorum declined to seek the gubernatorial nomination and instead endorsed eventual winner Tom Corbett. In the fall of 2009, Santorum gave a speech at the University of Dubuque on the economy, fueling speculation that he would run for president in 2012. Santorum later recalled, "It got a lot of buzz on the Internet, so I thought, 'Wow, maybe there's some interest'". He decided to campaign after multiple conversations with his wife, who was not enthusiastic at first. On September 11, 2009, Santorum spoke to Catholic leaders in Orlando, Florida, saying that the 2012 presidential elections were going to be "a real opportunity for success." He then scheduled various appearances in Iowa with political nonprofit organizations. On January 15, 2010, Santorum sent an email and letter to supporters of his political action committee, saying, "I'm convinced that conservatives need a candidate who will not only stand up for our views, but who can articulate a conservative vision for our country's future". He continued, "And right now, I just don't see anyone stepping up to the plate. I have no great burning desire to be president, but I have a burning desire to have a different president of the United States". He formed a presidential exploratory committee on April 13, 2011. Santorum also mentioned his grandfather's historical encounter with Italian fascism as an inspiration for his presidential campaign. He formally announced his run for the Republican presidential nomination on ABC's Good Morning America on June 6, 2011, saying he was "in it to win." He initially lagged in the polls but gained as other conservative candidates slumped. By the weekend before the Iowa caucuses, polls showed him in the top three along with Romney and Ron Paul. The Des Moines Register also noted that the momentum was with Santorum. In the closest finish in the history of the Iowa caucuses, the count on the night put Romney as winner by a margin of eight votes, but the final result announced two weeks later showed that Santorum had won by 34 votes. Santorum later focused on the states holding votes on February 7, a strategy that paid off, as he won all three. Santorum surged in polls taken shortly after, ranking first in some and a close second in others. In the March 13 primaries, Santorum narrowly won both Mississippi and Alabama and followed up with a victory in Louisiana on March 24. Following the hospitalization of his daughter Bella and losses in Wisconsin, Maryland, and the District of Columbia, Santorum announced the suspension of his campaign on April 10, 2012, in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. He had won 11 state primaries and nearly 4 million votes, more than any other candidate except Romney. Santorum topped Romney in polls for a brief period. Upon the conclusion of Santorum's run, Romney called him "an important voice" in the GOP. Santorum received a prime time speaking slot at the 2012 Republican National Convention. He was originally slated to speak early in the evening, but convention organizers moved him to 9 pm with the other highly anticipated speakers of the evening, Ann Romney and convention keynote Chris Christie. Santorum spoke of the American dream his immigrant grandfather worked to give his family and said Obama was turning the dream into a nightmare. He talked about his experiences on the presidential campaign trail, speaking with emotion about his daughter Bella and meeting disabled people and their families. He emphasized the importance of strengthening marriage and the family. He also condemned Obama's actions on the welfare reform law, of which he was one of the chief proponents in Congress, and his actions on education, including school choice and student loans. Santorum concluded his speech to a standing ovation, saying, I thank God that America still has one party that reaches out their hands in love to lift up all of God's children—born and unborn—and says that each of us has dignity and all of us have the right to live the American Dream. And without you, America is not keeping faith with that dream. We are stewards of a great inheritance. In November we have a chance to vote for life and liberty, not dependency. A vote for Mitt Romney and Paul Ryan will put our country back in the hands of leaders who understand what America can and, for the sake of our children, must be to keep the dream alive. In June 2012, Santorum launched Patriot Voices, a 501(c)(4) nonprofit with a mission to "mobilize conservatives around this country who are committed to promoting faith, family, freedom and opportunity" in support of causes and candidates across the country. Santorum supported U.S. Senate candidates Ted Cruz in Texas and Richard Mourdock in Indiana in their respective Republican primaries; both won. In the general elections, Patriot Voices endorsed eight U.S. Senate candidates and four House candidates. In Iowa's 2012 retention elections Santorum lent support to the "NO Wiggins" effort to oust Iowa Supreme Court Justice David Wiggins, who they say promulgated a personal political agenda in the court. They have also been vocal in opposition to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which they say threatens parental rights and U.S. sovereignty. In August 2021 Santorum became a Senior Advisor to the Convention of States Project of Citizens for Self-Governance. "As Senior Advisor, Rick is counseling us on strategy, will serve as a public voice for the surging Convention of States movement, and will focus his incredible energy on restoring our nation and returning the proper balance to our republic," said Mark Meckler, head of the Convention of States Project. In June 2013, Santorum became Chairman and CEO of EchoLight Studios, a Dallas-based Christian movie company. Santorum has produced the Christmas-themed movie The Christmas Candle and the religious liberty film One Generation Away. He is a part owner of Plasma Technologies LLC. Appearing on NBC's Meet the Press on August 4, 2013, Santorum said, "I'm open to looking into a presidential race in 2016." He outlined plans for a potential 2016 run in an interview with The Washington Post, and officially announced his candidacy on May 27, 2015. After performing poorly in the Iowa caucuses, Santorum ended his campaign on February 3, 2016, and endorsed Florida senator Marco Rubio. After Rubio suspended his campaign, Santorum endorsed Donald Trump. In May 2021, Santorum stated that America was founded by white Europeans and that prior to their arrival, America was populated by nothing more than a handful of primitive warring Native American tribes. He was dropped from CNN over these remarks, with some responses referring to them as "classic white supremacist rhetoric" and being "dangerous manipulation". In response, Santorum said he had “misspoke” and denied that he was “trying to dismiss [the genocide of] Native Americans”. In his 2005 book It Takes a Family, Santorum advocated a society oriented toward "family values" and centered on monogamous, heterosexual relationships, marriage, and child raising. He opposes both same-sex marriage and civil unions, saying the American public and their elected officials should decide on these "incredibly important moral issues" rather than the Supreme Court. During a 2003 interview, Santorum expressed opposition to same-sex marriage, said he favors having laws against polygamy, sodomy (between same sex or opposite sex couples), and other actions "antithetical to a healthy, stable, traditional family", and likened homosexuality to bestiality and child sexual abuse. The remarks drew a retaliatory response from many, including author, journalist, and LGBT community activist Dan Savage, who launched a contest to coin a "santorum" neologism among the readers of his blog with the winner as "the frothy mixture of lube and fecal matter that is sometimes the byproduct of anal sex". The website Savage set up for the campaign became one of the top search results for Santorum's surname, creating a situation that commentators dubbed "Santorum's Google problem". Santorum has characterized the campaign as a "type of vulgarity" spread on the Internet. In September 2011, Santorum unsuccessfully requested that Google remove the content from its search engine index. In 2015, during an interview on The Rachel Maddow Show, he expressed regret for making the "man-on-dog" statement, which he described as "flippant", but added: "[T]he substance of what I said ... I stand by that." In 2011, during his bid for the Republican nomination in the upcoming presidential election, Santorum attended a Republican primary debate held two days after the official end of the Clinton-era "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" policy that effectively banned gays and lesbians from open service in the United States Armed Forces and fielded a question from Stephen Snyder-Hill, a gay soldier then serving in Iraq, about the progress made by gay soldiers in the military. The soldier was booed by some in the audience, and Santorum said his administration would reinstate the ban on gay soldiers in the military. Santorum was roundly criticized for not supporting the soldier, and he later asserted he had not heard the booing from the stage. In 2015, Santorum signed an online pledge vowing not to respect any law, including any decision by the United States Supreme Court, conferring legal recognition on same-sex marriage. The pledge states, in part: "A decision purporting to redefine marriage flies in the face of the Constitution and is contrary to the natural created order. As people of faith we pledge obedience to our Creator when the State directly conflicts with higher law." In April 2015, Santorum stated on Hugh Hewitt's radio program that he would not attend a same-sex wedding, saying: "as a person of my faith, that would be something that would be a violation of my faith." At a Republican convention in South Carolina in 2015, Santorum responded to a question about Caitlyn Jenner by saying: "if [Jenner] says he's a woman, then he's a woman. My responsibility as a human being is to love and accept everybody. Not to criticize people for who they are." Due to Santorum's consistent opposition to same-sex marriage, his apparent acceptance of Jenner's transition surprised some.[who?] Some people criticized Santorum for continuing to use the male pronoun in reference to Jenner. Santorum declined to take a position on whether transgender people should be allowed to use restrooms of the gender of their choice, saying only that he believed the federal government should leave the issue to local authorities. Santorum later clarified his statement, writing that he "meant to express empathy", and "not a change in public policy." Santorum has consistently held socially conservative views and has advocated "compassionate conservatism". He has a more mixed record on fiscal issues. As a member of Congress, he voted for the Bush tax cuts, favored a balanced budget amendment and sought to curb entitlements, playing a key role in enacting welfare cuts. He has been criticized for supporting costly federal programs in education and transportation and for using earmarks to fund Pennsylvania projects. He says he regrets many of his votes for such programs and opposes earmarks. He has also specifically disavowed his 2003 support for the unfunded Medicare prescription drug benefit and his vote for the No Child Left Behind Act. In 2003, he was described by the Pennsylvania Report as having a "confrontational, partisan, 'in your face' style of politics and government." "I just don't take the pledge. I take the bullets", Santorum said. "I stand out in front and I lead to make sure the voices of those who do not have a voice are out in front and being included in the national debate." Santorum considered himself pro-choice on abortion throughout his early life but adopted an anti-abortion position by 1990 when he ran for Congress. He has become known for his staunch opposition to abortion. In 2015, he said, "'I do not believe life begins at conception. I know life begins at conception. This is not a matter of debate. It's not a matter of faith ... Every child at the moment of conception is both living—that embryo is metabolizing—and it is ... genetically completely human"'. During a 2016 presidential debate, Santorum said, "'Twice in my life we were counseled to have an abortion—once with our son Gabriel and one with our little girl, Bella ... Neither time did Karen (Santorum's wife) and I even think about [an abortion], because we know life begins at conception'". In 1996, Santorum led the unsuccessful attempt to override President Bill Clinton's veto of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 1995, He also sponsored a similar bill in 1999. Santorum was a lead sponsor of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, which was signed into law by President George W. Bush in November 2003 and upheld by the Supreme Court of the United States in the 2007 decision Gonzales v. Carhart. Santorum has condemned the term "middle class" as "Marxism talk" used by liberals, maintaining that the United States has no social classes. At an August 2013 GOP fundraiser in Rock Rapids, Iowa, he said, "Don't use the term the other side uses... [t]he middle class.... Since when in America do we have classes? Since when in America are people stuck in areas or defined places called a class? That's Marxism talk... When Republicans get up and talk about middle class, we're buying into their rhetoric of dividing America. Stop it. There's no class in America. Call them on it." Santorum has said he does not believe a "right to privacy" is part of the Constitution. He has criticized the Supreme Court decision in Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), which held that the Constitution guaranteed that right and overturned a law prohibiting the sale of contraceptives to married couples. Santorum has asserted that the right to privacy set forth in Griswold was a "jurisprudential novelty [that] quickly become a constitutional wrecking ball" and eventually led the Court to recognize a constitutional right to abortion in Roe v. Wade (1973). In critiquing Griswold, Santorum emphasized that he did not support laws banning contraceptives. Santorum has, however, described contraception as "a license to do things in [the] sexual realm that [are] counter to how things are supposed to be." In March 2005, Santorum expressed misgivings about the death penalty in light of wrongly convicted individuals who were sentenced to death. He went on to say, "I agree with the Pope that in the civilized world... the application of the death penalty should be limited. I would definitely agree with that. I would certainly suggest there probably should be some further limits on what we use it for." In January 2012, Santorum said that "when there is certainty, that's the case that capital punishment can be used" but that "if there is not certainty, under the law, it shouldn't be used." Santorum used cannabis in college, but later said, "Even during that time, I knew that what I was doing was wrong." He is against the legalization of cannabis and believes that the federal law against it should be enforced in Colorado. He has voted in favor of increasing penalties for drug trafficking and possession and for increased spending on drug control. Santorum rejects the overwhelming scientific consensus on climate change, which states that global warming is harmful and primarily human-caused, calling it "junk science". He has claimed that global warming is a "beautifully concocted scheme" by the political left and "an excuse for more government control of your life." In reaction to Pope Francis's encyclical Laudato si', which acknowledges man-made climate change and calls for swift and unified global policies to phase out fossil fuels, Santorum said in 2015: "The Church has gotten it wrong a few times on science, and I think we probably are better off leaving science to the scientists and focusing on what we're good at, which is theology and morality." He has stated a policy of "drill everywhere" for oil and that there is "enough oil, coal and natural gas to last for centuries". In 2012, Santorum said that half of all euthanizations in the Netherlands are involuntary, that Dutch hospitals euthanize elderly patients for financial reasons, and that 10% of all deaths in the Netherlands are the result of involuntary euthanizations. Santorum's statements were called "bogus" by FactCheck.org, and Glenn Kessler, fact-checker for The Washington Post, said there was no evidence to support them. Santorum's comments were met with a significant backlash in the Netherlands and were significantly criticized worldwide. As U.S. representative from Pennsylvania, in each year from 1992 through 1994 Santorum received a grade of B, and as U.S. Senator from Pennsylvania he received grades of A from 1995 through 1997, B+ in 1998 and 1999, B in 2000, A from 2001 through 2004, B in 2005, and B+ in 2006 from the National Taxpayers Union, a conservative taxpayers advocacy organization. Santorum, who received nearly $116,000 from the gun lobby from 1990 to 2017, has consistently supported gun rights. Santorum is an advocate of the right to bear arms. He is also a defender of gun manufacturers, and voted for the 2005 Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (Bill S 397), which prevents civil suits from being brought against gun manufacturers for criminal acts perpetrated with their weapons. On March 25, 2018, in response to the "March for Our Lives", Santorum told CNN that rather than marching the students should "take CPR classes" instead of "looking to someone else to solve their problems." Columbia Journalism Review called the comment "asinine on its face," but said that, even so, the response from doctors, journalists and students about the "stupid" comment was excessive. In 2015, Santorum called for more restrictions on family-based immigration after warning of a "flood of legal—not illegal—immigrants to our country", which he blamed for depressing the median income of American workers. In 2006, Santorum opposed the Senate's immigration reform proposal, saying the U.S. should simply act to enforce currently existing laws. He has openly stated his opposition to amnesty for illegal immigrants. He supports the construction of a barrier along the U.S.–Mexican border, an increase in the number of border patrol agents, and the stationing of National Guard troops along the border. He also believes that illegal immigrants should be deported immediately when they commit crimes and that undocumented immigrants should not receive benefits from the government. He believes English should be established as the national language in the United States. Santorum cites his own family's history (his father immigrated to the U.S. from Italy) as proof of how to immigrate "the right way". At the 2015 Iowa Freedom Summit, Santorum said the volume of legal immigration into the United States is also too high, and stated that the number of immigrants lawfully entering the country was "affecting American workers" by taking jobs and lowering wages. Santorum claimed that all "net new jobs" created in the United States economy since 2000 have gone to immigrants (both legal and illegal). At the Iowa Freedom Summit, Santorum said: "We need an immigration policy that puts American workers first." In June 2011, Santorum said he would continue to "fight very strongly against libertarian influence within the Republican Party and the conservative movement." In an interview with NPR in the summer of 2005, Santorum discussed what he called the "libertarianish right", saying "they have this idea that people should be left alone, be able to do whatever they want to do. Government should keep our taxes down and keep our regulation low and that we shouldn't get involved in the bedroom, we shouldn't get involved in cultural issues, you know, people should do whatever they want. Well, that is not how traditional conservatives view the world, and I think most conservatives understand that individuals can't go it alone." During his 2016 presidential campaign, Santorum came out in support of an increase in the federal minimum wage. In September 2015, he said, "'Republicans are losing elections because we aren't talking about [workers], all we want to talk about is what happened to business, there are people that work in those businesses.'" Santorum supports paid family leave. On his website, Santorum said that the "Obama Administration has turned a blind eye" to pornography, but promised the situation would "change under a Santorum Administration." According to USA Today, some conservatives believe Santorum's opposition to pornography could "hurt the party politically." On March 23, 2012, Santorum wrote on his campaign website that there is "a wealth of research" demonstrating that pornography causes "profound brain changes" and widespread negative effects on children and adults, including violence to women. Researchers say that there is no such evidence of brain changes, although pornography's harmfulness "is still in dispute." Santorum defended his assertions by saying that "the Obama Department of Justice seems to favor pornographers over children and families", and that the department's failure to prosecute the porn industry "proves his point." He then said that Obama has not put a priority on tackling the porn industry, "putting children at risk as a result of that." In a position paper circulated in March 2012, Santorum said he would order his attorney general to "vigorously enforce" existing laws that "prohibit distribution of hardcore (obscene) pornography on the Internet, on cable/satellite TV, on hotel/motel TV, in retail shops and through the mail or by common carrier." While in Congress, Santorum supported efforts to fight global HIV/AIDS, provide assistance to orphans and vulnerable children in developing countries, combat genocide in Sudan, and offer third world debt relief. In 2006, rock musician and humanitarian Bono said of Santorum, "he has been a defender of the most vulnerable." On the domestic front, Santorum supported home ownership tax credits, savings accounts for children, rewarding savings by low-income families, funding autism research, fighting tuberculosis, and providing housing for people with HIV/AIDS. He supported increased funding for Social Services Block Grants and organizations like Healthy Start and the Children's Aid Society, and financing community health centers. Santorum supported partial privatization of Social Security, and following President Bush's reelection, he held forums across Pennsylvania on the topic. The Cato Institute's Center for Trade Policy Studies identified Santorum, during his U.S. Senate tenure, as having a mostly pro-free trade and mostly anti-subsidies voting record. Santorum met his future wife, Karen Garver (born 1960), while she was a neo-natal nurse studying law at the University of Pittsburgh and he was recruiting summer interns for Kirkpatrick & Lockhart. They married in 1990 and have seven living children. In 1996, the Santorums' son Gabriel was born prematurely after 20 weeks of pregnancy and died in the hospital two hours later. Karen wrote that she and Rick slept with Gabriel's body between them in the hospital that night and brought his body home the following day so that their other children could see him. The Santorums' four eldest children appeared with their parents on Piers Morgan Tonight in January 2012. Elizabeth, who was five at the time of Gabriel's death, said she was glad to have seen him, and that he holds a place in her heart. Santorum traveled, in 2002, to Rome to speak at a centenary celebration of the birth of Saint Josemaría Escrivá, founder of Opus Dei. He and his wife were invested as Knight and Dame of Magistral Grace of the Knights of Malta in a ceremony at St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York on November 12, 2004. Santorum's net worth has been estimated between $880,000 and $3 million, which is mainly held as five rental properties around Penn State University, two personal homes in Great Falls and Penn Hills, and some IRAs. In 1997, Santorum purchased a three-bedroom house in the Pittsburgh suburb of Penn Hills. In 2001, he bought a $640,000 house in Leesburg, Virginia, sold it in 2007 for $850,000, and purchased a $2 million home in Great Falls, Virginia. According to The Washington Post, Santorum has paid $50,000 per year out of pocket for medical expenses not covered by insurance for his daughter Isabella's Trisomy 18. The Santorums once paid $25,000 to have Isabella airlifted from a Virginia hospital to a children's hospital in Philadelphia. In his free time, Santorum is an avid fantasy baseball player. Although he was raised in a nominally Catholic household, Santorum's faith began to deepen when he met his future wife, Karen. By his account, conversations with her father, Kenneth Garver, a staunch Catholic and abortion opponent, solidified his understanding and opposition to abortion. He and his wife have since become increasingly religious. Santorum now considers himself a devout Catholic and acknowledges his faith as the source of his politics and worldview. He attends Mass almost daily and organized a Catholic study group for lawmakers while in Congress. Santorum proudly calls himself a culture warrior and true Christian conservative. In so positioning himself, he has garnered popularity among Protestant evangelicals, but his support among Catholics is not as robust. Santorum's emphasis on his "Christian roots" was especially favored by evangelicals in the Midwest and Southern states during the 2012 primaries, although he lost the Republican Catholic vote in most states to Romney. Exit polls found only 42% of those Catholics and less than a third of Protestant evangelicals knew Santorum was Catholic. After Santorum won Protestant-majority states Alabama and Mississippi but lost in heavily Catholic Puerto Rico, The Huffington Post said he "seemed exasperated by the trend" and said his base support came from "people who take their faith seriously", not necessarily fellow Catholics. Santorum has written for Catholic publications and frequently comments on political issues from a religious standpoint. He has said, "I don't believe in an America where the separation of church and state is absolute. The First Amendment means the free exercise of religion and that means bringing people and their faith into the public square." In an interview with the National Catholic Reporter, Santorum said that the distinction between private religious conviction and public responsibility, espoused by President John F. Kennedy, had caused "great harm in America". He said: "All of us have heard people say, 'I privately am against abortion, homosexual marriage, stem cell research, cloning. But who am I to decide that it's not right for somebody else?' It sounds good, but it is the corruption of freedom of conscience." He told a group of college students in 2008 that the United States had been founded on "Judeo-Christian" ethics, and now "it is a shambles, it is gone from the world of Christianity as I see it." Santorum has said he values faith over politics and considers politicians' faith significant. He questioned whether Barack Obama truly has a religion, alleging that he may have chosen Christianity as a politically expedient platform for power. Santorum has said that "if the president says he's a Christian, he's a Christian" but has stated that Obama's agenda is based on a "phony theology", not the Bible. In an interview with Glenn Beck, Santorum said Obama's desire for greater higher education rates nationwide was a veiled attempt at "indoctrination", saying that "62 percent of kids who go into college with a faith commitment leave without it." Santorum declined to provide a source for that figure. He believes colleges reinforce secular relativism and antagonize religiosity, particularly Christianity, and lists young people's support for abortion, gay marriage, and pornography as "symptoms" of indoctrination. Santorum has written four books: It Takes a Family: Conservatism and the Common Good (2005); American Patriots: Answering the Call to Freedom (2012); Blue Collar Conservatives: Recommitting to an America That Works (2014); and Bella's Gift: How One Little Girl Transformed Our Family and Inspired a Nation (2015). In addition to Santorum's books, a collection of his speeches as a U.S. senator was published and released by Monument Press in 2005 under the title Rick Santorum: A Senator Speaks Out on Life, Freedom, and Responsibility. Santorum also wrote a foreword to William A. Dembski's 2006 Darwin's Nemesis: Phillip Johnson and the Intelligent Design Movement and a 2006 autobiography. In It Takes a Family, Santorum argues that the traditional family is the foundation of society. Santorum criticizes alike laissez-faire conservatives and liberal proponents of social welfare for promoting a radical view of autonomy. In particular, he criticizes the "bigs" – "big government, big media, big entertainment, big universities." The book became a New York Times bestseller. American Patriots tells the stories of 25 lesser-known Americans from the American Revolution. Santorum writes, "Most Americans know something about our Founding Fathers and their role in creating the government of the United States. However, most know little about the day-to-day battles fought by Americans of all backgrounds that paved the way for the high ideals of our founders to be put into practice." He also writes, "Today we are facing a threat to the very foundation our founders laid. That threat does not come from an alien force but from those who are willing and determined to abandon the concept of God-given rights. Like the royalty during the Revolution, today's elites wish to return to the pre-Revolutionary paradigm in which they, through governmental force, allocate rights and responsibilities." Blue Collar Conservatives departs from traditional Republican orthodoxy and says that the Republican Party must appeal to blue collar Americans. He says, "As many as six million blue collar voters stayed home from the polls, and there's good reason to believe that a large majority of them would have voted Republican if they had voted." Santorum puts forward a recipe for Republican success in which Republicans advocate for workers and not just corporations. He says that many middle class workers who have been forced into part-time jobs at big box stores or even into public assistance programs are amenable to the GOP's message if it is presented in relatable terms. He tackles education, saying the current system of government-run schools is a "relic of the late 19th century" and that children should not be pressured into going to college when a job or vocational training would be a better option. He criticizes libertarian influence in the Republican Party, saying, "There are some in my party who have taken the ideal of individualism to such an extreme that they have forgotten the obligation to look out for our fellow man." He says the GOP should be less quick to dismiss concerns over decreasing social and economic mobility, saying that large businesses and stocks are strong, while life has become "a trickle" for workers. He questions rich compensation of business executives, and says that while he supports free trade, Republicans need to look at its impact on the average person and consider whether existing laws are fair. In January 2015, Santorum announced Bella's Gift: How One Little Girl Transformed Our Family and Inspired a Nation, a book about his daughter Bella, who lives with a rare genetic condition called Trisomy 18. The book is authored by Santorum and his wife, Karen Santorum, and co-authored by their daughter, Elizabeth Santorum. It was released February 10, 2015. Biography portal Pennsylvania portal Conservatism portal Republican Party presidential primaries, 2012 Republican Party presidential primaries, 2016 Republican Party presidential candidates, 2016 "CNN Drops Rick Santorum After Dismissive Comments About Native Americans". The New York Times. May 22, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "GOP Candidate Rick Santorum's Daughter Hospitalized In Virginia". CBS. January 31, 2012. Retrieved February 19, 2012. "Aldo Santorum Obituary". Legacy.com. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "Pennsylvania Town Hall – Pennsylvania's Marketplace of Ideas". Patownhall.com. January 15, 2011. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Zito, Salena (January 21, 2011). "Psychologist Aldo Santorum devoted career to fellow veterans". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "The Senator's Biography". Santorum's Senate website. Archived from the original on December 30, 2006. Retrieved December 30, 2006.; Steve Goldstein (April 17, 2005). "Big Profile, Big Target". Beaver County Times. "Santorum genealogy". Freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.com. Retrieved June 18, 2010.; The Pennsylvania Manual. Dept. of General Services for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. January 6, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2011. Paul West (February 26, 2012). "Santorum and Romney fight their own class war in Michigan". Los Angeles Times. Ball, Molly (January 2, 2012). "Who Is Rick Santorum?". The Atlantic. Retrieved January 20, 2012. quoting a 2005 article: Newall, Mike (October 5, 2005). "The Path of the Righteous Man: How Rick Santorum became the nation's evangelical poster boy". Philadelphia CityPaper. Archived from the original on January 23, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2012. Everybody called him "Rooster" because of a strand of hair on the back of his head which stood up, and because of his competitive, in-your-face attitude. 'He would debate anything and everything with you, mostly sports,' says Goettler. 'He was like a rooster. He never backed down.' Melinda Henneberger (December 15, 2011). "Rick Santorum is long on substance, short on support". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 9, 2012. Butler Senior High School classbook, The Magnet, 1975 "Nation & World: 20 things about Rick Santorum – U.S. News & World Report". Usnews.com. June 16, 2006. Retrieved January 11, 2012. Tony Scifo (November 5, 1996). "Carmel's political alumni return for chat with students Carmel High School". Daily Herald. Murray, Michael (August 26, 2011). "Santorum to visit Penn State". The Daily Collegian. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2012. Cherkis, Jason (March 5, 2012). "Rick Santorum's Frat Brothers Perplexed By Claims Of Cultural Oppression". HuffPost. Retrieved June 30, 2012. New York Times At a Glance: Rick Santorum October 1, 2011 The Pennsylvania Manual Archived June 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Vol 116, Section Eight: The Federal Government, pp. 8–11, 2003. Retrieved 2013-05-05. Cherkis, Jason (February 26, 2012). "Rick Santorum: A Conservative Who Once Defended Labor Unions, Gays In Military, Art Funding". HuffPost. Retrieved March 9, 2012. Tapper, Jake (January 4, 2012). "Rick Santorum, Mr. Bipartisan Compromise – and Mr. Pro Wrestling?". ABC News. Retrieved February 12, 2012. Ball, Molly (January 2, 2012). "11 Things You Might Not Know About Rick Santorum". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 6, 2018. Fitzgerald, Thomas (October 22, 2010). "Conn. race a body slam – with Pa. ties: GOP Senate hopefuls rise got boost from Santorum". The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. A.1. Konigsberg, Eric (1995). "A Funny Thing Happened On the Way To Santorum" (PDF). Philadelphia. 86 (12). Metrocorp: 150. Retrieved August 27, 2013. "The Pittsburgh Press, November 7, 1990". Retrieved January 4, 2012. "Santorum elated at upset victory to win 18th District seat in Congress". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. November 7, 1990. Retrieved January 4, 2012. "Santorum, Klink win House races". Observer Reporter. Washington, Pennsylvania. November 4, 1992. Retrieved January 4, 2012. Greg Giroux; Heidi Przybyla (January 4, 2012). "Santorum Pro-Labor Votes Lurk as Rivals Attack Early on Earmarks". Bloomberg News. John Vaught LaBeaume (January 9, 2012)"Santorum to Examiner: Stands by '93 NAFTA 'nay'" Archived February 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Washington Examiner Toeplitz, Shira (January 25, 2012). "Santorum and Gingrich Share Complicated Past". Roll Call. Retrieved April 27, 2016. "Rick Santorum News and Video". Fox News. April 7, 2010. Archived from the original on January 1, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "Rick Santorum – Politics News Story – WRTV Indianapolis". Theindychannel.com. October 17, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2012.[permanent dead link] "Fact Check: Is Santorum the Biggest (Senate) Loser?" NJ Today. Retrieved February 12, 2012. Santorum, Rick. Blue Collar Conservatives: Recommitting to an America that Works. Regnery Publishing, 2014, p. 97. Hicks, Josh (January 12, 2012). "Rick Santorum and welfare reform (Fact Checker biography)". The Fact Checker. The Washington Post. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Reeves, Frank; Torry, Jack; Shelly, Peter J. (November 26, 1995). "Santorum says he's in no hurry to back candidate". Pittsburgh Post–Gazette. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "Was Santorum a Senate Spendthrift?". The Weekly Standard. February 15, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Senate Religious Freedom Agenda" (PDF). The United States Senate. Retrieved January 16, 2014. "S.2572 – Workplace Religious Freedom Act of 2002". The Library of Congress. May 23, 2002. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "Bill Summary & Status: 104th Congress (1995 – 1996) S.2071". The Library of Congress (Thomas). Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "S.1124 – Workplace Religious Freedom Act of 1997". Congress.gov. October 21, 1997. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "Bill Summary & Status 106th Congress (1999 – 2000) S.1668 Cosponsors". The Library of Congress (Thomas). Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "Congressional Record – 109th Congress (2005-2006) – THOMAS (Library of Congress)". Thomas.loc.gov. February 16, 2006. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "CONGRESSIONAL RECORD—SENATE" (PDF). U.S. Government Printing Office. February 16, 2006. pp. S1407–409. Peter Slevin (March 14, 2005). "Battle on Teaching Evolution Sharpens". The Washington Post. "Is There a Federal Mandate to Teach Intelligent Design Creationism?" (PDF). National Center for Science Education. Retrieved October 29, 2010. "We'd Like Some Answers Origin of man, universe continues to cause debate". Alumni News Stories. Oral Roberts University Alumni Foundation. Archived from the original on February 16, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2006. "Language on evolution attached to education law". Issues in Science and Technology. American Association for the Advancement of Science. Spring 2002. Archived from the original on December 12, 2007. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District. p. 89. "ID's backers have sought to avoid the scientific scrutiny ... by advocating that the controversy, but not ID itself, should be taught in science class. This tactic is at best disingenuous ..." George J. Annas (May 25, 2006)."Intelligent Judging – Evolution in the Classroom and the Courtroom". New England Journal of Medicine. 354:2277–2281. "... as long as the controversy is taught in classes on current affairs, politics, or religion, and not in science classes, neither scientists nor citizens should be concerned." "AAAS Statement on the Teaching of Evolution" Archived February 21, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. American Association for the Advancement of Science. February 16, 2006. "... there is no significant controversy within the scientific community about the validity of the theory of evolution. The current controversy surrounding the teaching of evolution is not a scientific one." Santorum, Rick (December 18, 2001). "No child left behind act of 2001—conference report". Congressional Record. p. S13377. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Phillip E. Johnson (May 9, 2003). "Intelligent Design, Freedom, & Education". Breakpoint.org and Discovery Institute News. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Bruce Chapman; David DeWolf. "Why the Santorum Language Should Guide State Science Education Standards" (PDF). Discovery Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Rick Santorum (March 14, 2002). "Illiberal Education in Ohio Schools". The Washington Times. Rick Santorum (January 14, 2005). "Teach the Controversy". Allentown Morning Call.[permanent dead link] Annas, George J. (2006). "Intelligent Judging – Evolution in the Classroom and the Courtroom". The New England Journal of Medicine. 354 (21): 2277–81. doi:10.1056/NEJMlim055660. PMID 16723620. "Rick Santorum, 'It Takes a Family'". Interview with Rick Santorum. National Public Radio Morning Edition. August 4, 2005. "Santorum Breaks With Christian-Rights Law Center". The Washington Post. December 23, 2005. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Mirkinson, Jack (September 8, 2011). "Chris Matthews, Rick Santorum argue after Republican debate (video)". HuffPost. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "ADDS – Aviation Digital Data Service". Aviationweather.gov. June 24, 2011. Retrieved January 9, 2012. "National Weather Services Duties Act of 2005 (Introduced in Senate)". April 21, 2005. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Babington, Charles (September 10, 2005). "Some GOP Legislators Hit Jarring Notes in Addressing Katrina". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "AOPA Online: Air Traffic Services Brief – National Weather Service Duties Act of 2005 – Santorum Bill S. 786". Aopa.org. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "Election '06". The Sunday Patriot – News. Harrisburg, Pa. August 27, 2006. p. A02. "Sen. Rick Santorum (R-PA)". Citizens for Ethics. Archived from the original on July 16, 2007. Retrieved July 17, 2007. Dorman, Todd (January 2, 2012). "Todd Dorman column". The Gazette. Cedar Rapids, Iowa. "Corruption Roll Call". Multinational Monitor. Vol. 27, no. 3. May–June 2006. pp. 15–23. "Report: Hundreds of WMDs Found in Iraq". Fox News. June 22, 2006. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved November 1, 2009. "Report on Iraqi Chemical Munitions". June 21, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2006. Retrieved September 13, 2006. Dafna Linzer (June 23, 2006). "Lawmakers Cite Weapons Found in Iraq". The Washington Post. Juana Summers (May 17, 2011). "Rick Santorum: John McCain wrong on torture". Politico. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Raffaele, Martha (October 27, 2006). "Santorum: Casey lacking on security". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Summers, Juana (May 17, 2011). "Rick Santorum: John McCain wrong on torture". Politico. "Santorum: McCain Doesn't Understand Interrogation". Fox News. May 18, 2011. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2019. "Santorum Hits President on Afghanistan Withdrawal Timeline – ABC News". ABC News. March 12, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Siegel, Elyse (September 22, 2011). "GOP Debate: Republican Presidential Candidates Face Off In Florida (LIVE UPDATES)". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Hefling, Kimberly (July 21, 2006). "Santorum says Iran at center of world's conflict". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 1, 2012. O'Toole, James (April 18, 2003). "Santorum trying again on Syria sanctions bill". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Bonnie Squires; Dan Loeb (September 18, 2006). "Rick Santorum On Iran: His record does not match his rhetoric". Philadelphia Jewish Voice. Retrieved September 22, 2006. Rick Santorum (December 6, 2007). "The Elephant in the Room | Put aside politics to confront Iran". Philly.com. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Ball, Molly (January 2, 2012). "Who Is Rick Santorum?". The Atlantic Wire. Retrieved January 20, 2012. McKinnon, Mark (August 12, 2009). "Santorum Is Dangerous". The Daily Beast. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Michael Sokolove (May 22, 2005). "The Believer". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved January 11, 2011. Joyner, James (January 5, 2007). "Santorum Ouster Means End of Senate Candy Desk". Outside the Beltway. Toeplitz, Shira (February 13, 2011). "Mark Kirk: Senate candy man". Politico. Maeve Reston (January 26, 2005). "Santorum focusing on re-election to Senate, not White House run". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Williams, Juan (January 11, 2006). "The K Street Project and Jack Abramoff". NPR. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Marcus Stern and Kristina Cooke (January 5, 2012). "Rivals set to pounce on Santorum's past". Reuters. Retrieved January 6, 2012. Dan Eggen; Carol D. Leonnig ( January 5, 2012). "Santorum plays down long history as Washington insider". The Washington Post. McIntire, Mike; Luo, Michael (January 6, 2012). "After Santorum Left Senate, Familiar Hands Reached Out". The New York Times. Santorum and the Lobbyists 'K Street? K Street? Never heard of it' The Philadelphia Inquirer January 29, 2006 Reston, Maeve (November 15, 2005). "Casey chides Santorum on lobbying ethics". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Miller, Jeff (January 26, 2006). "Santorum denies working with K Street project". The Morning Call. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Josh Hicks (January 9, 2012). "Rick Santorum and the K Street Project". The Washington Post. "Pennsylvania Senate: Casey by 23 Santorum Remains Most Vulnerable Incumbent". Rasmussen Reports. May 31, 2006. Naftali Bendavid (January 7, 2012). "An Old Loss Dogs Surging Santorum". The Wall Street Journal. Cooke, Kristina (March 5, 2012). "Special report: Santorum's wins and self-inflicted wounds". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Jerry Bowyer (October 10, 2006). "Outside Santorum's Sanctum". New York Sun. Archived from the original on January 19, 2008. Retrieved November 9, 2006. Stephen Moore (April 15, 2004). "Santorum's Shame". National Review. "Casey Widens Lead Over Santorum In Pennsylvania, Quinnipiac University Poll Finds; Voters Lean To Pro-Choice Side Of Abortion Debate". Quinnipiac University. February 13, 2006. Archived from the original on December 23, 2007. Kimberly Hefling (September 26, 2006). "Casey Doubles Lead Over Santorum". York Dispatch. James O'Toole (October 4, 2006). "Green Party hopeful is out; win for Casey". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Brian Knowlton (February 12, 2012). "Santorum Faces Questions on Women in the Work Force". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Rick Santorum Was Warned That 2005 Book Could Become Fodder For Political Attacks". ABC News. March 17, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Rick Santorum (July 12, 2002). "Fishers of Men". Catholic Online. Retrieved August 23, 2006. John Baer (June 24, 2005). "A look into Santorum's brain". Philadelphia Daily News. "Senator Rick Santorum (Interview)". RushLimbaugh.com. July 21, 2005. Archived from the original on June 12, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Miller, Jeff (January 20, 2006). "Casey rips Santorum on "K Street'". The Morning Call. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Reston, Maeve (April 2, 2006). "Casey still pounding Santorum on lobbies". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved December 14, 2013. "Meet the Press transcript". NBC. September 13, 2006. "Santorum Responds To Walgren's Residency Rip". WTAE. June 1, 2006. Retrieved January 1, 2012.[permanent dead link] Vera Miller (September 20, 2006). "Dems Press Cyber Cost Issue". Penn Hills Progress. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Reynolds, Daniel (November 19, 2004). "Santorum school flap continues". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on May 14, 2007. Retrieved April 25, 2007. "Editorial: Home school/ Santorum, not the state, should pay Penn Hills". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. September 11, 2006. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "State Pays Penn Hills Schools In Santorum Dispute". WTAE-TV. September 13, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved April 25, 2007. James O'Toole, "Santorum asks county to drop tax exemption", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, September 27, 2006 Goldstein, Steve; Budoff, Carrie (December 9, 2004). "Senator is a force, a target Santorum emerging as the face of Senate Republicans High-profile battles are the norm for Santorum". The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. A.1. Brubeck, Sarah (November 28, 2011). "Santorum Opens the Floor: Q&A Session In Newport Caps Weekend". Valley News. White River Junction, Vt. p. A.1. Amy McConnell Schaarsmith (July 12, 2005). "Penn Hills loses bid to charge Santorum for online school tuition". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Norman, Tony (September 15, 2006). "Santorum has got to be kidding". Post-gazette.com. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Editorial (September 15, 2006). "Santorum hurls the low hard one". Scranton, Pennsylvania: The Times-Tribune. Eichel, Larry (September 14, 2006). "Santorum ad impugns ethics of Casey 'team'. It portrays investigated men. None, however, has a formal campaign role". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2019. Kimberly Hefling (September 13, 2006). "Santorum ad shows Casey "campaign team" behind bars". Associated Press.[dead link] John J. Miller (January 9, 2007). "Rick's Return. Life after the Senate for Santorum". National Review. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved January 16, 2012. Brad Rhen (October 25, 2006). "Santorum issues GOP call to arms". Lebanon Daily News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006. Toland, Bill (October 13, 2006). Santorum, Casey go toe-to-toe in debate. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. William Petroski (August 7, 2011). "Candidate profile: Rick Santorum refuses to compromise on principles". Des Moines Register. Retrieved January 16, 2012. Carter Eskew (January 2, 2011). "Playing tricks with Ricks". The Washington Post. Salena Zito (March 1, 2007). "Santorum to contribute to Fox News". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on March 4, 2007. "Santorum joins law firm of Eckert Seamans Cherin & Mellott". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. March 19, 2007. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. "Universal Health Services – Board of Directors". Uhsinc.com. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2011. "Rick Santorum". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008. Retrieved April 15, 2008. Heidi Przybyla and Julie Bykowicz, Santorum Becomes Millionaire in Six Years After U.S. Senate Loss Bloomberg Businessweek January 5, 2011 Rucker, Philip (January 5, 2012). "Santorum experienced major jump in income after leaving Senate". The Washington Post. Jessica Chasmar (January 17, 2017). "Rick Santorum joins CNN as senior political commentator". The Washington Times. Retrieved February 10, 2017. Wemple, Erik (April 27, 2021). "Opinion: CNN stays silent on Rick Santorum's comments about Native American culture". The Washington Post. "Opinion | Rick Santorum's Native American crack shows how acceptable this racism remains". NBC News. April 27, 2021. Spencer, Christian (April 27, 2021). "CNN urged to fire Rick Santorum after controversial comments about Native Americans". The Hill. Demopoulos, Alaina (May 22, 2021). "CNN Fired Rick Santorum for Racist, Pro-Colonization Comments". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Carrie Budoff (November 17, 2006). "Santorum: No oval office run". The Philadelphia Inquirer.[dead link] "Mitt Romney's Free and Strong America PAC". Mittromney.com. November 9, 2009. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2010. Blake, Aaron (May 23, 2011). "Santorum gets a grilling on 'Meet the Press'". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Santorum weighs in on race". Lancaster Online. September 24, 2008. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2010. "Santorum eyes gubernatorial bud". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. September 30, 2007. Archived from the original on October 19, 2007. Retrieved March 13, 2008. "PA Report 100" (PDF). Pennsylvania Report. Capital Growth, Inc. January 23, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 7, 2011. "Santorum endorses Corbett". PoliticsPA. November 17, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "Santorum Fights to Be Heard Amid Republican Din". The New York Times. September 30, 2011. Romm, Tony. "Santorum reportedly mulling White House bid". The Hill. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "Santorum says he's considering 2012 bid". CNN. January 15, 2010. Archived from the original on April 28, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010. Ward, Jon. Brief "Primary Election 2012: Conservative Fears Of Permanent Welfare State May Create Wild Ride." Huff Post, May 8, 2011. "CNN Poll: Romney on top, Gingrich fading & Santorum rising in Iowa". Politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com. December 28, 2011. Archived from the original on January 1, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2012. "Romney leads Paul in new Des Moines Register Iowa Poll; Santorum surges". Caucuses.desmoinesregister.com. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Condon, Stephanie (January 4, 2011). "Iowa caucus results: Mitt Romney beats Rick Santorum by 8 votes". CBS News. Retrieved January 4, 2011. Rosalind S. Helderman and Nia-Malika Henderson (February 8, 2012), "Rick Santorum's strategy of focusing on low-key races paid off" The Washington Post Laurie Kellman – Associated Press (February 8, 2012). "Santorum: I won and raised about $250K Tuesday night". The Washington Times. Retrieved February 9, 2012. "2012 Republican Presidential Nomination". Realclearpolitics.com. March 6, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Delegates split 3 ways". Yahoo! News. "Results for Election Date: 3/24/2012". Louisiana Secretary of State. Retrieved March 25, 2012. Blake, Aaron; Henderson, Nia-Malika (April 10, 2012). "Rick Santorum to drop out of the presidential race". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 10, 2012. "Santorum suspends campaign". Fox News. April 10, 2012. "Santorum: 'I'm Open' to 2016 Run". The Weekly Standard. November 26, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Romney calls Santorum "important voice" in GOP". CBS News. April 10, 2012. Linda Feldman (August 29, 2012). "GOP Convention: Rick Santorum attacks Obama over welfare reform". Alaska Dispatch. Archived from the original on June 2, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Santorum talks up American dream, accuses Obama of turning it into 'nightmare'". Fox News. August 28, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Convention Watch: Convention kiss, praising mom". San Francisco Chronicle.[dead link] David Jackson (August 28, 2012). "Santorum lauds Romney, blasts Obama". USA Today. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Santorum says under Obama, dream of freedom has become 'nightmare of dependency'". Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2019. Maggie Haberman (August 28, 2012). "Santorum hits Obama for 'nightmare of dependency'". Politico. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Rick Santorum RNC speech transcript (text and video)". Politico. August 28, 2012. p. 2. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Rachel Weiner (June 8, 2012). "Rick Santorum's next move: 'Patriot Voices'". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Strauss, Daniel (September 30, 2012). "Santorum plants seed for possible 2016 White House candidacy". The Hill. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Endorsements". Patriotvoices.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Judge-retention vote at a fevered pitch". M.ottumwacourier.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "CRPD". Patriotvoices.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Weiner, Rachel (June 24, 2013). "Rick Santorum now running Christian movie studio". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Caitlin McDecvitt, Rick Santorum to release a Christmas movie, Politico, 9/25/13 "Rick Santorum by-passes Hollywood and debuts his feature-length movie in a church". The Washington Times. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Lardner, Richard; Dearen, Jason. "Trump admin funds plasma company based in owner's condo". The Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Easley, Jonathan. "Santorum 'open' to 2016 run". The Hill. Archived from the original on August 9, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2013. Santorum is running for president again – and says this time will be different 9 December 2014. Retrieved 1 June 2015. Gabriel, Trip (May 27, 2015). "Rick Santorum Announces New Presidential Bid, and New Focus on Middle Class". The New York Times. King, John; Kopan, Tal; Diamond, Jeremy (February 3, 2016). "Rick Santorum dropping presidential bid". CNN Politics. Retrieved February 3, 2016. Gutierrez, Gabe (February 3, 2016). "Rick Santorum Ends 2016 Run, Endorses Marco Rubio". NBC News. Retrieved October 5, 2017. "Santorum endorses Trump after 'long heart-to-heart'". The Hill. May 24, 2016. Retrieved October 5, 2017. "Rick Santorum axed by CNN over racist remarks on Native Americans". The Guardian. May 22, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "APIAHF". APIAHF. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "Opinion | Rick Santorum's Native American crack shows how acceptable this racism remains". NBC News. April 27, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "George Stephanopoulos Interviews Sen. Rick Santorum". Think Progress. July 31, 2005. Archived from the original on June 14, 2006. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Excerpt from Santorum interview". USA Today. Associated Press. April 23, 2003. Archived from the original on January 22, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2008. Every society in the history of man has upheld the institution of marriage as a bond between a man and a woman... In every society, the definition of marriage has not ever to my knowledge included homosexuality. That's not to pick on homosexuality. It's not, you know, man on child, man on dog, or whatever the case may be. It is one thing. And when you destroy that you have a dramatic impact on the quality John Barron, "Meet the candidates Rick Santorum" Archived 2017-04-11 at the Wayback Machine, ABC News, 16 February 2012 Savage, Dan (May 15, 2003). "Bill, Ashton, Rick". The Stranger. Retrieved January 9, 2012. Rovzar, Chris (September 7, 2010). "Does Rick Santorum Really Have a Google Problem?". New York Intelligencer. Retrieved February 24, 2011. "Santorum". spreadingsantorum.com. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "Santorum Talks About Longtime Google Problem". Roll Call. February 15, 2011. Retrieved February 24, 2011. Burns, Alexander (September 20, 2011). "Rick Santorum contacted Google, says company spreads 'filth'". Politico. Retrieved September 21, 2011. Ring, Trudy (July 22, 2015). "WATCH: Rick Santorum Regrets 'Man on Dog' Remark — Sort Of". Advocate.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. Zaru, Deena. "Rick Santorum 'absolutely' regrets comparing homosexuality to bestiality". CNN.com. CNN. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017. Dwyer, Devin (October 3, 2011). "Obama Blasts Republicans Over Booing of Gay Soldier". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Ennis, Dawn (June 15, 2015). "Who Are the 44,500 Who Say They'll Go to Jail to Fight Marriage Equality?". advocate.com. The Advocate. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Wong, Curtis (April 23, 2015). "'Pledge In Solidarity To Defend Marriage' Urges SCOTUS To Reject Same-Sex Marriage Case". HuffPost. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Condon, Stephanie (April 17, 2015). "Gay weddings: What would Rick Santorum do?". cbsnews.com. CBS News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Linshi, Jack (May 3, 2015). "Rick Santorum on Bruce Jenner: 'If He Says He's a Woman, Then He's a Woman'". Time. No. May 3, 2015. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Margolin, Emma (May 4, 2015). "Santorum clarifies surprising remarks about Bruce Jenner". MSNBC. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Gass, Nick (June 12, 2015). "Rick Santorum: I'd welcome an endorsement from Caitlyn Jenner". Politico.com. Politico. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Carlson, Adam (May 3, 2015). "Rick Santorum Supports Bruce Jenner: 'If He Says He's a Woman, Then He's a Woman'". People. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Flores, Reena (May 4, 2015). "Rick Santorum clarifies comments on Bruce Jenner's identity". cbsnews.com. CBS News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Rick Santorum (November 17, 2005). "The Conservative Future: Compassion". Townhall.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2006. Andrew Miga (January 5, 2012). "Santorum has blemishes on conservative record. In Congress, Santorum earned reputation as earmark user". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Retrieved January 13, 2012. Josh Hicks (January 10, 2012). "Santorum's record on fiscal policy (Fact Checker biography)". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "The PA Report "Power 75" List" (PDF). Pennsylvania Report. Capital Growth, Inc. January 31, 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 20, 2006. "Rick Santorum Reaffirms Commitment to Social Conservative Cause". ABC News. June 4, 2011. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Stein, Sam (February 21, 2012). "Santorum In '95: 'I Was Basically Pro-Choice All My Life, Until I Ran For Congress'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Santorum In 1995: 'I Was Basically Pro-Choice All My Life Until I Ran For Congress'". Business Insider. February 21, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2013. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Weiner, Rachel (February 21, 2012). "Report: Rick Santorum supported abortion rights in past". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Bolten, Kathy A. "Santorum defends his anti-abortion stances". Des Moines Register. Taylor, Jessica (May 27, 2015). "5 Things You Should Know About Rick Santorum". NPR. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Rick Santorum Wants to be More Than Just a Pro-Life Candidate". The Atlantic. July 10, 2015. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Senate Fails to Overturn Veto of 'Partial Birth' Abortion Ban". Chicago Tribune. September 27, 1996. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Senate Supports Abortion Rights". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "CNN.com - Senate passes late-term abortion ban - Dec. 17, 2003". CNN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Bush Signs Ban on Partial-Birth Abortions". Fox News. March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. Greenhouse, Linda (April 19, 2007). "Justices Back Ban on Method of Abortion". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2019. Reilly, Mollie (12 August 2013). "Rick Santorum On Middle Class: 'That's Marxism Talk,' 'There's No Class In America'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Krugman, Paul (30 August 2018). "For Whom the Economy Grows". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Rick Santorum (July 19, 2005). "The Constitutional Wrecking Ball". National Review. Archived from the original on January 1, 2006. Peter Wehner (October 24, 2011). "The GOP's Weak Field". Commentary. politicks Org (March 22, 2005). "Santorum on Capital Punishment". 2012.republican-candidates.org. Archived from the original on April 18, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2012. "Clips From Friday: Rick Santorum on the death penalty; Karen Santorum opens up about the death of their infant son". Piersmorgan.blogs.cnn.com. January 23, 2012. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2012. "Rick Santorum on Drugs". OnTheIssues. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015. Ferner, Matt (May 6, 2015). "Here's Where The GOP's 2016 Presidential Contenders Stand On Marijuana Legalization". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015. "The Rick Santorum Interview". RushLimbaugh.com. June 8, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2012. "Jeb Bush joins Republican backlash against pope on climate change" in The Guardian, 17 June 2015 Jane C. Timm (June 3, 2015). "Santorum to Pope Francis: 'Leave science to the scientists'". MSNBC. Archived from the original on August 20, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Johnson, Brad; Somanader, Tanya (June 24, 2011). "Santorum: 'There's no such thing as global warming'". Grist. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Michael Morse; Eugene Kiely (February 22, 2012). "Santorum's Bogus Euthanasia Claims". FactCheck.org. Annenberg Public Policy Center. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2014. But the facts are clear: Santorum grossly misrepresented the practice of euthanasia in the Netherlands when making his case against it. Kessler, Glenn (February 22, 2012). "Euthanasia in the Netherlands: Rick Santorum's bogus statistics". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2019. There appears to be not a shred of evidence to back up Santorum's claims about euthanasia in the Netherlands. It is telling that his campaign did not even bother to defend his comments. Jones, Melanie (February 20, 2012). "Rick Santorum's 'Involuntary Euthanasia' Claim Outrages Dutch". International Business Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2014. National Taxpayers Union – Rick Santorum, National Taxpayers Union, archived from the original on October 2, 2015, retrieved September 3, 2015 National Taxpayers Union – Rick Santorum, National Taxpayers Union, archived from the original on October 2, 2015, retrieved September 7, 2015 Fisher, Tyler; Frostenson, Sarah; Mihalik, Lily, "The gun lobby: See how much your representative gets", Politico, February 21, 2018, Retrieved March 25, 2018 Ball, Molly (February 17, 2012). "Rick Santorum on Gun Rights". Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2012. politicks Org (August 10, 2015). "Santorum on Gun Control". Archived from the original on August 2, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. "Santorum knocks marches: Kids should learn CPR". MSN. March 25, 2018. Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved March 25, 2018. The media today: CNN's Santorum 'controversy' shows the worst of cable news Archived 2018-12-23 at the Wayback Machine By Pete Vernon, CJR, March 27, 2018 Sarlin, Benjy (January 19, 2015). "Rick Santorum's 2016 message comes into focus". www.msnbc.com. NBC UNIVERSAL. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Retrieved January 21, 2015. "On the Issues". RickSantorum.com. Archived from the original on July 11, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2006. "Santorum in Iowa: Catholic bishops are wrong on immigration | Iowa Caucuses". The Des Moines Register. December 12, 2011. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Devaney, Tim (January 24, 2015). "Santorum: Immigrants costing US jobs". TheHill.com. The Hill. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. We need an immigration policy that puts American workers first. "Iowa Freedom Summit, Rick Santorum". C-Span.org. C-SPAN. January 24, 2015. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. Ye Hee Lee, Michelle (January 24, 2015). "Santorum's claim that all 'net new jobs' went to immigrants and fewer native-born Americans are working since 2000". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 30, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. Rick Santorum's "Real Concerns" About The Tea Party Archived 2016-12-14 at the Wayback Machine Townhall.com January 5, 2012 Steve Inskeep, host Rick Santorum, 'It Takes a Family' Archived 2018-11-16 at the Wayback Machine NPR August 4, 2005 "Santorum defends raising minimum wage". September 16, 2015. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2019. "Paid Family Leave Will Support Working Families". National Review. November 26, 2018. Sneed, Tierney (March 16, 2012). "Is Rick Santorum Right on Banning Internet Porn?". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2012. Cronin, Melissa (March 23, 2012). "Santorum Says Porn Causes Aggression But Scientists Disagree". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2012. Grim, Ryan (March 18, 2012). "Rick Santorum: Pornography Not A Priority For Obama Administration". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2012. Rick Santorum vows to end 'pandemic of pornography.' Could he prevail? Archived 2017-11-07 at the Wayback Machine By Patrik Jonsson, The Christian Science Monitor, March 17, 2012 Eugene Scott. "Bono: 'Rick Santorum is in the house!'". CNN. Archived from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved August 9, 2016. Brooks, David (October 29, 2006). "Political Theater and the Real Rick Santorum". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. Brooks, David (October 29, 2006). "Political Theater and the Real Rick Santorum". The New York Times. "Kathryn Jean Lopez: Rick Santorum has his share of believers". ricksantorum.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "Candidate bio – Rick Santorum". MSNBC. Archived from the original on November 22, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Free Trade, Free Markets: Rating the Congress". Cato Institute. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives". "Pennsylvania Elections - Summary Results". electionreturns.pa.gov. Archived from the original on May 29, 2008. Karen Garver Santorum (1998). Letters to Gabriel. CCC of America. ISBN 978-1-56814-528-0. "Rick Santorum: Faith and conservatism fuel bid for Republican presidential nomination". February 11, 2012. "Santorum: Brought baby home to bury him". YouTube. January 20, 2012. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Allen, John (January 18, 2002). "Opus Dei prestige on display at centenary event". National Catholic Reporter. Vol. 38, no. 11. p. 8. Doerr, Edd (July–August 2003). "Rick the lip, wrong Paige, and the plumed Knight". The Humanist. 63 (4): 42. "Hospitallers" (PDF). Sovereign Military Hospitaller Order of St. John of Jerusalem of Rhodes and Malta. Winter 2004–2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 12, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2006. "Rick Santorum Net Worth – How much is Rick Santorum worth?". Their Net Worth. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "The Net Worth of GOP Presidential Candidates". Foxbusiness.com. April 7, 2010. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Election 2012: How rich are these guys?". CNN. January 13, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "The Rich List – 2012 Presidential Race Edition". Davemanuel.com. Retrieved March 7, 2012. "Right-Leaning Novelty Real Estate: GOP Candidates' Homes for Sale". Blog.movoto.com. November 7, 2011. Archived from the original on December 10, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Riggs, Erika (January 9, 2012). "GOP Candidates Look to Trade These Homes for White House | Zillow Blog – Real Estate Market Stats, Celebrity Real Estate, and Zillow News". Zillow.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Seelye, Katharine Q.; Saulny, Susan (January 31, 2012). "Santorum Daughter's Illness a Test for Candidate". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Karen Tumulty (February 7, 2015). "Santorums' new book reveals how faith and love are tested by a daughter's disability". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Jacobs, Ben (April 13, 2012). "Tough-to-Beat Election Behind Him, Rick Santorum Plays Fantasy Baseball". The Daily Beast. Retrieved March 21, 2015. Sheryl Gay Stolber; Laurie Goodstein (March 3, 2012). "From 'Nominal Catholic' to Clarion of Faith". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Stan Guthrie (March 28, 2005). "Sen. Rick Santorum: I Draw No Line Between My Faith and My Decisions ..." Christianity Today. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Rachel Zoll And Kasie Hunt (March 18, 2012). "Rick Santorum Not Getting Catholic Vote". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Raushenbush, Paul (March 19, 2012). "Pastor Dennis Terry Introduces Rick Santorum, Tells Non-Christians And Liberals To Get Out (VIDEO)". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Juana Summers; Alexander Burns (February 8, 2012). "Rick Santorum emphasizes his Christian roots". Politico. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Catholic Rick Santorum struggling to convert GOP Catholics to his cause". Daily News. New York. March 31, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. David Lauter (March 14, 2012). "Poll: Most Republicans don't know Rick Santorum is Catholic". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Max J. Rosenthal (March 19, 2012). "Rick Santorum Frustrated By Low Support From Fellow Catholics". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Santorum says he doesn't believe in separation of church and state". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. February 26, 2012. Horowitz, Alana (February 26, 2012). "Santorum: Separation Of Church And State 'Makes Me Want To Throw Up'". HuffPost. Ryan Grim (February 18, 2012). "Rick Santorum In 2008: Mainstream Protestantism Fell Out Of 'World Of Christianity'". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Tartar, Andre (February 19, 2012). "Santorum Says Obama's Not a Real Christian, Then Grudgingly Admits He Is". New York Intelligencer. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Santorum Says Obama's Agenda Based on 'Phony' Theology, Not Bible". The Christian Post. February 19, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Santorum: Obama College Plan Aimed at 'Indoctrination'". National Journal. February 23, 2012. "Highlights: Rick Santorum talks economy, controversy, and faith on GBTV". GBTV. February 23, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2013. Cavan Sieczkowski (January 18, 2013). "Rick Santorum Blames Gay Marriage, Abortion And Porn Ideals On College Indoctrination". HuffPost. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Rick Santorum (2005). It Takes a Family: Conservatism and the Common Good. Intercollegiate Studies Institute. ISBN 978-1-932236-29-3. Rick Santorum (2012). American Patriots: Answering the Call to Freedom. Tyndale House Publishers. ISBN 978-1414379081. Rick Santorum (2014). Blue Collar Conservatives: Recommitting to an America That Works. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-1621572398. Rick Santorum (2015). Bella's Gift: How One Little Girl Transformed Our Family and Inspired a Nation. Thomas Nelson. ISBN 978-0718021955. Foreword by Rick Santorum (2006). William A. Dembski (ed.). Darwin's Nemesis: Phillip Johnson and the Intelligent Design Movement. IVP Academic. ISBN 978-0-8308-2836-4. Rick Santorum (2005). Rick Santorum. Monument Press. ISBN 978-0-9769668-0-7. "Author biographies". Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Rick Santorum (October 2, 2012). "Santorum cites unsung heroes of the American Revolution (book excerpt)". MSNBC. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Rick Santorum slams 'pursuit of happiness'". POLITICO. 22 October 2012. Rick Santorum bucks Republican orthodoxy in book POLITICO BOOK REVIEW: 'Blue Collar Conservatives'". The Washington Times. "Senator Rick Santorum and his wife have a book coming out about a special child – Bella – Gretawire". Gretawire. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Rick Santorum at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Column archives at Townhall.com Rick Santorum at Curlie Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Profile at Vote Smart Works by Rick Santorum at Open Library Appearances on C-SPAN Articles Excerpt from Santorum interview USA Today, April 23, 2003 "Lawsuit Abuse Critic Explains Suit", ABC Primetime, November 10, 2005 Editorial: "Charities on the Hill", The Washington Post, March 7, 2006 "Santorum Against the World" Archived January 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, Michael Dougherty, The American Conservative, July 30, 2007