Dwayne Douglas Johnson (born May 2, 1972), also known by his ring name The Rock, is an American actor, businessman, and professional wrestler. He is currently signed to WWE performing on the SmackDown brand as a member of The Bloodline. Widely regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time, he was integral to the development and success of the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now WWE) during the Attitude Era, an industry boom period in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Johnson wrestled for the WWF for eight years before pursuing an acting career. His films have grossed over $3.5 billion in North America and over $10.5 billion worldwide, making him one of the world's highest-grossing and highest-paid actors. He is a co-owner of the United Football League, a professional American football league. He is also a member of the board of directors of TKO Group Holdings, the parent company of UFC and WWE. In 2012, he co-founded the entertainment production company Seven Bucks Productions. He is the founder of Teremana Tequila, which is approximately valued at $3.5 billion dollars. After accepting an athletic scholarship to play football at the University of Miami, he was a member of the 1991 national championship team but was largely a backup player. Despite aspirations to professional football, he went undrafted in the 1995 NFL draft, and briefly signed with the Calgary Stampeders before being cut in his first season. In 1996, Johnson's father Rocky assisted in helping him secure a contract with the WWF. Johnson quickly rose to global prominence, aided by a gimmick he employed as a charismatic trash talker. Johnson left the WWE in 2004 and returned in 2011 as a part-time performer until 2013, making sporadic appearances from thereon until 2019 where he quietly retired until 2023, where he returned once again on a part time basis. A 10-time world champion, including the promotion's first of African-American descent, he is also a two-time Intercontinental Champion, a five-time Tag Team Champion, the 2000 Royal Rumble winner, and WWE's sixth Triple Crown champion. Johnson headlined the most-bought professional wrestling pay-per-view (WrestleMania XXVIII) and was featured among the most watched episodes of WWE's flagship television series (Raw and SmackDown). Johnson's first film role was in The Mummy Returns (2001). The next year, he played his first leading role in the action fantasy film The Scorpion King. He has since starred in family films The Game Plan (2007), Race to Witch Mountain (2009), Tooth Fairy (2010), Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle (2017), Jumanji: The Next Level (2019), and Jungle Cruise (2021), and the action films Journey 2: The Mysterious Island (2012), G.I. Joe: Retaliation (2013), Hercules (2014), Skyscraper (2018), San Andreas (2015) and Rampage (2018). He also starred in the action comedy films Get Smart (2008), Central Intelligence (2016), Baywatch (2017), and Red Notice (2021). His role as Luke Hobbs in the Fast & Furious films, beginning with Fast Five (2011), helped the franchise become one of the highest-grossing in film. He joined the DC Extended Universe playing the title role in Black Adam (2022). He is also known for voicing Maui in the Disney animated film Moana (2016) and is set to reprise the role in the upcoming live action remake. Johnson produced and starred in the HBO comedy-drama series Ballers (2015–2019) and the autobiographical sitcom Young Rock (2021). His autobiography, The Rock Says, was released in 2000 and was a New York Times bestseller. In 2016 and 2019, Time named Johnson as one of the world's most influential people. Johnson was born in Hayward, California, on May 2, 1972, the son of Mataniufeagaimaleata "Ata" Fitisemanu (née Maivia) and former professional wrestler Rocky Johnson (born Wayde Douglas Bowles). Growing up, he briefly lived in Grey Lynn in Auckland, New Zealand, with his mother's family, where he played rugby and attended Richmond Road Primary School before returning to the U.S. Johnson's father was a Black Nova Scotian with a small amount of Irish ancestry. His mother is Samoan. His father and Tony Atlas were the first black tag team champions in WWE history, in 1983. His mother is the adopted daughter of Peter Maivia, who was also a professional wrestler. Johnson's maternal grandmother Lia was one of the first female pro wrestling promoters, taking over Polynesian Pacific Pro Wrestling after her husband's death in 1982 and managing it until 1988. Through his maternal grandfather Maivia, Johnson is a non-blood relative of the Anoaʻi wrestling family. In 2008, he inducted his father and grandfather into the WWE Hall of Fame. Johnson attended Montclaire Elementary School in Charlotte, North Carolina, and then moved to Hamden, Connecticut, where he attended Shepherd Glen Elementary School and then Hamden Middle School. He attended President William McKinley High School in Honolulu and then Glencliff High School and McGavock High School, both in Nashville, Tennessee, and then Freedom High School in Bethlehem Township, Pennsylvania, in the Lehigh Valley region of the state, where he graduated in 1990. At Freedom High School, Johnson initially struggled and was drawn into a culture of conflict and petty crime. By age 17, he had been arrested several times for fighting, theft, and check fraud, and was suspended two weeks for fighting. An article in the local newspaper labeled him "a troubled teenager with a history of run-ins with police." But Freedom High School football coach Jody Cwik saw athletic potential in Johnson, and recruited him to join the school's football team, where he played defensive tackle, an experience that proved to be a significant personal transformation for Johnson. "My thought process started to change. That's when I started thinking about goals and what I wanted to accomplish", he has since said about his high school football experience. In addition to playing football, Johnson also was a member of Freedom High School's track and field and wrestling teams. By his senior year at Freedom High School, Johnson had played only two years of football, but was offered a full athletic scholarship offer from the University of Miami, whose football program was beginning to emerge as one of the nation's top-level NCAA Division 1 teams. As he did in high school, Johnson continued to play defensive tackle at the University of Miami, where he was a member of the Miami Hurricanes 1991 team, which won that year's national championship. Despite playing four years there, however, Johnson found himself behind elite players on the depth chart, including future NFL star and Pro Football Hall of Fame inductee Warren Sapp, and appeared mostly in backup roles. In his time at Miami, Johnson played in 39 games with one start. He recorded 4.5 sacks and 77 tackles. In 1995, Johnson graduated with a Bachelor of General Studies and a dual major in criminology and physiology. He was also one of the university's most prolific student speakers in the Miami-area community, frequently delivering positive messages about his own struggles and encouraging students to remain in school and avoid the dangers of drug use. After graduating, Johnson was signed by the Calgary Stampeders of the Canadian Football League. Calgary moved him from defensive tackle to linebacker. He was assigned to Calgary's practice roster, but was cut two months into Calgary's 1995 season. After being cut by Calgary, Johnson began his professional wrestling career the next year, in 1996. Veteran wrestler Pat Patterson secured several tryout matches for Johnson with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) in 1996. Wrestling at first under his real name, Johnson defeated The Brooklyn Brawler at a house show on March 10 and lost matches to Chris Candido and Owen Hart. After wrestling at Jerry Lawler's United States Wrestling Association under the name Flex Kavana and winning the USWA tag team championship twice with his partner Bart Sawyer in the summer of 1996, Johnson was signed to a WWF contract. He received additional training from Tom Prichard, alongside Achim Albrecht and Mark Henry. Johnson made his WWF debut as Rocky Maivia, a combination of his father and grandfather's ring names, although announcers acknowledged his real name. He was initially reluctant to take this ring name but was persuaded by Vince McMahon and Jim Ross. He was given the nickname "The Blue Chipper", and to play up his lineage, he was hyped as the WWF's first third-generation wrestler. A clean-cut face character, Maivia was pushed heavily from the start despite his wrestling inexperience. He debuted on Monday Night Raw as a member of Marc Mero's entourage on November 4, 1996. His first match came at Survivor Series on November 17, 1996, in an eight-man elimination tag match; he was the sole survivor and eliminated the final two members of the opposing team, Crush and Goldust. On February 13, 1997, he won the Intercontinental Championship from Hunter Hearst Helmsley on Monday Night Raw. Maivia then successfully defended the title against Helmsley at In Your House 13: Final Four. Johnson's first WrestleMania match came at WrestleMania 13 on March 23, 1997, where he was victorious in his Intercontinental Championship defense against The Sultan. WWF fans started to reject his character and push from the company. He defeated Bret Hart by disqualification in a title defense on the March 31 episode of Raw is War. Behind the scenes, Hart mentored Johnson for his first year in WWF and refused to be booked to take the title from him. On April 20, at In Your House 14: Revenge of the 'Taker, he lost to Savio Vega by countout but retained the title. Audiences became increasingly hostile toward Maivia, with chants of "die, Rocky, die" and "Rocky sucks" being heard during his matches. After losing the Intercontinental Championship to Owen Hart on the April 28, 1997, episode of Raw Is War, Maivia suffered a legitimate knee injury in a match against Mankind in June 1997 and spent several months recovering. Upon returning in August 1997, Maivia turned heel for the first time in his career by lashing out at fans who had been booing him and joining Faarooq, D'Lo Brown and Kama in the stable called the Nation of Domination. He then refused to acknowledge the Rocky Maivia name, instead referring to himself in the third person as the Rock, though he would still be billed as "The Rock" Rocky Maivia until 1998. The Rock would then regularly insult the audience, WWF performers, and interviewers in his promos. At D-Generation X: In Your House on December 7, 1997, Stone Cold Steve Austin defeated the Rock in under six minutes to retain the Intercontinental Championship. The next night on Raw Is War, Austin was ordered by Mr. McMahon to defend the title in a rematch, but forfeited it to the Rock instead, handing him the title belt before hitting him with the Stone Cold Stunner. The Rock feuded with Austin and Ken Shamrock through the end of 1997 and beginning of 1998. On January 19, 1998, at the Royal Rumble, the Rock defeated Shamrock by disqualification to retain the Intercontinental title. Later that night, he entered the Royal Rumble match and lasted until the final two before he was eliminated by Stone Cold Steve Austin. On March 29, at WrestleMania XIV, he defeated Shamrock by disqualification once again to retain the title. The next night, on Raw is War, the Rock debuted a new Intercontinental Championship design and would later overthrow Faarooq as leader of the Nation of Domination to spark a feud between the two. He then successfully defended the Intercontinental title against Faarooq at Over the Edge: In Your House on May 31. The stable would then refer to themselves as simply "The Nation". The Rock and the Nation then feuded with Triple H and D-Generation X, with the two stable leaders first meeting in the quarter-final of the 1998 King of the Ring tournament, which the Rock won. At King of the Ring, the Rock defeated Dan Severn in the semi-final match and lost to rival Ken Shamrock in the final. The Rock then resumed his feud with Triple H, as the two had a two out of three falls match at Fully Loaded: In Your House for the Intercontinental title, which the Rock retained in controversial fashion. This led to a ladder match at SummerSlam on August 30, 1998, where the Rock lost the title. In the latter half of 1998, The Rock saw a big uptick in fan support. He also started consolidating his famous persona during this time, which would last until 2000. His popularity caused him to be booked in a feud with fellow Nation members Mark Henry and D'Lo Brown, turning babyface in the process. Henry defeated him at Judgment Day: In Your House on October 18, 1998, after interference from Brown, effectively breaking up the stable. The Rock was then entered into the "Deadly Game" tournament for the vacant WWF Championship. The finals occurred at Survivor Series on November 15, 1998, where the Rock defeated Vince McMahon's associate, Mankind, to win his first WWF Championship. A "double turn" then occurred as the Rock turned heel again after allying with Vince and Shane McMahon as the crown jewel of their stable, The Corporation, after the McMahons betrayed Mankind. On December 13, 1998, at the pay-per-view named after him, Rock Bottom: In Your House, the Rock had a rematch with Mankind for the WWF Championship. Mankind appeared to win the match when the Rock passed out to the Mandible Claw submission move, but Vince McMahon ruled that since the Rock did not tap out, he retained his title. In the main event of the January 4, 1999, episode of Raw Is War, Mankind defeated the Rock for the championship after interference from Stone Cold Steve Austin. Then at the Royal Rumble on January 24, 1999, the Rock regained the title in an "I Quit" match, a type of submission match that only ends if one of the combatants says "I quit" on a microphone. Intended to show a vicious streak in the Rock's character, the Rock hit Mankind in the head with a steel chair 11 times instead of the scripted five, five shots already being risky (most wrestling matches in the Attitude Era involving steel chairs had at most 2 or 3 shots to the head). After the fifth shot, Mankind was still ringside instead of two-thirds up the entrance ramp where he was supposed to be, and after the eleventh shot, which knocked Mankind out, a recording of Mankind saying "I Quit" from an earlier interview was played over the public address system. On January 31, during an episode of Sunday Night Heat, the Rock and Mankind participated in an Empty Arena match, a match that took place in an arena with 22,000 empty seats where any part of the facility could be used to contest the match. After 20 minutes of chaotic brawling in the ring, the stands, a kitchen, the catering area, an office, the arena corridors and finally a basement loading area, Mankind pinned the Rock using a forklift truck to win the WWF title. The two faced off again, at St. Valentine's Day Massacre: In Your House on February 14, 1999, in a Last Man Standing match which ended in a draw, meaning Mankind retained the title. Their feud ended on the February 15 Raw Is War, when the Rock won his third WWF Championship in a Ladder Match after a debuting Big Show interfered on his behalf. The Rock then lost the WWF Championship to Stone Cold Steve Austin at WrestleMania XV on March 28, 1999. The Rock's popularity continued to grow and audiences still cheered for him even though he was a heel. He then lost the title rematch against Stone Cold Steve Austin at Backlash: In Your House on April 25, 1999. The next night on Raw is War he was fired from the Corporation after he was betrayed by Shane McMahon, turning him face again and starting a feud with Triple H, The Undertaker and The Corporate Ministry. On April 29, 1999, WWF aired the pilot episode of SmackDown!, a term derived from one of the Rock's catchphrases. In the episode, the Rock continued his feud with The Corporate Ministry. This led to a match with Triple H, at Over the Edge on May 23, 1999, which the Rock won, and a match for the WWF Championship against The Undertaker, at King of the Ring, which the Rock lost. The Rock then lost a number one contender's match to Triple H, at Fully Loaded, after interference from "Mr. Ass" Billy Gunn. The Rock then defeated Gunn in a Kiss My Ass match at SummerSlam on August 22, 1999. The Rock was also given the privilege of having his own signature match, like The Undertaker with the Buried Alive match, Kane with the Inferno Match and Mankind with the Boiler Room Brawl: the Brahma Bullrope match, a variant of a strap match was a normal singles match where the components are tied together with a rope used for cattle farming, and the rope and its attached cowbell could both be used as weapons. The Rock contested this match twice, both times in Texas (vs Triple H in Dallas, and vs Al Snow in Houston). Shortly after SummerSlam, the Rock began teaming with former opponent Mankind and the two became known as the Rock 'n' Sock Connection. They became WWF Tag Team Champions for the first time after defeating The Undertaker and Big Show for the titles on the August 30, 1999, episode of Raw is War. The two performed a number of critically acclaimed comedic skits together, including one called "This Is Your Life", which saw Mankind bring parody versions of people from the Rock's past on television, such as his high school girlfriend and his high school football coach, only to have the Rock insult them. The segment earned an 8.4 Nielsen rating, one of the highest ratings ever for a Raw segment. The two lost the titles back to Undertaker and Big Show on the September 9 episode of SmackDown! and won them back from them on the September 20 episode of Raw is War. Rock and Mankind then lost the titles to The New Age Outlaws on the very next episode of SmackDown!. Rock and Mankind would win the tag titles for the third and final time after beating the New Age Outlaws on the October 14 episode of SmackDown! before losing the titles to The Holly Cousins on the October 18 episode of Raw is War. At the Royal Rumble, on January 23, 2000, the Rock entered the Royal Rumble match and was one of the final two remaining, along with Big Show. In an attempt at a "false finish", Big Show intended to throw the Rock over the top rope in a running powerslam-like position, before the Rock countered the move on the ring apron, sending Big Show to the floor before reentering the ring as the winner. But the Rock's feet accidentally hit the floor during the reversal attempt, though those watching the event on television did not see that. This was played up in the storyline as Big Show provided additional video footage showing it and claimed to be the rightful winner. The Rock's number one contendership for the WWF Championship was then put on the line against Big Show at No Way Out on February 27, 2000, which Big Show won after Shane McMahon interfered. The Rock then defeated Big Show on the March 13 episode of Raw Is War, to regain the right to face the WWF Champion, Triple H, at WrestleMania 2000 on April 2, in a Fatal Four-way elimination match, also including Big Show and Mick Foley. Each wrestler had a McMahon in his corner: Triple H had his wife Stephanie, Foley had Linda, the Rock had Vince and Big Show had Shane. The Rock lasted until the final two but was eliminated by Triple H after Vince betrayed him by hitting him with a chair. Due to his image at the time, a Magic: The Gathering deck archetype was named after him. In the following weeks, the Rock continued his feud with Triple H and eventually won his fourth WWF Championship, which he won on April 30, at Backlash, after Stone Cold Steve Austin intervened on his behalf. The following night on Raw, he successfully defended his title against Shane McMahon in a Steel Cage match. On May 21, at Judgment Day, the Rock faced Triple H in an Iron Man match with Shawn Michaels as the special guest referee. With the score tied at five falls each, and with seconds left on the time limit, the Rock was disqualified when The Undertaker attacked Triple H, thus giving Triple H the 6–5 win and the title. The Rock won the WWF Championship for a fifth time at King of the Ring on June 25 by scoring the winning pin in a six-man tag team match, teaming with Kane and The Undertaker against Shane McMahon, Triple H and Vince McMahon, whom he pinned. The Rock successfully defended the championship against Chris Benoit, on July 23, at Fully Loaded. The next month, he successfully defended his title against Kurt Angle and Triple H at SummerSlam. The Rock had another successful title defense against Benoit, Kane and The Undertaker, on September 24, at Unforgiven. The Rock then lost the WWF Championship to Kurt Angle, at No Mercy, on October 22, 2000. The next month, the Rock feuded with Rikishi and defeated him at Survivor Series. The Rock wrestled a six-man Hell in a Cell match for the WWF Championship, at Armageddon, which Angle won to retain the title. On the December 18 episode of Raw, the Rock won the WWF Tag Team Championship with The Undertaker, defeating Edge and Christian, before losing it back to them the next night at a SmackDown! taping. In 2001, the Rock continued to feud with Angle over the WWF Championship, culminating at No Way Out on February 25, 2001, where he pinned Angle to win the WWF Championship for a sixth time. The Rock then feuded with the Royal Rumble winner, Stone Cold Steve Austin, whom he lost the title to at WrestleMania X-Seven after Austin allied with Vince McMahon, who interfered on his behalf. On the next night's Raw Is War, during a steel cage title rematch, Triple H attacked the Rock, allying with McMahon and Austin and helping Austin retain the championship. Austin and Triple H then formed a tag team called The Power Trip, while the Rock was indefinitely suspended in storyline. Johnson used this time off to act in The Scorpion King. The Rock returned in late July 2001 when the WWF was feuding with rival promotions World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) during what is known as The Invasion storyline. In reality, WCW was purchased by Vince McMahon and the WWF, and ECW had gone out of business in early 2001. Many former WCW and ECW wrestlers were then brought onto WWF television and formed The Alliance to compete with WWF in storyline. The Alliance and Vince McMahon then both attempted to persuade the Rock to join their team. The Rock then aligned with McMahon and the WWF. The next month, the Rock defeated Booker T, at SummerSlam, to win the WCW Championship for the first time. He later lost the title to Chris Jericho at No Mercy on October 21, 2001. The next night on Raw, he teamed with Jericho to win the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Dudley Boyz. The two then lost the tag titles to Booker T and Test on the November 1, 2001, episode of SmackDown!. The Rock defeated Jericho on the November 5 episode of Raw for his second WCW Championship. As part of the WWF's battle against The Alliance, the Rock wrestled in a "winner takes all" five-on-five elimination tag team match at Survivor Series where the losing team's company would be dissolved in storyline. He was a member of Team WWF along with Chris Jericho, The Undertaker, Kane, and Big Show. The Alliance's team consisted of Stone Cold Steve Austin, Kurt Angle, Booker T, Rob Van Dam, and Shane McMahon. In the end, it came down to a one-on-one between the Rock and Stone Cold Steve Austin. The Rock seemed to have the upper hand, until his teammate Jericho entered the ring and attacked the Rock. Austin tried to capitalize on this by pinning the Rock, but Kurt Angle revealed his true allegiance by attacking Austin. The Rock then pinned Austin, giving Team WWF the victory and forcing The Alliance to disband. The Rock's WCW Championship was renamed the unbranded "World Championship" following the Alliance's loss. At the next pay-per-view, Vengeance on December 9, 2001, the Rock lost the World Championship to Jericho, who would then unify the WWF and World titles later that night. The Rock then unsuccessfully challenged Jericho for the now Undisputed WWF Championship at Royal Rumble on January 20, 2002. At the next pay-per-view, No Way Out on February 17, 2002, the Rock defeated The Undertaker in a singles match. The event also saw the WWF debut of the famed WCW faction New World Order, which at the time consisted of "Hollywood" Hulk Hogan, Kevin Nash, and Scott Hall. This later led to a match between the Rock and Hogan at WrestleMania X8 on March 17, 2002. The match was billed as "icon versus icon", with both men representing the top tier of two generations of wrestling; ultimately the Rock pinned Hogan at WrestleMania X8 to win the match. Despite the Rock portraying a heroic character and Hogan a villain, a portion of the crowd attending the SkyDome was rooting heavily for Hogan. In an interview in 2013, Hogan said he and the Rock changed the style of the match on the fly based on the crowd's response. After the introduction of the first-ever brand extension, the WWF held a "draft lottery" on the March 25, 2002, episode of Raw. The Rock was the number one overall pick, going to the SmackDown! brand before taking a sabbatical from wrestling. The Rock made a surprise return on a June episode of Raw before going to his assigned brand of SmackDown!. There, he was named the number one contender for the WWE Undisputed Championship, which he won for a record-setting seventh time at Vengeance, on July 21, by defeating Kurt Angle and then-champion The Undertaker in a Triple Threat match. The Rock successfully defended the title at the Global Warning event against Triple H and Brock Lesnar after pinning Triple H. On August 25, at SummerSlam, after interference from Lesnar's manager Paul Heyman, the Rock lost the WWE Undisputed Championship to Lesnar along with the record for the youngest WWE Champion, which he had set in 1998. In 2018, writing for ESPN.com, Sean Coyle noted in a retrospective review of the event, that following his victory over Hulk Hogan at WrestleMania X8, the Rock "started to see a dip in fan support" and "that dip turned into a plunge" by the time Rock had his match with Lesnar at SummerSlam because fans knew he was leaving WWE to pursue an acting career, as evidenced by the negative crowd response during his match with Lesnar. After SummerSlam ended, the Rock was visibly angry at the crowd reaction. When he tried to do a post-show speech for the crowd, the fans booed him. The Rock then took time off to kickstart his acting career. The Rock returned on the January 30, 2003, episode of SmackDown! to set up another match with Hulk Hogan at No Way Out. Because of negative fan reaction during previous matches as a result of his budding acting career, The Rock turned heel for the first time since 1999. He also started a new persona that has been called Hollywood Rock, with a new look and a shaved head. The Rock defeated Hogan at No Way Out before moving to the Raw brand. There, he had various small feuds, including one with The Hurricane. He also began performing "Rock Concerts", segments in which he played the guitar and mocked WWE performers and fans in song. After failing to win a number one contendership for the World Heavyweight Championship, The Rock went into another program with Stone Cold Steve Austin. This led to a match at WrestleMania XIX on March 30, 2003, which called back to their previous two WrestleMania encounters, both of which Austin had won. The Rock won after delivering three consecutive Rock Bottoms, ending their long-running rivalry in what turned out to be Austin's final match, until WrestleMania 38. The next night, Raw was billed as "The Rock Appreciation Night", in honor of his victory over Austin. That night, he was attacked by a debuting Goldberg. At Backlash on April 27, 2003, Goldberg defeated The Rock, who then briefly left WWE to film Walking Tall. During the rest of the year, The Rock made occasional appearances, returning to a face character. In 2004, The Rock aided Mick Foley in his feud against Evolution, leading to a reunion of the Rock 'n' Sock Connection. They lost against Ric Flair, Randy Orton, and Batista in a handicap match at WrestleMania XX on March 14, 2004, when Orton pinned Foley after an RKO. This was Johnson's final wrestling match until November 2011. The Rock appeared in WWE sporadically following WrestleMania XX. He made returns to provide support for Eugene against Jonathan Coachman, and made a cameo in his hometown of Miami and helped Mick Foley against La Résistance. Later in 2004, he hosted a pie-eating contest, as part of the WWE Diva Search, and ended the segment by giving Coachman a People's Elbow. The Rock's contract with WWE then ended and he started his full-time acting career. On March 12, 2007, the Rock appeared on a WWE show after nearly three years, via a pre-taped promo shown during Raw. He correctly predicted that Bobby Lashley would defeat Umaga at WrestleMania 23 in Donald Trump's and Vince McMahon's "Battle of the Billionaires" Hair vs. Hair match. On March 29, 2008, Johnson inducted his father Rocky Johnson and grandfather Peter Maivia into the WWE Hall of Fame. His next appearance was through a pre-taped promo on October 2, 2009, during the Decade of SmackDown. On September 30, 2009, the Rock appeared at a World Xtreme Wrestling (WXW) show to support the professional wrestling debut of Sarona Snuka, the daughter of his longtime friend and mentor Jimmy Snuka. On February 14, 2011, the Rock was announced as the host of WrestleMania XXVII on April 3, 2011, appearing live on Raw for the first time in almost seven years. During a lengthy promo, he addressed the fans and started a feud with John Cena. After numerous appearances via satellite, the Rock appeared live on the Raw before WrestleMania XXVII to confront Cena. After he and Cena exchanged insults, The Miz and Alex Riley appeared and attacked the Rock; he fended off Miz and Riley, only for Cena to blindside him with an Attitude Adjustment. On April 3, at WrestleMania XXVII, the Rock opened the show by cutting a promo. After appearing in numerous backstage segments, the Rock came to ringside to restart the main event between Cena and The Miz as a No Disqualification match, after it had ended in a draw. As revenge for the Attitude Adjustment Cena had given him on Raw, Rock hit Cena with the Rock Bottom, allowing The Miz to pin him and retain the WWE Championship. After the match, Rock attacked Miz and hit him with the People's Elbow. The next night on Raw, the Rock and Cena agreed to a match at WrestleMania XXVIII the next year. They then worked together to fend off an attack by The Corre, which at the time consisted of Wade Barrett, Heath Slater, Justin Gabriel, and Ezekiel Jackson. The Rock appeared live on Raw in his hometown of Miami to celebrate his 39th birthday. On September 16, WWE announced the Rock would wrestle in a traditional 5-on-5 Survivor Series tag team match, teaming with Cena at Survivor Series in November. But on the October 24 episode of Raw, Cena instead suggested the Rock be his partner in a standard tag team match against The Miz and R-Truth, a team called Awesome Truth, which Rock agreed to the next week. On November 14, during the special Raw Gets Rocked, the Rock appeared live, delivering Rock Bottoms to Mick Foley, who had been hosting a "This Is Your Life"-style segment for Cena, and later both members of Awesome Truth. The Rock and Cena defeated Awesome Truth on November 20 at Survivor Series, when the Rock pinned The Miz. After the match, the Rock gave Cena a Rock Bottom. Leading up to WrestleMania, the Rock and Cena had several verbal confrontations on Raw. On the March 12, 2012, episode of Raw, the Rock hosted his first "Rock Concert" segment since 2004, mocking Cena in his songs. On April 1, at WrestleMania XXVIII, the Rock defeated Cena in the main event after countering Cena's attempt at a People's Elbow into a Rock Bottom and pinning Cena. This event broke the record for biggest professional wrestling pay-per-view buyrate. The following night on Raw, the Rock praised Cena, calling their match "an honor". He then vowed to once again become WWE Champion. On July 23, at Raw 1000, the Rock announced he would wrestle for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble pay-per-view. During the show, he encountered then-reigning WWE Champion CM Punk, Daniel Bryan, and John Cena, all of whom expressed a desire to face him. The Rock later saved Cena from an assault by Big Show, only to be laid out by CM Punk. On the January 7, 2013, episode of Raw, the Rock returned to confront his Royal Rumble opponent CM Punk. On January 11, he made his first SmackDown appearance in ten years, getting into an altercation with Team Rhodes Scholars, resulting in him delivering a Rock Bottom to Damien Sandow and a People's Elbow to Cody Rhodes. The Rock closed out the 20th-anniversary episode of Raw, on January 14, with one of his "Rock Concerts", leading to a brawl with CM Punk. The following week on Raw, the Rock was attacked by The Shield. Vince McMahon then asserted that if The Shield attacked the Rock in his title match with CM Punk, Punk would be stripped of the WWE Championship. On January 27, at the Royal Rumble, CM Punk would seemingly defeat the Rock after the arena lights went out and someone attacked the Rock. Vince McMahon then came out and was about to strip Punk of the championship, however, at the Rock's request, he instead restarted the match. This culminated in the Rock defeating Punk to win his eighth WWE Championship. Punk received a title rematch with the Rock, at Elimination Chamber on February 17, 2013, with the added stipulation that if the Rock was disqualified or counted out, he would still lose the WWE Championship. The Rock would pin Punk to defeat him and retain the championship. The following night on Raw, the Rock unveiled a new WWE Championship design, with a different center plate and removable customizable side-plates which had his "Brahma Bull" logo. The Rock then resumed his rivalry with John Cena, who won that year's Royal Rumble to set up a rematch of the previous WrestleMania match between the two at WrestleMania 29, only this time with the WWE Championship on the line. On April 7, at WrestleMania 29, Rock lost the WWE Championship to Cena, ending his reign at 70 days. Despite being advertised for Raw after WrestleMania, where it was stated that the Rock was still entitled a rematch for the WWE Championship, The Rock did not appear because of a real injury sustained during his match with Cena, in which his abdominal and adductor tendons tore from his pelvis. Johnson underwent surgery on April 23 to reattach the torn tendons. Post surgery, it made his abdomen look far less muscular than the rest of his body, notably his arms. In April 2014, the Rock appeared in the opening segment of WrestleMania XXX along with Stone Cold Steve Austin and Hulk Hogan. On the October 6 episode of Raw, the Rock made a surprise appearance to confront Rusev and Lana; this resulted in the Rock clearing Rusev from the ring. The Rock appeared at the 2015 Royal Rumble event on January 25, 2015, during the main event match, where he helped his relative Roman Reigns fend off Big Show and Kane after Reigns eliminated them from the match. Reigns then won the match and the Rock endorsed him in the ring. The Rock appeared at WrestleMania 31 on March 29, 2015, alongside Ronda Rousey, getting into an in-ring altercation with Triple H and Stephanie McMahon. Rock and Rousey prevailed after he attacked Triple H and she overpowered McMahon. On June 27, the Rock appeared at a live event in Boston, where he confronted Bo Dallas and gave him a Rock Bottom. On the January 25, 2016, episode of Raw, the Rock was in a segment that saw him converse with The Miz, Big Show, Lana and Rusev before he and his relatives, The Usos, got into an altercation with then-WWE Tag Team Champions, The New Day. The Rock appeared at WrestleMania 32 on April 3, 2016, where he announced that WWE had broken the all-time WrestleMania attendance record before being interrupted by The Wyatt Family. The Rock got into a verbal back-and-forth with Bray Wyatt before having an impromptu match with Wyatt Family member Erick Rowan. The Rock won after giving Rowan a Rock Bottom and pinning him in six seconds, which set the record for the fastest win in WrestleMania history. The Rock was then aided by a returning John Cena to fend off Wyatt, Rowan and Braun Strowman. On the February 20, 2017, episode of Raw, the Rock made an untelevised appearance after the broadcast had gone off the air, where he promoted and filmed a scene for his then-upcoming film Fighting with My Family. On August 3, 2019, the Rock officially announced his retirement from professional wrestling. On September 30, 2019, after weeks of speculation, the Rock announced that he would appear on SmackDown's 20th Anniversary on October 4, 2019, marking his first appearance on SmackDown since October 2014 and his first televised appearance since April 2016. At the event, he cut a promo with Becky Lynch before they were interrupted by King Corbin. After attacking Corbin, the Rock and Lynch celebrated in the ring. On September 15, 2023, the Rock made a surprise return to SmackDown, in a segment with Pat McAfee and Austin Theory, who Rock took out within the segment. This marked his first televised appearance in WWE since October 4, 2019. It was teased that a former WWE Champion would be appearing on the Day 1 edition of Raw on January 1, 2024; the unidentified champion was at first revealed to be Jinder Mahal, who insulted the crowd before being interrupted by The Rock in his first live appearance on Raw since 2016. The two brawled and The Rock emerged victorious, after which he asked the crowd if he should sit at "the head of the table" in a direct reference to Undisputed WWE Universal Champion Roman Reigns, his relative whose nickname is "The Head of the Table". The Rock also appeared on the February 2 episode of SmackDown, where he confronted Reigns after Royal Rumble winner Cody Rhodes decided against choosing Reigns as his WrestleMania 40 opponent to allow The Rock to face Reigns. This was met by intense backlash from fans who wanted Rhodes to face Reigns; the WrestleMania XL media event on February 8 thus saw The Rock align himself with Reigns, chastise Rhodes for reversing his decision not to choose Reigns as his WrestleMania opponent, and slap Rhodes for speaking out against the Anoaʻi family (of which The Rock and Reigns are both members). As WWE's chief creative officer Triple H was being interviewed backstage over what had just transpired, The Rock and Reigns walked by and told him to "fix it" or they would, though Triple H would later appear on SmackDown to stand by Rhodes' decision. On the February 16 episode of SmackDown, The Rock officially joined Reigns' faction The Bloodline and revived the villainous "Hollywood Rock" character he had last used in 2003. He then appeared on the March 1 episode of SmackDown, where he gave himself the new nickname of "The Final Boss" and issued a challenge to Rhodes and Seth Rollins; if they beat him and Reigns in a tag team match at WrestleMania Night 1, Rhodes' championship match against Reigns on Night 2 will be free of interference from The Bloodline, but if Rhodes and Rollins lose, the championship match will be contested under Bloodline Rules. The Rock appeared on Wyclef Jean's 2000 single "It Doesn't Matter" and in its music video. He also recorded "Pie" with Slick Rick for WWF The Music, Vol. 5. In 1999, Johnson appeared on That '70s Show as his father Rocky Johnson. The next year, he was on Star Trek: Voyager as an alien wrestler who used the Rock's moves. In 2000, he hosted Saturday Night Live (SNL) for the first time. Fellow wrestlers Triple H, Big Show, and Mick Foley also appeared on the show. Johnson has said the success of that episode is the reason he began receiving offers from Hollywood studios. He has since hosted SNL four more times. In 1999, the Rock was listed No. 5 on Entertainment Weekly's Top 12 Entertainers of the Year. In 2000, Access Hollywood ranked him number six in their list of the Top 10 Celebrities of 2000. That year, Rock was also listed in the Forbes Celebrity 100 and People Magazine's 25 Most Intriguing People. The Rock was listed on Entertainment Weekly's 101 Most Influential People in both 2000 and 2001. In 2001, he was also listed on E!'s 20 Top Entertainers. In 2002, the Rock was listed on E!'s 25 Toughest Stars. In 2003, he was listed in VH1's 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons and was No. 13 in People Magazine's 50 Favorite TV Stars. The Rock made a surprise appearance at the official Xbox unveiling during Bill Gates's keynote speech at the ongoing Computer Electronics Show in 2001. Johnson's motion picture debut was as The Scorpion King in The Mummy Returns (2001). The movie broke a two-year record for the highest-grossing single day in film history by earning $28,594,667. The movie's financial success led to Johnson's first leading role in the spin-off The Scorpion King (2002). He received $5.5 million for the role and Guinness World Records named him the record-holder for highest-paid actor in their first leading role. The Rock has appeared on the covers of many magazines, including Rolling Stone, Entertainment Weekly, and TV Guide. He has also appeared in, and been the cover athlete for, several video games. As of November 2021[update], his Instagram account is the fourth most-followed in the world, with over 280 million followers. The Rock has been listed as one of the all-time greatest professional wrestlers, as well as one of the top draws in wrestling history. Many have placed the Rock on their "Mount Rushmore of Pro Wrestling", including Hulk Hogan, Ric Flair, and John Cena. In Cable Visions: Television Beyond Broadcasting, the Rock was described as "for a long time, the WWE's biggest star and probably held the greatest international appeal". R. D. Reynolds stated in his book The WrestleCrap Book of Lists that the Rock was "the biggest star for WWE from 1999 until 2004". The Rock's "I quit" match with Mankind at the 1999 Royal Rumble event is infamous for its brutality and one of the most popular "I quit" match of all times. The Rock main-evented the most bought pay-per-view worldwide in WWE history (WrestleMania XXVIII), the most bought pay-per-view domestically in WWE history (WrestleMania X-Seven), the highest rated Raw in history, the highest rated SmackDown in history, and was part of the highest rated cable segment in WWE history with Mankind entitled "This is Your Life", in which Mankind would honor The Rock with various gifts and reunions. His return in 2001 had a 7.1 rating, the highest-rated segment of the year. The Rock was also part of the highest-rated match of the 21st century when his WWF Championship defense against Shane McMahon, on May 1, 2000, got an 8.3 rating, making it the highest-rated segment of all time, behind "This Is Your Life". In 2011, the Rock's return to an episode of Raw generated an average of 4.7 million viewers in the United States, with 7.4 million tuning in during his promo. Raw 1000 was the highest rated Raw episode of 2012 and his segment with CM Punk and Daniel Bryan was the highest rated segment of the show. In 2013, the night after the Rock won the WWE Championship for the first time in over a decade, at Royal Rumble, Raw got its highest rating of that year. Derived from one of his catchphrases "lay the smackdown", WWE introduced in 1999 its second flagship program, WWE SmackDown, which became television's second longest-running weekly episodic program in history. The term "smackdown" was included in Merriam-Webster dictionaries in 2007. He is also known for popularizing the term "jabroni", derived from "jobber", although it was originally introduced by The Iron Sheik. The Rock holds the record for most Raw shows main-evented in one year (38 in 2000), most SmackDown shows main-evented in one year (36 in 2000), and is tied with Stone Cold Steve Austin (in 2001) for most PPV shows main evented in one year (12 in 2000). At the 2021 Survivor Series, WWE held a 25-man Battle Royal to celebrate the 25th Anniversary of the Rock's WWE debut. The match was won by Omos. Johnson entered Hollywood and the film industry, becoming a star initially through his wrestling popularity and noted work ethic. Over his acting career, he became one of the highest-paid and most successful actors in Hollywood. He began his acting career on television while wrestling. In his first television acting job, in 1999, he played his father in an episode of That '70s Show called "That Wrestling Show". Nearly a year later, he appeared in the Star Trek: Voyager episode "Tsunkatse" as an alien wrestler who fought popular character Seven of Nine. While Johnson was away from WWE, the company continued to sell "The Rock" merchandise, and he continued to be featured prominently in the opening montages of their television shows. Johnson began his film career in earnest with roles in The Mummy Returns (2001), The Scorpion King (2002), The Rundown (2003), and Walking Tall (2004). He had a supporting role in Be Cool (2005) as a bodyguard hoping to become an actor, and was the primary antagonist in Doom (2005). He also had roles in Gridiron Gang (2006), Reno 911!: Miami (2007), and Southland Tales (2006). He played a cocky famous American football player in The Game Plan (2007), Agent 23 in Get Smart (2008), a cab driver in Race to Witch Mountain (2009), the title character in Tooth Fairy (2010) and a police officer in The Other Guys (2010). He presented the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 80th Academy Awards. Johnson's first big box-office success came in 2011, portraying Luke Hobbs in Fast Five (2011); the film became the seventh highest-grossing film of 2011. He also starred in the box office hit Journey 2: The Mysterious Island in 2012. He became known for reinvigorating film franchises after portraying Marvin F. Hinton / Roadblock in G.I. Joe: Retaliation and reprising his role as Luke Hobbs in Fast & Furious 6 (2013), while also starring in true-story films Pain & Gain (2013) and Empire State (2013). That same year, he hosted and produced the TNT reality competition series The Hero, and won the Favorite Male Buttkicker Award at the 2013 Nickelodeon Kid's Choice Awards. In May 2013, it was announced that he would executive produce and star in Ballers, an HBO comedy-drama series about NFL players living in Miami. By December of that year, Forbes named him the top-grossing actor of 2013, with his films bringing in $1.3 billion worldwide for the year. Forbes credited the success of Fast & Furious 6, which grossed $789 million globally, and his frequent acting work as primary reasons for topping the list. Johnson starred as the title character in Hercules in 2014 and hosted another reality series for TNT that same year, entitled Wake Up Call, which saw him "lending a helping hand to everyday people who were facing enormous challenges in their lives" alongside guest experts such as Rocco DiSpirito, Jillian Michaels, and Josh Shipp. In 2015, Johnson reprised his role as Luke Hobbs in Furious 7 and starred in the disaster film San Andreas. In 2016, he co-starred with Kevin Hart in the action-comedy Central Intelligence and had a lead voice role in the Disney animated film Moana, in which he voiced the Polynesian demigod Maui. He reprised his role as Luke Hobbs in The Fate of the Furious, which was released in 2017. Johnson starred in two other blockbuster movies that year, Baywatch and Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle as Mitchell "Mitch" Buchannon and Dr. Smolder Bravestone, respectively. In 2018, he starred in the action films Rampage and Skyscraper. Johnson's role within the Fast & Furious franchise continued with Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw, starring alongside co-star Jason Statham. David Leitch directed the project from a script co-written by franchise-writer Chris Morgan and Drew Pearce. The film began principal photography in September 2018, and was released on July 26, 2019. Johnson will reprise his role in Hobbs & Shaw 2 after not appearing in F9 and also not returning in Fast X or Fast & Furious 11. In May 2023, it was reported that he would make a cameo appearance during a post-credits scene of Fast X. Johnson reprised his role as Bravestone, in Jumanji: The Next Level. With the critical and financial success of Welcome to the Jungle, production of the movie began in early 2019, and it was released on December 13, 2019. In 2021, Johnson co-starred with Emily Blunt in Disney's Jungle Cruise as Frank Wolff. The film is based on the theme-park ride of the same name. Jaume Collet-Serra directed, with a script by Michael Green from a previous one by J. D. Payne and Patrick McKay. In addition to his work on the film, Johnson assisted with re-designing the titular ride for all Disney theme parks. Jungle Cruise was released on July 30, 2021. Also in 2021, Johnson starred in Netflix's film Red Notice, written and directed by Rawson Marshall Thurber. It is the third time that the two collaborated, after Central Intelligence and Skyscraper. It co-stars Gal Gadot and Ryan Reynolds. Johnson is noted for his busy schedule and developing multiple projects at once. A sequel to the box-office hit San Andreas was announced to be in the pre-production stage with the director of the first film, Brad Peyton, returning as director along with the main cast (marking the fourth collaboration between the two following Journey 2, San Andreas, and Rampage). On November 14, 2019, he announced a December 2021 release date for the standalone Black Adam film. Production on Black Adam began filming in April 2021 and was released on October 21, 2022. He earned $22.5 million to star in the film and received millions more for producing and promoting it on social media. Johnson has been a member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in the Actor's Branch since 2017. In 2024, he presented an award alongside Bad Bunny. On March 16, 2021, he appeared for the first time as The Foundation in Fortnite Battle Royale. Johnson was initially uncredited in his role, yet teased his involvement in a cryptic Instagram post shared on the day of the event. Following another Instagram video for Johnson's ZOA Energy drink, in which The Foundation's helmet and sidearm were subtly featured in the background, his involvement was finally confirmed during the Chapter 2 End Event on December 4, 2021, with The Foundation removing his helmet to reveal that he shared Johnson's voice and likeness. In May 2023, Johnson reprised his role as Luke Hobbs in a cameo appearance during the mid-credits scene of Fast X. In 2012, Johnson founded his production company Seven Bucks Productions. Though originally attached as producer and star, Johnson will now serve solely as the former on a film adaptation of The Janson Directive. John Cena will fill the leading role, with Akiva Goldsman attached as screenwriter. Additionally, he will produce and star in a Netflix exclusive film titled John Henry & The Statesmen, as the titular folklore hero. The film will be directed by Jake Kasdan, from a script by Kasdan and Tom Wheeler. With the first official teaser trailer released in October 2018, the project marks Kasdan's and Johnson's third collaboration, after Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle and Jumanji: The Next Level. In 2019, Johnson produced and appeared as himself in Fighting with My Family, a comedy drama about Paige and her family, who are also professional wrestlers. Johnson will co-produce and star in The King, a film about king Kamehameha Kūnuiākea, founder and first ruler of the Kingdom of Hawaiʻi. The project will be directed by Robert Zemeckis from a script by Randall Wallace. The movie will be comparable to Braveheart in tone, given Wallace's work on both films, and will depict the king's role in resolving the wars among the islands of Hawaiʻi. The King was scheduled to begin production in 2020, but was halted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Johnson is also attached to produce/star in a sequel to Big Trouble in Little China, as well as project under development with Shane Black focusing on a new interpretation of Doc Savage. In 2021, his biographical comedy-drama series Young Rock began airing on NBC. A film centered around Teth-Adam/Black Adam, a part of the DC Extended Universe, was announced to be in development in January 2017. Originally cast in the role as early as September 2014 as the antagonist, in a film centered around the superhero Billy Batson/Shazam, his villainous role for Shazam! was reworked into two separate films. Johnson did not appear in Shazam!, but he served as a producer and his likeness was used through special effects in flashback scenes. In March 2020, Johnson launched Teremana Tequila, which sold 600,000 nine-litre cases in its first year. In August 2020, Johnson along with several partners and investors—including RedBird Capital Partners—purchased the XFL for $15 million. Within months, Johnson announced plans for the relaunch of the league in spring 2022. While the launch was delayed a year, the first games of 2023 kicked off on time. After a successful 2023 season, the XFL and United States Football League announced their intent to merge into a single league. On December 31, 2023, it was announced that the new merged league would be called the United Football League (UFL). The league would feature 8 teams and start on March 30, 2024. Johnson, along with Dany Garcia, and RedBird Capital Partners own 50% of the UFL together under XFL Properties LLC. On January 23, 2024, Johnson joined the TKO Group Holdings board of directors. In the process, he obtained full ownership over his trademarked name "The Rock", which was owned by WWE. As part of the settlement, Johnson signed a new services and merchandising agreement with WWE. In 2000, Johnson published his autobiography, The Rock Says..., co-written with Joe Layden. It debuted at No. 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list and remained on the list for several weeks. In 2013, Johnson hosted and produced the TNT reality competition series The Hero. In 2014, he hosted another TNT reality series, Wake Up Call. In 2019, Johnson started hosting the NBC competition series The Titan Games. In March 2016, Johnson partnered with American fitness apparel manufacturer Under Armour to release "Project Rock". The first item in his partnership with Under Armour, a gym bag, sold out in a couple of days. His second item, a black T-shirt sporting his signature "Brahma bull", sold out after being worn at WrestleMania 32. Johnson also released an alarm clock app as part of "Project Rock" that received more than one million downloads in its first week of release. Since then, they have released sneakers, headphones, and other apparel. In 2016, Johnson started his YouTube channel. His first video, The YouTube Factory, featured online personality Lilly Singh and several other internet stars. In 2019, Johnson announced he would launch a competitive bodybuilding show, "Athleticon", with his business partner and ex-wife Dany Garcia. It is set to rival other long-standing bodybuilding shows such as The Arnold Classic and Joe Weider's Mr. Olympia. The show was set to debut in October 2020 in Atlanta, Georgia, but plans were disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. A fan of the rapper Tech N9ne, Johnson is featured on the song "Face Off" from the rapper's 2021 album Asin9ne. Johnson attended the 2000 Democratic National Convention, which was part of WWE's non-partisan "Smackdown Your Vote" campaign aiming to influence young people to vote. He also had a speaking role at the 2000 Republican National Convention. Johnson voted for Barack Obama in the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. He did not vote in the 2016 presidential election, and is an independent voter as of 2017[update]. He endorsed Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election. Johnson has expressed interest in running for president himself, telling USA Today in February 2021, "I would consider a presidential run in the future if that's what the people wanted." Following an online public opinion poll that found that 46% of Americans would consider voting for Johnson in a presidential election, he said in an April 12, 2021, interview on Today, "I do have that goal to unite our country and I also feel that if this is what the people want, then I will do that." In 2006, Johnson founded the Dwayne Johnson Rock Foundation, a charity working with at-risk and terminally ill children. On October 2, 2007, he and his then wife, Dany Garcia, donated $1 million to the University of Miami to support the renovation of its football facilities. The university renamed the Hurricanes' locker room in Johnson's honor. In 2015, Johnson donated $1,500 to a GoFundMe to pay for an abandoned dog's surgery. In 2017, he donated $25,000 to Hurricane Harvey relief efforts. In 2018, Johnson donated a gym to a military base in Oahu, Hawaii. After the 2018 Hawaii floods, he worked with Malama Kauai, a nonprofit organization, to help repair flood damage. Johnson has also worked with Make-A-Wish Foundation on a number of occasions. In July 2023, Johnson made a seven-figure donation to the SAG-AFTRA Foundation during the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike, which foundation president Courtney B. Vance cited to be "the largest single donation that (the foundation) has ever received from one individual at one time". Johnson first met Dany Garcia when they were both University of Miami students in the early 1990s. They married on May 3, 1997. She is a businesswoman, International Fitness and Bodybuilding Federation professional bodybuilder, and producer. They have one child, Simone, a daughter, who was born August 14, 2001, in Davie, Florida. In 2003, Johnson got a partial Samoan Peʻa tattoo on his left side. In August 2004, in recognition of his service to the Samoan people, and because he is a descendant of Samoan chiefs, Johnson was given the noble title Seiuli, meaning the son of Malietoa [Alo o Malietoa], by Malietoa Tanumafili II during his visit there. On June 1, 2007, Johnson and Garcia announced they were separating amicably. In 2007, Johnson began dating Lauren Hashian, the daughter of Boston drummer Sib Hashian. They met in 2006 while Johnson was filming The Game Plan. In May 2008, his divorce to Garcia was finalized. In 2009, Johnson obtained Canadian citizenship through his father's birth and citizenship there. In 2017, he had the small "Brahma bull" tattoo on his right arm covered with a larger half-sleeve tattoo of a bull's skull. On August 18, 2019, Johnson and Hashian married in Hawaii. They have two daughters, Jasmine and Tiana, and live in Los Angeles. They also maintain a farm in Virginia and a home in Southwest Ranches, Florida. In February 2020, WWE announced that Johnson's daughter Simone had started training at the WWE Performance Center, making her the first fourth-generation WWE wrestler. On May 16, Johnson announced she had signed a contract with WWE, and in May 2022 announced that her ring name would be Ava Raine. She has since been appearing on the NXT brand. Johnson is a supporter of the Samoa national rugby league team, and publicly pledged his support to the team during the 2021 Rugby League World Cup when the team made the finals for the first time. Pro Wrestling Illustrated Match of the Year (1999) vs. Mankind in an "I Quit" match at Royal Rumble Match of the Year (2002) vs. Hollywood Hulk Hogan at WrestleMania X8 Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (1999, 2000) Wrestler of the Year (2000) Ranked No. 2 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2000 United States Wrestling Association USWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Bart Sawyer Wrestling Observer Newsletter Best Box Office Draw (2000, 2011, 2012) Best Gimmick (1999) Best on Interviews (1999, 2000) Most Charismatic (1999–2002, 2011, 2012) Most Improved (1998) Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2007) WWE/World Wrestling Entertainment/Federation WWE Championship (8 times) WCW Championship (2 times) WWF Intercontinental Championship (2 times) WWF Tag Team Championship (5 times) – with Mankind (3), The Undertaker (1), and Chris Jericho (1) Royal Rumble (2000) Sixth Triple Crown Champion Deadly Games WWF Championship Tournament (1998) Slammy Award (9 times) Best Actor (2014) Game Changer of the Year (2011) – with John Cena Guess Who's Back or: Return of the Year (2011) LOL! Moment of the Year (2012, 2013) – insulting John Cena using the history of Boston, Massachusetts, Rock Concert on the 20th anniversary episode of Raw Match of the Year (2013) – vs. John Cena for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29 New Sensation (1997) "Tell Me You Didn't Just Say That" Insult of the Year (2014) – insulting Rusev and Lana "This is Awesome" Moment of the Year (2015) – with Ronda Rousey The title was named the WWF Championship during The Rock's first six reigns. It was known as the WWF Undisputed Championship during his seventh reign and as the WWE Championship during his eighth. The title was renamed the World Championship during his second reign. "It Doesn't Matter" did not enter the Canadian Hot 100, but peaked at number eight on the Hot Canadian Digital Singles chart. "Face Off" did not enter the Billboard Hot 100, but peaked at number four on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart. "WWE profile - The Rock". ESPN.co.uk. August 11, 2016. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Milner, John. "The Rock Bio". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2008. "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson". WWE. Retrieved March 9, 2012. "The Rock". Cagematch. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Dworkis, Michael. "Dr. Tom Prichard: The Doctor of Talent". MichaelDworkis.com. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved September 25, 2012. "The Greatest Professional Wrestlers of All Time". UGO. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2018. "The Top 100 Pro Wrestlers of All time Reviewed in Wrestling Perspective". Wrestling Perspective. Retrieved November 14, 2011. "Dwayne Johnson Movie Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 11, 2019. "People Index". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 11, 2019. Robehmed, Natalie (August 25, 2016). "The World's Highest-Paid Actors 2016: The Rock Leads With Knockout $64.5 Million Year". Forbes. Retrieved August 27, 2016. "Some Lesser-Known Truths About Academe". May 3, 2017. "Asking a professor whether you should pursue a Ph.D. is a little like asking The Rock — aka Dwayne Douglas Johnson, the world's highest-paid actor last year — whether you should become an actor" "The Rock Buys The XFL for $15 Million". RingsideNews.com. August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Kerr, Jeff (August 2, 2020). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson buys XFL for $15 million with partner Redbird Capital, per report". CBS Sports. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Earl, William (February 21, 2022). "Dwayne Johnson's XFL Sets Football R&D Pact With NFL". Variety. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Raimondi, Marc (January 23, 2024). "'The Rock' joins UFC, WWE's TKO Group board". ESPN. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Valinsky, Jordan (January 23, 2024). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson scores mega payday to join the WWE's board". CNN. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Chiari, Mike (January 23, 2024). "The Rock Becomes Board Member of WWE's Parent Company TKO, Obtains Trademark to Name". Bleacher Report. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Busch, Anita (June 7, 2017). "Hiram Garcia Named President of Production at Seven Bucks Prods". Deadline. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Is Expected To Become A Billionaire From His Tequila Brand Valued At Around $3.5 Billion". Yahoo Finance. February 1, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024. "Suspension at Freedom High took Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson from troubled teen to one of world's 'most likable people'," The Morning Call, January 4, 2021 "20 Surprising Facts About Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson". Hollywood.com. Archived from the original on August 26, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Cloete, Faden (February 15, 2024). "Tragic Details About The Rock". Wrestling Inc. Retrieved March 30, 2024. Dee, Johnny (May 22, 2015). "Dwayne Johnson". The Guardian. Retrieved September 28, 2016. Castillo, Alfonso (April 16, 2019). "WWE: WrestleMania sets new PPV record". Newsday. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Oestriecher, Blake. "WWE Isn't Bringing Back The Attitude Era, But An Edgier Product Can't Hurt". Forbes. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Lynch, John (March 20, 2018). "The 23 most successful movie franchises of all time". Business Insider. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson, 'Black Adam' Cast on Film's 15-Year Journey and Hopes for DCEU's Future". The Hollywood Reporter. October 13, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Live-Action Moana in the Works from Dwayne Johnson, Disney". The Hollywood Reporter. April 3, 2023. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kissell, Rick (August 25, 2015). "Ratings: 'Ballers' Ends First Season as HBO's Most-Watched Comedy in Six Years". "Best Sellers Plus". The New York Times. Retrieved August 28, 2012. "Bulletin with Newsweek". J. Haynes and J.F. Archibald. November 12, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016 – via Google Books. Berg, Peter (April 21, 2016). "The World's 100 Most Influential People: Dwayne Johnson". Time. Archived from the original on March 17, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2016. "Dwayne Johnson, Taylor Swift, Gayle King, more cover Time's 100 most influential people issue". USA Today. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson". Forbes. Group, Chuck Barney | Bay Area News (January 27, 2021). "Sorry, Hayward, Johnson's TV show skips his time in the Bay Area". The Mercury News. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Dwayne Johnson Biography: Film Actor, Athlete (1972–)". Biography.com (FYI / A&E Networks). Retrieved December 12, 2017. "Rocky Johnson: Hall of Fame". World Wrestling Entertainment. Retrieved March 31, 2011. What is The Rock's mother's real name? It's not Ata Johnson, 2023, retrieved December 11, 2023 Morgan, Kaya. "Dwayne Johnson – How The Rock Transformed from Pro Wrestler to Bankable Movie Star". Island Connections. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2006.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Levenson, Michael (January 15, 2020). "Rocky Johnson, Professional Wrestler and Father of Dwayne (the Rock) Johnson, Dies at 75". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. "Actors – The Rock". Monsters&Critics. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved April 21, 2008. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson: Rugby's the toughest sport I ever played". Stuff. April 17, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson's Irish heritage revealed". irishpost.com. May 2, 2018. Entertainment.ie. "Watch: We chat to Dwayne Johnson about Hercules, getting ripped and his Irish roots". entertainment.ie. Retrieved December 28, 2017. "Superstars". wwe.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Solomon, Brian (2006). WWE Legends. Simon and Schuster. p. 146. ISBN 0-7434-9033-9. Young, Graham (April 10, 2010). "The Rock's on a roll in Hollywood". The Birmingham Post. Archived from the original on December 23, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2010. Brecher, Elinor J. (October 25, 2008). "Grandmother of 'The Rock,' promoter". The Miami Herald. Crow, Jonathan (March 12, 2008). "Through The Years – Dwayne 'Not Just The Rock' Johnson". Yahoo Movies. Archived from the original on March 16, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2009. "Hall of Fame: High Chief Peter Maivia". WWE. Archived from the original on February 20, 2010. Retrieved February 16, 2010. Maivia, born in Samoa in the 1930s, was a "blood brother" of the Anoaʻi family. "The Anoaʻi family wrestling dynasty: photos", WWE, retrieved November 29, 2015, High Chief Peter Maivia, The Rock's grandfather, was "blood brothers" with The Wild Samoans' father, Amituanai Anoaʻi. Sonny, Julian (November 16, 2015), "Samoan Strength: The Rock's Family Tree Is A Wrestling Dynasty", Elite Daily, retrieved November 29, 2015 Pockross, Adam (March 27, 2013), "The Rock's Grandfather Was a Bond Villain: Could It Be Another Family Business?", Yahoo! Movies, retrieved November 29, 2015, the "High Chief" is most often remembered as a prominent member of one of the greatest families in all of professional wrestling: the Anoaʻi/Maivia family of Samoans. "Wrestler 'Umaga' Edward Fatu dies of heart attack, friend says", CNN, December 5, 2009, retrieved November 29, 2015, [...]was a member of the famous Anoaʻi wrestling family, which includes cousin Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson, his two uncles, who wrestled as The Wild Samoans in the 1980s, and brothers, Sam "Tonga Kid" and Solofa Jr. "Rikishi," according to Wrestlers Rescue, a support group for retired professional wrestlers. "Johnson Family Reunion". WWE. February 25, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2009. Johnson, Dwayne [@TheRock] (June 7, 2019). "Wow check out my 8yr old AFRO!! I loved Montclaire Elementary!! Had my first crush (see what you could've had Eve??!) and was bullied by a punk and waited for him after school and punched him in the face. End of that, bs. Big love to all the kids and staff. #CharlotteNC" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "NEW HAVEN 200: Introducing a summer series looking back on two centuries of sports", Chip Malafronte, New Haven Register, June 23, 2012 "'The Rock' remembers Nashville past". The Tennessean. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson talks past arrest and theft ring". azcentral. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Morgan, Kaya. "University of Miami Famous Alumni". NCAA Tickets Now. Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved December 29, 2006. "How football helped transform Dwayne Johnson into Hollywood's biggest star". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "How good was The Rock at football?". ESPN. December 11, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "How good was The Rock at football?". ESPN.com. December 11, 2012. "Miami Magazine | University of Miami". magazine.miami.edu. "Johnson is used to wrestling with misconceptions". The Palm Beach Post. August 27, 1994. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Cryderman, Kelly (September 15, 2017). "Rising from rock bottom". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved May 24, 2019. Johnson, George (September 18, 2014). "Johnson: Stamps could party like it's 1995". Calgary Herald. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. The Rock; Layden, Joe (2000). The Rock Says... Harper Entertainment. pp. 186–188. ISBN 0-06-039298-3. World Wrestling Federation (November 17, 1996). "Marc Mero, Rocky Maivia, Jake Roberts, and The Stalker vs. Crush, Jerry Lawler, Hunter Hearst Helmsley, and Goldust". Survivor Series (1996). The Rock; Layden, Joe (2000). The Rock Says... Chapter 10, "Rocky Maivia": Harper Entertainment. p. 146. ISBN 0-06-039298-3.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) "Episode 183". WWF Monday Night Raw. November 4, 1996. 4:15 minutes in. USA Network. "Survivor Series 1996 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WWF Thursday Raw: February 13, 1997". The Other Arena. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Rocky Maivia's first Intercontinental Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on April 10, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WWF Monday Night Raw". WWF Television. March 31, 1997. USA Network. The camera goes backstage after Steve Austin's in-ring interview, and Jim Ross says: "There, you see The Rock." Monday Night War S01 E12:The War Gets Electrified. WWE. Cawthon, Graham (January 16, 2023). "Ring Results: 1997". The History of WWE. Oliver, Greg (February 24, 1998). "A piece of The Rock". Slam! Wrestling. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on October 11, 1999. Retrieved August 26, 2018. Hart, Bret (2007). Hitman: My Real Life in the Cartoon World of Wrestling. Random House Canada (Canada), Grand Central Publishing (US). 420. ISBN 9780307355676. ISBN 978-0-307-35567-6 (Canada) ISBN 978-0-446-53972-2 (US) "WWF Raw: April 28, 1997". The Other Arena. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved March 18, 2008. "Nation of Domination Profile". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "In Your House 19: D-Generation X results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WWF Raw: December 8, 1997". The Other Arena. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Rock's second Intercontinental Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on April 28, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Royal Rumble 1998 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WrestleMania XIV official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 13, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "In Your House 22: Over the Edge 1998 results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "In Your House 23: Fully Loaded 1998 results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "SummerSlam 1998 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on June 20, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2008. Germany, Kevin. "Video Tributes: 10 Things to Love About WWE Legend Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson". Bleacher Report. "In Your House 24: Breakdown 1998 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "In Your House 25: Judgment Day 1998 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Rock's first WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 13, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Rock def. Mankind to become new WWE Champion". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Corporation Profile". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "In Your House 26: Rock Bottom results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. ""Stone Cold" Helps Mankind Win the Big One". WWE. Retrieved January 2, 2023. "Royal Rumble 1999 official results". WWE. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Rock's second WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. Lelinwalla, Mark (February 4, 2016). "WWE Looks Back At Super Bowl 'Halftime Heat' With The Rock vs. Mankind". Tech Times. "Monday Night Raw: February 15, 1999". The Other Arena. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "The Rock's third WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 27, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Stone Cold vs. The Rock for the WWE Championship". WWE. Archived from the original on February 23, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WWE Champion Stone Cold Steve Austin def. The Rock". WWE. Archived from the original on February 21, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Over the Edge 1999 results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "King of the Ring 1999 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on February 17, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Fully Loaded 1999 results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "SummerSlam 1999 official results". WWE. Archived from the original on June 20, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "WWE Raw Results – August 30, 1999". Online World of Wrestling. August 30, 1999. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved May 4, 2008. "Rock 'n' Sock Connection's first World Tag Team Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 25, 2008. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Rock 'n' Sock Connection's third World Tag Team Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2007. Christopher Robin Zimmerman. "Slashwrestling RAW report – with ratings". Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved January 13, 2007. "WWE: Inside WWE > Title History > World Tag Team > 19990909 – Undertaker & Big Show". October 13, 2005. Archived from the original on October 13, 2005. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "WWE: Inside WWE > Title History > World Tag Team > 19990920 – Mankind & The Rock". November 27, 2005. Archived from the original on November 27, 2005. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "WWE: Inside WWE > Title History > World Tag Team > 19990923 – New Age Outlaws". November 23, 2005. Archived from the original on November 23, 2005. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "WWE: Inside WWE > Title History > World Tag Team > 19991014 – Mankind & The Rock". November 28, 2005. Archived from the original on November 28, 2005. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "WWE: Inside WWE > Title History > World Tag Team > 19991018 – Crash & Hardcore Holly". December 30, 2005. Archived from the original on December 30, 2005. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "The Rock (No. 24) wins the Royal Rumble Match". World Wrestling Entertainment. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "No Way Out 2000 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "Raw 2000 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "WrestleMania 2000 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "Triple H w/ Stephanie McMahon vs. Mick Foley w/ Linda McMahon vs. Big Show w/ Shane McMahon vs. The Rock w/ Mr. McMahon". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 21, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "WrestleMania 2000 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on February 18, 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2008. Olive, Saffron (August 17, 2021). Where Did The Deck Name "The Rock" Come From? | MTG #Shorts. MTGGoldfish. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. "The Rock defeats Triple H to become new WWE Champion". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "The Rock's fourth WWE Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 31, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock vs. Triple H in a 60-Minute WWE Iron Man Match for the WWE Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "Raw results – May 22, 2000". Lords of Pain. Archived from the original on December 19, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "King of the Ring 2000 results". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on February 16, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "The Rock's fifth WWE Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock: Profile & Match Listing – Internet Wrestling Database (IWD)". profightdb.com. "The Rock vs. Kurt Angle for the WWE Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Survivor Series 2000 official results". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 20, 2008. "Six-Man Hell in a Cell Match for the WWE Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Undertaker and Rock's first World Tag Team Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Kurt Angle vs. The Rock for the WWE Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock's sixth WWE Championship reign". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 31, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Stone Cold vs. The Rock for the WWE Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "WWF Raw: April 2, 2001". The Other Arena. Archived from the original on January 15, 2006. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Power Trip Profile". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved April 13, 2008. "The Rock vs. Booker T w/Shane McMahon for the WCW Championship". WWE. Archived from the original on June 21, 2007. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock's first WCW Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 31, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "No Mercy 2001 official results". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Chris Jericho and The Rock's first World Tag Team Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 11, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock: Profile & Match Listing – Internet Wrestling Database (IWD)". profightdb.com. "The Rock's second WCW Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on February 21, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock, Chris Jericho, Big Show, Kane & Undertaker def. Stone Cold Steve Austin, Kurt Angle, Shane McMahon, Booker T & Rob Van Dam; Sole Survivor: The Rock". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Vengeance 2001 official results". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Royal Rumble 2002 official results". WWE. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "No Way Out 2002 official results". WWE. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. The Rock def. Undertaker "WrestleMania X8 official results". WWE. Archived from the original on March 11, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Gramlich, Chris. "WrestleMania X8 results". SLAM! Sports. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "WrestleMania X8 results". SLAM! Sports. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Hulk Hogan: I Changed Rock Match On The Fly". Fighting Spirit Magazine. March 20, 2013. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2013. "WrestleMania 18 review". Gerweck.net. March 17, 2002. Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. "The Rock's seventh WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 11, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Rock defeats Undertaker and Kurt Angle in a triple threat match to become WWE Champion". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Global Warming results". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Brock Lesnar w/Paul Heyman vs. The Rock for the Undisputed Championship". WWE. Archived from the original on May 26, 2007. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Coyle, Sean (August 8, 2017). "SummerSlam 2002: A look back at a landscape-shifting moment in WWE history". ESPN.com. ESPN Inc. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Scaia, Rick (August 25, 2002). "WWE SummerSlam". Online Onslaught. Archived from the original on June 9, 2008. Retrieved January 23, 2008. "WWE SummerSlam 2002". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Johnson, Vaughn (July 3, 2014). "Throwback Thursday: Looking back at WWE Summerslam 2002". Philly.com. Retrieved December 2, 2018. "WWE SmackDown! Results – January 30, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. January 30, 2003. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "Every Version Of The Rock, Ranked". TheSportster. February 13, 2021. "WWE Ruthless Aggression Review: Hollywood Rock – TJR Wrestling". tjrwrestling.net. July 12, 2021. "The Rock vs. Hulk Hogan". WWE. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "WWE Raw Results – February 24, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. February 24, 2003. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "RAW results – March 24, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Woodward, Hamish (January 4, 2023). "Ranking Every Steve Austin vs The Rock Match At Wrestlemania (Worst To Best)". Retrieved January 27, 2023. "WrestleMania XIX official results". WWE. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Moore, Wesley. "WWE Raw (March 31, 2003) Results". WrestleView. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "Goldberg defeats The Rock". WWE. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Tylwalk, Nick. "Raw: Rock-ing and rolling in San Diego". Slam! Sports. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "RAW results – March 8, 2004". Online World of Wrestling. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "WrestleMania XX official results". WWE. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "The Great One, The Rock-A Biography". RootZoo.com. March 30, 2008. Archived from the original on June 14, 2008. Retrieved April 13, 2008. Starr, Noah. "Billion dollar burn". WWE. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "Be a part of the 2008 WWE Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony". WWE. Retrieved April 1, 2008. Bishop, Matt (October 2, 2009). "Smackdown: A decade of memories". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Martin, Adam (September 30, 2009). "Video: Dwayne Johnson at WXW". Wrestle View. Archived from the original on October 4, 2009. Retrieved September 30, 2009. Konuwa, Alfred. "John Cena's Fruity Pebbles, Cookie Puss and Other Unflattering WWE Nicknames". Bleacher Report. Bishop, Matt (February 15, 2011). "Raw: Finally, The Rock has returned to WWE". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2011. Plummer, Dale (March 28, 2011). "Raw: One last push toward Wrestlemania". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Bishop, Matt (April 3, 2011). "The Rock costs Cena retained the championship at WrestleMania XXVII". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2011. Caldwell, James (April 4, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 4/4: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live Raw – The Rock & Austin live, fall-out from WrestleMania 27, Sin Cara debut". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 8, 2011. Plummer, Dale (May 2, 2011). "Raw: Happy Birthday Rock". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2011. "The Rock to appear in Survivor Series tag team match". WWE. September 16, 2011. Retrieved December 29, 2011. Stephens, David. "Raw Results – 10/24/11". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on January 26, 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Stephens, David. "Raw Results – 10/31/11". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Stephens, David. "Raw Results – 11/14/11". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2012. Martin, Adam. "WWE Survivor Series: The Rock and John Cena vs. The Miz and R-Truth". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 2/27: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – The Rock returns to Raw, WM28 hype". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 3/12: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Rock Concert vs. Cena Rap, Taker returns". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 3/26: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – final WM28 hype, Cena-Rock & Hunter-HBK confrontation". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE WrestleMania 28 PPV Report 4/1: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – Rock-Cena, Taker-Hunter, Punk-Jericho". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 2, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 4/2: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – WM28 fall-out, how will Cena respond to Rock loss?, two big title matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 14, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 7/23: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw No. 999 – WWE recognizes 1,000 episodes, WWE Title match, Lesnar, Rock, DX, wedding". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/7: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – WWE Title match, The Rock returns, Cena vs. Ziggler (updated w/Box Score)". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved January 13, 2013. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Smackdown Results 1/11: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of The Rock's big return, new World Champ crowned (updated w/Box Score)". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "PWTorch.com – Parks's WWE Raw Report 1/14: Complete "virtual time" coverage of the 20th Anniversary of Raw, including Rock Concert, Divas Title Match". www.pwtorch.com. "WWE videos". Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Royal Rumble PPV Results 1/27: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Punk vs. Rock, 30-man Rumble". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved February 18, 2013. Caldwell, James. "WWE News: Chamber PPV results & notes – WM29 main event set, World Title match set, Shield big win, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved February 18, 2013. "Rock unveiled the new WWE Title". Retrieved February 18, 2013. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 3/4: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live "Old-School Raw" – Taker returns, Rock-Cena in-ring confrontation, WM29 hype, more". www.pwtorch.com. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 3/25: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Rock returns for Q&A debate with Cena, Hunter punts Barrett, latest WM29 hype". www.pwtorch.com. "Caldwell's WWE Wrestlemania 29 PPV Results: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live PPV from MetLife Stadium – Rock-Cena II, Taker-Punk, Lesnar-Hunter, more". www.pwtorch.com. Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 4/8: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – WM29 fall-out, new World Champ, no Rock, Taker live, crowd takes over". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved August 3, 2013. "WWE News: New update on Rock's WrestleMania injury". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved August 3, 2013. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson undergoes successful surgery". News24. April 25, 2013. Retrieved April 25, 2019. Landsverk, Gabby. "The Rock says he doesn't have a six-pack, but he weighs his food and lifts weights to sculpt his 'five-and-a-half-pack'". Business Insider. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Meltzer, Dave. "WWE Wrestlemania 30 live coverage & results: The Streak is over, Daniel Bryan's reign begins". Wrestling Observer. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Caldwell, James. "Raw News: Rock surprise return, Reigns non-live return, Edge back on TV, Lesnar MIA, next week's Raw guest star, more". PWTorch.com. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Scherer, Dave. "How and why everything went so badly wrong for WWE last night at the Rumble". PWInsider.com. Retrieved January 27, 2015. "Rock's role, crowd response to Rumble winner, Bully Ray returns & other surprise entrants, more". PWTorch.com. Retrieved January 26, 2015. Schwartz, Nick. "Daniel Bryan was eliminated early from the Royal Rumble and fans are furious". USA Today. Retrieved January 26, 2015. Powell, John. "WrestleMania 31 the best Mania ever". Slam! Wrestling. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Gentile, Mark. "Show Results – 6/27 WWE in Boston, Mass.: Detailed second report – The Rock cameo, Rollins vs. Ambrose steel cage main event, Jericho, Cena vs. Owens, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 9, 2016. Tedesco, Mike (January 26, 2016). "WWE Raw Results – 1/25/16 (The Rock, Fastlane main event)". WrestleView.com. Retrieved April 29, 2019. Caldwell, James. "4/3 WrestleMania 32 PPV Results – CALDWELL'S Complete Live Report on Main PPV". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Fuster, Jeremy (February 21, 2017). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Returns to WWE Ring to Leave CM Punk a Voicemail (Video)". TheWrap. Retrieved February 22, 2017. Ellis, Philip (August 3, 2019). "The Rock Just Announced His Official Retirement From Wrestling". Men's Health. Retrieved September 1, 2019. Pedersen, Erik (September 30, 2019). "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson Rolls Back To WWE For Fox's 'SmackDown!' Debut". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Powell, Jason (October 4, 2019). "10/04 WWE Friday Night Smackdown results: Powell's review of The Rock's return, Kofi Kingston vs. Brock Lesnar for the WWE Championship, Kevin Owens vs. Shane McMahon in a career vs. career ladder match, Becky Lynch and Charlotte Flair vs. Sasha Banks and Bayley". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved October 4, 2019. Mahjouri, Shakiel (September 16, 2023). "The Rock surprises with return to WWE SmackDown in segments with John Cena, Pat McAfee". CBSSports.com. Retrieved September 16, 2023. Powell, Jason (January 1, 2024). "WWE Raw results (1/1): Powell's live review of Day 1 with Seth Rollins vs. Drew McIntyre for the World Heavyweight Championship, Rhea Ripley vs. Ivy Nile for the Women's World Championship, Becky Lynch vs. Nia Jax". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Thompson, Andrew (January 1, 2024). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson appears on Day 1 WWE Raw, asks crowd if he should sit at the 'head of the table'". POST Wrestling. Retrieved February 5, 2024. Boone, Matt (January 2, 2024). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Makes Surprise Return At WWE Raw: Day 1". Wrestling Headlines. Retrieved January 2, 2024. Barrasso, Justin (February 2, 2024). "The Rock Returning for WrestleMania". Sports Illustrated Wrestling News, Analysis and More. Retrieved February 3, 2024. "WWE quiere traer de vuelta al personaje 'Hollywood' the Rock". February 12, 2024. Powell, Jason (February 8, 2024). "WrestleMania XL Kickoff press conference live coverage: Cody Rhodes announces his decision, The Rock, Roman Reigns, Seth Rollins, Rhea Ripley, Bianca Belair, and Triple H appear". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Powell, Jason (February 8, 2024). "WrestleMania XL Kickoff press conference live coverage: Cody Rhodes announces his decision, The Rock, Roman Reigns, Seth Rollins, Rhea Ripley, Bianca Belair, and Triple H appear". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved February 8, 2024. "FULL SEGMENT — Rock and Reigns lay the SmackDown on the WWE Universe: SmackDown, Feb. 16, 2024". WWE YouTube. February 16, 2024. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Nazareth, Errol (June 7, 2000). "Wyclef, The Rock Shoot "It Doesn't Matter" Video". MTV. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Rock On". Wrestling Digest. October 2000. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved July 17, 2008. Ristic, Alex. "New WWF CD disappoints". Archived from the original on August 3, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Star Trek: Voyager Tsunkatse Steve, Anderson (February 2001). "7 Superstars Shining Brightly". Wrestling Digest. Archived from the original on September 25, 2008. Retrieved July 17, 2008. "What 'The Rock' Is Cooking". WWE Corporate. May 21, 2000. Archived from the original on March 23, 2008. Retrieved July 21, 2008. "Chat with Dwayne The Rock Johnson!". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 5, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "AmIAnnoying.com – Entertainment Weekly's Top 12 Entertainers of the Year [1999]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "PWI Online :: Home". pwi-online.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "AmIAnnoying.com – Forbes' Celebrity 100 Power Ranking [2000]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – People Magazine's 25 Most Intriguing People [2000]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – Entertainment Weekly's 101 Most Influential People [2001]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – E!'s 20 Top Entertainers [2001]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – Entertainment Weekly's 101 Most Influential People [2000]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – E!'s 25 Toughest Stars [2002]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – VH-1's 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons [101–200]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "AmIAnnoying.com – People Magazine's 50 Favorite TV Stars [2003]". amiannoying.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "CES 2001: The Rock Crashes Bill Gates' CES Keynote Speech". GameSpot. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Dwayne Johnson developing 'The Scorpion King' reboot". The Hindu. November 12, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated". pwi-online.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Dwayne Johnson Biography". Movies.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2007. "Top 25 Hollywood moneymakers: these black powerhouses generate the most green in Tinseltown". The Free Library. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Eells, Josh (April 4, 2018). "Dwayne Johnson: The Pain and the Passion That Fuel the Rock". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Coggan, Devan (November 30, 2017). "Dwayne Johnson sleighs the holidays on EW's new cover". EW. Retrieved September 26, 2021. "WWE announces collector TV Guide editions". WWE. January 27, 2000. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Cook, Dave (June 25, 2013). "WWE 2K14 cover revealed, features The Rock talking smack". VG247. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "The Most Followed Instagram Profiles". Trackalytics.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019. "Hulk Hogan on Which Four Wrestlers Should Be on Wrestling's Mt. Rushmore, Tonight's Q&A, More". WrestlingInc.com. April 5, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Ric Flair on Who Should Be on Wrestling's Mt. Rushmore, Hulk Hogan's Lawsuit, Origins Of 'Woooo'". WrestlingInc.com. April 2, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Sports Illustrated (March 25, 2014). "SI Now: John Cena's wrestling Mt. Rushmore". Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2016 – via YouTube. Banet-Weiser, Sarah; Chris, Cynthia; Freitas, Anthony (2007). Cable Visions: Television Beyond Broadcasting. NYU Press. ISBN 9780814799499. Reynolds, R. D. (November 16, 2010). The Wrestlecrap Book of Lists!. ECW Press. ISBN 9781554902873. Retrieved November 12, 2016 – via Google Books. Reilly, Dan (August 25, 2016). "Mick Foley: Family Man, Hardcore Legend and Reality Show Star." Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 23, 2023. "WWE over the Limit thoughts". May 23, 2011. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. "WWE Royal Rumble 1999 Review – TJR Wrestling". January 7, 2022. "411Mania". Weakland, Russ (April 16, 2012). "WrestleMania 28 Breaks PPV Records With 1.3 Million Buys". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Dilbert, Ryan. "WWE". Bleacher Report. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Saalbach, Axel. "Wrestlingdata.com – The World's Largest Wrestling Database". wrestlingdata.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Wrestlingdata.com – The World's Largest Wrestling Database". wrestlingdata.com. Retrieved April 29, 2019. "The Rock: This is Your Life!". WWE. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Bill Banks Talks About the Highest Rated Wrestling Segment". Bleacher Report. "Detailed RAW Ratings Breakdown on The Rock's Promo (HUGE Number!)". WrestleChat...It's Where it's At!. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Complete Quarter Hour Breakdown From Monday's Raw 1,000". 411Mania. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "2013 Ratings – Gerweck.net". gerweck.net. December 28, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Bacle, Ariana (April 7, 2015). "'WWE SmackDown' moves to USA Network". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "It was a ginormous year for new words". Today.com. July 10, 2007. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2007. "m-w.com/dictionary/smackdown". Retrieved July 23, 2007. Willis, Jeremy (September 1, 2020). "'Jabroni,' the word made famous by The Rock and The Iron Sheik, gets official dictionary status". ESPN. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Dator, James (September 2, 2020). "'Jabroni' is now in the dictionary, and it's all thanks to The Rock". SB Nation. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Saalbach, Axel. "Wrestlingdata.com – The World's Largest Wrestling Database". wrestlingdata.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Saalbach, Axel. "Wrestlingdata.com – The World's Largest Wrestling Database". wrestlingdata.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Saalbach, Axel. "Wrestlingdata.com". Retrieved August 28, 2015. Saalbach, Axel. "Wrestlingdata.com – The World's Largest Wrestling Database". wrestlingdata.com. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Chiari, Mike. "Omos Wins Battle Royal to Celebrate The Rock at 2021 WWE Survivor Series". Bleacher Report. Retrieved November 24, 2021. "How The Rock went from failed football player to the highest-paid actor in Hollywood". Business Insider. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Morris, Sam (July 14, 2016). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson is the world's highest paid actor, and rightly so". The Guardian. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Chi, Paul. "The Secret to Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson's Success". HWD. Retrieved June 27, 2018. "The Rock's best advice for success". Fortune. Retrieved June 27, 2018. "Warmed-over Chili not cool". Rogerebert.com. March 3, 2005. "80th Annual Academy Awards Results & Commentary". DigitalHit.com. April 22, 2008. Dwayne Johnson a.k.a. The Rock, presents Visual Effects "Why Dwayne The Rock Johnson is 'franchise viagra'". yahoo.com. November 12, 2016. Johnson, Dwayne [@TheRock] (August 16, 2012). "3:35am. London. AM cardio starts now.. then breakfast, then hit the weights, then on to set of FAST 6. Let's roll.. #OwnIt" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Gilman, Greg (June 6, 2013). "How the Rock Went From Action Hero to TNT Reality 'Hero'". The Wrap. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "The Hero – official page". TNT. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Swift, Andy (March 24, 2013). "Kids' Choice Awards Winners 2013: Kristen Stewart & More — Full List". Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (October 21, 2013). "John David Washington To Co-Star In HBO's 'Ballers', Robert Hoffman In E!'s 'Songbyrd'". Andreeva, Nellie (May 2, 2013). "Dwayne Johnson To Star In & Produce HBO Pilot About Athletes From Steve Levinson & Mark Wahlberg, Peter Berg To Direct". Pomerantz, Dorothy (December 16, 2013). "Dwayne Johnson Is The Top-Grossing Actor Of 2013". Forbes. "Hercules, Starring Dwayne Johnson, to Arrive August 8, 2014". Coming Soon. January 17, 2013. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "TNT Orders Reality Series 'Wake Up Call' from Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson". Variety. Johnson, Dwayne [@TheRock] (August 9, 2013). "She rocks my Championship belt better than me! My fam @UFC Champ @RondaRousey joins me in FAST & FURIOUS 7! #BringIt" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (June 23, 2015). "Dwayne Johnson to Star in Film Adaptation of 'Rampage' Video Game". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Evry, Max (April 22, 2016). "Dwayne Johnson Officially Boards Jumanji Remake". ComingSoon.net. Retrieved August 27, 2016. "The Rock Interview: Dwayne Johnson Talks Daughters, Divorce & Family | Fatherly". www-fatherly-com.cdn.ampproject.org. November 4, 2021. MTV News [@MTVNEWS] (January 29, 2019). "Dwayne @TheRock Johnson tells @joshuahorowitz what to expect from his new @FastFurious spin-off @HobbsAndShaw and whether or not we'll see him in #Fast9" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Gonzalez, Umberto (May 12, 2023). "'Fast X' Shocker: Dwayne Johnson Returns to 'Fast & Furious' Franchise (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Retrieved May 13, 2023. N'Duka, Amanda (April 24, 2018). "Sony Dates 'Jumanji' Sequel For December 2019 – CinemaCon". Deadline. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Pedersen, Erik (August 19, 2015). "Dwayne Johnson Guiding 'Jungle Cruise' Pic For Disney". Deadline Hollywood. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 31, 2017). "Jaume Collet-Serra To Direct Dwayne Johnson In 'Jungle Cruise': No 'Suicide Squad 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Keene, Allison (January 30, 2018). "Emily Blunt Boards Disney's 'Jungle Cruise' with Dwayne Johnson". Collider.com. Retrieved January 30, 2018. Stephens, David (March 26, 2018). "Disney's Jungle Cruise Movie Casts Emily Blunt's Brother". ScreenRant.com. Hood, Cooper (April 18, 2018). "Disney's Jungle Cruise Casts Edgar Ramírez As Its Villain". Screen Rant. Retrieved April 18, 2018. Stephens, David (April 19, 2018). "Disney's Jungle Cruise Casts Jesse Plemons As Another Villain". Screen Rant. "The Rock's Jungle Cruise Involvement Will Go Beyond The Movie". cinemablend.com. April 30, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 19, 2018). "Dwayne Johnson's 'Jungle Cruise' Moves To Summer 2020". Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2019. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Kicks Off 'Hardcore' Eight-Month Workout Program". May 11, 2018. Welk, Brian (April 3, 2020). "'Black Widow' Moves to November as Other MCU Films Shift Back to 2021, 2022". The Wrap. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 8, 2019). "Netflix Takes 'Red Notice'; Ryan Reynolds Joins Dwayne Johnson & Gal Gadot In Rawson Marshall Thurber-Directed Global Heist Film". Fritz, Ben (March 9, 2018). "How Much Does Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Make for One Movie?". The Wall Street Journal. "Dwayne Johnson's 'Red Notice' Pushed Back 5 Months to Fall 2020". November 8, 2018. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Might Just BE The BUSIEST Celeb In The Business! – CHFI". CHFI. July 25, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson Is The Busiest Man In Showbiz". www.msn.com. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "'San Andreas' sequel now in development". upi.com. February 19, 2016. Gonzalez, Sandra (November 14, 2019). "Dwayne Johnson announces release date for 'Black Adam' superhero film". CNN. Retrieved December 19, 2019. Kroll, Justin (February 8, 2019). "Seven Bucks Productions' Hiram Garcia on 'Fighting With My Family' and Dwayne Johnson's Work Ethic". Joe Anderton (April 10, 2021). "Dwayne Johnson announces DC's Black Adam has started filming". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 10, 2021. Lang, Brent (July 20, 2022). "Inside Movie Stars' Salaries: Joaquin Phoenix Nabs $20M for Joker 2, Tom Cruise Heads to Over $100M and More". Variety. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Stedman, Alex (June 28, 2017). "Academy Invites Record 774 New Members". Variety. Retrieved October 7, 2020. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Wishes Happy 30th Birthday to 'Brother' Bad Bunny While Presenting at 2024 Oscars". Peoplemag. Retrieved March 16, 2024. Medina, Bryan (December 5, 2021). "Fortnite reveals Dwayne Johnson as "The Foundation" while Spider-Man joins Chapter 3". MARCA. Retrieved December 8, 2021. Kroll, Justin (April 30, 2018). "John Cena to Star in 'Janson Directive' for Dwayne Johnson's Seven Bucks Productions". Variety. Retrieved June 27, 2018. Mancuso, Vinnie (October 9, 2018). "Dwayne Johnson Is "The Man" in Teaser for Netflix's 'John Henry & The Statesmen'". Collider. Kroll, Justin (February 14, 2017). "Vince Vaughn Joins Dwayne Johnson's 'Fighting With My Family'". Goldberg, Matt (November 14, 2018). "'Fighting with My Family' Trailer Has The Rock Helping Wrestling Wannabes". Collider. Retrieved December 12, 2018. Busch, Anita; Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 29, 2018). "Dwayne Johnson To Play Kamehameha In 'The King;' Robert Zemeckis Directs Script By 'Braveheart's Randall Wallace For Warner Bros & New Line". "Dwayne Johnson's 'Big Trouble in Little China' Won't Be a Remake, But a Continuation". /Film. August 27, 2018. "Dwayne Johnson Says 'Big Trouble in Little China' Remake Definitely Happening". Retrieved June 20, 2018. "Dwayne Johnson Provides an Update on Shane Black's 'Doc Savage'". /Film. April 12, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Yeung, Jeff (October 4, 2020). "Dwayne Johnson Announces Cast of 'Young Rock'". Hype Beast. Johnson, Dwayne [@TheRock] (September 3, 2014). ""Kneel at his feet or get crushed by his boot." My honor to become.. #BlackAdam #TheAntiHero #DCComics" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Dwayne Johnson to Play Black Adam in New Line's 'Shazam,' Darren Lemke to Script". Variety. September 3, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2014. Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 19, 2017). "Shazam! To Split Into Two Films: Dwayne Johnson To Star As 'Black Adam'". "Dwayne Johnson Won't Appear in 'Shazam!,' DC's Geoff Johns Says". The Hollywood Reporter. July 21, 2017. "Dwayne Johnson Hints 'Shazam' Might Release Sooner than Announced". ComingSoon.net. May 26, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2016. de Semlyen, Phil (January 6, 2022). "Dwayne Johnson is breaking all records with his new booze brand". Time Out. Retrieved November 27, 2022. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Is Reviving The XFL With $15 million Bet On The Future Of Football". Yahoo Finance. March 1, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Dixon, Ed (January 2, 2024). "XFL and USFL merge to form new UFL spring football league". SportsPro. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Weprin, Alex (December 31, 2023). "Combined XFL and USFL to be Called UFL, Will Air Games on Fox and ESPN Platforms Starting in 2024". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 2, 2024. "TKO Appoints Dwayne Johnson to Board of Directors". TKO. January 23, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Goldsmith, Jill (January 23, 2024). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Joins Board Of TKO, Secures Full Ownership Of Trademarked Name". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Otterson, Joe (January 23, 2024). "Dwayne Johnson Named Board Member of WWE Parent TKO Group, Granted Full Ownership of 'The Rock' Trademark". Variety. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "The Hero – official page". TNT. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. "The Titan Games". www.nbc.com. "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson Launches "Project Rock," His New Signature Line of Under Armour Gear". mensfitness.com. March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Menapace, Brendan (March 22, 2016). "Under Armour, Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Sell Out of Gym Merch – Promo Marketing". promomarketing.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Gustashaw, Megan (March 4, 2016). "The Rock Designed a Gym Bag to Help Guys Everywhere Get Swole". gq.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Sozzi, Brian (April 8, 2016). "'The Rock' proves again he can sell tons of Under Armour swag". thestreet.com. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "WWE News: The Rock's Alarm Clock App Breaks 1 Million Downloads, Owen Hart's Birthday Today". 411mania.com. May 7, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Project Rock T-Shirts & Gear". Under Armour®. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Dry, Jude (July 18, 2016). "The Rock Just Launched a YouTube Channel, And He's Asking Social Media Stars To Help Him Find His Edge". IndieWire. Retrieved March 26, 2023. shoshannac (September 17, 2019). "Athleticon Is Coming to Shake Up the Bodybuilding and Fitness World". Bodybuilding.com. Retrieved October 21, 2019. "Watch: "The Rock's Ultimate Workout" Features Music From Tech N9ne". StrangeMusicInc.com. March 8, 2017. "Dwayne Johnson makes his rap debut with 'Face Off' — even if fans don't believe it's his first". Entertainment Weekly. Hubbard, Alan (October 15, 2000). "Rock in the Hardest Place". The Independent. London. Retrieved May 27, 2009. "Smackdown Your Vote! Announces New Members, WWF Superstar Kurt Angle Named Honorary Chairman". Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved May 27, 2009.. Nwanevu, Osita (July 19, 2016). "Watch the Rock's Very Odd Speech at the 2000 Republican Convention". The Slate. New York City. Retrieved September 11, 2016. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Admits He Didn't Vote for Trump or Hillary in 2016: I Wanted 'Someone Else'". Mediaite. April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Sirota, Peggy; Weaver, Caity (May 10, 2017). "Dwayne Johnson for President!". GQ. Archived from the original on June 11, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2017. Mizoguchi, Karen (September 27, 2020). "Dwayne Johnson Endorses Presidential Candidate for First Time, Supports Joe Biden and Kamala Harris". People. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Smith, Ryan (October 25, 2021). "Dwayne Johnson Shares 'Honest Feelings' on Running for President". Newsweek. Retrieved February 4, 2024. "The Rock for president? I'll run if the people want it, says Dwayne Johnson". The Guardian. April 12, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2024. "DJ Rock Foundation: Mission Statement". DJ Rock Foundation.org. 2006. Archived from the original on March 5, 2008. Retrieved June 4, 2007. Schwartz, Nick. "Miami unveils football locker room dedicated to The Rock". For The Win. Retrieved September 11, 2014. "He's a Pawller! Dwayne Johnson drops $1,500 to save orphaned puppy's life". TODAY.com. December 2, 2015. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson donates thousands to aid Hurricane Harvey recovery efforts". ABC7 Los Angeles. August 29, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "@therock on Instagram: "Cool update on Armed Forces Day. I was able to donate an entire gym to a military base that's very close to my heart, @jointbasephh. We…"". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "'Stay strong, Kauai': 'The Rock' asks for donations for flood-ravaged Kauai". hawaiinewsnow.com. May 16, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson Inspired by Make-A-Wish Kids on Disney's 'Jungle Cruise' Set". Movies. September 15, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Jackson, Angelique (July 24, 2023). "Dwayne Johnson Contributes 'Historic' Donation to SAG-AFTRA Foundation Relief Fund, Says President Courtney B. Vance: 'It's a Call to Arms for All of Us' (Exclusive)". variety.com. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Jordan, Julie (June 1, 2007). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson & Wife Split Up". People. Retrieved June 4, 2007. FitzPatrick, Hayley (August 14, 2019). "Dwayne Johnson's heartfelt post to his daughter on her 18th birthday will make you want to call your dad". ABC News. Retrieved February 12, 2020. "Tahiti Tatou". Archived from the original on October 10, 2004. Retrieved December 7, 2007. "The Rock's Royal Homecoming". Pacific Magazine. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 13, 2008. Hurtado, Alexandra (April 19, 2021). "Meet the Woman Who Got a Rock from Dwayne Johnson, Lauren Hashian". Parade: Entertainment, Recipes, Health, Life, Holidays. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Brow, Jason (September 17, 2015). "Lauren Hashian: 5 Things To Know About The Rock's Pregnant Girlfriend". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on October 12, 2015. Retrieved October 13, 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Finn, Natalie (May 30, 2008). "The Rock's Divorce Solidifies". Retrieved September 23, 2020. Gill, Meagan (June 13, 2017). "Proud of Canadian roots: Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson holds dual-citizenship". 604 now. Retrieved July 12, 2019. "@therock on Instagram: "After approximately 30 hours of tattooing (4 sessions) with my good bud and iconic artist @nikkohurtado, the story of my skull is complete.…"". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2018. :"@therock on Instagram: "We do. August 18th, 2019. Hawaii. Pōmaikaʻi (blessed) @laurenhashianofficial @hhgarcia41"". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Jones, Rich (August 19, 2019). "Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson announces marriage to Lauren Hashian". Mirror. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Dwayne The Rock Johnson Marries Longtime Partner Laura Hashian in Secret Hawaiian Wedding, See Pics". News18. August 19, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019. Dwayne Johnson's 3 Kids: All About Simone, Jasmine and Tiana, 2023, retrieved December 26, 2023 Zauzmer, Emily (December 17, 2018). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson's Daughter Jasmine Turns 3 — See Her Parents' Birthday Tributes". People. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson's Daughter Tiana Turns 2! 'Sweetest Baby Girl in the Whole World,' Lauren Hashian Says". People. "One good thing Virginia has going for it this week? The Rock". The Washington Post. February 7, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019. Wolton, Rebbekka (October 10, 2018). "Taking a look inside The Rock's luxurious $5 million mansion". Sports Retriever. Retrieved April 25, 2019. "The Rock Moves into Southwest Ranches, Orders Big Addition". Curbed Miami. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "Simone Johnson begins training at WWE Performance Center". WWE. Retrieved February 12, 2020. "WWE: The Rock's daughter steps into the ring". BBC News. February 12, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2020. "WATCH: The Rock on his daughter, Simone Johnson, joining WWE". Wrestling News | Wwe and Aew Results, Spoilers, Rumors & Scoops. May 16, 2020. Callas, Brad (May 30, 2022). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson's Daughter Simone Responds to Backlash Over Her WWE Name". Complex. Proszenko, Adrian (November 18, 2022). "'Make history': The Rock urges Samoa to take World Cup fight to Kangaroos". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved November 5, 2023. "'This is a big deal': The Rock, NFL star QB deliver epic speeches to Samoa ahead of World Cup final". Fox Sports. November 19, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Peaks on the Billboard Hot 100: "You're Welcome": Anderson, Trevor (December 7, 2016). "Thanks to 'Moana,' Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Debuts on Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Peaks on the Canadian Hot 100: "You're Welcome": "Chart Search: Dwayne Johnson, CAN, You're Welcome". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Gold & Platinum - RIAA". RIAA. Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "BRIT Certified - bpi" (To access, enter the search parameter "Dwayne Johnson" and select "Search by Keyword"). British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Tech N9ne Chart History: Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Peaks on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart: "It Doesn't Matter": "Wyclef Jean Chart History: Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Face Off": "Tech N9ne Chart History: Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Tech N9ne Chart History: Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Wyclef Jean Chart History: Hot Canadian Digital Song Sales". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (October 8, 2021). "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson on his historic rap debut (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "Tech N9ne Chart History: Bubbling Under Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "PWI Awards". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Kappa Publishing Group. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved December 4, 2016. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated Award Winners – Match of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on April 15, 2008. Retrieved May 12, 2008. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated (PWI) 500 for 2000". Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved December 4, 2016. "USWA World Tag Team Title History". Solie's Title Histories. Retrieved March 21, 2008. Meltzer, Dave (January 26, 2011). "Biggest issue of the year: The 2011 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Awards Issue". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, CA: 1–40. ISSN 1083-9593. Meltzer, Dave (January 30, 2012). "Jan 30 Wrestling Observer Newsletter: Gigantic year-end awards issue, best and worst in all categories plus UFC on FX 1, death of Savannah Jack, ratings, tons and tons of news". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, CA. ISSN 1083-9593. Meltzer, Dave (January 23, 2013). "The 2012 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Annual Awards Issue". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. ISSN 1083-9593. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2013. "Wrestling Observer Hall of Fame". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2010. "History of WWE World Heavyweight Championship". WWE. November 15, 1998. "Rock's eight WWE Championship Reign". WWE. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2013. "Rock's first WCW Championship Reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2001. "Rock's second WCW Championship Reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved November 5, 2001. "WWE Intercontinental Championship official title history". WWE. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "World Tag Team Championship official title history". WWE. Retrieved March 21, 2008. "WWE's Triple Crown Champions". WWE. Retrieved May 8, 2019. "WWF Deadly Game Tournament Brackets". Pro Wrestling History. Retrieved April 20, 2007. Laboon, Jeff (December 8, 2014). "2014 Slammy Award winners". WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "2011 Slammy Award Winners". WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "WWE.com Exclusive Slammy Awards 2011". WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "2012 WWE Slammy Awards and WWE.com Slammy Awards winners". WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "2013 Slammy Award winners". WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "And the winner is..." WWE. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "2015 Slammy Award winners". WWE. December 16, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "Dwayne Johnson". Sports Illustrated. October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2014. "2001 Teen Choice Awards". Hollywood.com. October 26, 2001. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "Dwayne Johnson To Receive "Cinemacon® Action Star of the Year Award" | CinemaCon". cinemacon.com. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "2013 Kids' Choice Awards: And the winners are..." Entertainment Weekly. March 23, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "Muscle & Fitness names The Rock as their 'Man of the Century'". WWE.com. December 3, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2019. "The Rock Receives Mr. Olympia ICON Award, Makes Announcement on Production Deal for 2017 Event". 411Mania. September 18, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "People's Choice Awards 2016: Full List of Winners". People's Choice. January 7, 2016. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "Dwayne 'The Rock' Johnson Is This Year's Sexiest Man Alive!". People. November 15, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "Dwayne Johnson – The Shorty Awards". shortyawards.com. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Hollywood Walk of Fame". ABC News. Retrieved June 30, 2016. "Hollywood Walk of Fame – Dwayne Johnson". walkoffame.com. Hollywood Chamber of Commerce. Retrieved December 13, 2017. "People's Choice Awards 2017: Full List of Winners". People's Choice. January 19, 2017. Archived from the original on January 20, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2017. "Kids' Choice Awards: The Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. March 11, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Teen Choice Awards 2017 Winners: The Complete List". E! Online. August 14, 2017. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "NAACP Image Awards 2017 Winners: The Complete List". E! News. February 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. "2018 Kids' Choice Awards: Complete List of Winners". E! Online. March 25, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2019. "Who won the Teen Choice Awards? See the full winners' list". USA Today. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Khalifeh, Mona (March 5, 2018). "Dwayne Johnson Celebrates Winning a Razzie For Baywatch: The Movie Was So Bad They Actually Had to Create Another Category". E! Online. E!. Retrieved March 5, 2018. Williams, Janice (March 5, 2018). "The Rock Proudly Accepts 2018 Razzie Award for So-Bad-It's-Good 'Baywatch' Movie". Newsweek. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2018. "People unfollow 'The Rock' after he posts support of US military". americanmilitarynews.com. March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 21, 2019. "Dwayne Johnson Will Receive MTV's Generation Award". Deadline. June 13, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019. Dwayne Johnson at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Dwayne Johnson at IMDb The Rock at Twitter The Rock on WWE.com Dwayne Johnson's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling Database Dwayne Johnson profile at Miami Hurricanes football Portals:  Biography  Canada  Film  Los Angeles  California