Aaliyah Dana Haughton (/ɑːˈliːə/ ah-LEE-ə; January 16, 1979 – August 25, 2001) was an American singer and actress. She has been credited with helping to redefine contemporary R&B, pop, and hip hop, earning her the nicknames the "Princess of R&B" and "Queen of Urban Pop". Born in Brooklyn and raised in Detroit, she first gained recognition at the age of 10, when she appeared on the television show Star Search and performed in concert alongside Gladys Knight. At the age of 12, Aaliyah signed with Jive Records and her uncle Barry Hankerson's Blackground Records. Hankerson introduced her to R. Kelly, who became her mentor, as well as lead songwriter and producer of her debut album, Age Ain't Nothing but a Number (1994). The album sold three million copies in the United States and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). After allegations of an illegal marriage with Kelly, Aaliyah ended her contract with Jive and signed with Atlantic Records. Aaliyah worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott for her second album, One in a Million (1996), which sold three million copies in the United States and more than eight million copies worldwide. In 2000, Aaliyah made her acting debut in the film Romeo Must Die, alongside Jet Li. She contributed to the film's soundtrack, which was supported by her single "Try Again". The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 solely through airplay, becoming the first in the chart's history to do so. After completing the film, Aaliyah subsequently filmed her starring role in Queen of the Damned (which was released posthumously), and in July 2001, released her eponymous third album, which topped the Billboard 200. The album spawned the singles "We Need a Resolution", "Rock the Boat" and "More Than a Woman". On August 25, 2001, at the age of 22, Aaliyah was killed in an airplane accident in the Bahamas along with eight other people on board, when the overloaded aircraft she was traveling in crashed shortly after takeoff. The pilot was later found to have traces of cocaine and alcohol in his body and was not qualified to fly the aircraft designated for the flight. Aaliyah's family filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the aircraft's operator, which was settled out of court. In the decades following her death, Aaliyah's music has continued to achieve commercial success, aided by several posthumous releases. She has sold 8.1 million albums in the US and an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide. Billboard lists her as the tenth most successful female R&B artist of the past 25 years, and the 27th most successful in history. Her accolades include three American Music Awards and two MTV VMAs, along with five Grammy Award nominations. Aaliyah Dana Haughton was born on January 16, 1979, in Brooklyn, the younger child of Diane and Michael "Miguel" Haughton, a warehouse worker. She was of African-American descent. Her name is the feminine form of the Arabic "Ali", meaning "highest, most exalted one, the best." Aaliyah was fond of her name, calling it "beautiful" and saying she was "very proud of it" and strove to live up to her name every day. When she was five years old, her family moved to Detroit, Michigan, where she was raised along with her older brother, Rashad. In Detroit, her father began working in the warehouse business, one of his brother-in-law Barry Hankerson's widening interests. Her mother stayed home and raised her and her brother. Her mother enrolled her in voice lessons at an early age. Eventually, she started performing at weddings, church choir, and charity events. Aaliyah attended a Catholic school, Gesu Elementary, where in first grade she was cast in the stage play Annie which inspired her to become an entertainer. Aaliyah's mother was a vocalist, and her uncle Hankerson was an entertainment lawyer who had been married to Gladys Knight. As a child, Aaliyah traveled with Knight and worked with an agent in New York City to audition for commercials and television programs, including Family Matters. After failing to land a role on the show she continued her acting through the Gesu Players. In 1989 at age ten she appeared on Star Search, where she performed "My Funny Valentine". Aaliyah chose to begin auditioning. Her mother made the decision to drop her surname. She auditioned for several record labels and at age 11 appeared in concerts alongside Knight. During her childhood, she had several pet animals including ducks, snakes and iguanas. Her cousin Jomo had a pet alligator, which Aaliyah felt was too much, remarking, "that was something I wasn't going to stroke." Aaliyah attended Detroit schools and believed she was well-liked, but she was teased for her short stature. By age 15, however, she came to love her height. Her mother told her to be happy she was small and complimented her. Although some children disliked Aaliyah, she determined, "You always have to deal with people who are jealous, but there were so few it didn't even matter. The majority of kids supported me, which was wonderful." Even in her adult life, she considered herself small. She had "learned to accept and love" herself and added: "the most important thing is to think highly of yourself because if you don't, no one else will". During her audition for acceptance to the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts, Aaliyah sang "Ave Maria" in Latin. Aaliyah held a 4.0 grade-point average when graduating from high school. She reflected: "I wanted to keep that 4.0. Being in the industry, you know, I don't want kids to think, 'I can just sing and forget about school.' I think it's very important to have an education, and even more important to have something to fall back on." She considered a future career teaching music, music history or drama if she did not make a living as a recording artist because, as she reasoned, "when you pick a career it has to be something you love". After Hankerson signed a distribution deal with Jive Records, he signed Aaliyah to his Blackground Records label at the age of 12. Hankerson later introduced her to recording artist and producer R. Kelly, who became Aaliyah's mentor, as well as lead songwriter and producer of her first album, recorded when she was 14. Aaliyah's debut album, Age Ain't Nothing but a Number, was released under her mononym "Aaliyah", by Jive and Blackground Records on May 24, 1994; it debuted at number 24 on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 38,000 copies in its first week. It peaked at number 18 on the Billboard 200 and it was certified two times Platinum by the RIAA. To date the album has sold over 3 million copies in the US. In Canada, the album was certified gold by Music Canada for 50,000 copies in shipments. In 2014, Vibe magazine estimated that the album had sold six million copies globally. Upon its release, Age Ain't Nothing But a Number received generally favorable reviews from music critics. Some writers noted that Aaliyah's "silky vocals" and "sultry voice" blended with Kelly's new jack swing helped define R&B in the 1990s. Her sound was also compared to that of female quartet En Vogue. Christopher John Farley of Time magazine called the album a "beautifully restrained work", noting that Aaliyah's "girlish, breathy vocals rode calmly on R. Kelly's rough beats". Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic felt that the album had its "share of filler", but described the singles as "slyly seductive". He also wrote that the songs on the album were "frequently better" than that of Kelly's second studio album, 12 Play. The single "At Your Best (You Are Love)" was criticized by Billboard for being out of place on the album and for its length. Aaliyah's debut single, "Back & Forth", peaked at number 5 on the Hot 100 and topped the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for three weeks. Two more singles charted: a cover of the Isley Brothers' "At Your Best (You Are Love)" peaked at number 6 on the Billboard Hot 100, and the album's title track, "Age Ain't Nothing but a Number", peaked at number 75. Additionally, she released "The Thing I Like" as part of the soundtrack to the 1994 film A Low Down Dirty Shame. "If Your Girl Only Knew" (1996) The first single released from her second studio album, "If Your Girl Only Knew" was described as a sassy, organ-infused song. Aaliyah was noted for having "smoother, more seductive, and stronger" singing. Problems playing this file? See media help. In 1996, Aaliyah left Jive Records and signed with Atlantic Records. She worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott, who contributed to her second studio album, One in a Million. Elliott recalled Timbaland and herself being nervous to work with Aaliyah, since Aaliyah had already released her successful debut album while Elliott and Timbaland were just starting out. Elliott also feared she would be a diva, but reflected that Aaliyah "came in and was so warming; she made us immediately feel like family." The album yielded the lead single "If Your Girl Only Knew", which peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs for two weeks. It also generated the singles "Hot Like Fire" and "4 Page Letter". One in a Million peaked at number 18 on the Billboard 200, and was certified double platinum by the RIAA on June 16, 1997, denoting shipments of two million copies. The album went on to sell 3 million copies in the US and over eight million copies worldwide. The year after her album was released, Aaliyah was featured on Timbaland & Magoo's debut single, "Up Jumps da Boogie". In 1997 Aaliyah graduated with a 4.0 GPA from the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts, where she majored in drama. The same year, she began her acting career, playing herself in the police drama television series New York Undercover. During this time, Aaliyah participated in the Children's Benefit Concert, a charity concert at the Beacon Theatre in New York. She also became the spokesperson for the Tommy Hilfiger Corporation. During her campaign with Tommy Hilfiger, the company sold over 2,400 pairs of the red, white and blue baggy jeans she wore in their advertisements. In December 1997, she performed the Christmas carol "What Child Is This?" at the annual Christmas in Washington television special. She also contributed to the soundtrack album for the animated film Anastasia, performing a cover version of "Journey to the Past" that earned songwriters Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Song. Aaliyah performed the song at the 1998 Academy Awards ceremony, becoming the youngest singer to perform at the event. Also in 1998, she released the song "Are You That Somebody?" which was featured on the Dr. Dolittle soundtrack. The song peaked at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 and earned Aaliyah her first Grammy Award nomination. In 1999, Aaliyah landed her first big-screen acting role in Romeo Must Die. She starred opposite martial artist Jet Li, playing a couple who fall in love amid their warring families. Released on March 24, 2000, the movie grossed US$18.6 million in its first weekend, ranking number two at the box office. Aaliyah purposely stayed away from reviews of the film to "make it easier on" herself, but she heard "that people were able to get into me, which is what I wanted." In contrast, some critics felt there was no chemistry between her and Jet Li, as well as viewing the film as too simplistic. This was echoed by Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times, who wrote that while Aaliyah was "a natural" and the film was conceived as a spotlight for both her and Li, "they have so little chemistry together you'd think they're putting out a fire instead of shooting off sparks. In addition to acting, Aaliyah served as an executive producer of the film's soundtrack, for which she contributed four songs. "Try Again" was released as a single from the soundtrack; the song topped the Billboard Hot 100, making Aaliyah the first artist to top the chart based solely on airplay; this led the song to be released in a 12-inch vinyl and 7-inch single. The music video won the Best Female Video and Best Video from a Film awards at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. It also earned her a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R&B Vocalist. The soundtrack went on to sell 1.5 million copies in the United States. After completing Romeo Must Die, Aaliyah began to work on her second film, Queen of the Damned. She played the role of an ancient vampire, Queen Akasha, which she described as a "manipulative, crazy, sexual being". Filming both Romeo Must Die and Queen of the Damned delayed the release of the album. Aaliyah had not intended for her albums to have such a gap between them. "I wanted to take a break after One in a Million to just relax, think about how I wanted to approach the next album. Then, when I was ready to start back up, "Romeo" happened, and so I had to take another break and do that film and then do the soundtrack, then promote it. The break turned into a longer break than I anticipated." Ultimately, she filmed Queen of the Damned and recorded her third album at the same time so that it could be released in 2001. Aaliyah enjoyed balancing her singing and acting careers. Though she called music a "first" for her, she also had been acting since she was young and had wanted to begin acting "at some point in my career", but "wanted it to be the right time and the right vehicle" and felt Romeo Must Die "was it". Connie Johnson of the Los Angeles Times argued that Aaliyah having to focus on her film career may have caused her to not give the album "the attention it merited." During the recording stages for the album, Aaliyah's publicist disclosed that the album's release date was most likely in October 2000. Eventually, she finished recording the album in March 2001; after a year of recording tracks that began in March of the previous year.Aaliyah was released five years after One in a Million on July 17, 2001, and it debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 187,000 copies in its first week. The first single from the album, "We Need a Resolution", peaked at number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100. The week after Aaliyah's death, her third album rose from number 19 to number 1 on the Billboard 200. "Rock the Boat" was released as a posthumous single. The music video premiered on BET's Access Granted, and it became the most viewed and highest rated episode in the history of the show. The song peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100. Promotional posters for Aaliyah that had been put up in major cities such as New York and Los Angeles became makeshift memorials for grieving fans. In February 2002, the album was certified double Platinum by the RIAA. "More than a Woman" and "I Care 4 U" were released as posthumous singles and peaked within the top 25 of the Billboard Hot 100. "More than a Woman" reached number one on the UK singles chart making Aaliyah the first female deceased artist to reach number one on the UK singles chart. "More than a Woman" was replaced by George Harrison's "My Sweet Lord" which is the only time in the UK singles chart's history when a dead artist has replaced another dead artist at number one. Aaliyah was signed to appear in several future films, including a romantic film titled Some Kind of Blue, and a Whitney Houston–produced remake of the 1976 film Sparkle. Houston recalled Aaliyah being "so enthusiastic" about the film; the project was shelved after she died. Before her death Aaliyah filmed some scenes for the sequels of The Matrix as the character Zee. A portion of her role in The Matrix Reloaded was filmed; these unused scenes were included in the tribute section of the Matrix Ultimate Collection series. "Are You That Somebody?" (1998) Timbaland's stuttering, idiosyncratic productions challenged Aaliyah to reveal her artistic personality more than she had on R. Kelly's smoother musical settings. Problems playing this file? See media help. Aaliyah had the vocal range of a soprano, and with the release of her debut album Age Ain't Nothing but a Number, writer Dimitri Ehrlich of Entertainment Weekly compared her style and sound to R&B group En Vogue. Ehrlich also expressed that Aaliyah's "silky vocals are more agile than those of self-proclaimed queen of hip-hop soul Mary J. Blige." In her review for Aaliyah's second studio album One in a Million Vibe magazine, music critic Dream Hampton said that Aaliyah's "deliciously feline" voice has the same "pop appeal" as Janet Jackson's. According to Rolling Stone "the most remarkable thing about Aaliyah's voice, besides its flexibility and crisp range, was its almost preternatural poise — she always seemed to be holding her power in reserve, to know every side of the scenarios she described". While, Siân Pattenden from Mixmag stated that, "She doesn't try to toss the caber with vocal athleticism. There's no shouting, screeching, wailing or jazz-style noodling. Everything is underplayed: Ms Haughton's range is displayed by the slightest high-octave backing and tiniest harmonies". Aaliyah herself said her vocal styling consisted of her singing softly while utilizing her falsetto. She further explained saying, "My signature style is breathy, tone-y, airy. It's simple but I can ride a crazy track." Although she frequently sang in a softer tone, there were moments when she utilized other facets of her voice. "Never Givin' Up" (1996) and "The One I Gave My Heart To" (1997) are a few stand-out vocal highlights. Daryl Simmons the producer of "The One I Gave My Heart To", recalled Aaliyah doing opera vocal warm-up exercises in preparation for the songs recording. While commenting on her doing opera vocal warm ups Simmons mentioned, "It was the furthest thing I would have ever thought that she could do. It just blew my mind." The song's writer, Diane Warren praised her vocals on the song, saying: "It showed her vocal range, and I know a couple of people thought she wouldn't be able to do that song. I thought, 'No, she'll be able to do that." Variety echoed a similar sentiment as warren, saying "The One I Gave My Heart To" "showcased Aaliyah's ability to hit higher notes." Discussing her approach on "Never Givin' Up" producer Craig King said, "lyrically and vocally she just took you to places that you didn't know she could go". From the very beginning, she opted "for an edgier, more mature sound", and her songs were often uptempo and at the same time often dark, revolving around "matters of the heart". She "easily straddled the hip-hop and pop worlds, never projecting the frilliness of her ingénue peers". In 2001, Aaliyah called her sound "street but sweet", pairing feminine vocals with a gritty urban rhythm track. In another interview she further spoke about her artistry, saying, "I love to fuse other types of music with my own". She explored a wide range of genres such as R&B, pop, hip hop, funk, soul, and dance-pop. Discussing her lyrical content in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide (2004), Keith Harris said "When it came to sexual availability, she was between En Vogue maliciously taunting 'You're never gonna get it' and Tweet blankly cooing 'Oops, there goes my shirt.'" Lyrically, "Her first two albums carefully toed the line between adolescence and adulthood, displaying a woman exploring the terrain of love, trust, and lust; one who exuded a playful innocence while hinting at a more sultry side." Aaliyah did not usually write her own lyrics. The only time she had a hand in writing is on the song "Death of a Playa" from the "Hot Like Fire" single (1997). She co-wrote that song with her brother Rashad Haughton, and "it reflects Aaliyah's dark perspective on romance". Of her role in crafting her music, Aaliyah said, "I like to have the final say but I was trained as a singer, actress and dancer, the interpreter, bringing other people's words to life. I need the songs to reflect me in one way or another". After her R. Kelly–produced debut album, Aaliyah worked with Timbaland and Missy Elliott, whose productions were more electronic. The duo "mixed choppy, nervous rhythms over loops of computer-generated backing tracks, and incorporating harmonies which – within the genre's limited horizons – seemed daring". They also created, the "Freeze-and-stop style of singing on top of bass-heavy instrumentals" which became Aaliyah's signature style. Aaliyah's songs have been said to have "crisp production" and "staccato arrangements" that "extend genre boundaries" while containing "old-school" soul music. Kelefah Sanneh of The New York Times called her "a digital diva who wove a spell with ones and zeroes", and writes that her songs comprised "simple vocal riffs, repeated and refracted to echo the manipulated loops that create digital rhythm", as Timbaland's "computer-programmed beats fitted perfectly with her cool, breathy voice to create a new kind of electronic music." She released "musically risky singles into a notoriously fickle pop market", without being "concerned about conforming to the stereotypes of the marketplace". Her songs "gracefully walk a line between commerciality and experimentation". Reviewing her album, British publication NME felt that Aaliyah's "radical" third album was "intended to consolidate her position as U.S. R&B's most experimental artist". As her albums progressed, writers felt that Aaliyah matured, calling her progress a "near-flawless declaration of strength and independence". ABC News noted that her music was "evolving from the punchy pop-influenced hip hop and R&B to a more mature, introspective sound", on her third album. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described her album Aaliyah as "a statement of maturity and a stunning artistic leap forward", and called it one of the strongest urban soul records of its time. She portrayed "unfamiliar sounds, styles and emotions", but managed to please critics with the contemporary sound it contained. Ernest Hardy of Rolling Stone felt that Aaliyah was displaying stronger technique, giving her best vocal performances. Altogether, Aaliyah's music can be described as alternative R&B, progressive soul, and neo soul, according to Time's Farley. As an artist, Aaliyah said she was inspired by a number of performers. These include Michael Jackson, Stevie Wonder,Sade, Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails, Korn, Donnie Hathaway, Johnny Mathis, Janet Jackson, Whitney Houston, and Barbra Streisand. Aaliyah said that Michael Jackson's Thriller was her "favorite album" and that "nothing will ever top Thriller." She said she had always wanted to work with Janet Jackson, to whom she had often been compared, saying, "I admire her a great deal. She's a total performer ... I'd love to do a duet with Janet Jackson." Jackson reciprocated Aaliyah's affection, saying, "I've loved her from the beginning because she always comes out and does something different, musically." Jackson also said she would have enjoyed collaborating with Aaliyah. According to director Paul Hunter from day one, "Aaliyah wanted her videos to stand out from clips by other R&B singers". He stated, "You can watch programming all day and see a certain type of video by female artists, "Then when one of hers comes on it's something special, something different to look at. That's what she was about." Christopher John Farley from Time stated that Aaliyah's "videos, for the most part, are about mood, not about storylines... Her videos are usually lushly shot and infused with sexual tension, though not in overt and obvious ways". Alisha Acquaye from Teen Vogue felt that, "There's much to gather while watching an Aaliyah music video" in fact, she thinks that watching them is "actually an understatement". Acquaye further explained, "There's a state of hypnosis you submit to as she envelops you through sight and sound, tugging at your heartstrings. Between a sequence of sensual, strong movements, infectious instrumentals, and intuitive lyrics that spark emotions of desire, sex, and empowerment, you are enraptured in Aaliyah's physical presence". Most of Aaliyah's videos included dance routines. While discussing her video choreography Billboard mentioned that she "coined the smooth choreography and tomboyish style that would inspire [R&B]'s future generations for years to come". Vibe praised several videos saying, "Looking back on her videos like "Try Again" and "Are You That Somebody," Aaliyah's talent in all of those techniques of dancing are apparent, as she's able to hit every syncopated word and beat with ease as if she's moving on air". Kyann-Sian Williams from NME named "Are You That Somebody?" as a visual that, "pushed the boundaries when it came to dance breaks in music videos". Williams declared, "Until that time, dance breaks were usually reserved for boybands like *NSync and the Backstreet Boys, but Aaliyah claimed it for R&B stars too". Aaliyah focused on her public image while protecting her private life. She felt that it was "important ... to differentiate yourself from the rest of the pack". USA Today said, "Her slinky vocal style and eye-popping videos made her a crossover star, while her persistent protection of her privacy added an air of intrigue about her". According to Aaliyah, "I put a lot of pressure on myself to be true to myself and not let anything else influence me to do what someone else is doing. Being a little edgy and sexy is me. My image isn't a put-on. I'm happy to put over that dark edge in my videos, because it's always been there. I used to wear my sunglasses or have my hair over one eye a lot more when I was younger. [Now] I'm happy with all aspects of myself." She often wore baggy clothes and sunglasses, stating that she wanted to be herself. Aaliyah also wore black clothing, starting a trend for similar fashion among women in United States and Japan. In 1998, she hired a personal trainer to keep in shape, and exercised five days a week and ate diet foods. As her career progressed, "she went through so many fashion revamps". For example, When she changed her hairstyle, Aaliyah took her mother's advice and covered her left eye, much like Veronica Lake. The look has become known as her signature and been referred to as fusion of "unnerving emotional honesty" and "a sense of mystique". In regards to her fashion choices, writer Jeff Lorez described her as a "model of understatement". According to Lorez, "She's beautiful, but hardly in a high-gloss, supermodel way—more like a really good-looking girl next door. And rather than bling-blinging her ice in a ghetto-fabulous manner befitting her Trumped-up surroundings, she blings on the down-low: A subtle bracelet here, a winking pendant there, offset by her simple black jeans and matching sweater. Trés cool". Former TRL host Carson Daly said that she was "cutting edge, always one step ahead of the curve and that the TRL audience looks to her to figure out what's hot and what's new". Aaliyah was often praised for her "clean-cut image" and "moral values". Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote of Aaliyah's artistry and image, "she was lithe and dulcet in a way that signified neither jailbait nor hottie—an ingenue whose selling point was sincerity, not innocence and the obverse it implies." Emil Wilbekin, told CNN: "Aaliyah is an excellent role model because she started her career in the public eye at age 15 with a gold album, Age Ain't Nothing but a Number. And then her second album, One in a Million went double platinum. She had the leading role in Romeo Must Die, which was a box office success. She's won numerous awards, several MTV music video awards, and aside from her professional successes, many of her lyrics are very inspirational and uplifting. She also carried herself in a very professional manner. She was well-spoken. She was beautiful, but she didn't use her beauty to sell her music. She used her talent. Many young hip-hop fans greatly admire her." She was also seen by others as a sex symbol and didn't have a problem with being considered one. "I know that people think I'm sexy and I am looked at as that, and it is cool with me," she stated. "It's wonderful to have sex appeal. If you embrace it, it can be a very beautiful thing. I am totally cool with that. Definitely. I see myself as sexy. If you are comfortable with it, it can be very classy and it can be very appealing." Aaliyah also felt though her image was "risque and sexy", it was important to remain respectable because she wanted to make songs that everyone could relate to without it being vulgar. When she participated in fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger's All America Tour Tommy Jean ads, she wore boxer shorts, baggy jeans and a tube top. Hilfiger's brother, Andy, called it "a whole new look" that was "classy but sexy". The single "We Need a Resolution" was argued to have transformed "the once tomboy into a sexy grown woman". Aaliyah's family played a major role in the course of her career. Beginning in 1995, Aaliyah's father Michael Haughton served as her personal manager, and her mother assisted him. Aaliyah's brother Rashad Haughton and her cousin Jomo Hankerson were with her when she worked. After her father became ill, her brother Rashad became her manager. Aaliyah was known to have usually been accompanied by members of her family. Her brother Rashad stated that the filming of "Rock the Boat" was the only time her family was not present during a video shoot. In October 2001, Rashad said: "It really boggles everyone [that] from Day One, every single video she ever shot there's always been myself or my mother or my father there. The circumstances surrounding this last video were really strange because my mother had eye surgery and couldn't fly. That really bothered her because she always traveled. My dad had to take care of my mom at that time. And I went to Australia to visit some friends. We really couldn't understand why we weren't there. You ask yourself maybe we could have stopped it. But you can't really answer the question. There's always gonna be that question of why." Her friend Kidada Jones said in the last year of Aaliyah's life, her parents had given her more freedom and she had spoken about wanting a family. Aaliyah reportedly developed an intimate relationship with Kelly during the recording of her debut album. She told Vibe magazine in 1994 that she and Kelly would "go watch a movie" and "go eat" when she got tired and would then "come back and work". She described the relationship between her and Kelly as "rather close." In December 1994, Aaliyah told the Chicago Sun-Times that whenever she was asked about being married to Kelly, she urged them not to believe "all that mess" and that she and Kelly were "close" and "people took it the wrong way". With the release of Age Ain't Nothing but a Number, rumors circulated about a relationship between Aaliyah and R. Kelly, including the allegation that they had secretly married without her parents' knowledge. Vibe magazine later revealed a marriage certificate that listed the couple married on August 31, 1994, in Sheraton Gateway Suites in Rosemont, Illinois. Aaliyah, who was 15 at the time, was listed as 18 on the certificate; R. Kelly was 27. The marriage was annulled by her parents in February 1995, but the pair denied the allegations, saying that neither was married and that the certificate was a forgery. Jamie Foster Brown in the 1994 issue of Sister 2 Sister wrote that "R. Kelly told me that he and Aaliyah got together, and it was just magic." Brown also reported hearing about a sexual relationship between them. "I've been hearing about Robert and Aaliyah for a while—that she was pregnant. Or that she was coming and going in and out of his house. People would see her walking his dog, 12 Play, with her basketball cap and sunglasses on. Every time I asked the label, they said it was platonic. But I kept hearing complaints from people about her being in the studio with all those men." Brown later added "at 15, you have all those hormones and no brains attached to them". In his 2011 book The Man Behind the Man: Looking from the Inside Out, Demetrius Smith Sr., Kelly's former tour manager, revealed that Kelly married Aaliyah after she told him that she was pregnant. In the 2019 documentary Surviving R. Kelly, Smith described how he helped Aaliyah forge the necessary documents to show she was 18 to marry Kelly. Smith also said he was "not proud" of his role in facilitating their marriage. Additionally, the documentary revealed that Jovante Cunningham, a former backup dancer, claimed to have witnessed Kelly having sex with Aaliyah on his tour bus. Aaliyah admitted in court documents that she had lied about her age. In May 1997, she filed suit in Cook County seeking to have all records of the marriage expunged because she was not old enough under state law to get married without her parents' consent. It was reported that she cut off all professional and personal ties with Kelly after the marriage was annulled and ceased contact with him. In a 2014 interview, Aaliyah's cousin Jomo Hankerson said that she "got villainized" for her relationship with Kelly and the scandal over the marriage made it difficult to find producers for her second album. "We were coming off of a multi-platinum debut album and except for a couple of relationships with Jermaine Dupri and Puffy, it was hard for us to get producers on the album." Hankerson also expressed confusion over why "they were upset" with Aaliyah given her age at the time. Aaliyah was known to avoid answering questions about Kelly after the professional split. During an interview with Christopher John Farley, she was asked whether she was still in contact with him and would ever work with him again. Farley said Aaliyah responded with a "firm, frosty 'no'" to both questions. Vibe magazine said Aaliyah changed the subject anytime "you bring up the marriage with her". A spokeswoman for Aaliyah said in 2000 that when "R. Kelly comes up, she doesn't even speak his name, and nobody's allowed to ask about it at all." Kelly later said that Aaliyah had opportunities to address their relationship after they separated professionally but chose not to. In 2019, Damon Dash revealed to Hip Hop Motivation that Aaliyah did not even speak of her relationship with Kelly in private; he tried multiple times to discuss it with her, but she would only say that Kelly was a "bad man". Dash said he was unable to watch Surviving R. Kelly because its interviews with visibly traumatized girls struggling to discuss their encounters with Kelly reminded him of how Aaliyah behaved when trying to recount her relationship with Kelly. Dash later appeared in Surviving R. Kelly, Part II in 2020. Other allegations were made about Kelly regarding underage girls in the years after Aaliyah's death, and their marriage was used as an example of his involvement with them. He has refused to discuss his relationship with her, citing her death. "Out of respect for her, and her mom and her dad, I will not discuss Aaliyah. That was a whole other situation, a whole other time, it was a whole other thing, and I'm sure that people also know that." In 2016, Kelly said that he was as in love with Aaliyah as he was with "anybody else." Aaliyah's mother, Diane Haughton, reflected that everything "that went wrong in her life" began with her relationship with Kelly. After the documentary Surviving R. Kelly aired in January 2019, pressure from the public using the Mute R. Kelly hashtag escalated and RCA Records dropped Kelly from the label. In February 2019, Kelly was indicted on ten counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. In July 2019, he was arrested on federal charges of sex crimes, human trafficking, child pornography, racketeering, and obstruction of justice. When his trial began in August 2021, Kelly faced 22 federal criminal charges that involved allegedly abusing 11 girls and women between 1994 and 2018. Aaliyah's illegal marriage to Kelly was heavily featured in the court case. On September 27, 2021, a federal court jury found Kelly guilty of nine counts including racketeering, sexual exploitation of a child, kidnapping, bribery, sex trafficking, and a violation of the Mann Act. The judge ordered that Kelly remain in custody pending sentencing, which was set for May 4, 2022. On June 29, 2022, Kelly was sentenced to 30 years in prison. Aaliyah was dating the co-founder of Roc-A-Fella Records, Damon Dash, at the time of her death. Although they were not formally engaged, Dash claimed the couple had planned to marry in interviews given after Aaliyah's death. In the summer of 2000, Aaliyah was introduced to Dash by his accountant and they formed a friendship. Aaliyah never publicly addressed their relationship as anything but platonic. Due to their hectic work schedules, Aaliyah and Dash were separated for long periods of time. Jay-Z mentioned Aaliyah and Dash in the remix of her song "Miss You", released in 2003. In August 2021, Dash told Entertainment Tonight's Kevin Frazier, "I was reflecting [that] there hasn't been one day since she's passed, not one in the 20 years, that I haven't either heard her name, heard her record, or seen a picture of her ... Every single day she's present in my life and I feel lucky for that." On August 25, 2001, at 6:50 p.m. (EDT), Aaliyah and some employees of her record company boarded a twin-engine Cessna 402 light aircraft at the Marsh Harbour Airport in Abaco Islands, the Bahamas, to travel to Opa-Locka Airport in Florida after they completed filming the video for "Rock the Boat". They had a flight scheduled the next day, but with filming finishing early, Aaliyah and her entourage were eager to return to the US and decided to leave immediately. The designated airplane was smaller than the Cessna 404 on which they had originally arrived, but the whole party and all the equipment were accommodated on board. The plane crashed and caught fire shortly after takeoff, about 200 feet (60 m) from the end of the runway. Aaliyah and the eight others on board—pilot Luis Morales III, hair stylist Eric Forman, Anthony Dodd, security guard Scott Gallin, family friend Keith Wallace, make-up stylist Christopher Maldonado, and Blackground Records employees Douglas Kratz and Gina Smith—were killed. The passengers had grown impatient because the Cessna was supposed to arrive at 4:30 pm. EDT, but did not arrive until 6:15 pm. Another charter pilot, Lewis Key, claimed to have overheard passengers arguing with their pilot, Luis Morales, before takeoff, adding that Morales warned them that there was too much weight for a "safe flight". Key added: "He tried to convince them the plane was overloaded, but they insisted they had chartered the plane and they had to be in Miami Saturday night." Key indicated that Morales gave in to the passengers and that he had trouble starting one of the engines. According to findings from an inquest conducted by the coroner's office in the Bahamas, Aaliyah had "severe burns and a blow to the head" in addition to severe shock and a weak heart. The coroner theorized that she went into such a state of shock that even if she had survived the crash, her recovery would have been nearly impossible given the severity of her injuries. The bodies were taken to the morgue at Princess Margaret Hospital in Nassau, where they were kept for relatives to help identify them. Some of them were badly burned. As the subsequent investigation determined, the aircraft was overloaded by 700 pounds (320 kg) when it attempted to take off, and was carrying one more passenger than it was certified for. The National Transportation Safety Board reported, "The airplane was seen lifting off the runway, and then nose down, impacting in a marsh on the south side of the departure end of runway 27." The report indicated that the pilot was not approved to fly the plane. Morales falsely obtained his FAA license by showing hundreds of hours never flown, and he may also have falsified how many hours he had flown to get a job with his employer, Blackhawk International Airways. Additionally, toxicology tests performed on Morales revealed traces of cocaine and alcohol in his system. Aaliyah's private funeral Mass was held on August 31, 2001, at the Church of St. Ignatius Loyola in Manhattan, following a procession from the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel. Her body was set in a silver-plated copper-deposit casket, which was carried in a horse-drawn, glass hearse. An estimated 800 mourners attended the procession. Among those in attendance at the private ceremony were Missy Elliott, Timbaland, Gladys Knight, Lil' Kim, and Sean Combs. After the service, 22 white doves were released to symbolize each year of her life. Aaliyah's brother Rashad delivered the eulogy and described his sister as giving him strength: "Aaliyah, you left, but I'll see you always next to me and I can see you smiling through the sunshine. When our life is over, our book is done. I hope God keeps me strong until I see her again." He read the names of the other victims of the crash and concluded by asking mourners to pray for them as well. As Diane Haughton and the mourners left, they sang Aaliyah's song "One in a Million". Immediately after Aaliyah's death, there was uncertainty over whether the music video for "Rock the Boat" would ever air. It made its world premiere on BET's Access Granted on October 9, 2001. She won two posthumous awards at the American Music Awards of 2002; Favorite Female R&B Artist and Favorite R&B/Soul Album for Aaliyah. Her second and final film, Queen of the Damned, was released in February 2002. Before its release, Aaliyah's brother, Rashad, re-dubbed some of her lines during post-production. It grossed US$15.2 million in its first weekend, ranking number one at the box office. On the first anniversary of Aaliyah's death, a candlelight vigil was held in Times Square; millions of fans observed a moment of silence; and throughout the United States, radio stations played her music in remembrance. In December 2002, a collection of both previously unreleased and released material was issued as Aaliyah's first posthumous album, I Care 4 U. A portion of the proceeds was donated to the Aaliyah Memorial Fund, a program that benefits the Revlon UCLA Women's Cancer Research Program and Harlem's Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. It debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200, selling 280,000 copies in its first week. The album's lead single, "Miss You", peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for three weeks. In August of the following year, luxury fashion house Dior donated profits from sales in honor of Aaliyah. In April 2005, Aaliyah's second posthumous album, a double CD+DVD box set titled Ultimate Aaliyah, was released in the United Kingdom by Blackground Records. A documentary movie Aaliyah Live in Amsterdam was released in 2011, shortly before the tenth anniversary of Aaliyah's death. The documentary, by Pogus Caesar, contained previously unseen footage shot of her career beginnings in 1995 when she was appearing in the Netherlands. In March 2012, music producer Jeffrey "J-Dub" Walker announced that the song "Steady Ground", which he produced for Aaliyah's third album, would be included in a posthumous Aaliyah album. Aaliyah's brother Rashad denied Walker's claim. On August 5, 2012, Blackground Records released the track "Enough Said" which was produced by Noah "40" Shebib and features Canadian rapper Drake. Four days later, Jomo Hankerson claimed a posthumous album was being produced that would feature new production by Timbaland and Missy Elliot, who both later denied being involved with the project. The album was scheduled to be released by the end of 2012 by Blackground Records, but its release was shelved. In June 2013, Aaliyah was featured on the track "Don't Think They Know" by Chris Brown, which appears on Brown's sixth studio album, X. Timbaland voiced his disapproval for "Enough Said" and "Don't Think They Know" in July 2013, but later apologized to Chris Brown, explaining that Aaliyah and her death were a "very sensitive subject". In May 2015, Aaliyah was featured on the Tink track "Million", which contained samples from her song "One in a Million". In September 2015, Aaliyah by Xyrena, an official tribute fragrance, was announced. On December 25, 2015, Timbaland released the mixtape Kings Stay Kings which includes the unreleased Aaliyah song "Shakin" featuring rapper Strado. In June 2018, MAC Cosmetics released a cosmetics collection inspired by Aaliyah, The Aaliyah for Mac collection which was priced at $250 and sold out within minutes. MAC and i-D Magazine partnered up to release a short film titled "A-Z of Aaliyah" which coincided with the launch. On August 21, 2019, the Madame Tussauds museum unveiled a wax figure of Aaliyah at their Las Vegas location, modeled on her appearance in the "Try Again" music video. Four days later, Aaliyah's family announced that they were in talks with record companies to discuss the future of her discography. In March 2021, Funko Pop! released an Aaliyah figurine. In August 2021, Blackground Records announced that Aaliyah's recorded works would be re-released on physical, digital, and streaming services in a deal between the label and Empire Distribution. Aaliyah's estate issued a statement in response to the announcement, denouncing the "unscrupulous endeavor to release Aaliyah's music without any transparency or full accounting to the estate". One in a Million was reissued on August 20. After the album's re-release, One in a Million re-entered the UK Official Hip Hop and R&B Albums Chart Top 40 at number eight. In the US, the album reached the top ten on the Billboard 200 for the first time at number ten, selling 26,000 album-equivalent units in the week ending of August 26. Aaliyah was reissued September 10, 2021. After the album's re-release, Aaliyah re-entered the UK Official Hip Hop and R&B Albums Chart Top 40 at number seven and re-entered the US Billboard 200 chart at number 13. In celebration of the reissue, Blackground released an animated commercial titled "It's Been A Long Time" (in a similar style to the album's original 2001 commercial), directed by Takahiro Tanaka, showing Aaliyah resurrecting her music from out of a large underground vault. Compilation albums I Care 4 U and Ultimate Aaliyah were reissued October 8, 2021. Ultimate Aaliyah peaked at number 8 on the UK R&B Albums Chart Top 40 and charted for the first time in the US at number 41 on the Billboard 200. On August 25, 2021, Barry Hankerson revealed in an interview with Big Tigger for WVEE that a posthumous album titled Unstoppable would be released in "a matter of weeks". The album will feature Drake, Snoop Dogg, Ne-Yo, Chris Brown, Future and use previously unreleased vocals from before Aaliyah's passing. On December 17, 2021, Background Records released the posthumous Aaliyah single "Poison" featuring The Weeknd. On January 4, 2022, Hankerson confirmed that Unstoppable would be released later that month, however, there was no sign of the album, nor any announcement from the label, and as of 2024, remains unreleased. Aaliyah has been credited for helping redefine R&B, pop and hip hop in the 1990s, "leaving an indelible imprint on the music industry as a whole." According to Billboard, she revolutionized R&B with her sultry mix of pop, soul and hip hop. Peter Piatkowski from PopMatters, stated, "Much like Janet Jackson's Control set a template of sorts for dance-pop divas in the 1980s, Aaliyah's patented brand of Black pop, which was a mélange of hip-hop, electropop, and soul, set a standard against which other young urban-pop singers were judged". In a 2001 review of her third album, Ernest Hardy from Rolling Stone professed that Aaliyah's impact on R&B and pop has been enormous. Steve Huey of AllMusic wrote Aaliyah ranks among the "elite" artists of the R&B genre, as she "played a major role in popularizing the stuttering, futuristic production style that consumed hip-hop and urban soul in the late 1990s." Critic Bruce Britt stated that by combining "schoolgirl charm with urban grit, Aaliyah helped define the teen-oriented sound that has resulted in contemporary pop phenom's like Brandy, Christina Aguilera and Destiny's Child". Described as one of "R&B's most important artists" during the 1990s, her second studio album, One in a Million, became one of the most influential R&B albums of the decade. Music critic Simon Reynolds cited "Are You That Somebody?" as "the most radical pop single" of 1998. Kelefah Sanneh of The New York Times wrote that rather than being the song's focal point, Aaliyah "knew how to disappear into the music, how to match her voice to the bass line", and consequently "helped change the way popular music sounds; the twitchy, beat-driven songs of Destiny's Child owe a clear debt to 'Are You That Somebody'." Sanneh asserted that by the time of her death in 2001, Aaliyah "had recorded some of the most innovative and influential pop songs of the last five years." Music publication Popdust called Aaliyah an unlikely queen of the underground for her influence on the underground alternative music scene. The publication also mentioned that the forward-thinking music Aaliyah made with Timbaland and the experimental music being made by many underground alternative artists are "somewhat cut from the same cloth". While compiling a list of artists that take cues from Aaliyah, MTV Hive stated that it's easy to spot her influence on underground movements like dubstep, strains of indie pop, and lo-fi R&B movements. Erika Ramirez, an associate editor of Billboard, said at the time of Aaliyah's career "there weren't many artists using the kind of soft vocals the ways she was using it, and now you see a lot of artists doing that and finding success". Ramirez argued that Aaliyah's second album One in a Million was "very much ahead of its time, with the bass and electro kind of R&B sounds that they produced", and that the sound, "really stood out" at its time, was being replicated. There has been continuing belief that Aaliyah would have achieved greater career success had it not been for her death. Emil Wilbekin mentioned the deaths of The Notorious B.I.G. and Tupac Shakur in conjunction with hers and added: "Her just-released third album and scheduled role in a sequel to The Matrix could have made her another Janet Jackson or Whitney Houston". Director of Queen of the Damned Michael Rymer said of Aaliyah, "God, that girl could have gone so far" and spoke of her having "such a clarity about what she wanted. Nothing was gonna step in her way. No ego, no nervousness, no manipulation. There was nothing to stop her." On July 18, 2014, it was announced that Alexandra Shipp replaced Zendaya for the role of Aaliyah for the Lifetime TV biopic movie Aaliyah: The Princess of R&B, which premiered on November 15, 2014. Zendaya drew criticism because people felt that she was too light skinned and did not greatly resemble Aaliyah. She voiced her strong respect for Aaliyah before dropping out of the project. She explained her choice to withdraw from the film in videos on Instagram. Aaliyah's family has been vocal in their disapproving of the film. Her cousin Jomo Hankerson stated the family would prefer a "major studio release along the lines" of What's Love Got to Do with It, the biopic based on the life of Tina Turner. Aaliyah's family has consulted a lawyer to stop Lifetime from using "any of the music, or any of the photographs and videos" they own and Jomo Hankerson claimed the TV network "didn't reach out." On August 9, 2014, it was announced that Chattrisse Dolabaille and Izaak Smith had been cast as Aaliyah's collaborators Missy Elliott and Timbaland. Dolabaille and Smith both received criticism for their appearances in comparison with that of Missy Elliot and Timbaland. Despite negative reviews, the film's premiere drew 3.2 million viewers, becoming the second highest rated television movie of 2014. On August 17, 2021, Atria Books (an imprint of Simon & Schuster) published Kathy Iandoli's Baby Girl: Better Known as Aaliyah, a biography that draws on interviews with Aaliyah's friends, mentors and family, and document how her career influenced a new generation of artists. It has not been authorized by the Haughton family. On August 5, 2022, Beyoncé released "The Queens Remix" to her single "Break My Soul", in which she name-drops Aaliyah, along with other cultural icons. On June 14, 2023, Aaliyah was the subject of the documentary Superstar: Aaliyah, which was broadcast on ABC. The documentary included interviews with Damon Dash, Barry Hankerson, Sevyn Streeter, Will.i.am, Justine Skye, and author Kathy Iandoli, and discussed Aaliyah's life, career and legacy. Aaliyah has sold 8.1 million albums in the United States and an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide. Throughout the years, she has earned several honorific nicknames, including "Princess of R&B", "Pop Princess", and "Queen of Urban Pop", as she "proved she was a muse in her own right". While Ernest Hardy of Rolling Stone dubbed her the "undisputed queen of the midtempo come-on". She also has been referred to as a pop and R&B icon for her impact on those genres. At the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards, Aaliyah was honored by Janet Jackson, Missy Elliott, Timbaland, Ginuwine and her brother, Rashad, who all paid tribute to her. Also during 2001, the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Aaliyah as one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls. In 2003, Aaliyah was ranked as one of "The Top 40 Women of the Video Era" in VH1's The Greatest series. Also, in 2003 in memory of Aaliyah, the Entertainment Industry Foundation created the Aaliyah Memorial Fund to donate money raised to charities she supported. In 2008, she was ranked at number 18 on BET's "Top 25 Dancers of All Time". In December 2009, Billboard ranked Aaliyah at number 70 on its Top Artists of the Decade, while her album Aaliyah was ranked at number 181 on the magazine's Top 200 Albums of the Decade. In 2010, Billboard listed her as the tenth most successful female R&B artist of the past 25 years, and 27th most successful R&B artist overall. In 2011, Essence ranked her at number 14 on its 50 Most Influential R&B Starts list. In 2012, VH1 ranked her number 48 on their "Greatest Women in Music". In 2014, NME ranked her at number 18 on its 100 most influential artist list. In August 2018, Billboard ranked Aaliyah at number 47 on their Top 60 Female Artists of All-Time list. In 2020, the publication included her on its list of the 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time. Rolling Stone ranked her at number 40 on their 200 Best Singers of All Time list. In September 2023, she was inducted into the National Rhythm & Blues Hall of Fame. Age Ain't Nothing but a Number (1994) One in a Million (1996) Aaliyah (2001) I Care 4 U (2002) Ultimate Aaliyah (2005) List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of awards and nominations received by Aaliyah List of fatalities from aviation accidents DJ Vlad (June 25, 2017). "Buckshot on Working with Eminem, Eminem Almost Signing to Duck Down". Archived from the original on November 16, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021 – via YouTube. Spanos, Brittany (November 17, 2014). "10 Craziest Things We Learned From the Aaliyah Lifetime Movie". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Huey, Steve. "Aaliyah Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 13, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2008. Sutherland 2005, p. 1. Christian, Margena A. (February 24, 2022). "Aaliyah". Aaliyah (16 Jan. 1979–25 Aug. 2001), singer, actress, and model. American National Biography. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/anb/9780198606697.013.20818. ISBN 978-0-19-860669-7. Aaliyah (16 Jan. 1979–25 Aug. 2001), singer, actress, and model, was born Aaliyah Dana Haughton to Michael Haughton, a warehouse worker, and Diane Haughton in Brooklyn, New York. "Vibe Magazine's Emil Wilbekin: Remembering Aaliyah". CNN. August 27, 2001. Archived from the original on June 16, 2009. Retrieved May 6, 2009. Ali, Rasha (February 21, 2017). "Aaliyah's 'Queen of the Damned' 15th Anniversary: 10 Things You Didn't Know About Vampire Thriller". The Wrap. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2019. Sutherland 2005, pp. 2–4. Farley, Christopher John (January 26, 2002). Aaliyah: More Than a Woman. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7434-5566-4. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Kenyatta 2002, p. 3 Bogdanov, Vladimir; Woodstra, Chris; Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (2002). All Music Guide to Rock. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 1. ISBN 0-87930-653-X. Warner, Jennifer (2014). Aaliyah: A Biography. BookCap Study Guides. ISBN 978-1-62917-359-7. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2020. Sutherland 2005, p. 9. Farley 2002, pp. 22–23. Jones, Steve (August 28, 2001). "Aaliyah: A life in the spotlight, lost far too early". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 9, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2009. Silverman, Stephen M. (August 26, 2001). "Singer Aaliyah Killed in Plane Crash". People. Archived from the original on August 1, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Carter, Kelley L. (July 25, 2001). "While Aaliyah loves music, she loves acting too". Bartow Press. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved August 22, 2023.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Losing to Win: Remembering the Real Stars of 'Star Search'". Yahoo. April 17, 2014. Archived from the original on April 9, 2023. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Sutherland 2005, p. 15. Perrone, Pierre (August 27, 2001). "Aaliyah – Obituaries, News". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Farley 2002, p. 77 Farley 2002, p. 35 "Aaliyah". The Daily Telegraph. London. November 22, 2001. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2009. "Between the Bullets" (PDF). Billboard (June 11, 1994) page 97. Nielsen Business Media. Archived from the original on May 1, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2010 – via World Radio History. "Artist Chart History – Aaliyah – Albums". Billboard. Nielsen Business Media. Archived from the original on August 2, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2009. "RIAA – Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2009. Hall, Rashaun (July 20, 2001). "Aaliyah Returns to Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 2, 2009. Retrieved July 23, 2009. "Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA): Certification Results". Canadian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved May 17, 2009. King, Aliya S. (August 26, 2014). "What Millennials Should Know About... Aaliyah's 'Age Ain't Nothing But A Number' LP". Vibe. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Ehrlich, Dimitri (June 17, 1994). "Age Ain't Nothing But a Number – Music Review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 21, 2009. Retrieved May 17, 2009. Cinquemani, Sal (2001). "Aaliyah: Age Ain't Nothing But a Number". Slant. Archived from the original on May 9, 2009. Retrieved May 17, 2009. Brackett & Hoard 2004, p. 1 Farley, Christopher John (August 26, 2001). "Siren of Subtlety". Time. Archived from the original on October 30, 2010. Retrieved September 14, 2009. Partridge, Kenneth (May 23, 2014). "Aaliyah, 'Age Ain't Nothing But A Number' at 20: Classic Track-by-Track Review". Billboard. "Chart Beat Bonus". Billboard. August 31, 2001. Archived from the original on September 30, 2014. Retrieved May 11, 2022. Farley 2002, p. 103 Cinquemani, Sal (2001). "Aaliyah: One in a Million". Slant. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Stanley, Leo. "One in a Million – Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved June 21, 2009. "Missy Elliot Remembers Aaliyah". MTV. November 20, 2012. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014. Powers, Lindsay (August 25, 2011). "Aaliyah Died 10 Years Ago Today: What Fans Say". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Baggs, Michael (August 20, 2021). "Aaliyah albums streaming:'Her influence is absolutely everywhere'". BBC News. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "Singer Aaliyah, Eight Others Die in Plane Crash in Bahamas". Jet: 56. September 10, 2001. ISSN 0021-5996. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Farley 2002, p. 77 Sutherland 2005, p. 79. Sutherland 2005, p. 128. Reid, Shaheem; Schumacher-Rasmussen, Eric; Horn, Teri van (August 27, 2001). "Hard-Working Aaliyah Packed Hit Albums, Movies into Short Life". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2012. C. R. WHITE, CONSTANCE (October 26, 1997). "If It Sings, Wear It; Tommy Hilfiger dresses the stars in hopes that they will strut his stuff". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2018. ""Christmas in Washington": If it's the holiday season, it..." tribunedigital-chicagotribune. December 19, 1997. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Simmonds 2008 Bruce Britt (June 30, 2000). "Aaliyah". BMI.com. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "Nine Things We'll Never Forget About Aaliyah". Billboard. Nielsen SoundScan. August 25, 2010. Retrieved March 17, 2012. "Aaliyah, Jet Li to star in cross-cultural "Romeo And Juliet"". MTV News. April 6, 1999. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Basham, David (February 18, 2000). "Aaliyah, DMX, Ginuwine Pitch In for "Romeo" LP". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Wolk, Josh (March 26, 2000). "'Romeo' and Julia". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved May 10, 2009. "Hip-pop's Aaliyah Flaunts Versatility". Orlando Sentinel. July 22, 2001. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2014. "Aaliyah's 2001 Vibe Cover Story: 'What Lies Beneath'". Vibe.com. January 14, 2015. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2015. Mitchell, Elvis (March 22, 2000). "Romeo Must Die (2000) FILM REVIEW; Hip-Hop Joins Martial Arts but Lets Plot Muscle In". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Pareles, Jon (August 27, 2001). "Aaliyah, 22, Singer Who First Hit the Charts at 14". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 13, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2009. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits. Billboard Books. p. 896. ISBN 0-8230-7677-6. "MTV Video Music Awards: The winners". BBC News. London. September 8, 2000. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2009. "R&B's Aaliyah dies in plane crash". BBC News. London. August 26, 2001. Archived from the original on June 23, 2009. Retrieved May 21, 2009. "Remembering Aaliyah Ten Years Later: The Final MTV Interview". MTV. August 25, 2011. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Johnson, Connie (July 29, 2001). "A Coasting Aaliyah Steers Clear of Depth". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. "Aaliyah Back In Recording Studio". MTV. March 9, 2000. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2014. "Aaliyah Finishes New Album During Break From Movies". MTV. March 14, 2001. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2014. Martens, Todd (July 26, 2001). "Keys Wards Off Aaliyah, Foxy at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved July 23, 2009. Martens, Todd (September 6, 2001). "Aaliyah Posthumously Tops Album Chart". Billboard. Retrieved July 23, 2009. "Complex's Wifey Hall of Fame: Aaliyah". Complex. Complex Media Network. August 25, 2009. Archived from the original on August 28, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2009. "Aaliyah Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Farley 2002, p. 182 "Posthumous number one for Aaliyah". BBC News. January 13, 2001. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved April 7, 2011. Myers, Justin (January 16, 2018). "More Than A Woman: Aaliyah remembered on her birthday". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2022. Myers, Justin (August 25, 2016). "Remembering Aaliyah on the 15th anniversary of her death". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "Aaliyah Bites!". Dotmusic. May 28, 2001. Archived from the original on August 11, 2001. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Cheung, Nadine (November 11, 2011). "Whitney Houston Discusses Aaliyah and Upcoming Film 'Sparkle'". PopCrush. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2014. Goodman, Abbey (April 11, 2002). "Aaliyah's 'Matrix' Role to Be Given to Nona Gaye". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 31, 2009. Retrieved April 14, 2009. Ultimate Matrix Collection disc 9: "The Burly Man Chronicles"; Follow the White Rabbit – Australia Shoot – Tribute. Sutherland 2005, p. 101 Ehrlich, Dimitri (June 17, 1994). "Age Ain't Nothing but a Number – Music Review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 21, 2009. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Hampton, Dream (October 1996). "Revolutions- Aaliyah One In A Million". Vibe. New York: 134. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Pattenden, Siân (January 16, 2019). "Classic Cover Story: When Aaliyah Reigned Supreme". Mixmag. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. "Sultry Singer Aaliyah On Why It's Cool To Be So Hot". Jet. Johnson Publishing Company. July 23, 2001. O'Brien, Lucy (July 15, 2001). "Aaliyah Video + Interview Special!". NME. Archived from the original on June 2, 2002. Retrieved August 25, 2023. Augustin, Camille (August 26, 2016). "Aaliyah Week: How 'One In A Million' Pushed The Envelope Of R&B". Vibe. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Alex Gonzalez; Jem Aswad (August 20, 2021). "Aaliyah's Catalog Finally Hits Streaming Services: 10 Essential Songs". Variety. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Seymour, Craig (June 23, 2001). "Aaliyah – Music Review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Farley, Christopher John (July 22, 2001). "Street But Sweet". Time. Archived from the original on March 8, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2009. Lorez, Jeff (July 5, 2001). "Killer Queen". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on February 10, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Ex, Kris (December 1996). "Got To Give It Up". Vibe. New York: 126. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. Aaliyah's fresh sound is a brick-layered foundation with a rubbery synth-bass that incorporates actual old-school funk and R&B. Lisi, Brian (August 25, 2016). "A look at Aaliyah's first and last TV appearances on the 15th anniversary of her tragic death". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Only 22 years old when a plane carrying her and eight others crashed shortly after takeoff, Aaliyah Dana Haughton has been heralded for not just amassing major achievements at such a young age, but for incorporating elements of R&B, pop and hip-hop into her music in a way that would define the sound of an entire decade. Prince, David J. (December 23, 2009). "The Decade in Music: Top 50 Moments". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. With Timbaland and Missy Elliott in her production corner, the 22-year-old was a muse who revolutionized R&B with her honey-coated voice and sultry mix of pop, soul and hip-hop. Flick, Larry (May 30, 1998). "Reviews & Previews – Singles". Billboard. Vol. 110, no. 22. p. 27. Retrieved June 13, 2022. This time, she fronts the first single from "Dr. Doolittle" and it's a welcome return to her Funk/Hip-Hop roots. Russell, Baillie (August 8, 2001). "Aaliyah: Aaliyah". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2022. As its 15 tracks thump, click and stutter with inventive, state-of-the-art dancepop, Aaliyah's voice weaves through the sparse but punchy arrangements with a mix of sultriness. King, Jason (February 2003). "Revolutions". Vibe. New York: 136. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2022. Although I Care 4 U is missing such beloved tracks as "If Your Girl Only Knew" and "Rock the Boat", it still gathers some of the most adventurous dance-pop of the last 10 years. Harris, Keith. "Aaliyah Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 3, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2022. "25 Best Aaliyah Songs of All Time". Complex. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2022. Seymour, Craig (August 31, 2001). "Aaliyah, A Tribute". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Needham, Alex (July 7, 2001). "Who's That Girl?". NME. London: 25–26. Hardy, Ernest (August 2, 2001). "Aaliyah – Aaliyah – Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 24, 2007. Retrieved October 29, 2010. Sanneh, Kelefa (September 2, 2001). "A Pioneer, Briefly, Of a New Sound". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2012. Petridis, Alexis (August 31, 2001). "The princess of risk". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Bychawski, Adam (June 21, 2001). "Aaliyah Polishes A Third!". NME. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Farley 2002, p. 6 "Pop Star Aaliyah Dead in Plane Crash". ABC News. August 27, 2001. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Aaliyah – Aaliyah". AllMusic. Archived from the original on December 10, 2010. Retrieved January 7, 2011. Farley 2002, p. 54 Sutherland 2005, pp. 8–10. Farley 2002, p. 28 Lang, George (August 31, 2001). "Promising singer worthy of posthumous praise". The Oklahoman. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. her principal idols were Sade, whom she tried to emulate on much of her mid-tempo material like "Rock da Boat," and Trent Reznor, whose industrial influence was felt on the final album's closer, the genre-bending What If. Jacobs, Matthew (October 26, 2021). "An Oral History of Queen of the Damned". Vulture. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Footman 2021 Drennen, Eileen M.; Murray, Sonia; Hamilton, Doug; Dollar, Steve; Henry, Derrick; Janich, Kathy; DeVault, Russ (August 9, 1996). "Home Entertainment The Latest in Music, Videos And Books New Music Mini Reviews Review". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Cox Enterprises. p. G.06. Actually, she's a streetwise Jackson with a far more soulful song selection. The gritty beats just don't stop on 'One in a Million,' which, a la Jackson, has one track after another aching for sensual choreography. Farley, Christopher John (December 8, 2001). "Aaliyah: More Than a Woman". Time. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Acquaye, Alisha (June 7, 2018). "Why Aaliyah for M.A.C. Is So Important, According to Rashad Haughton". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2022. "The 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time: Staff List". Billboard. August 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 27, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2020. "From Baby Girl To More Than A Woman: A Look At Aaliyah's Growth From Fashion To Dance". Vibe. August 22, 2016. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Williams, Kyann-Sian (August 20, 2021). "From Baby Girl To More Than A Woman: A Look At Aaliyah's Growth From Fashion To Dance". NME. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. Sutherland 2005, p. 52. Sutherland 2005, p. 51. Sutherland 2005, p. 53. Sutherland 2005, p. 50. Landoll, Kathy (January 16, 2014). "What I Learned About Style From Aaliyah's 'We Need A Resolution'". Noisey Vice. Archived from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Sutherland 2005, p. 54. Macpherson, Alex (August 25, 2011). "Aaliyah's true legacy is her rare gift for nuance". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014. Retrieved December 13, 2016. "U.S. investigators to probe Aaliyah crash". CNN. August 27, 2001. Archived from the original on April 21, 2009. Retrieved May 21, 2009. Christgau, Robert (March 25, 2003). "As Long as I Still Can". The Village Voice. New York. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2012. "Vibe Magazine's Emil Wilbekin: Remembering Aaliyah". CNN. August 27, 2001. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2015. "Artist Spotlight: Aaliyah". Boom 92. January 16, 2015. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Penrice, Ronda Racha (December 27, 2011). "Drake's tattoo to Timbaland's heart: Aaliyah still idolized after all these years". theGrio. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2014. Farley, p. 176. "Aaliyah Obituary: Remembering the R&B Star". Rolling Stone. October 11, 2001. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "R. Kelly And Aaliyah Secretly Married On This Day In 1994". b96.cbslocal.com. Chicago's B96. August 31, 2011. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. "Timeline: The life and career of R. Kelly". WBEZ 91.5 Chicago. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved August 19, 2014. Kenyatta 2002, p. 25 Duncan, Amy (July 18, 2017). "The story of R Kelly and Aaliyah – from their secret teenage marriage to those pregnancy rumours". Metro. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "R. Kelly: Indecent Proposal". Vibe. September 18, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved May 14, 2009. "R. Kelly marriage to Aaliyah". Vibe. December 1994. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. "Did R. Kelly impregnate Aaliyah?". S2SMagazine.com. May 25, 2011. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Moghe, Sonia (August 21, 2021). "Former R. Kelly tour manager reluctantly testifies about the singer's marriage to Aaliyah". CNN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2021. "'Surviving R. Kelly' Shares Disturbing New Details About His Reported Marriage To Aaliyah". Essence. October 23, 2020. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Hohman, Maura (January 10, 2019). "Aaliyah's Ex Boyfriend Says She Wouldn't Talk About R. Kelly: 'It Was So Much Hurt for Her'". People. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2019. "Kelly accused of sex with teenage girls". Chicago Sun-Times. December 21, 2000. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Partridge, Kenneth (August 27, 2016). "Aaliyah's 'One In a Million' Turns 20: How Her Second Album Predicted R&B's Future". Billboard. Retrieved July 14, 2018. Farley 2002, p. 162. "Why Has the Public Forgiven R. Kelly for His Sordid, Predatory Past?". The Daily Beast. December 9, 2013. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved August 15, 2014. "R. Kelly Gets Painfully Candid About Bill Cosby, Aaliyah, and Rape Accusations". Vulture. January 20, 2016. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Ryan, Patrick (January 2, 2020). "'Surviving R. Kelly, Part II': Aaliyah was a 'sacrificial lamb' in alleged abuse 'cover-up'". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Grady, Constance (April 25, 2018). "Sexual misconduct allegations against R. Kelly spanning 25 years, in one timeline". Vox. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Vineyard, Jennifer (May 13, 2004). "R. Kelly: When The Gavel Drops". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. "R. Kelly Addresses Relationship With Aaliyah, Allegations in Child Pornography Case". NBC Chicago. January 22, 2016. Archived from the original on January 24, 2016. Retrieved January 30, 2016. Aswad, Jem (January 18, 2019). "R. Kelly Dropped by Sony Music". Variety. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2019. "R Kelly: Singer charged with sexual abuse in Chicago". February 22, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2019. "R. Kelly arrested in Chicago after being indicted by federal grand jury on new sex crime charges" Archived September 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Chicago Tribune, July 11, 2019. Tsioulcas, Anastasia (March 13, 2020). "New York Federal Prosecutors File New Charges Against R. Kelly". NPR. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. O'Brien, Rebecca Davis (September 22, 2021). "27 years later, R. Kelly's illegal marriage to Aaliyah is at the center of the case against him". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2021. "R Kelly found guilty on racketeering and sex trafficking charges". the Guardian. September 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. "R. Kelly given 30 years in jail for sex abuse". BBC. June 29, 2022. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Salam, Eram (June 29, 2022). "R Kelly sentenced to 30 years on sexual abuse charges- The R&B singer, 55, had been found guilty of sex trafficking and racketeering involving women, girls and boys". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Farley 2002, p. 140. Calloway, Sway; Hiatt, Brian; Kroft, Ryan (August 28, 2001). "Damon Dash Says Every Day with Aaliyah Was Special". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 19, 2011. Retrieved August 5, 2014. Warner, Jennifer (2014). Aaliyah: A Biography. BookCaps Study Guides. ISBN 978-1-5006-2821-5. Ramirez, Erika (August 24, 2011). "Damon Dash Talks Losing Aaliyah: 'Nothing Prepares You for That'". Billboard. Reid, Shaheem (March 13, 2003). "Jay-Z Tells Aaliyah Dame's Doing Well, Missy Misses Her On New Remix". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 23, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Pierre, Mekishana (August 25, 2021). "Damon Dash Reflects on Aaliyah's Legacy on the Anniversary of Her Death (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Schumacher-Rasmussen, Eric (August 26, 2001). "Aaliyah Killed in Plane Crash". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009. Retrieved April 9, 2009. Sutherland 2005, p. 119. "U.S. investigators to probe Aaliyah crash". CNN. August 27, 2001. Archived from the original on April 13, 2009. Retrieved April 8, 2009. "Aaliyah – Haste, Errors and a Fallen Star". The New York Times. September 8, 2001. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Pilot in crash 'warned soul singer's group that plane was overloaded'". Independent. August 28, 2001. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "More Questions Emerge in Aaliyah Crash". ABC News. August 29, 2001. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2020. "Coroner Delivers Verdict Over Aaliyah Death Crash". NME. November 20, 2003. Archived from the original on May 21, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2010. "Bahamas Coroner delivers verdict in Aaliyah death crash". Caribbean News. Caribbean Net News. November 21, 2003. Archived from the original on January 27, 2004. Retrieved February 7, 2007. Hirschman, Bill (August 27, 2001). "Singer Aaliyah dies in Bahamas plane crash". Sun Sentinel. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014. Moss, Corey (July 16, 2002). "Cocaine, Alcohol Found in Pilot of Aaliyah's Plane". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2009. NTSB Identification: MIA01RA225 (Report). National Transportation Safety Board. Archived from the original on June 28, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2009. Simmonds 2008, p. 455 Holguín, Jaime (November 11, 2003). "Aaliyah Crash Pilot Was on Cocaine". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 31, 2011. Retrieved April 7, 2009. Moody, Nekesa Mumbi (September 1, 2001). "Fans, celebrities gather for Aaliyah's Cinderella funeral for". Arizona Daily Sun. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "Hundreds Say Good-Bye to Aaliyah". CBS News. August 26, 2001. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved February 2, 2010. Miliano, Lou (August 31, 2001). "Hundreds Say Good-Bye To Aaliyah". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved April 24, 2009. "In Pictures: Adieu to Aaliyah". BBC News. August 31, 2001. Archived from the original on June 4, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2010. Reid, Shaheem (August 31, 2001). "Fans, Artists Pay Last Respects To Aaliyah". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2009. "FUNERAL AWASH WITH TEARS & PINK ROSES". New York Daily News. September 1, 2001. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020. Schumacher-Rasumeen, Eric (August 27, 2001). "Timbaland, P. Diddy, Other Artists React To Aaliyah's Death". MTV. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2014. D'Angelo, Joe (January 10, 2002). "Alicia Keys, Destiny's Child, Aaliyah Excel at AMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 26, 2010. Retrieved April 9, 2009. Silverman, Stephen M. (April 11, 2002). "Nona Gaye to Fill in for Aaliyah". People. Archived from the original on June 3, 2009. Retrieved May 16, 2009. "Aaliyah film tops US box office". BBC News. London. February 25, 2002. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2009. "Young Legends Who Live on Through Their Music". Jet: 59. September 9, 2002. ISSN 0021-5996. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2010. Cohen, Jonathan (October 28, 2002). "Unreleased Aaliyah Track Hits The Net". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 25, 2009. Retrieved April 24, 2009. Martens, Todd (December 18, 2002). "Holiday Sales Keep Shania 'Up' On Top". Billboard. Retrieved July 23, 2009. "Aaliyah Chart History (Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs)". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. "Aaliyah Honoured By Dior". Vogue. August 5, 2003. Archived from the original on July 20, 2009. Retrieved April 24, 2009. Kellman, Andy (2005). "Ultimate Aaliyah Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Young, Graham (July 22, 2011). "Pogus Caesar premieres his Aaliyah movie in Birmingham". Birmingham Post. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Williams, Brennan (March 7, 2012). "Posthumous Aaliyah Album in the Works: Report". The Huffington Post. AOL. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved March 18, 2012. Ramirez, Erika (August 5, 2012). "Aaliyah Featuring Drake, 'Enough Said': Listen". Billboard. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "Timbaland & Missy Elliott Will Not Work on Aaliyah Posthumous Album". XXL News. August 13, 2012. Archived from the original on August 17, 2012. Retrieved September 2, 2012. Horowitz, Steven J. (August 9, 2012). "Exclusive: Drake, Missy, Timbaland? Blackground Clarifies Rumors Swirling Around Aaliyah Album (Update)". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2012. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "Aaliyah tribute album shelved". MSN Music News. MSN. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved January 8, 2014. "Chris Brown Pairs With Aaliyah Hologram in 'Don't Think They Know' Video – Video". Rolling Stone. June 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2013. "Timbaland Apologizes To Chris Brown For Aaliyah Collab Remarks". RAPFIX. July 26, 2013. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. "Timbaland Doesn't Approve Of Aaliyah Vocals On Drake, Chris Brown Songs". RAPFIX. July 24, 2013. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Chapman Jr., George (May 5, 2015). "Tink Samples Aaliyah's 'One in a Million'". BET. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2015. Tardio, Andres. "Here's The Story Behind The New Aaliyah Fragrance". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved September 28, 2015. Weiner, Natalie (December 26, 2015). "Hear a Previously-Unreleased Aaliyah Song on Timbaland's New Mixtape". Billboard. Retrieved May 26, 2022. "The "Aaliyah For Mac" collector's box sells out in minutes". CBS news. June 24, 2018. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved June 25, 2018. "MAC Just Announced An Aaliyah Collection". August 24, 2017. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2017. "Finally, We Have a Launch Date for M.A.C's Aaliyah Collection". April 2, 2018. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2018. Runtagh, Jordan (August 22, 2019). "Aaliyah's Brother Unveils New Wax Figure of the Late Singer at Madame Tussauds; The unveiling comes days before the 18th anniversary of the plane crash that claimed Aaliyah's life". People. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Copsey, Rob (August 26, 2019). "Aaliyah's estate announces her music is coming to streaming services". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "FUNKO: POP ROCKS: AALIYAH The "Princess of R&B" and "Queen of Urban Pop", Aaliyah, is stepping out onto the stage of your music collection". Forbidden Planet. February 2, 2021. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved November 14, 2021. Mier, Tomás (August 5, 2021). "Aaliyah's Estate Slams 'Unscrupulous' Effort to Release Her Music 'Without Transparency'". People. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. "Aaliyah albums streaming: 'Her influence is absolutely everywhere'". BBC. August 20, 2021. Archived from the original on August 29, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Legaspi, Althea (August 20, 2021). "Stream Aaliyah's 'One in a Million' Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "Official Hip Hop and R&B Albums Chart Top 40, 27 August 2021 – 02 September 2021". Official Charts Company. August 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved August 27, 2021. "Olivia Rodrigo's 'Sour' Returns to No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart After Vinyl Release". Billboard. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Brandle, Lars (September 10, 2021). "Aaliyah's Chart-Topping Final Album Arrives on Streaming Platforms: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. "Official Hip Hop and R&B Albums Chart Top 40, 17 September 2021 to 23 September 2021". Official Charts Company. September 17, 2021. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Billboard 200 Chart – Week of September 25, 2021". Billboard. September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2021. "Aaliyah Album Commercial (2021) – "It's Been A Long Time"". YouTube. September 10, 2021. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Legaspi, Althea (October 8, 2021). "Stream Aaliyah's 'I Care 4 U' and 'Ultimate Aaliyah' Compilation Albums". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Official Hip Hop and R&B Albums Chart Top 40 15 October 2021 – 21 October 2021". Official Charts Company. October 15, 2021. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved October 15, 2021. "Billboard 200 – Week of October 23, 2021". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Barry Hankerson answers every burning question on Aaliyah, the wait to get her music on streaming and more". Radio.com. August 25, 2021. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. Blistein, Jon (December 17, 2021). "Aaliyah's First Posthumous Song in Nearly a Decade, 'Poison' Featuring The Weeknd,' Has Arrived". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Kearns, Sarah (December 14, 2021). "The Weeknd Will Reportedly Feature on a Posthumous Aaliyah Album". Hypebeast. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Jones, Damian (January 4, 2022). "Aaliyah's uncle confirms posthumous album 'Unstoppable' is coming this month". NME. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved January 4, 2022. Cinquemani, Sal; Gonzalez, Ed. "Aaliyah (1979–2001)". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Piatkowski, Peter (July 21, 2022). "'Aaliyah': The Legacy Of The Perfect R&B/Pop Record". PopMatters. Archived from the original on December 25, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Huey, Steve (2009). "Aaliyah: Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 13, 2010. Retrieved June 22, 2009. Bush, John. "I Care 4 U – Overview". AllMusic. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Aaliyah, Whose Soaring Career Was Cut Short by a Tragedy". The New York Times. August 25, 2016. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved March 24, 2020. "Aaliyah, Unlikely Queen of the Underground". Popdust. August 25, 2011. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2015. "Hive Five: Exploring Aaliyah's Modern Day Influence". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 16, 2015. Ryan, Patrick (November 13, 2014). "13 years later, Aaliyah is still R&B's 'Princess'". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2017. "IN DEATH, ENTERTAINER'S STORY GOES ON". Daily News. New York. August 31, 2001. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2014. Farley, p. 168. "Aaliyah biopic: Alexandra Shipp to play late R&B star in Lifetime movie". Daily News. New York. July 18, 2014. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2014. Ge, Linda (June 18, 2014). "Zendaya Fires Back at Critics Over Aaliyah Casting Backlash". The Wrap. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2014. Michaels, Sean (June 19, 2014). "Family of Aaliyah reportedly plan to block a TV biopic about the late singer". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Fisher, Luchina (July 21, 2014). "Zendaya Coleman Explains Exit from Aaliyah Biopic". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020. Siemaszko, Corky (June 24, 2014). "Aaliyah's family wants big screen biopic with A-list star portraying late singer, not low-budget Lifetime TV movie". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn (August 9, 2014). "Aaliyah Biopic Adds Missy Elliott and Timbaland Roles: Report". Billboard. Diaz, Evelyn (August 14, 2014). "Missy Elliott, Timbaland Casting in Aaliyah Biopic Causes Uproar". BET. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Keene, Allison (November 15, 2014). "'Aaliyah: The Princess of R&B': TV Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2014. Hibberd, James (November 17, 2014). "Lifetime's Aaliyah movie was a hit despite backlash". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Lamarre, Carl (October 23, 2020). "Here's When 'Baby Girl: Better Known as Aaliyah' Book Will Be Released". www.billboard.com. Billboard. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2021. FitzPatrick, Hayley. "New details of late R&B star Aaliyah's life revealed in 'Baby Girl: Better Known as Aaliyah'". www.billboard.com. ABC News. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Michael Calcagno, Kyle Denis (August 16, 2022). "Here Are All the Shout-Outs on Beyoncé's 'Break My Soul (The Queens Remix)'". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2022. "Madonna Joins Beyoncé on New "Break My Soul" Remix: Listen". Pitchfork. August 5, 2022. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2022. Johnston, Rylee (June 14, 2023). "'Superstar: Aaliyah': How to Watch the ABC Tribute Special". Billboard. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Saunders, Angel (June 14, 2023). "ABC to honor the life and impact of Aaliyah in exclusive one-hour special". Revolt. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "Ask Billboard: How Popular Is Country Music?". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 12, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (December 12, 2008). "Ask Billboard: 'Titanic,' Mid-'90s Singers, Tori Amos". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Eliot, Marc (2008). Song of Brooklyn: An Oral History of America's Favorite Borough. Random House. p. 38. ISBN 978-0-7679-2014-8. "Canadian RandB Singer Keisha Chante to Play Aaliyah in 2009 Biopic". BET. December 18, 2008. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Aaliyah's 35th Birthday: Drake, Missy Elliott, Stars Remember Singer". Us Weekly. January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Sources for Princess of R&B: Sutherland 2005, p. 21 Mamo, Heran (December 17, 2021). "Aaliyah's 'Poison' Collab With The Weeknd Finally Arrives: Stream It Here". Billboard. Retrieved June 16, 2022. The Princess of R&B and the dark prince of R&B join forces on the track... Sources for Pop Princess: Flick, Larry (March 14, 1998). "Reviews and Previews – Singles". Billboard. Vol. 110, no. 11. p. 22. Retrieved June 14, 2022. Jeep siren Aaliyah's transformation into a pop princess is complete with the release of this Oscar-nominated theme to the film "Anastasia". Cawn, Brad (August 19, 2001). "Aaliyah Aaliyah (Blackground/Virgin) Through..." Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2022. On her third record, her first in five years, this pop princess has matured..... Frydenlund, Zach (October 2, 2014). "Check Out the First Trailer for Lifetime's "Aaliyah: The Princess of R&B" Biopic". Complex. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. During the quick clip, Shipp is seen playing the late pop princess in scenes where she is at dance rehearsal, in the studio, and in an argument with her mother while Iggy Azalea's song, "Goddess," serves as the soundtrack for the trailer. Glover, Sarah (August 25, 2016). "#Aaliyah15: Remembering R&B Singer Aaliyah 15 Years Later". NBC Philadelphia. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. On social media, fans used the hashtag #Aaliyah15 to share their remembrances of the pop princess. Sources for Queen of Urban Pop: "Ep. 166 | Episode Summary, Highlights, and Recaps". VH1. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2012. But Aaliyah Dana Houghton, the reigning Queen of Urban Pop, wasn't sitting still. She was hard at work, shooting her next video, when a plane crash ended her life on August 25 Hodges, Michael (August 25, 2017). "Grapevine: MAC Aaliyah collection coming in 2018". The Detroit News. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Petitions circulated last year demanding that the "Queen of Urban Pop," whom Essence magazine says was a loyal MAC customer before her death at 22 on a plane in the Bahamas, get her own line and the cosmetics giant responded. Mayo, Nicki (August 25, 2017). "What's your favorite Aaliyah song?". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Aaliyah Haughton will always be remembered as the "Princess of R&B" and "Queen of Urban Pop." She's trending today on social media because it's the anniversary of her death. Stone, Megan (January 18, 2021). "Aaliyah's estate weighs in on adding her entire music catalogue to streaming services". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Aaliyah has since been hailed the "Queen of Urban Pop" and is credited for influencing the future sound of a variety of genres including R&B and hip hop. Seymour, Craig (December 13, 2002). "I Care 4 U". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Janet Jackson New Album: Janet Jackson First Album: People.com". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "Lifetime's Aaliyah Biopic Should Never Have Been Made – VH1". VH1 News. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2021. D'Angelo, Joe (September 6, 2001). "Janet, Missy, Others Honor Aaliyah During VMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved June 17, 2009. Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian David (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide: Completely Revised and Updated 4th Edition. Simon & Schuster. p. 1. ISBN 0-7432-0169-8. "The Greatest – Ep. 71 '50 Greatest Women of the Video Era'". VH1. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2009. Sutherland 2005, p. 204. "Top 25 Dancers". BET. February 1, 2008. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2009. "Best of the 2000s – Artists of the Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 11, 2010. Retrieved May 11, 2010. "Decade End Charts – Billboard 200 Albums". Billboard. 2009. Archived from the original on February 4, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Trust, Gary; Caulfield, Keith; Ramirez, Rauly (November 18, 2010). "The Top 50 R&B / Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years". Billboard. Retrieved April 4, 2011. "50 Most Influential RnB Stars". Essence. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved February 21, 2023. "VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music". VH1. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "NME's 100 Most Influential Artists: 50 – 1". NME.COM. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. Zellner, Xander (August 2, 2018). "Hot 100 Turns 60! The Top 60 Female Artists of All-Time, From Madonna to Mariah Carey & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2018. Grein, Paul (May 19, 2023). "Aaliyah, New Edition & More Headed for National Rhythm & Blues Hall of Fame". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian David (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide: Completely Revised and Updated 4th Edition. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7432-0169-8. Farley, John (2002). Aaliyah: More Than a Woman. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-7434-5566-5. Footman, Tim (2021). Aaliyah. Plexus Publishing Limited. ISBN 9780859657136. Kenyatta, Kelly (2002). An R&B Princess in Words and Pictures. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 0-9702224-3-2. Simmonds, Jeremy (2008). The Encyclopedia of Dead Rock Stars. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-754-8. Sutherland, William (2005). Aaliyah remembered: her life & the person behind the mystique. Victoria, B.C.: Trafford Publishing. ISBN 1-4120-5062-6. OCLC 59337110. Wikiquote has quotations related to Aaliyah. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aaliyah. Official website Aaliyah at AllMusic Aaliyah at IMDb Aaliyah on Grammy Awards Aaliyah Dana Haughton at Find a Grave