Rimini (/ˈrɪmɪni/ RIM-in-ee, Italian: [ˈriːmini] ; Romagnol: Rémin or Rémne; Latin: Ariminum) is a city in the Emilia-Romagna region of Northern Italy. Sprawling along the Adriatic Sea, Rimini is situated at a strategically-important north-south passage along the coast at the southern tip of the Po Valley. It is one of the most notable seaside resorts in Europe, with a significant domestic and international tourist economy. The first bathing establishment opened in 1843. The city is also the birthplace of the film director Federico Fellini, and the nearest Italian city to the independent Republic of San Marino. The ancient Romans founded the colonia of Ariminum in 268 BC, constructing the Arch of Augustus and the Ponte di Tiberio at the start of strategic roads that ended in Rimini. During the Renaissance, the city benefited from the court of the House of Malatesta, hosting artists like Leonardo da Vinci and producing the Tempio Malatestiano. In the 19th century, Rimini hosted many movements campaigning for Italian unification. Much of the city was destroyed during World War II, and it earned a gold medal for civic valour for its partisan resistance. In recent years, the Rimini Fiera has become one of the largest sites for trade fairs and conferences in Italy. As of 31 December 2019, Rimini's urban area was home to 151,200 people, with approximately 325,000 living in the eponymous province, making it the twenty-eighth largest city in Italy. The area was inhabited by Etruscans until the arrival of the Celts, who held it from the 6th century BC until their defeat by the Umbri in 283 BC. In 268 BC at the mouth of the Ariminus (now called the Marecchia), the Roman Republic founded the colonia of Ariminum. Ariminum was seen as a bastion against Celtic invaders and also as a springboard for conquering the Padana plain. The city was involved in the civil wars of the first century, aligned with the popular party and its leaders, first Gaius Marius, and then Julius Caesar. After crossing the Rubicon, the latter made his legendary appeal to the legions in the Forum of Rimini. As the terminus of the Via Flaminia, which ended in the town at the surviving prestigious Arch of Augustus (erected 27 BC), Rimini was a road junction connecting central and northern Italy by the Via Aemilia that led to Piacenza and the Via Popilia that extended northwards; it also opened up trade by sea and river. Remains of the amphitheatre that could seat 12,000 people, and a five-arched bridge of Istrian stone completed by Tiberius (21 AD), are still visible. Later Galla Placidia built the church of Santo Stefano. The evidence that Rimini is of Roman origins is illustrated by the city being divided by two main streets, the Cardo and the Decumanus. The end of Roman rule was marked by destruction caused by invasions and wars, but also by the establishment of the palaces of the Imperial officers and the first churches, the symbol of the spread of Christianity that held the important Council of Ariminum in the city in 359. When the Ostrogoths conquered Rimini in 493, Odoacer, besieged in Ravenna, had to capitulate. During the Gothic War (535–554), Rimini was taken and retaken many times. In its vicinity the Byzantine general Narses overthrew (553) the Alamanni. Under the Byzantine rule, it belonged to the Duchy of the Pentapolis, part of the Exarchate of Ravenna. In 728, it was taken with many other cities by Liutprand, King of the Lombards but returned to the Byzantines about 735. Pepin the Short gave it to the Holy See, but during the wars of the popes and the Italian cities against the emperors, Rimini sided with the latter. In the 13th century, it suffered from the discords of the Gambacari and Ansidei families. The city became a municipality in the 14th century, and with the arrival of the religious orders, numerous convents and churches were built, providing work for many illustrious artists. In fact, Giotto inspired the 14th-century School of Rimini, which was the expression of original cultural ferment. The House of Malatesta emerged from the struggles between municipal factions with Malatesta da Verucchio, who in 1239 was named podestà (chief magistrate) of the city. Despite interruptions, his family held authority until 1528. In 1312 he was succeeded by Malatestino Malatesta, first signore (lord) of the city and Pandolfo I Malatesta, the latter's brother, named by Louis IV, Holy Roman Emperor, as imperial vicar of Romagna. Ferrantino, son of Malatesta II (1335), was opposed by his cousin Ramberto and by Cardinal Bertrand du Pouget (1331), legate of Pope John XXII. Malatesta II was also lord of Pesaro. He was succeeded by Malatesta Ungaro (1373) and Galeotto I Malatesta, uncle of the former (1385), lord also of Fano (from 1340), Pesaro, and Cesena (1378). His son, Carlo I Malatesta, one of the most respected condottieri of the time, enlarged the Riminese possessions and restored the port. Carlo died childless in 1429, and the lordship was divided into three parts, Rimini going to Galeotto Roberto Malatesta, a Catholic zealot inadequate for the position. The Pesarese line of the Malatestas tried, in fact, to take advantage of his weakness and to capture the city, but Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta, Carlo's nephew, who was only 14 at the time, intervened to save it. Galeotto retired to a convent, and Sigismondo obtained the rule of Rimini. Sigismondo Pandolfo was the most famous lord of Rimini. In 1433, Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor, sojourned in the city and for a while he was the commander-in-chief of the Papal armies. A skilled general, Sigismondo often acted as condottiero for other states to gain money to embellish it (he was also a dilettante poet). He had the famous Tempio Malatestiano rebuilt by Leon Battista Alberti. However, after the rise of Pope Pius II, he had to fight constantly for the independence of the city. In 1463, he was forced to submit to Pius II, who left him only Rimini and little more; Roberto Malatesta, his son (1482), under Pope Paul II, nearly lost his state, but under Pope Sixtus IV, became the commanding officer of the pontifical army against Ferdinand of Naples. Sigismondo was, however, defeated by Neapolitan forces in the battle of Campomorto (1482). Pandolfo IV, his son (1500), lost Rimini to Cesare Borgia, after whose overthrow it fell to Venice (1503–1509), but it was later retaken by Pope Julius II and incorporated into the Papal States. After the death of Pope Leo X, Pandolfo returned for several months, and with his son Sigismondo Malatesta held a rule which looked tyrannous even for the time. Pope Adrian VI expelled him again and gave Rimini to the Duke of Urbino, the pope's vicar in Romagna. In 1527, Sigismondo managed to regain the city, but in the following year the Malatesta dominion died forever. At the beginning of the 16th century, Rimini, now a secondary town of the Papal States, was ruled by an Apostolic Legate. Towards the end of the 16th century, the municipal square (now Piazza Cavour), which had been closed off on a site where the Poletti Theatre was subsequently built, was redesigned. The statue of Pope Paul V has stood in the centre of the square next to the fountain since 1614. In the 16th century, the 'grand square', which was where markets and tournaments were held, underwent various changes. A small temple dedicated to Saint Anthony of Padua and a clock tower were built there, giving the square its present shape and size. Until the 18th century raiding armies, earthquakes, famines, floods and pirate attacks ravaged the city. In this gloomy situation and due to a weakened local economy, fishing took on great importance, a fact testified by the construction of structures such as the fish market and the lighthouse. In 1797, Rimini, along with the rest of Romagna, was affected by the passage of the Napoleonic army and became part of the Cisalpine Republic. Napoleonic policy suppressed the monastic orders, confiscating their property and thus dispersing a substantial heritage, and demolished many churches including the ancient cathedral of Santa Colomba. The troops of Joachim Murat, King of Naples, marched through Rimini on 30 March 1815. In a last attempt to gain allies before his defeat in the Neapolitan War, Murat published the Rimini Proclamation, one of the earliest calls for Italian unification. In 1845, a band of adventurers commanded by Ribbotti entered the city and proclaimed a constitution which was soon abolished. In 1860, Rimini and Romagna were incorporated into the Kingdom of Italy. The city was transformed after the 1843 founding of the first bathing establishment and the Kursaal, a building constructed to host sumptuous social events, became the symbol of Rimini's status as a tourist resort. In just a few years, the seafront underwent considerable development work, making Rimini 'the city of small villas'. During World War I, Rimini and its surrounding infrastructure was one of the primary targets of the Austro-Hungarian Navy. After Italy's declaration of war on 15 May 1915, the Austro-Hungarian fleet left its harbours the same day and started its assault on the Adriatic coast between Venice and Barletta.[citation needed] The 1916 Rimini earthquakes, on 17 May and 16 August, led to the demolition of 615 buildings in the city, with many historic churches severely damaged. 4,174 people were displaced between Rimini and Riccione. On 19 October 1922, Riccione was separated from Rimini to form a separate comune. In World War II, Rimini suffered sustained Allied aerial bombardment from November 1943 until its liberation on 21 September 1944. 82% of Rimini's buildings were destroyed, the highest figure among Italian cities with over 50,000 inhabitants. Around 55,000 refugees fled to the north, to the hinterland, and to San Marino, where they sheltered in the country's railway tunnels. As the Allied frontline approached the city, naval bombardment followed, and remaining citizens hid in makeshift shelters or in caves by the Covignano hill. Partisan resistance was also notable in Rimini, with official reports of 400 young people involved in resistance cells. On 16 August 1944, three partisans were hanged in Rimini's central square, which would later be renamed in their honour. The Battle of Rimini was a major engagement in the Gothic Line. Oliver Leese, the British Eighth Army's commander, called the advance to liberate Rimini "one of the hardest battles of the Eighth Army ... comparable to El Alamein, Mareth, and the Gustav Line (Monte Cassino)". Within 37 days of the battle, over 10,000 soldiers had died between the Allied and Axis forces. For its role in liberating Rimini, the 3rd Greek Mountain Brigade was awarded the honorific title "Rimini Brigade". 1,939 Allied soldiers, of which 1,413 are British, were buried in the Coriano Ridge War Cemetery in Coriano. 114 Greek soldiers were buried in a cemetery in Riccione's Fontanelle area, and an Indian cemetery with 618 burials is located on the San Marino Highway. Following Rimini's liberation, reconstruction work began, culminating in huge development of the tourist industry in the city. Rimini is situated at 44°03′00″ north and 12°34′00″ east, along the coast of the Adriatic sea, at the southeastern edge of Emilia-Romagna, at a short distance from Montefeltro and Marche. Rimini extends for 135.71 square km and borders the municipalities of Bellaria-Igea Marina, San Mauro Pascoli, and Santarcangelo di Romagna towards NW, Verucchio and Serravalle, San Marino towards SW, Coriano towards S, and Riccione towards SE. Rimini is the main centre of a 50-kilometre (31-mile) coastal conurbation, which extends from Cervia to Gabicce Mare, including the seaside resorts of Cesenatico, Gatteo a Mare, Bellaria-Igea Marina, Riccione, Misano Adriatico and Cattolica. The conurbation is a result of urban sprawl as the tourist economy developed along the riviera romagnola. Rimini's natural geography provides a strategically-important passage along the Adriatic Sea at the boundary between northern Italy, characterised by the plains of the Po Valley, and central Italy, characterised by more mountainous terrain. For its geographical position and its climatic features, Rimini is situated on the edge between the Mediterranean and the central European microclimates, providing an environment of notable naturalistic value. Rimini's coastal strip, made of recent marine deposits, is edged by a fine sandy beach, 15 kilometres (9.3 miles) long and up to 200 metres (660 feet) wide, interrupted only by river mouths and gently shelving towards the sea. Along the coastline, there is a low sandy cliff, created by the rising sea in around 4000 BC, partly conserved north of Rimini, between Rivabella and Bellaria-Igea Marina, approximately 1.3 kilometres (0.81 miles) from the coast. Rimini's ancient coastline was situated much farther inland: it gradually shifted outward over centuries, with new land developed throughout the 20th century. Rimini's city centre was founded between two rivers: the Marecchia and the Ausa. Until the 1960s, the Ausa flowed south of Rimini's city centre, running between the present-day Rimini Sud junction of the A14 tolled highway and the Arch of Augustus, where it turned north-east along the old city walls to empty at Piazzale Kennedy. From the 1960s, the Ausa was diverted to flow parallel to the SS16 [it] state road along cemented banks, and empty into the Marecchia. The diversion was completed in 1972, with the Ausa's former route reduced to a sewage outlet, and redeveloped into a series of public parks. The Marecchia itself, which flows north of Rimini, was also deviated to empty into the Adriatic Sea further north, between San Giuliano Mare and Rivabella. The deviation was prompted because the river was subjected to periodic, destructive floods near its mouth, where the riverbed became narrow after various bends. The ancient riverbed is still used as Rimini's harbour. Rimini's southern boundary with the municipality of Riccione is marked by the Rio dell'Asse, a minor stream. To its southwest, Rimini is surrounded by several rolling hills: Covignano (153 metres (502 feet) altitude), Vergiano (81 metres (266 feet) altitude), San Martino Monte l'Abbate (57 metres (187 feet) altitude) and San Lorenzo in Correggiano (60 metres (200 feet) altitude). The hills are widely cultivated, with vineyards, olive groves and orchards, and historic villas. Rimini's city centre, bounded by the Malatesta city walls, was divided in the medieval era into four rioni. Clodio, in the city's north, was popular and a peculiar urban structure tied with the Marecchia. Pomposo, in the city's east, was the largest district, and included large orchards and convents. Cittadella, in the city's west, was the most important district, including the municipal palaces, Castel Sismondo, and the Cathedral of Santa Colomba. Montecavallo, in the city's south, is characterised today by bowed, irregular streets of medieval origins, by the Fossa Patara creek and a small hill called Montirone. The boundaries of these rioni are not known, but it is assumed that they followed the current Corso d'Augusto, Via Garibaldi, and Via Gambalunga. Outside Rimini's city centre were four ancient boroughs: San Giuliano, San Giovanni, San Andrea, and Marina. These were entirely incorporated to the city by the urban sprawl in the early 20th century: Borgo San Giuliano, along Via Emilia, dates to the 11th century and was originally a fishermen's settlement. Dominated by the Church of San Giuliano, it is one of the most picturesque spots of the city, with narrow streets and squares, colourful small houses and many frescoes representing characters and places of Federico Fellini's films. Borgo San Giovanni, on both sides of Via Flaminia, was populated by artisans and the middle class. Borgo Sant'Andrea, located outside of Porta Montanara on the city's southwestern gate, was tied with agriculture and commerce of cows. Borgo Marina, on the right bank of the Marecchia, was heavily transformed by Fascist demolitions and World War II bombings, which hit this area due to its proximity to the bridges and railway station of the city. San Giovanni and Sant'Andrea were developed in the 15th century; they burned in a fire in 1469 and were rebuilt in the 19th century, relocating small industries and manufactures, including a brick factory and a phosphorus matches factory. Rimini's municipality includes the coastal districts of Torre Pedrera [it], Viserbella, Viserba, Rivabella, and San Giuliano Mare to the city centre's north. To the city centre's south are the coastal districts of Bellariva, Marebello, Rivazzurra, and Miramare. These coastal districts are characterised by their tourist economy, with hotels and entertainment venues. Along the Via Emilia, to Rimini's northwest, is the suburb of Celle and Santa Giustina, just before the border with Santarcangelo di Romagna. North of Santa Giustina are the villages of Orsoleto and San Vito. Along the Via Marecchiese, to Rimini's east, are the suburbs of Marecchiese, Villaggio Azzurro, Padulli, and Spadarolo, and the rural village of Corpolò. On the road to San Marino is the village of Grotta Rossa. On the road to Ospedaletto is the suburb of Villaggio 1° Maggio and the rural village of Gaiofana. Along the Via Flaminia, to Rimini's southeast, are the suburbs of Colonnella and Lagomaggio. Rimini has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: Cfa) moderated by the influence of the Adriatic Sea, featuring autumn and winter mean temperatures and annual low temperatures among the very highest in Emilia-Romagna. Precipitations are equally distributed during the year, with a peak in October and minimums in January and July. In spring, autumn, and winter, precipitations mainly come from oceanic fronts, while in summer, they are brought by thunderstorms, coming from the Apennines or the Po Valley. Humidity is high all year round, averaging a minimum of approximately 72% in June and July and a maximum of approximately 84% in November and December. Prevailing winds blow from west, south, east, and northweast. Southwesterly winds, known as libeccio or garbino, are foehn winds, which may bring warm temperatures in each season. On average, there are over 2,040 sunshine hours per year. As of 2019[update], Rimini has 150,951 inhabitants, with a density of about 1,100 inhabitants per square kilometre within the city limits. In 1861, by the time of the first Italian census, the population was around 28,000; in 1931 it was more than double, 57,000. With the increasing tourism development, population rapidly grew between 1951 and 1981, the fastest growing period for Rimini in the 20th century, when the city's population grew from 77,000 to over 128,000. During the 20th century, two former districts of Rimini got administrative autonomy, causing two distinct temporary drops in population totals: Riccione in 1922 and Bellaria-Igea Marina in 1956. Foreign population is 18,396, (12.5% of the total), mainly from Eastern Europe, East Asia and North Africa. Between 1992 and 2014, foreign population grew from around 1,800 to over 18,000 units. The most important foreign communities are Albanians (3,479), Romanians (2,904), Ukrainians (2,409), Chinese (1,197) and Moldovans (1,023). Other notable foreign groups in the city are Senegalese, Moroccans, Macedonians, Tunisians, Russians, Bangladeshis and Peruvians. Rimini's population is mostly Catholic. The city is the seat of the Diocese of Rimini, a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Ravenna-Cervia. The first cathedral of the diocese was the former Cathedral of Santa Colomba until 1798, when the title was transferred to the church of Sant'Agostino. Since 1809, Rimini's cathedral is the Tempio Malatestiano. Besides Roman Catholic churches, there are also Orthodox, Evangelical and Adventist churches. Between the 13th and 14th century, Rimini had a flourishing Jewish community, which built three distinct synagogues, all destroyed, formerly located around the area of Piazza Cavour, Via Cairoli and Santa Colomba. In its post-war history, Rimini has largely voted for left-wing parties. In the 1975 regional elections, the Italian Communist Party won 49.9% of votes in Rimini, its best-ever electoral result. For much of Rimini's modern history, the city's municipal government has been politically subordinate to other cities in Romagna. From 1540 until 1797, with a brief restoration in 1815, Rimini was part of the Papal States' Legation of Romagna, headquartered in Ravenna. In 1797, the Cisalpine Republic incorporated Rimini into the Rubicon Department, headquartered in Forlì. With the return of the Papal States in 1816, Rimini came under the Legation of Forlì. In 1850, Rimini came under the reformed Legation of Romagna, now with Bologna as its capital. Finally, on 27 December 1859, with Romagna's annexation into the Kingdom of Italy, Rimini became part of the Province of Forlì. On 16 April 1992, for the first time in its modern history, Rimini became a provincial capital with the formation of the Province of Rimini. Rimini is a major international tourist destination and seaside resort, among the most well known in Europe and the Mediterranean basin, thanks to a long sandy beach, bathing establishments, theme parks and opportunities for leisure and spare time. The economy of the city is mainly based on tourism, whose development started in the first half of the 19th century and increased after World War II.[citation needed] In 2017, the city welcomed over 57 million tourists. Rimini's origins as a seaside resort date to the foundation of the first bathing establishment, the oldest on the Adriatic Sea, in 1843. The width of the beach, the gentle gradient of the sea bed, the equipment of bathing establishments, the luxurious hotels, the mildness of the climate, the richness of curative waters, the prestigious social events, made Rimini a renowned tourist destination among the Italian and European aristocracy during the Belle Époque. Tourism in Rimini started as therapeutic stay (thalassotherapy, hydrotherapy and heliotherapy), evolving into elite vacation in the late 19th century, into middle-class tourism during the fascist era and finally into mass tourism in the postwar period. The touristic season in Rimini includes the annual Notte rosa  [it] (Pink Night), a weekend cultural festival held in early July that includes exhibitions, music concerts, and firework displays. The festival is held across the riviera romagnola, over which it is estimated to attract two million visitors and revenues exceeding €200 million. Italy's third and fourth oldest theme parks were opened in Rimini: Fiabilandia [it] in Rivazzura (1965) and Italia in Miniatura, a miniature park in Viserba (1970). Rimini concentrates about a quarter of Emilia-Romagna's hotels, with over 1,000 hotels, more than 220 of which are open all year round, aside from apartment hotels, apartments, holiday homes, bed & breakfast and campings. Tourism is mainly based on seaside holidays, but also includes events, nightlife, culture, wellness, food and wine. Rimini is among Italy's leading trade fair and convention sites. Relocated in 2001 to the city's west, Rimini Fiera comprises sixteen pavilions with 129,000 m2 (1,390,000 sq ft) of exhibit floor, and hosts trade fairs, sporting events, and musical performances, as well as the annual Rimini Meeting, a religious and cultural festival organised by Communion and Liberation, a lay Catholic movement. The majority of Rimini's hotels reopen for the conference season, which provides a flow of visitors to the city outside of the summer beach season. The dates of conferences are also used to set municipal regulations on the touristic season along the riviera. The Fiera's previous site, on Via Monte Titano, was redeveloped in 2011 into Rimini Palacongressi, a smaller conference space. In 2015, the Fiera and Palacongressi were estimated to be worth about a tenth of the province of Rimini's gross domestic product. The city's other economic sectors, such as services, commerce, construction industry, have been influenced by the development of tourism. Commerce is one of the main economic sectors, thanks to the presence of a large wholesale center, two hypermarkets, department stores, supermarkets and hundreds of shops and boutiques. Industry, less developed than tourism and services, includes various companies active in food industry, woodworking machineries, building constructions, furnishing, clothing and publishing. Notable companies are Bimota (motorcycles), SCM (woodworking machines), Trevi S.p.A. (electronic goods). Rimini is also seat of a historic railway works plant. Agriculture and fishing were the city's main economic sources until the early 20th century. The most common crops, in terms of surface area, are alfalfa, wheat, durum wheat, grape vine, olive tree, barley and sorghum. Among fruit trees dominates apricot, peach and plum trees. Important are the traditional productions of wine (Sangiovese, Trebbiano, Rebola, Pagadebit, Albana wines) and extra virgin olive oil. The fishing industry can count on a fleet of about 100 fishing boats, the most consistent of Rimini's fishing department, which includes the coast between Cattolica and Cesenatico. The City Museum (Museo della Città), is Rimini's main and oldest museum. It was inaugurated in 1872 as the Archaeology Gallery, at the ground floor of Palazzo Gambalunga, thanks to Riminese historian Luigi Tonini, who researched and studied the city's archaeological heritage. The Archaeology Gallery was conceived as a collection of Etruscan civilization and Roman antiquities, found in Rimini and in the surrounding countryside. In 1923, it moved to the monastery of San Francesco, and was expanded with a section of medieval art in 1938. Its collections avoided the destruction of the Second World War after they ewre moved to shelters in Spadarolo and Novafeltria. In 1964, the collections moved to Palazzo Visconti and finally, from 1990, to the Collegio dei Gesuiti, a large Jesuit convent designed by Bolognese architect Alfonso Torreggiani, built in 1749. In the Archaeological department are exhibited grave goods from Villanovian tombs of Verucchio and Covignano, architectural pieces, sculptures, mosaics, ceramics, coins of Republican and Imperial eras, and the exceptional medical kit from the Domus del Chirurgo. The collection of the Roman Lapidary, exhibited in the inner courtyard of the convent, has funerary monuments, epigraphies and milestones. The Medieval and Modern Art departments include collections of paintings, sculptures and art objects by artists from Romagna (Giovanni da Rimini, Giuliano da Rimini, Guido Cagnacci), Emilia (Guercino, Vittorio Maria Bigari), Tuscany (Domenico Ghirlandaio, Agostino di Duccio) and Veneto (Giovanni Bellini), from 14th to 19th century. The City Museum arranges temporary exhibitions and promotes researches, study and restoration activities of the city's historical and artistic heritage. The Fellini Museum, dedicated to Federico Fellini, houses temporary exhibitions of documents, drawings, scenographies and costumes related to the Riminese film director. The Museum of Glances (Museo degli Sguardi) is housed in Villa Alvarado, on the Covignano hill. It was inaugurated by explorer Delfino Dinz Rialto on 9 September 1972, then known as the Museum of Primitive Arts (Museo delle Arti Primitivi), and hosted in the Palazzo del Podestà [it]. In 2005, it was rededicated as one of Italy's main museums on the cultures of Africa, Oceania, and the pre-Columbian Americas. 600 works are exhibited in the museum, whose collections number over 7,000 objects. The Maritime and Small Fishing Museum (Museo della Piccola Pesca e della Marineria), in Viserbella, exhibits Rimini's nautical history through a collection of boats, fishing tools, photographs and a large seashells collection, with pieces from all over the Mediterranean Sea. The Multimedia Archaeological Museum (Museo Archeologico Multimediale) underneath the Amintore Galli Theatre showcases excavations from the theatre's renovation that uncovered a Roman domus, Byzantine finds, and the ancient Malatesta city walls underneath the theatre. The theatre also includes spaces dedicated to the history of Italian theatre, the architecture of the Galli Theatre, and the life and music of Giuseppe Verdi. There are two private museums outside the city centre: the Aviation Museum (Museo dell'Aviazione) in Sant'Aquilina, close to the Sammarinese border, and the Motorcycling National Museum (Museo Nazionale del Motociclo) in Casalecchio. Founded in 1619 following a bequest by Riminese lawyer Alessandro Gambalunga [it], the Biblioteca Civica Gambalunga holds over 300,000 physical exhibits, including 293,879 books. Among notable exhibits include an 11th-century Evangelarium, an early 12th-century codex of Honorius Augustodunensis, a codex by Hugh of Saint Victor, and letters from Giovanni Bianchi. A collection from Adolphe Noël des Vergers records the French project for a collection of Latin epigraphy and other 19th-century archaeological ventures. Other libraries in Rimini include a library of the University of Bologna, a school library in San Giuliano Mare, a bioethics institute's library, the diocesan library in San Fortunato, and a medical-scientific library in Rimini's hospital. The first stable theatre in Rimini is documented since 1681, when the city council decided on the transformation of the Palazzo dell'Arengo [it]'s main hall into a large theatre hall, hosting shows of amateur dramatics companies and the young Carlo Goldoni, who was studying philosophy in Rimini at that time. Between 1842 and 1857, the Teatro Nuovo Comunale, now the Amintori Galli Theatre, was built to a neoclassical design by Luigi Poletti; it is considered one of his architectural masterpieces. On 16 August 1857, the theatre hosted the world premiere of Giuseppe Verdi's Aroldo, which was a major event in the city, attracting many foreign visitors. During the Second World War, the theatre was severely damaged by Allied bombardment. Following a complete restoration in the 2010s, the theatre reopened on 28 October 2018. Rimini appeared on the movie screen for the first time in some early footages, such as the documentary "Rimini l'Ostenda d'Italia" (1912), and in various Istituto Luce's newsreels in the Thirties. The film director Federico Fellini, was born and raised in Rimini, portrayed characters, places and atmospheres of his hometown through his movies, which however were almost entirely shot in Cinecittà's studios in Rome: I Vitelloni, 8 e ½ (Oscar award in 1964), I clowns, Amarcord (Oscar award in 1975). Other Italian movies filmed in Rimini includes "La prima notte di quiete" by Valerio Zurlini, "Rimini Rimini" by Sergio Corbucci, "Abbronzatissimi" by Bruno Gaburro, "Sole negli occhi" by Andrea Porporati, "Da zero a dieci" by Luciano Ligabue and "Non pensarci" by Gianni Zanasi. The earliest musician from Rimini was Saint Arduino (10th century); a musical tradition of some distinction was witnessed in the following century by the presence of a music school, named "Scuola cantorum", at the Cathedral of Santa Colomba. French composer Guillaume Dufay stayed in Rimini, at Malatesta's court until 1427. In 1518 Pietro Aaron became the first choirmaster of the Cathedral's chapel. In 1690 Carlo Tessarini, violinist and composer, was born in Rimini. The city also gave birth to the musician Benedetto Neri, professor at the Academy of Music in Milan.[citation needed] On 16 August 1857, Rimini's New Municipal Theatre hosted the world premiere of Giuseppe Verdi's Aroldo. Between the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many social events and dance parties took place at the Bathing Establishment, hosting celebrities such as soprano Elena Bianchini-Cappelli and tenor Enrico Caruso. In recent years, the city inspired the homonymous music album by Fabrizio De André, released in 1978, and it is cited in various popular Italian and foreign songs by Fabrizio De André, Francesco Guccini, Nino Rota, Elvis Costello, Fred Buscaglione. Also born in Rimini were the songwriter Samuele Bersani and the composer and music producer Carlo Alberto Rossi, author of some of Mina's songs. Rimini's cuisine is simple and characterized by intense flavours and it is indissolubly related to the traditions of rural culture, influenced by the city's location—between the sea and the hills and near the border between Romagna and Marche. The traditional first course is pasta, which includes regular pasta, pasta in broth and baked pasta, prepared in many different shapes. Almost all pasta dishes require a base of "sfoglia", a dough of eggs and flour, handmade with a rolling pin. First courses include cappelletti, passatelli in broth, lasagne, cannelloni, nidi di rondine, ravioli, tagliatelle, garganelli, maltagliati, gnocchi and strozzapreti, seasoned with bolognese sauce or a dressing of butter and sage. Second courses include meat dishes, such as pollo alla cacciatora, rabbit in porchetta, meat-filled zucchini, sausages and mixed grilled meats, and fish dishes, like barbecues of atlantic mackerels, sardines, rotisseries of oily fishes, sepias with peas, fried squids and gianchetti (known here as "omini nudi"). Piada is a flatbread of ancient traditions, thin and crumbly, obtained from a dough of flour, water, lard and salt, and baked on a scorching "testo" of terracotta or cast iron. It is often accompanied by grilled meats or fishes, sausages, gratinée vegetables, salami, prosciutto, fresh cheeses and country herbs. Cassoni are stuffed flatbreads similar to piada, with various fillings: country herbs, potatoes and sausages, tomato and mozzarella. Side dishes include mixed salads, gratinée vegetables, roasted potatoes, sautée bladder campion leaves, marinated olives with dill, garlic and orange zest. Traditional desserts are ciambella, Carnevale's fried fiocchetti and castagnole, zuppa inglese (a rich dessert with custard, savoiardi and liqueurs), caramelized figs, peaches in white wine and strawberries in red wine.[citation needed] Native to Rimini, piada dei morti is a sweet focaccia topped with raisins, almonds, walnuts, and pine nuts, traditionally eaten in November for All Souls' Day. Typical local products are squacquerone (a fresh cheese) and saba, a grape syrup used to prepare desserts. Quality extra virgin olive oil is traditionally produced in Rimini area since ancient times. The wines include Sangiovese, Trebbiano, Pagadebit, Rebola, Cabernet Sauvignon and Albana, a dessert wine of Roman origins. Rimini has a varied historical and artistic heritage which includes churches and monasteries, villas and palaces, fortifications, archaeological sites, streets and squares, as a result of the succession of various civilizations, dominations and historical events through its history, from the Romans to the Byzantines, the medieval comune, the Malatesta seignory, the Venetian Republic and the Papal States dominations. The city has always been a key gate to the Orient and the southern areas of the Mediterranean for the Po Valley, thanks to its geographical position and its harbour, and a meeting point between cultures of Northern and Central Italy. Rimini has monuments of different eras, with important examples of architecture from the Roman age, such as the Arch of Augustus, the Tiberius Bridge, the Amphitheatre and the Domus del Chirurgo; from the Middle Ages, such as the Palazzo dell'Arengo, the church of Sant'Agostino and Castel Sismondo; from the Renaissance, with the Tempio Malatestiano, masterpiece of Leon Battista Alberti. Rimini's archaeological heritage includes some domus of Republican and Imperial age, characterized by polychrome or black and white mosaics, necropolis and sections of the pavement of the ancient Roman streets. The city, along with its boroughs and the seaside district of Marina Centro, also preserves buildings from the Baroque, the Neoclassical and Art Nouveau periods, with churches, palaces, hotels and mansions which reveal its role of cultural and trading centre and seaside resort. The city centre has a Roman structure, partly modified by following medieval transformations. Urban evolution, through the renovation of the Malatesta, earthquakes and the suppressions of monasteries, has led to a stratification of historic sites and buildings. The bombings of World War II caused extensive destruction and damage, compromising the monumental heritage and the integrity of the city centre, which has been reconstructed and restored in order to valorize its historic places and buildings. Piazza Cavour The Tiberius Bridge Piazza Tre Martiri Tempio Malatestiano: the original gothic-style cathedral of San Francesco was built in the 13th century, but reconstructed into a Renaissance masterwork by the Florentine architect Leon Battista Alberti, commissioned by Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta, hence the name. In the cathedral are the tombs of Sigismondo and his wife Isotta. Bell tower of the former Cathedral of Santa Colomba. Sant'Agostino: 13th-century Romanesque church. Chiesa dei Teatini: 17th-century Baroque-style church. San Fortunato: this 1418 church houses the Adoration of the Magi painting (1547) by Giorgio Vasari. San Giovanni Battista: 12th-century church with single nave with rich stucco decoration from the 18th century. San Giuliano Martire: 1553–1575 church houses a painting by Paul Veronese (1588) depicting the martyrdom of that saint. The church also houses the polyptych (1409) by Bittino da Faenza (1357–1427) depicting episodes of this saint's life. Santa Maria dei Servi: Church built in 1317 by the religious order of the Servants of Mary and entirely transformed in 1779 by architect Gaetano Stegani, who was buried here. The façade was completed in 1894 by Giuseppe Urbani. The interior has a single nave, adorned with coupled columns on each side and rich Baroque plasters. Church of Suffragio: situated in Piazza Ferrari, was constructed by the Jesuites in 1721, designed by Giovan Francesco Buonamici. It features an unfinished brick façade. The interior, shaped in the form of the Latin Cross, has a single nave flanked by chapels and adorned by plain Baroque decorations and paintings by Guido Cagnacci. Tempietto of Sant'Antonio. Madonna della Scala. Castel Sismondo. This castle built by Sigismondo Pandolfo was later used as a prison. Grand Hotel Rimini. Built in Liberty style, the Italian variant of Art Nouveau, the hotel was designed by architect Paolito Somazzi [it] and inaugurated on 1 July 1908. One of Rimini's most well-known buildings, the luxury hotel is notable for its elegance, classic style, and association with Fellini. A copy of the hotel was heavily featured in his film Amarcord (1973), and once successful, Fellini would often stay at the hotel's suite 315. The hotel numbers 121 rooms. Its facilities include a bar, restaurant, spa, indoor swimming pool, sauna, and steam room. It is the only hotel in Rimini with a private beach. Palazzo dell'Arengo [it] (1204). This building was the seat of the judiciary and civil administrations. On the short side, in the 14th century, the podestà residence was added. It was modified at the end of the 16th century. Palazzo Garampi Amintore Galli Theatre. Inaugurated on 16 August 1857 with the world premiere of Giuseppe Verdi's Aroldo, the theatre was designed by Luigi Poletti, and is considered one of his architectural masterpieces. The theatre was renovated after being damaged by an earthquake in 1916, and flourished in Fascist Italy following its reopening in 1923. During the Second World War, the theatre was severely damaged by Allied bombardment. Following a complete restoration in the 2010s, the theatre reopened on 28 October 2018. Villa des Vergers (in San Lorenzo in Correggiano). Dating to the 17th century, the villa was purchased by Adolphe Noël des Vergers in 1843, and substantially redesigned in 1879 by Arthur-Stanislas Diet. Between 1938 and 1946, it was owned by Mario Ruspoli, 2nd Prince of Poggio Suasa, who employed Pietro Porcinai to design the villa's gardens. The villa was used as a military headquarters by German forces in the Second World War, and has since been owned by a series of local entrepreneurs. Since 2021, the villa has hosted civil wedding ceremonies. It is also used for corporate events. Arch of Augustus. Built in 27 BC in honour of Augustus, the first Roman emperor, the arch and city gate marks the northern end of the Via Flaminia. Under Fascist Italy, the adjoining city walls and surrounding buildings were demolished, leaving the Arch of Augustus to stand as an isolated monument. Along with the Bridge of Tiberius, it is one of Rimini's most-recognised symbols, and is represented on the city's coat of arms. It is the oldest preserved arch in Italy. Ponte di Tiberio. Constructed between 14 and 21 AD under the reigns of emperors Augustus and Tiberius, the bridge over the Marecchia was built to showcase the impressiveness of Roman monumental infrastructure, and it is the oldest surviving Roman bridge to be decorated with Greek orders. Andrea Palladio considered the Ponte di Tiberio "the most beautiful and the most worthy of consideration" of all the bridges he surveyed. It has been depicted by notable artists including Giovanni Bellini, Giovan Battista Piranesi, and Richard Wilson. Monumental Cemetery of Rimini. Consecrated in 1813, the Monumental Cemetery of Rimini is the final resting place of several prominent figures associated with Rimini, including Amintore Galli, Renzo Pasolini, and Federico Fellini. Porta Montanara. Built after Sulla's civil war in the first century BC, the original construction of the ancient Roman city gate comprised two arches. The north-facing arch was walled as early as the first or second century AD, and incorporated into a medieval cellar. It was uncovered by Allied aerial bombardment during the Second World War. After Rimini's liberation, the south-facing arch was destroyed by the occupying Allied forces to facilitate the passage of tanks through the city. In 1949, the remaining arch was deconstructed and reassembled in the courtyard of the Tempio Malatestiano. Porta Montanara was restored near its original location in 2004, at the southern end of Rimini's cardo maximus, on the road to the valley of the Marecchia. Fontana dei Quattro Cavalli [it]. The fountain is one of the symbols of Rimini as a seaside resort, built in 1928 by riminese sculptor Filogenio Fabbri. Demolished in 1954, was accurately reconstructed in 1983, recomposing the original parts. The fountain features a large circular basin, overlooked by four marine horses which sustain the superior basin. Fontana della Pigna Monument to Pope Paul V Torre dell'Orologio. The clocktower was built in 1547 in Piazza Tre Martiri, replacing the ancient "beccherie" (public butcher's), and reconstructed in 1759 by Giovan Francesco Buonamici. In 1875, the top of the tower was ruined due to an earthquake, and it was restored in 1933. The clock, which dates back to 1562, overlooks a perpetual calendar assembled in 1750, decorated by terracotta panels depicting zodiacal signs, months and lunar phases. The central, blind arch of the porch houses the memorial of the victims of World War II. Italia in Miniatura (in Viserba). Opened on 4 July 1970, Italia in Miniatura is Italy's fourth-oldest theme park, and attracts 500,000 visitors per year. The miniature park features 273 polyurethane models over an outdoor area of 85,000 square metres (910,000 sq ft). As well as Italian monuments, the models include European landmarks and geographic features such as mountains and volcanoes. A 1:5 reproduction of 119 buildings in Venice can be traversed with a gondola ride along the Grand Canal. Other attractions include a driving school, a suspended monorail, interactive spaces dedicated to science education, a parrot aviary, hot air balloons, a log flume, and a Pinocchio-themed train ride. Roman amphitheater (2nd century). The amphitheater was erected alongside the ancient coast line, and had two orders of porticoes with 60 arcades. It had elliptical shape, with axes of 117.7 by 88 metres (386 by 289 ft). The arena measured 73 by 44 metres (240 by 144 ft), not much smaller than the greatest Roman amphitheatres: the edifice could house up to 15,000 spectators. Ponte di San Vito (in San Vito). Dating to the reign of emperor Augustus, only a 14th-century arch above the original Augustan stones remains of the Augustan bridge, which was likely monumental, with a total length of approximately 90 metres (300 feet), and numbering eight or more arches. In recent centuries, Riminese historians have claimed the bridge as the place where Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon. In October 2022, Rimini's municipal government incorporated the arch into a public park. Rimini has an extensive parks system, with 1.3 million square metres of parks and gardens inside the urban area and a total of 2.8 million square metres of green areas inside the city limits, including river parks, sport facilities and natural areas. The city's park system includes a series of large urban parks, created along the former Marecchia and Ausa riverbeds, neighbourhood parks and gardens and tree-lined boulevards. The main parks of the city are XXV Aprile Park, Giovanni Paolo II Park, Alcide Cervi Park, Fabbri Park, Ghirlandetta Park, Federico Fellini Park, Pertini Park in Marebello and Briolini Park in San Giuliano Mare. Every Saturday, XXV Aprile Park hosts one of the Italy's thirteen (as of 2022) parkruns. In Rimini there are about 42,000 public trees, belonging to 190 different species, predominantly linden, planes, maples, poplars, pines and oaks. 23 of these are old trees, protected as "monumental trees" for their age and their naturalistic value, such as the plane of piazza Malatesta, the downy oak of Giovanni Paolo II Park, the cypresses of Sant'Agostino, the elm of Viale Vespucci and the linden trees of San Fortunato. The city's cycling network is articulated inside the main parks and boulevards, linking the most important monuments, tourist attractions, beaches, meeting places, offering various opportunities to different use categories, including urban travels, mountain bike and cyclotourism. The urban cycling network is connected, through XXV Aprile Park, to the cycle route which links Rimini and Saiano, along the river Marecchia. XXV Aprile Park Giovanni Paolo II Park Alcide Cervi Park Rimini is the seat of a campus of University of Bologna, attended by 5,800 students, which include bachelors and masters belonging to eight Faculties: Economics, Statistical Sciences, Pharmacy, Literature and Philosophy, Industrial Chemistry, Sport Sciences, Medicine and Surgery. The city has public schools of all levels, including 13 nurseries, 12 kindergartens, 39 primary schools, 5 secondary schools and 11 high schools (4 Lyceums, 3 Technical Institutes, 3 Professional Institutes and an Institute of Musical Studies). The city's oldest lyceum, the Classical Lyceum "Giulio Cesare", founded in 1800, was attended by Amintore Galli, Giovanni Pascoli, and Federico Fellini. Rimini is an important road and railway junction due to its geographic position at the southern tip of the Po Valley, where Adriatic coastal routes meet those extending northwest along the plains. Rimini is the terminus of three ancient Roman roads: the Via Flaminia, which runs southeast along the Adriatic Sea, turning at Fanum Fortunae (Fano) to finish in Roma (Rome); the Via Aemilia, which runs northwest to reach Placentia (Piacenza); and the Via Popilia, which runs north along the Adriatic Sea to reach Atria (Adria), where it joined the Via Annia. Modern state roads replicate these roads: The SS9 [it] state road runs from Rimini to San Donato Milanese, replicating the Via Aemilia. The SS16 [it] state road runs along the Adriatic Sea from Padua to Otranto, replicating the Via Popilia and the coastal section of the Via Flaminia. Bulging inland, the SS16 constitutes Rimini's bypass road. Provincial roads connect Rimini to towns in its hinterland, including Coriano and Montescudo. Two other state roads provide connections to Rimini's hinterland: The SS72 state road connects Rimini to the border with the Republic of San Marino at Dogana, continuing in Sammarinese territory as the San Marino Highway up to Borgo Maggiore, from which the San Marino cablecar system connects with the City of San Marino. The SS258 [it] state road connects Rimini to Sansepolcro, in Tuscany, through the valley of the Marecchia. The tolled A14 Adriatic motorway runs from Bologna to Taranto through Rimini, relieving the SS9 and SS16. Rimini has two exits on the A14: Rimini North, in the locality of San Vito, and Rimini Sud, nearer the city centre, close to where the SS72 meets the SS16. Both exits opened on 13 August 1966 as part of the Cesena–Rimini section. Rimini's municipal government supports a new A14 exit onto the SS9 near Santa Giustina to relieve arterial roads near Rimini Fiera; the junction is included in the regional mobility development plan. Rimini railway station is at the midpoint of the Bologna–Ancona railway, and the terminus of the Ferrara–Rimini railway [it]. Regional and national trains of all categories call at the station. Rimini was formerly the terminus of two disused lines: Between 1916 and 1960, the Rimini–Novafeltria railway ran between Rimini Centrale [it], opposite the main railway station, and Novafeltria along the Marecchia valley, notably serving Verucchio and Talamello. The line included several stops in Rimini's territory. Between 1932 and 1944, the Rimini–San Marino railway connected Rimini to the City of San Marino through the Sammarinese towns of Dogana, Serravalle, Domagnano, and Borgo Maggiore. The line included a station and depot on Via Giovanni Pascoli, known as Rimini Marina. Both the Sammarinese and Italian governments have expressed interest in reopening the line. Rimini has four minor railway stations that are served by regional trains: Torre Pedrera and Viserba on the Ferrara–Rimini railway; and Rimini Fiera and Rimini Miramare on the Bologna–Ancona railway. The city is served by Rimini Fellini Airport, in the southern suburb of Miramare. The airport is a crucial nexus in the local economy, particularly for tourists visiting the riviera romagnola. It recorded 215,767 passengers in 2022, rendering it the second-busiest airport in Emilia-Romagna. The airport is mainly served by low-cost carriers and charter traffic. The airport was built in 1929 as an aerodrome, on the site of the former Rimini-Riccione Defence Section [it] of the army's Aeronautical Service. It ranked among Italy's busiest airports during the 1960s, supported by international tourists visiting Rimini's beaches. Its passenger use declined with the opening of the A14 tolled highway in 1966. Since the end of the Cold War, Fellini Airport has been specially popular among tourists from the countries of the former Soviet Union. Russian and Ukrainian passengers together represented 61% of Fellini Airport's passengers before the 2022 invasion, which was projected to lose the airport 300,000 passengers annually. Alongside its civilian history, the airport has a notable military history: it was the home of the 5th Aerobrigade [it] of the Italian Air Force between 1956 and 2010, and during the Cold War, it was identified by the Warsaw Pact as a strategic target in the event of an all-out war, housing several thousand Italian and NATO soldiers and thirty B61 nuclear bombs. Helicopters belonging to the 7th Army Aviation Regiment "Vega" remain at the airport. After Fellini Airport, the closest major airports are Luigi Ridolfi Airport in Forlì, Raffaello Sanzio Airport in Ancona, and Guglielmo Marconi Airport in Bologna. A coach service operated by Shuttle Italy Airport connects Rimini with Bologna Airport. Between 1959 and 1969, a helicopter service flew between Rimini's port and a heliport next to Borgo Maggiore's cablecar terminus in San Marino. Operated by Compagnia Italiana Elicotteri, the service ran several times per day, using a fleet of four-seater Bell 47J Rangers and a three-seater Agusta-Bell AB-47G, which were serviced at Rimini's airport. In 1964, the line was extended to San Leo. Tickets would cost up to 12,500 lire, including the cablecar to the City of San Marino and a shuttle to the Leonine fortress. The service would take fifteen minutes to reach Borgo Maggiore and twenty-five minutes to reach San Leo. Rimini and Riccione's combined bus network, operated by Start Romagna SpA, includes twenty-two suburban lines and twenty-six interurban lines. As well as serving the city's suburbs, the lines connect Rimini to towns and villages in the hinterland and to neighbouring comuni along the Adriatic coast. Rimini's trolleybus system comprises two trolleybus lines that connect the city centres of Rimini and Riccione; both are run by Start Romagna SpA. Route 11 runs from Rimini's railway station to Riccione Terme along the principal seafront avenue, serving the touristic seafront. The line originated as a horse-drawn omibus service in 1844, running between Rimini and the present-day Parco Federico Fellini. It was converted to a horse-drawn tram in 1877, and electrified in 1921. Between 1921 and 1927, it was progressively extended southwards to reach Riccione, and converted to a trolleybus line in 1939. The newer trolleybus route, Metromare, launched on 23 November 2019, provisionally using motorbuses because of a delay in the delivery of the trolleybus fleet. The 9.8-kilometre (6.1 mi) bus rapid transit line runs on a segregated track adjacent to the Bologna-Ancona railway between the stations of Rimini and Riccione. Intermediate stops serve the Fiabilandia amusement park in Rivazzurra, Miramare's railway station, and Federico Fellini International Airport. The trolleybuses entered service on the line on 28 October 2021. A 4.2-kilometre (2.6-mile) northern extension to Rimini Fiera has been approved, with construction starting in summer 2024. Rimini is served by six FlixBus stops; its principal stop, on Via Annabile Fada, is served by international routes. Local companies, including Bonelli Bus, Autolinee Benedettini, and Adriabus, provide regular and seasonal coach services to other Italian cities, San Marino, and regional historic sites such as Urbino and Gradara. HERA Group (Gruppo HERA), a multi-utility company based in Bologna, is responsible for the province of Rimini's gas, water, energy, and waste management. Rimini has three ecological stations (stazioni ecologiche) for waste sorting: Rimini Viserba, between the coastline and Italia in Miniatura; Rimini Via Nataloni, west of the city centre; and Rimini Via Macanno, south of Le Befane shopping centre. Rimini is served by the wastewater treatment plant of Rimini-Santa Giustina, which serves eleven municipalities and the Republic of San Marino. The plant has a water flow rate of 23,281,000 cubic metres (822,200,000 cubic feet), and capable of treating the equivalent of 560,000 inhabitants in the summer and 370,000 inhabitants the winter. The purification plant was inaugurated on 31 May 1972, and doubled in capacity between 2013 and 2015, to become Europe's largest purifier. In 2013, the municipal government, HERA, and Romagna Acque instituted an eleven-year, 154-million-euro Optimised Bathing Protection Plan (Piano di Salvaguardia della Balneazione Ottimizzato). The plan sought to reduce sewage discharges into the sea after rainfall or thunderstorms, which would lead to temporary bathing bans along Rimini's coastline, hurting its tourist economy. A rainwater collection tank, with a 14,000-cubic-metre (490,000-cubic-foot) capacity, and a lamination tank, with a 25,000-cubic-metre (880,000-cubic-foot) capacity, was installed under Piazzale Kennedy. As part of the plan, Rimini's sewage system was remodelled between 2014 and 2020. The main football team of the city is Rimini Calcio. It played for nine years (between 1976 and 2009) in Serie B, the second-highest division in the Italian football league system. Its better positioning was the fifth place of the 2006–07 season (when Rimini was also undefeated in both games against Juventus). Rimini has also a notable basketball team, the Basket Rimini Crabs, which played for several years in Serie A and two times in the European Korać Cup. About baseball, Rimini Baseball Club won 12 national championships and it was also European champion three times. Every Easter weekend, Rimini hosts Paganello, a beach ultimate tournament. First held in 1991, the event takes place over a 500-metre (1,600 ft) stretch of beach, between beaches 39 and 47. In 2023, the competition included 136 teams and 1,600 atheletes. The tournament runs between Maundy Thursday and Easter Monday, and is accompanied by cultural shows along Rimini's beach. There are two competitions: a Frisbee tournament, and the Freestyle, which is more acrobatic. Ancient Bards (founded 2006), symphonic metal band Enea Bastianini (born 1997), motorcycle racer Marco Battagli (died 1370/76), historian Samuele Bersani (born 1970), singer-songwriter Marco Bezzecchi (born 1998), motorcycle racer Mario Bianchelli (1660–1730), composer and guitar virtuoso Pier Paolo Bianchi (born 1952), Grand Prix motorcycle road racer Matteo Brighi (born 1981), football player Claudio Maria Celli (born 1941), titular archbishop Gregorio Celli (1225–1343), Roman Catholic priest, professed member of the Order of Saint Augustine, beatified by Pope Clement XIV on 6 September 1769 Roberto Paci Dalò (born 1962), composer, director and visual artist Patrizia Deitos (born 1975), supermodel and singer Victoria de Stefano (1940–2023), novelist, essayist, philosopher, and educator Mattia Drudi (born 1998), racing driver Federico Fellini (1920–1993), film director Amintore Galli (1845–1919), music publisher, academic, and composer, studied, lived in retirement, and died in Rimini Alberto Marvelli (1918–1946), engineer, president of Azione Cattolica Carlotta Montanari (born 1981), actress and former TV host Carlton Myers (born 1971), basketball player Aldo Oviglio (1873–1942), first Minister of Justice of the Mussolini government, was born and raised in Rimini Elio Pagliarani (1927–2012), poet and literary critic Renzo Pasolini (1938–1973), Grand Prix motorcycle road racer Alessandra Perilli (born 1988), shooter and first Olympic medalist for San Marino Hugo Pratt (1927–1995), comic book creator Giuliano da Rimini (c. 1307 – c. 1324), painter Michael Ruben Rinaldi (born 1995), motorcycle racer Carla Ronci (1936–1970), Venerable of the Catholic Church, was born, lived, and died in Rimini Delio Rossi (born 1960), football manager Loris Stecca (born 1960), former world champion boxer Siegfried Stohr (born 1952), racing driver Massimo Tamburini (1943–2014), motorcycle designer Giovanni Urbinati (born 1946), ceramist and sculptor Roberto Valturio (1405–1475), engineer and writer Renato Zangheri (1925–2015), deputy and Mayor of Bologna, was born and raised in Rimini Rimini is twinned with: Fort Lauderdale, U.S. Saint-Maur-des-Fossés, France Seraing, Belgium Sochi, Russia Yangzhou, China Ziguinchor, Senegal Its twinning with Saint-Maur-des-Fossés was inaugurated on 5 June 1972, and its twinning with Ziguinchor on 8 June 1974. Italy portal European Union portal Cities portal Roman Catholic Diocese of Rimini Battle of Rimini (1944) The Grand Hotel Rimini Rimini Calcio Football Club Rimini Lighthouse Graziosi Ripa, Anna (1980). Per la storia del Museo Archeologico riminese, in: Analisi di Rimini antica. Storia e archeologia per un museo. Rimini: Comune di Rimini. "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Popolazione Residente al 1° Gennaio 2018". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Richard J.A. Talbert, ed. (2000). Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World: Map-By-Map Directory. Vol. I. Princeton, NJ and Oxford, UK: Princeton University Press. p. 589. ISBN 0691049459. The Etruscan World. Taylor & Francis. 2014. p. 299. ISBN 9781134055234. "Il proclama di Rimini" [The Rimini Proclamation]. Il Ponte (in Italian). 6 May 2015. Retrieved 18 January 2024. Sacco, Antonio (30 May 2020). "Unificare l'Italia, il sogno di Murat" [Unifying Italy, Murat's dream]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 18 January 2024. Masini, Manlio (10 August 2021). "Il terremoto dell'agosto 1916: paura, sofferenza e solidarietà" [The earthquake of August 1916: fear, suffering and solidarity]. Corriere Romagna (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. "8 dicembre 1916 - Legge speciale per Rimini distrutta dal terremoto" [8 December 1916 – Special law for Rimini destroyed by the earthquake]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 7 December 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Bucci, Sara (17 May 2016). "Cent'anni fa il terremoto che distrusse Rimini" [One hundred years ago, the earthquake that destroyed Rimini]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. Conti, Enea (10 July 2022). "Riccione, la "festa infinita" per i cento anni del Comune" [Riccione: The "endless celebration" for the hundred years of the municipality]. Corriere di Bologna (in Italian). Retrieved 14 December 2023. Gambetti, Nicola (20 June 2023). "Monumenti sopravvissuti: l'Arco d'Augusto" [Surviving monuments: The Arch of Augustus]. Rimini Sparita (in Italian). Retrieved 16 January 2024. Susini, Daniele (6 July 2016). "Guerra sul confine orientale della linea gotica: il caso Rimini" [War on the eastern border of the Gothic line: The Rimini case]. Novecento.org (in Italian). 6. doi:10.12977/nov129. ISSN 2283-6837. Retrieved 11 January 2024. "La Linea Gotica" [The Gothic Line]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 17 January 2024. "La Linea Gotica" [The Gothic Line]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 17 January 2024. "12 giugno 1932 - Viene inaugurata la ferrovia Rimini - San Marino" [12 June 1932: The Rimini–San Marino railway was opened]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 12 June 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. Giuliani-Balestrino, Maria Clotilde (2005). "La superstrada Rimini-San Marino" [The Rimini-San Marino railway] (PDF). Studi e Ricerche di Geografia (in Italian). 29 (1): 1–4. "21 settembre 1944 - Rimini liberata" [21 September 1944 – Rimini liberated]. Chiamamicitta (in Italian). 20 September 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2024. Montemaggi, Andrea. "Gli alleati conquistano Rimini" [The Allies conquer Rimini] (PDF). Ariminum. September–October 2014 (in Italian). Rotary Club Rimini: 6–7. McKelvey Cleaver, Thomas (10 May 2016). The Bridgebusters: The True Story of the Catch-22 Bomb Wing. Simon & Schuster. p. 156. ISBN 978-1-62157-543-6. "I Cimiteri di Guerra tra Romagna e Marche" [The War Cemeteries between Romagna and the Marche]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 11 January 2024. "I Cimiteri di Guerra tra Romagna e Marche" [The War Cemeteries between Romagna and the Marche]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 11 January 2024. "Cimitero di guerra inglese" [English War Cemetery]. Terre di Coriano (in Italian). Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Coriano Ridge War Cemetery". Commonwealth War Graves. Retrieved 8 March 2024. Zaghini, Paolo (19 May 2020). "I cimiteri di guerra in Romagna: Le vicende del Coriano Ridge War Cemetery" [The war cemeteries in Romagna: The case of the Coriano Ridge War Cemetery]. E-Review: Rivista degli Istituti Storici dell'Emilia-Romagna in Rete (in Italian). doi:10.12977/ereview285. ISSN 2282-4979. "I Cimiteri di Guerra tra Romagna e Marche" [The War Cemeteries between Romagna and the Marche]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 11 January 2024. Cicchetti, Stefano (21 September 2021). "Chi erano i Greci che liberarono Rimini" [Who were the Greeks who liberated Rimini?]. Chiamamicitta (in Italian). Retrieved 11 January 2024. "Riccione. Seconda guerra mondiale, commemorazione dei militari greci morti per liberare il Riminese" [Riccione, Second World War: Commemoration of the Greek soldiers who died to liberate the Rimini area]. La Piazza (in Italian). 17 September 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2024. "I Cimiteri di Guerra tra Romagna e Marche" [The War Cemeteries between Romagna and the Marche]. La Città Invisibile (in Italian). Retrieved 11 January 2024. Giorgio Conti and Pier Giorgio Pasini, Rimini Città come Storia 2, Rimini, Giusti, 2000, p. 283. Emilia-Romagna, Milano, Touring Club Italiano, 1999, p. 27 Pietro Zangheri, Repertorio sistematico e topografico della flora e fauna vivente e fossile della Romagna, Tomo V, Museo civico di Storia Naturale di Verona, Verona, 1966–1970, p. 2052. PSC Comune di Rimini, Quadro Conoscitivo, Sistema Ambientale. Geologia, p. 15. Gambolati, G.; Giunta, G.; Putti, M.; Teatini, P.; Tomasi, L.; Betti, I.; Morelli, M.; Berlamont, J.; De Backer, K.; Decouttere, C.; Monbaliu, J.; Yu, C.S.; Brøker, I.; Christensen, E.D.; Elfrink, B.; Dante, A.; Gonella, M. (1998). "Coastal Evolution of the Upper Adriatic Sea due to Sea Level Rise and Natural and Anthropic Land Subsidence". CENAS: Coastline Evolution of the Upper Adriatic Sea due to Sea Level Rise and Natural and Anthropogenic Land Subsidence. Water Science and Technology Library. Vol. 28. pp. 1–34. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-5147-4_1. ISBN 978-94-011-5147-4. ISSN 0921-092X. "Parco Ausa" [Ausa Park] (in Italian). Ecomuseo Rimini. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "7 agosto 1763 - La burrasca spazza via tutte le barche nel porto di Rimini" [7 August 1763 – The storm sweeps away all the boats in the port of Rimini]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 7 August 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2024. L'Emilia-Romagna paese per paese, Firenze, Bonechi, 1984, p. 250. Masini, Manlio (2 November 2022). "La contesa tra Rimini e Riccione sui confini e il ponte sul Marano" [The dispute between Rimini and Riccione over their borders and the bridge over the Marano]. Corriere Romagna (in Italian). Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Referendum popolari 2003" [Popular referenda 2003] (in Italian). Comune di Rimini. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Giorgio Conti and Pier Giorgio Pasini, Rimini Città come Storia, Rimini, Giusti, 1982, p. 215. Giorgio Conti and Pier Giorgio Pasini, Rimini Città come Storia, Rimini, Giusti, 1982, p. 251. "Updated world map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification" (PDF). p. 1641. "Atlante idroclimatico dell'Emilia-Romagna 1961-2008" (PDF) (in Italian). pp. 22, 25, 28. "Atlante climatico del Servizio Meteorologico dell'Aeronautica Militare. Stazione meteorologica di Rimini Miramare" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 January 2015. "Atlante climatico del Servizio Meteorologico dell'Aeronautica Militare. Stazione meteorologica di Rimini Miramare" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). pp. 9–12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 January 2015. "Enea. Profilo climatico della stazione meteorologica di Rimini" (in Italian). pp. 9–12.[dead link] "Rimini Climate Normals 1991-2020". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. "Rimini Miramare" (in Italian). Temperature estreme in Toscana. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. "Dati popolazione ai censimenti dal 1861 al 2011" (in Italian). ISTAT. January 2016. "Dati popolazione ai censimenti dal 1861 al 2011" (in Italian). "Notiziario demografico 2014" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). p. 2. "Notiziario demografico 2014" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). pp. 4–5. Zaghini, Paolo (4 August 2019). "Niki Pagliarani, il sindaco che diede a Rimini i parchi e i Peep" [Niki Pagliarani, the mayor who gave Rimini parks and the Peep]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. Farini, Luigi Carlo (27 December 1859). "Decreto del 27 dicembre 1859, n. 79" [Decree of 27 December 1859, no. 79]. it.wikisource.org (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Decreto Legislativo 6 marzo 1992, n. 252" [Legislative Decree 6 March 1992, no. 252]. Gazzetta Ufficiale (in Italian). 6 March 1992. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "World Guides. Rimini Tourist Attractions and Sightseeing". p. 1. "Il Grand Hotel di Rimini spegne 110 candeline, tanti eventi per il compleanno" [The Grand Hotel in Rimini blows out 110 candles: Many events for its birthday]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 7 June 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Balnea.net. Museo virtuale dei bagni di mare e del turismo balneare" (in Italian). p. 1. Ferruccio Farina, L'estate della grafica. Manifesti e pubblicità della Riviera di Romagna 1893–1943, Rimini, Silvana Editoriale, Cinisello Balsamo, 1988, pp. 58-60. Giorgio Conti, Pier Giorgio Pasini, Rimini Città come Storia 2, Giusti, Rimini, 2000, p. 9. Spadazzi, Manuel (7 July 2013). "Notte rosa, la festa della Riviera romagnola. In due milioni urlano: "Noi ci siamo"" [Pink Night, the festival of the riviera romagnola. As two million people they cry: "We're here"]. Quotidiano Nazionale (in Italian). Retrieved 28 January 2024. "Vacanze: due milioni per la Notte Rosa dedicata a Fellini - Emilia Romagna" [Holidays: Two million for the Pink Night dedicated to Fellini]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 4 July 2010. Retrieved 28 January 2024. "Fiabilandia: l'intervista ...sulla storia del parco" [Fiabilandia: The interview...on the history of the park]. Parksmania (in Italian). 30 April 2007. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Gambetti, Nicola (2020). "L'Italia in Miniatura: Una storia lunga 50 anni" [Italy in Miniature: A history 50 years long] (PDF). Ariminum. May–June 2020 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 18–19. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Corti, Rosalba (4 August 2023). "Parchi divertimento sulla Riviera romagnola, la guida: quali e dove sono" [Amusement parks on the Romagna Riviera, the guide: Which ones and where they are]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Uno dei parchi italiani con più storia" [One of Italy's parks with the most history]. Italia in Miniatura (in Italian). Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Hotels - Rimini turismo". p. 1. Quadro Conoscitivo PSC, Sistema economico e sociale, p. 101 "Il sistema delle fiere in Italia: tendenze evolutive e confronto con i principali competitor" [The system of trade fairs in Italy: evolutionary tendencies and compared to principal competitors] (PDF). Confartigianato Imprese (PDF) (in Italian). p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2024. "Quartiere - Italian Exhibition Group" [The Rimini Exhibition Centre]. www.iegexpo.it. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Rimini Fiera, un piano da 4,2 milioni per i parcheggi: ampliamento pronto per il Sigep 2020" [A 4.2 million euro plan for parking at Rimini Fiera: Expansion ready for Sigep 2020]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 5 February 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "Il quartiere fieristico di Rimini si amplia: già pronti alcuni nuovi padiglioni" [Rimini's festival quarter expands: some new pavilions are already ready]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 26 May 2017. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Scheda di presentazione della nuova fiera di Rimini" [Presentation file of the new Rimini Fiera]. Edizioni Pubblicità Italia Srl. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Sigep da record, Iginio Massari: "Entra in una nuova era che per me richiama il Rinascimento"" [Record-breaking Sigep. Iginio Massari: "A new era enters that for me recalls the Renaissance".]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 22 January 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "A Rimini Rhythm'n'Basket: 15 partite, 2 concerti e la fan zone" [In Rimini, Rhythm'n'Basket: 15 matches, 2 concerts and the fan zone]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 4 March 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Trenta ore di musica elettronica in un Capodanno lungo tre notti. Attesi in migliaia al Galactica Nye" [Thirty hours of electronic music in a three-night-long New Year's Eve: Thousands expected at Galactica Nye]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 30 December 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "Che cos'è il Meeting" [What is the Meeting?]. Meeting di Rimini (in Italian). Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Rimini vuole una Pasqua da tutto esaurito. Il sindaco: "Il governo agevoli gli arrivi dall'estero"" [Rimini wants a sold-out Easter. Mayor: "The government facilitates arrivals from abroad".]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 21 February 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "Si anticipa l'apertura di hotel e ristoranti, grazie al Sigep la stagione parte prima anche a Riccione" [The opening of hotels and restaurants is brought forward: Thanks to Sigep, the season starts earlier even in Riccione]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 12 March 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2023. "1 dicembre 1968 - La Fiera di Rimini inaugura la sua prima sede" [1 December 1968: Rimini Fiera inaugurates its first location]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 30 November 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Rimini, il Palacongressi "spaziale" non decolla. Costato 110 milioni, ha problemi antisismici" [Rimini, the "spaceship" Palacongressi does not take off. It cost 110 million and has anti-seismic problems.]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 28 May 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Torri, Tommaso (27 March 2015). "Rimini Fiera: nel 2016 dopo 14 anni al timone finisce l'era Cagnoni" [Rimini Fiera: In 2016, after 14 years at the helm, the Cagnoni era ends]. RiminiToday (in Italian). Retrieved 8 June 2023. "L'officina Locomotive di Rimini fra tradizione e innovazione" (in Italian). p. 1. "CIA Romagna. Annata Agraria 2018" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). pp. 28–76. "I luoghi della pesca in Emilia-Romagna" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). pp. 77–82. Anna Graziosi Ripa, Per la storia del Museo Archeologico riminese, in: Analisi di Rimini Antica, Rimini, Comune di Rimini, 1980, p. 317. Anna Graziosi Ripa, Per la storia del Museo Archeologico riminese, in: Analisi di Rimini Antica, Rimini, Comune di Rimini, 1980, p. 158. Pier Giorgio Pasini, Musei nella Provincia di Rimini, Rimini, Provincia di Rimini, 2006, p. 61. "Museo degli Sguardi" [Museum of Glances]. Comune di Rimini (in Italian). 7 November 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Pier Giorgio Pasini, Musei nella Provincia di Rimini, Rimini, Provincia di Rimini, 2006, p. 53. Ceroni, Nadia; Bortolotti, Lidia (14 April 2020). "Teatro Amintore Galli (Ex Vittorio Emanuele II)" [Amintore Galli Theatre (formerly Victor Emmanuel II)]. Ministry of Culture (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Un museo multimediale sotto la platea del Teatro Galli | Rimini turismo" [A multimedia museum under the stalls of the Galli Theatre]. riminiturismo.it (in Italian). 4 August 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Alessandro Gambalunga". Biblioteca Gambalunga (in Italian). Retrieved 10 January 2024. Vagli, Letizia. "Biblioteca Civica Gambalunga (Rimini)". Ministry of Culture (in Italian). Retrieved 10 January 2024. "Biblioteca civica Gambalunga". Rimini Turismo (in Italian). 12 December 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "Biblioteca Civica Gambalunga". Consortium of European Research Libraries. 31 August 2012. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "Biblioteche a Rimini: dove poter studiare o lavorare" [Libraries in Rimini: where you can study or work]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 22 June 2020. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Ceroni, Nadia; Bortolotti, Lidia (14 April 2020). "Teatro Amintore Galli (Ex Vittorio Emanuele II)" [Amintore Galli Theatre (formerly Victor Emmanuel II)]. Ministry of Culture (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Teatro Amintore Galli" [Amintore Galli Theatre]. Comune di Rimini (in Italian). Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Storia del Teatro Amintore Galli" [History of the Amintore Galli Theatre]. www.riminicittadarte.it (in Italian). Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Storia del Teatro" [History of the Theatre]. Teatro Amintore Galli (in Italian). Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Teatro Amintore Galli" [Amintore Galli Theatre]. riminiturismo.it (in Italian). 21 August 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Giovagnoli, Attile (15 October 2018). "Giuseppe Verdi, il teatro e l'estate memorabile del 1857 a Rimini" [Giuseppe Verdi, the theatre, and the memorable summer of 1857 in Rimini]. Riminiduepuntozero (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. Olivelli, Renato (27 August 2021). "Rimini: Aroldo in equilibrio tra cruenza fascista e riconciliazione amorosa" [Rimini: Aroldo in balance between fascist cruelty and loving reconciliation]. Le Salon Musical (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Teatro Galli" [Galli Theatre]. Rimini Bombardata (in Italian). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Amintore Galli Theatre reborn in Rimini after 75 years". AV Technology. 4 January 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2020. "Rimini, una vivacità musicale antica" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. "Carlo Tessarini (c. 1690-c.1767)" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 May 2006. "Riviera di Rimini. Flavours". "Riviera di Rimini. Traditional recipes". "Comune di Rimini. I piatti tipici" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. "Riviera di Rimini. Recipe of Piada or Piadina". Santini, Enrico (29 October 2023). "La Piada dei Morti di Rimini, qual è la migliore?" [Rimini's piada dei morti: Which is the best?]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2024. Balzani, Bettina (4 November 2019). "La piada dei morti". Bettina In Cucina (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2024. D'Anna, Anna Maria (2 November 2021). "Piada dei morti: la più dolce piadina romagnola che nessuno conosce" [Piada dei morti: The sweetest Romagna piadina that no one knows]. Scatti di Gusto (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2024. Lazzari, Martina (29 October 2023). "Piada dei morti, preparazione e curiosità sulla dolce "piadina" romagnola" [Piada dei morti: Preparation and curiosity about the sweet Romagnol "piadina"]. RiminiToday (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2024. "Piada dei morti ricetta dolce facile romagnolo per il 2 Novembre" [Easy recipe for sweet Romagnol piada dei morti for 2 November]. Giallo Zafferano (in Italian). 31 October 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Nardi, Grazia (12 May 2020). ""An cnusémie al fèsti"" [What they left us]. Rimini Sparita (in Italian). Retrieved 17 February 2024. "Rimini Turismo. Extra virgin olive oil Colline di Romagna".[permanent dead link] "Rimini Turismo. The typical wines of Romagna".[permanent dead link] "Riviera di Rimini. Wine, Albana docg". "World Guides. Rimini Landmarks and Monuments". p. 1. "Encyclopædia Britannica. Rimini". "Santa Maria dei Servi Church now Santa Maria in Corte Parish Church". Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 7 March 2015. "Il Grand Hotel di Rimini sogno felliniano in stile Liberty" [The Grand Hotel in Rimini is a Fellini dream in Art Nouveau style]. L'Eco di Bergamo (in Italian). 23 August 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Annovazzi Lodi, Stefano (3 December 2019). "Il grand hotel della riviera che faceva sognare Fellini" [The grand hotel on the riviera that made Fellini dream]. ELLE Decor (in Italian). Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Il Grand Hotel di Rimini spegne 110 candeline, tanti eventi per il compleanno" [The Grand Hotel in Rimini blows out 110 candles: Many events for its birthday]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 7 June 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Zaghini, Paolo (26 November 2018). "Grand Hotel di Rimini, un mito che va oltre il racconto" [Grand Hotel in Rimini: A myth that goes beyond retelling]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). Retrieved 3 February 2024. Grant, Brigit (17 November 2023). "Revisiting Rimini: The Grand Hotel on the Italian Riviera". Jewish News. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Rimondini, Giovanni (8 June 2018). "I 110 anni del Grand Hotel di Rimini, da non confondere con quello di Amarcord" [The 110 years of the Grand Hotel in Rimini, not to be confused with that of Amarcord]. Riminiduepuntozero (in Italian). Retrieved 3 February 2024. Dodson, Sean (7 July 2008). "Top 10 hotels from the movies". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "La Suite 315 - Percorso museale Grand Hotel Rimini" [Suite 315: Museum course Grand Hotel Rimini]. Batani Select Hotels (in Italian). Retrieved 3 February 2024. Lane, Sarah (1 April 2019). "Grand Hotel Rimini". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Villa Des Vergers in vendita per dodici milioni" [Villa Des Vergers for sale for twelve million]. Corriere Romagna (in Italian). 11 March 2016. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "La storia della Villa Des Vergers a Rimini" [History of the Villa Des Vergers]. Villa des Vergers (in Italian). Retrieved 7 March 2024. Zaghini, Paolo (9 April 2018). "La Rimini ai tempi del Conte Belmonte, piccola e tartassata ma nel pieno della storia" [Rimini at the time of Count Belmonte: Small and harassed, but in the midst of history]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). Retrieved 7 March 2024. ""Vivi Verde": nel week end i cancelli della storica Villa des Vergers" ["Vivi Verde": The gates of the historic Villa des Vergers over the weekend]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 1 October 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2024. Zaghini, Paolo (27 October 2018). "Ivo Lotti, il partigiano che fondò l'Unipol" [Ivo Lotti: The partisan who founded Unipol]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Addio a Facchi, il signore dei Grand Hotel" [Goodbye to Facchi, the lord of the Grand Hotel]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 8 January 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Rimini wedding destination: anche Villa Des Vergers tra le sedi per celebrare i matrimoni civili" [Rimini wedding destination: Villa Des Vergers also among the venues for celebrating civil weddings]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 30 July 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Da Germania e Inghilterra per sposarsi a Rimini. In riva al mare e al Grand Hotel le location gettonate" [From Germany and England to get married in Rimini. The popular locations are by the sea and at the Grand Hotel]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 14 September 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "I sessant'anni preziosi della gioielleria Baleani" [The sixty precious years of Baleani jewellery]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 10 July 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Arco d'Augusto" [Arch of Augustus]. Comune di Rimini (in Italian). 24 January 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Favro, Diane (11 May 2015). "Arch of Augustus, Rimini". In de Grummond, Nancy Thomson (ed.). Encyclopedia of the History of Classical Archaeology. Routledge. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-134-26854-2. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "9 gennaio 1846 - A Rimini si scava per svelare i misteri dell'Arco d'Augusto" [9 January 1846 – Excavations are underway in Rimini to reveal the mysteries of the Arch of Augustus]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 9 January 2024. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Arco d'Augusto, storia di uno dei simboli di Rimini" [Arch of Augustus: History of one of Rimini's symbols]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 22 February 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Fiorini, Andrea (31 December 2018). "An Urban Archeological Project in Rimini. Preliminary Report (2017-2018). The Contribution of Building Archaeology to Research and Conservation". GROMA: Documenting Archaeology. 3. University of Bologna. doi:10.12977/groma18. ISSN 2531-6672. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Arco d'Augusto" [Arch of Augustus]. riminiturismo.it (in Italian). 18 March 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Ponte di Tiberio". Comune di Rimini. 24 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2024. "Ponte Tiberio da 2000 Anni Attrazione Immancabile della Città di Rimini" [The Tiberius Bridge, the protagonist of the city for 2000 years]. Visit Rimini (in Italian). 1 May 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2024. Cartoceti, Marcello (2014). "Le pietre raccontano" [The stones tell the story] (PDF). Ariminum. March–April 2014 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 8–10. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Rimondini, Giovanni (2014). "Un tesoro d'arte e di storia" [A treasure of art and history] (PDF). Ariminum. March–April 2014 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 8–10. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Zavatta, Giulio (2006). "I rilievi del Ponte di Augusto eseguiti dal celebre architetto vicentino" [The reliefs of the Bridge of Augustus realised by the famous architect from Vicenza] (PDF). Ariminum. July–August 2006 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 22–23. Retrieved 13 February 2024. Whitney, Charles S. (1 January 2003). Bridges of the World: Their Design and Construction. Courier Corporation. pp. 63–65. ISBN 978-0-486-42995-3. Rimondini, Giovanni (22 March 2022). "Avviso ai "riminizzatori": il ponte di Augusto e Tiberio è un gioiello culturale di Rimini e del mondo" [Notice to the "Riminisers": the Bridge of Augustus and Tiberius is a cultural jewel of Rimini and the world]. Riminiduepuntozero (in Italian). Retrieved 31 January 2024. Zavatta, Giulio (2006). "Il ponte di Tiberio dipinto e "interpretato" dal Bellini" [The Ponte di Tiberio painted and "interpreted" by Bellini] (PDF). Ariminum. March–April 2006 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 14–15. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Zavatta, Giulio (2009). "I disegni inediti di Constant Bourgeois e Prosper Barbot" [The unpublished sketches of Constant Bourgeois and Propser Barbot] (PDF). Ariminum. November–December 2009 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 10–12. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Carvalho, Cristina. "Ponte de Augusto em Rimini". Casa-Museu Medeiros e Almeida (in European Portuguese). Retrieved 31 January 2024. "28 maggio 1813 - Apre il Cimitero di Rimini" [28 May 1813 – The Rimini Cemetery opens]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 27 May 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2024. "Cimitero Monumentale e Civico di Rimini: dove la Commemorazione dei defunti svela un museo a cielo aperto" [Monumental and Civic Cemetery of Rimini: where the Commemoration of the dead reveals an open-air museum]. Alta Rimini (in Italian). 1 November 2023. Retrieved 14 January 2024. "Porta Montanara". Comune di Rimini (in Italian). Retrieved 26 January 2024. Masini, Manlio (2013). "Il mercato del bracciantato" [The labourer's market] (PDF). Ariminum. July–August 2013 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 18–19. "4 novembre 1946 - Inizia il calvario di Porta Montanara" [4 November 1946 – The ordeal of Porta Montanara begins]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 4 November 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Pedrazzi, Arnaldo (2005). "La medaglia commemorativa di Porta Montanara" [Porta Montanara's commemorative medal] (PDF). Ariminum. March–April 2005 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 49. Gambetti, Nicola (20 June 2023). "Monumenti sopravvissuti: l'Arco d'Augusto" [Surviving monuments: The Arch of Augustus]. Rimini Sparita (in Italian). Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Porta Montanara, Rimini". Romagna.net (in Italian). Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Grand Hotel-Piazzale Fellini". "Italia in miniatura festeggia i 40 anni" [Italy in Miniature celebrates 40 years]. Rimini Turismo (in Italian). 19 March 2010. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Il modellino del palazzo ducale Ferrara all'Italia in miniatura" [The model of the ducal palace of Ferrara in Italia in Miniatura]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 18 April 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Un'impresa che ha dell'incredibile presso Viserba" [An incredible enterprise in Ravenna] (in Italian). Il Resto del Carlino. 8 July 1970. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Cambio della guardia a Italia in Miniatura: il parco acquisito dal gruppo Costa" [Changing of the guard at Italia in Miniatura: The park is acquired by the Costa group]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 19 March 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Silvano, Giulio (29 April 2022). "Il grand tour dell'Italia in miniatura di Luigi Ghirri" [Luigi Ghirri's great tour of Italia in Miniatura]. Rivista Studio (in Italian). Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Riparte la stagione dei parchi divertimento, tra le novità il Mondo dei Dinosauri e gli insetti giganti XXL" [The amusement park season starts again: Among the new features, the World of Dinosaurs and the giant XXL insects]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 29 March 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Italia in Miniatura: funziona l'apertura serale agostana. Prossime date, il 16 e il 23 agosto" [Italia in Miniatura: August evening opening starts. Next dates, August 16th and 23rd.]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). 14 August 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Pappagallo perde la via di casa e viene accudito all'Italia in Miniatura" [Parrot loses his way home and is looked after at Italia in Miniatura]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). 7 August 2013. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Parchi Costa della Romagna: una grande ripartenza dopo 9 mesi di stop" [Romagna coastline parks: a great restart after 9 months closed]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). 16 June 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Italia in Miniatura". Rimini Turismo (in Italian). 8 August 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Il 6 agosto Italia in Miniatura festeggia 50 anni e regala l'ingresso a 1000 riminesi" [On August 6th, Italia in Miniatura celebrates 50 years and offers admission to 1000 Rimini residents]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). 2 August 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "l'Italia in miniatura a 50 anni riparte con mille ingressi" [Italia in Miniatura at 50 years old restarts with a thousand entries]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 30 August 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Rimondini, Giovanni (2019). "I ponti di San Vito tra antichità e medioevo" [The bridges of San Vito between antiquity and the medieval era] (PDF). Ariminum. January–February 2019 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 6–8. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Rimondini, Giovanni (2013). "Il ponte sul fiume Uso riapre la questione del Rubicone" [The bridge on the Uso river reopens the Rubicon question] (PDF). Ariminum. March–April 2013 (in Italian). Rimini Rotary Club: 6–8. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Montemaggi, Andrea (18 July 2023). "Il ponte di San Vito" [The Bridge of San Vito]. Rimini Sparita (in Italian). Retrieved 30 January 2024. Copioli, Rosita (20 March 2013). "Il dado è tratto, ecco il vero Rubicone" [The die is cast: here is the real Rubicon]. Avvenire (in Italian). Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Il Ponte di San Vito: è o non è il Ponte di Cesare?" [The Ponte di San Vito: is it or is it not Caesar's bridge?]. Il Ponte (in Italian). 11 June 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Rimini, ponte di San Vito recupero archeologico e sociale" [Rimini: the Bridge of San Vito, place of archaeological and social recovery]. Corriere Romagna (in Italian). 17 October 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Il ponte romano di San Vito risplende in tutta la sua bellezza. "Un patrimonio di tutta la città"" [The Roman bridge of San Vito shines in all its beauty: "A heritage of the whole city"]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 17 October 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Rapporto Ecosistema Urbano 2013" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). 7 December 2020. p. 55. "Rapporto Ecosistema Urbano 2013" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). 7 December 2020. p. 56. "Il censimento alberi e aree verdi del Comune di Rimini" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 January 2015. "Alberi monumentali e di pregio del Comune di Rimini" (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). p. 2. "9º Osservatorio Istruzione Universitaria nella Provincia di Rimini. A.A. 2009-2010." (PDF) (PDF) (in Italian). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2015. "Polo scientifico-didattico di Rimini. Facoltà e Corsi di Laurea." (in Italian). "Comune di Rimini. Servizi educativi." (in Italian). Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. "Amintore Galli". riminiturismo.it (in Italian). 17 February 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Liceo Classico Psicopedagogico "G. Cesare" – "M. Valgimigli"" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 27 December 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2015. "City map" (PDF). riminiturismo.it. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Elenco Strade Provinciali con classificazione 2021" [List of Provincial Roads with 2021 classification] (PDF). Province of Rimini (in Italian). 1 April 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Motorway A14 Bologna-Rimini-Ancona-Bari-Taranto". riminiturismo.it. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Notiziario della Società 'Autostrade'" [News of the 'Autostrade' society]. Autostrade (in Italian). Anno VIII (10–11). Rome: 60. 1966. ISSN 0005-1756. Frisoni, Roberta (28 January 2023). ""Acceleriamo sul casello di Rimini Fiera"" ["Let's speed up the Rimini Fiera tollbooth"]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Italian Railways: Rimini Station". "18 giugno 1922 - Completata la ferrovia Rimini - Novafeltria" [18 June 1922: The Rimini-Novafeltria railway is completed]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 17 June 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Ferrovia Rimini Centrale-Novafeltria" [Rimini Centrale-Novafeltria railway]. www.ferrovieabbandonate.it. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Macina, Chiara (14 September 2015). "Il Trenino Biancazzurro: la breve vita e la fine" [The Blue and White Train: Its short life and end]. Zoomma (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Ferrovia Rimini-S. Marino (RSM)" [Rimini-San Marino (RSM) Railway]. Ferrovie abbandonate. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Rimini Marina: così risorgerà la stazione della ferrovia per San Marino" [Rimini Marina: And so the railway station for San Marino will be resurrected]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 3 January 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Approvata la rigenerazione della antica stazione ferroviaria di Rimini Marina" [The regeneration of the historic Rimini Marina railway station has been approved]. Comune di Rimini (in Italian). 3 January 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. Scolari, Giancarlo (21 June 2012). "Torna il treno a San Marino" [The train returns to San Marino]. Ferrovie.it (in Italian). Retrieved 3 November 2023. "...e corre, corre, corre la locomotiva" [...And the locomotive runs, runs, runs.]. San Marino Fixing (in Italian). 17 October 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Barducci, Giacomo (2 September 2022). "San Marino: torna il Treno Bianco Azzurro" [San Marino: The White and Blue Train returns]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). Retrieved 2 November 2023. "L'idea: ripristinare la ferrovia tra Rimini e San Marino" [The idea: Restore the railway between Rimini and San Marino]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 28 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Spadazzi, Manuel (12 July 2023). "Svolta per l'aeroporto. "Il Fellini ha bisogno di noi imprenditori: torniamo a investire"" [Turning point for the airport: "Fellini needs us entrepreneurs: let's go back to investing"]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Dati di traffico 2022" [Traffic data 2022]. Ente Nazionale per l'Aviazione Civile (in Italian). 11 May 2023. p. 181. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Atlante Aeroporti: L'Area Centro Nord (CN)" (PDF). Italian Civil Aviation Authority (in Italian). 2008. pp. 480–503. Retrieved 11 January 2024. Malizia, Nicola (2011). "La nascita del "Giannetto Vassura"" [The birth of the "Giannetto Vassura"] (PDF). Ariminum. January-February 2011 (in Italian) (1). Rimini: Rimini Rotary Club: 10–12. "L'aeroporto un pezzo di storia di Rimini. Per i cento anni dalla costruzione un ciclo di incontri" [The airport is a piece of Rimini's history: A series of meetings for the hundredth anniversary of its construction]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 24 April 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "L'aeroporto di Rimini al quarto posto in Italia" [Rimini's airport in fourth place in Italy]. Riminiduepuntozero (in Italian). 3 February 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "A14, 50 anni fa il via al boom turistico" [A14: 50 years ago, the tourist boom kicked off]. Corriere Romagna (in Italian). 28 August 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Rtv, San Marino (12 February 2004). "Aeroporto di Rimini: dalla guerra all'ingresso di San Marino" [Rimini Airport: From the war to San Marino's entry]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Un 2011 da record per l'aeroporto: oltre 900mila passeggeri" [A record 2011 for the airport: over 900 thousand passengers]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 7 January 2012. Retrieved 22 December 2023. Torri, Tommaso (2 May 2015). "Aeroporto "Fellini": arrivato il via libera all'operatività 24 ore su 24" [Fellini Airport: The green light has been given for 24-hour operations]. RiminiToday (in Italian). Retrieved 8 January 2024. Zavagli, Stefano (22 October 2023). "Tra residenti e turisti 2,8 milioni di passeggeri, ma solo il 5% vola dal Fellini. "Enormi margini di crescita"" [Between residents and tourists, 2.8 million passengers, but only 5% fly from Fellini. "Huge room for growth".]. RiminiToday (in Italian). Retrieved 22 December 2023. Barducci, Giacomo (2 March 2022). "Aeroporto Federico Fellini: con la guerra circa 300.000 passeggeri in meno" [Federico Fellini Airport: With the war, about 300,000 fewer passengers]. San Marino RTV (in Italian). Retrieved 29 June 2023. Zavagli, Stefano (2 March 2022). "La guerra azzera il turismo dall'Est, Corbucci: "Perderemo 50 voli a settimana e 300mila passeggeri"" [The war eliminates tourism from the East. Corbucci: "We will lose 50 flights a week and 300 thousand passengers."]. RiminiToday (in Italian). Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Volano via! L'Aeronautica militare lascia Rimini dopo 54 anni" [They're flying away: The Air Force leaves Rimini after 54 years]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 8 September 2010. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "L'Aeronautica Militare a Rimini" [The Air Force in Rimini]. RomagnaZone (in Italian). 23 January 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Dove siamo" [Where we are]. Comune di Riccione (in Italian). Retrieved 26 December 2023. "Routes". Shuttle Italy Airport. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "La storia del servizio elicottero a San Marino, legato alla crescita del turismo di massa" [The history of the helicopter service in San Marino, linked to the growth of mass tourism]. www.titanpostsm.com (in Italian). 5 April 2020. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "30 giugno 1961 - Inaugurata la linea di elicotteri Rimini - San Marino - San Leo" [30 June 1961 – The Rimini – San Marino – San Leo helicopter line is inaugurated]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 29 June 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Gambetti, Nicola (5 August 2023). "Rimini - San Marino - San Leo in elicottero" [Rimini – San Marino – San Leo by helicopter]. Rimini Sparita (in Italian). Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Rete dei trasporti pubblici del Comune di Rimini" [Public transport network of Rimini] (PDF). Start Romagna (in Italian). Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Primo fine settimana di fuoco per il Metromare: circa 17.000 utenti in 142 corse" [First weekend of fire for Metromare: About 17,000 users in 142 runs]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 25 November 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Storia della filovia Rimini - Riccione" [Story of the Rimini-Riccione trolleybusway]. www.trasportipubblici.info. 31 December 2006. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "History". Patrimonio Mobilità Provincia di Rimini. Retrieved 27 June 2023. Pasini, Guido (25 June 2017). "I primi collegamenti tram a Rimini" [The first tram connections in Rimini]. RomagnaZone (in Italian). Retrieved 27 June 2023. "1 luglio 1873 - Si inaugura a Rimini il "grandioso Stabilimento Balneare"" [1 July 1873: The "grandiose Bathing Establishment" is inaugurated in Rimini]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 30 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Dal primo tram elettrico al Metromare, Rimini celebra un secolo di mobilità green" [From the first electric tram to the Metromare, Rimini celebrates a century of green mobility]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 29 September 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Una passeggiata notturna lungo i binari scomparsi" [A night walk along the vanished tracks]. newsrimini.it (in Italian). 30 June 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "La linea tranviaria Riccione-Rimini" [The Riccione-Rimini tramway]. Famija Arciunesa (in Italian). 27 November 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Pronti a celebrare i primi 80 anni del filobus Rimini-Riccione" [Ready to celebrate the first 80 years of the Rimini-Riccione trolleybus]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 28 June 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2023. Renzi, Roberto (3 April 2020). "Il Filobus e la Guerra (1935-1945)" [The Trolleybus and the War (1935-1945)]. Trasporti Pubblici in Romagna. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Trc: ulteriori ritardi per il via al Metromare, il via slitta al tardo autunno" [TRC: More delays for the go-ahead of the Metromare. The start is postponed to late autumn.]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 6 August 2019. Retrieved 24 June 2023. "MetroMare: la struttura è completata, collaudata e pronta alla messa in esercizio" [Metromare: The structure is completed, tested, and ready for commissioning]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 22 August 2019. Retrieved 24 June 2023. Trolleybus Magazine No. 350 (March–April 2020), pp. 68, 70. Trolleybus Magazine No. 368 (March–April 2023), pp. 74, 77. National Trolleybus Association (UK). ISSN 0266-7452 "Il Metromare elettrico al 100%, in linea i nuovi mezzi" [The 100% electric Metromare: The new vehicles are live]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 27 October 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Trolleybus Magazine No. 361 (January–February 2022), p. 34. "Metromare Stazione-Fiera, il progetto passa in commissione. Lavori al via nell'estate del 2024" [Metromare Stazione-Fiera: The project goes to commission. Work to start in the summer of 2024.]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 5 April 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2023. "Metromare, in III commissione la presentazione del progetto della tratta Stazione Fs-Rimini Fiera" [Metromare: The presentation of the project of the Station FS-Rimini Fiera stage is in the third commission]. Comune di Rimini. 5 April 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2023. "Autobus per Rimini" [Coaches for Rimini]. FlixBus. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Linee extraurbane". riminiturismo.it (in Italian). Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Stazioni Ecologiche" [Ecological Stations]. ilrifiutologo.it (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. "I nostri impianti" [Our plants]. Gruppo HERA (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. "PSBO: Il gigante buono che protegge il mare di Rimini" [PSBO: The gentle giant who protects Rimini's sea]. Gruppo HERA (in Italian). Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Un depuratore hi-tech a difesa del mare di Rimini" [A high-tech purifier to defend Rimini's sea]. Gruppo HERA (in Italian). 23 June 2015. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Frisbee, il ritorno del 'Paganello' a Rimini dal 17 al 21 aprile" [Frisbee: The return of 'Paganello' in Rimini from 17 to 21 April]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 7 April 2014. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "Paganello, the Frisbee cup with an international flavour in the heart of Romagna". Birra Amarcord (in Italian). 11 April 2017. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "Cosa fare a Rimini a Pasqua, dal Paganello allo street food: tutti gli eventi" [What to do in Rimini at Easter, from Paganello to street food: All the events]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 3 April 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "'Paganello': a Rimini il meglio del frisbee mondiale con più di 1500 atleti" ['Paganello': The best of world Frisbee in Rimini with more than 1,500 athletes]. Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). 2 April 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2024. Di Cesare, Maria Carmela (1998). "Galli, Amintore". Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani [Biographical Dictionary of Italians] (in Italian). Vol. 51. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "6 gennaio 1907 - Rimini festeggia i 50 anni del suo teatro con Amintore Galli" [6 January 1907 – Rimini celebrates 50 years of its theatre with Amintore Galli]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 5 January 2023. Retrieved 3 January 2024. "7 dicembre 1873 - Nasce a Rimini Aldo Oviglio, ministro della Giustizia durante il delitto Matteotti" [7 December 1873 – Aldo Oviglio, Minister of Justice during the Matteotti crime, was born in Rimini]. Chiamami Città (in Italian). 7 December 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "Biografia di Carla Ronci" [Biography of Carla Ronci]. Diocese of Rimini (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "La Diocesi celebra i 50 anni della scomparsa della Venerabile Carla Ronci" [The Diocese celebrates the 50th anniversary of the death of the Venerable Carla Ronci]. RiminiToday (in Italian). 1 April 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "Si è spento il riminese Renato Zangheri, ex sindaco di Bologna" [Renato Zangheri from Rimini, former mayor of Bologna, has passed away]. newsrimini.it (in Italian). 7 August 2015. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "Gemellaggi". comune.rimini.it (in Italian). Rimini. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. Rimini at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Province of Rimini Rimini Comune (Town Council) Official Tourist Information site of Rimini (Town Council) Rimini Archived 24 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine Rimini Travel Guide in Dutch