The Han Chinese or Han people are an East Asian ethnic group native to Greater China. They are the world's largest ethnic group, making up about 17.5% of the global population. The Han Chinese are the largest ethnic group of China (including mainland China, Hong Kong, and Macau), numbering 1.4 billion across the world, and making up 90% of the total population in China. They have had the most significant influence in shaping the development and growth of Chinese civilization. In Taiwan, they make up about 97% of the population. People of Han Chinese descent also make up around 75% of Singaporean residents. The term "Han" not only refers to a specific ethnic collective, but also represents an identity belonging to a distinctive people denoted with a particular set of behavioral attributes, cultural traits, genetic markers, historical background, and societal characteristics which has exerted a significant formative influence in shaping the development and growth of Chinese civilization. Originating from Northern China, the Han Chinese trace their ancestry to the Huaxia, a confederation of agricultural tribes that lived along the Yellow River. They settled along the Central Plains around the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River in Northern China. These confederation of tribes were the ancestors of the modern Han Chinese people as well as the progenitors of Chinese civilization. The term "Huaxia" was used by the ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius's contemporaries, during the Warring States era, to elucidate the shared ethnicity of all Chinese; Chinese people called themselves Hua Ren. Within the course of the Warring States period led to the emergence of the early discernible consciousness of the Zhou-era Chinese referring to themselves as being Huaxia (literally, "the beautiful grandeur"), which was distinctively used to adumbrate a "civilized" culture in contrast to what were perceived as "barbaric" towards the adjacent and adjoining vicinities bordering the Zhou Kingdoms that were inhabited by different non-Han Chinese peoples around them. For ethnic Han Chinese holding foreign citizenship who live outside of China, the term Hua people (华人; 華人; Huárén) or Huazu (华族; 華族; Huázú) is applied solely to people with a Han ethnic background that is semantically distinct from Zhongguo Ren or Chinese people (中国人; 中國人) which has connotations and implications limited to being citizens and nationals of China, especially with regards to people of non-Han Chinese ethnicity. The Huaxia tribes in Northern China continuously expanded into Southern China over the past two millennia, via military conquests and colonisation. Huaxia culture spread southward from its northern heartland in the Yellow River Basin into the south, absorbing various non-Han ethnic groups that became sinicised over the centuries at various points in Chinese history. The name "Han people" first appeared during the era of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, and was inspired by the Han dynasty, which is considered to be one of the first golden ages in Chinese history. As a unified and cohesive empire, Han China emerged as the center of East Asian geopolitical influence at the time, projecting much of its hegemony onto its East Asian neighbours and was comparable with the contemporary Roman Empire in population size, geographical and cultural reach. The Han dynasty's prestige and prominence influenced many of the ancient Huaxia to identify themselves as "The People of Han." To this day, the Han Chinese have since taken their ethnic name from this dynasty and the Chinese script is referred to as "Han characters." The name Han was derived from the name of the eponymous dynasty, which succeeded the short-lived Qin dynasty and is historically considered to be the first golden age of China's Imperial era due to the geopolitical power and influence it projected over much of East Asia. As a result of the dynasty's prominence in inter-ethnic and pre-modern international influence on Chinese civilization, the Chinese of the post-Qin era identified themselves as the "people of Han" (漢人; 汉人; Hànrén), a name that has been carried down to this day. Similarly, the Chinese language also came to be named and alluded to as the "Han language" (漢語; 汉语; Hànyǔ) ever since. On Oxford Dictionaries, the Han are defined as "The dominant ethnic group in China". In the Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania, the Han are called the dominant population in "China, as well as in Taiwan and Singapore." According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the Han are "the Chinese peoples especially as distinguished from non-Chinese (such as Mongolian) elements in the population". The Han dynasty's founding emperor, Liu Bang, was made king of the Hanzhong region after the fall of the Qin dynasty, a title that was later shortened to "the King of Han" (漢王; 汉王) during the Chu–Han Contention. The name "Hanzhong", in turn, was derived from the Han River, which flows through the region's plains. Prior to the Han dynasty, ancient Chinese scholars used the term Huaxia (華夏; 华夏; Huá Xià) in texts to describe China proper, while the Chinese populace were referred to as either the "various Hua" (諸華; 诸华, Zhūhuá) or the "various Xia" (诸夏; 諸夏, Zhūxià). This gave rise to a term commonly used nowadays by Overseas Chinese as an ethnic identity for the Chinese diaspora – Huaren (華人; 华人; Huá Rén, "ethnic Chinese people"), Huaqiao (华侨; 華僑; Huáqiáo, "the Chinese immigrant" meaning Overseas Chinese) as well as a literary name for China – Zhonghua (中華; 中华; Zhōnghuá, "Central China"). Zhonghua refers more to Chinese culture, although it may also be seen as equivalent to Zhonghua minzu. Some Overseas Chinese communities use Huaren or Huaqiao instead of Zhongguoren (中國人; 中国人), which has limited connotations and implications that are applied solely to those with ethnic Han ancestry while "Chinese" or Zhongguo Ren (中國人; 中国人) refers to any Chinese citizen and national regardless of their ethnic origins, due to their differing political views about the state. Among some southern Han Chinese varieties such as Cantonese, Hakka and Minnan, a different term exists – Tang Chinese (Chinese: 唐人; pinyin: Táng Rén, literally "the people of Tang"), derived from the later Tang dynasty, regarded as another golden age and high point in Chinese civilization. The term is used in everyday colloquial discourse and is also an element in one of the words for Chinatown: "street of the Tang people" (Chinese: 唐人街; pinyin: Táng Rén Jiē; Jyutping: tong4 jan4 gaai1). The phrase Huá Bù, 華埠; 华埠 is also used to denote the same area. Across China's vast geographical expanse, the Han Chinese can be divided into various subgroups based on their respective cultural, ethnic, genetic, linguistic, and regional features. The historical migrations that have occurred throughout China's vast geographical expanse over the last three millennia has engendered the evolution, emergence, and encapsulation in the diverse multiplicity of assorted Han Chinese ethnic subsidiary groups found throughout the various regions of modern China today. The vast majority of Han Chinese – over 1.2 billion – live in the People's Republic of China (PRC), where they constitute about 90% of its overall population. Han Chinese in China have been a culturally, economically and politically dominant majority vis-à-vis the non-Han minorities throughout most of China's recorded history. Han Chinese are almost the majority in every Chinese province, municipality and autonomous region except for the autonomous regions of Xinjiang (38% or 40% in 2010) and Tibet Autonomous Region (8% in 2014), where Uighurs and Tibetans are the majority, respectively. Han Chinese also constitute the majority in both of the special administrative regions of the PRC – about 92.2% and 88.4% of the population of Hong Kong and Macau, respectively.[failed verification] The Han Chinese in Hong Kong and Macau have been culturally, economically and politically dominant majority vis-à-vis the non-Han minorities. Nearly 30 to 40 million people of Han Chinese descent live in Southeast Asia. According to a population genetic study, Singapore is "the country with the biggest proportion of Hans" in Southeast Asia. Singapore is the only country in the world where Overseas Chinese constitute a majority of the population and remain a cultural, economic and politically dominant majority vis-à-vis the non-Han minorities. Up until the past few decades, overseas Han communities originated predominantly from areas in Eastern and Southeastern China (especially the provinces of Guangdong, Fujian, Guangxi, Yunnan and Zhejiang in particular). There are over 22 million people of Han Chinese ancestry in living in Taiwan. At first, these migrants chose to settle in locations that bore a resemblance to the areas they had left behind in mainland China, regardless of whether they arrived in the north or south of Taiwan. Hoklo immigrants from Quanzhou settled in coastal regions and those from Zhangzhou tended to gather on inland plains, while the Hakka inhabited hilly areas. Clashes and tensions between the two groups over land, water, ethno-racial, and cultural differences led to the relocation of some communities and over time, varying degrees of intermarriage and assimilation took place. In Taiwan, Han Chinese (including both the earlier Han Taiwanese settlers and the recent mainland Chinese that arrived in Taiwan with Chiang Kai-shek in 1949) constitute over 95% of the population. They have also been a politically, culturally and economically dominant majority vis-à-vis the non-Han indigenous Taiwanese peoples. The total overseas Chinese population worldwide number some 60 million people. Overseas Han Chinese have settled in numerous countries across the globe, particularly within the Western World where nearly 4 million people of Han Chinese descent live in the United States (about 1.5% of the population), over 1 million in Australia (5.6%)[failed verification] and about 1.5 million in Canada (5.1%),[failed verification] nearly 231,000 in New Zealand (4.9%),[failed verification] and as many as 750,000 in Sub-Saharan Africa. The Han Chinese have a rich history that spans thousands of years, with their historical roots dating back to the days of ancient China. Throughout Han history, China has been governed by dynasties, with periods during which it has seen cycles of expansion, contraction, unity, and fragmentation. Due to the overwhelming numerical and cultural dominance of Han culture in China, most of the written history of China can be read as "a history of the Han Chinese," hinted and tinged with only passing references to its ethnic non-Han minority counterparts. The prehistory of the Han Chinese is closely intertwined with both archaeology, biology, historical textual records and mythology. The ethnic stock to which the Han Chinese originally trace their ancestry from were confederations of late Neolithic and early Bronze Age agricultural tribes known as the Huaxia that lived along the Guanzhong and Yellow River basins in Northern China. In addition, numerous ethnic groups were assimilated and absorbed by the Han Chinese at various points in China's history. Like many modern ethnic groups, the ethnogenesis of Han Chinese was a lengthy process that involved the expansion of the successive Chinese dynasties and their assimilation of various non-Han ethnic groups that became sinicised over the centuries. Writers during the Western Zhou and Han dynasties derived ancestral lineages based on Shang dynasty-era legendary materials, while the Han dynasty historian Sima Qian's Records of the Grand Historian places the reign of the Yellow Emperor, the legendary leader of Youxiong tribes (有熊氏), at the beginning of Chinese history. The Yellow Emperor is traditionally credited to have united with the neighbouring Shennong tribes after defeating their leader, the Yan Emperor, at the Battle of Banquan. The newly merged Yanhuang tribes then combined forces to defeat their common enemy from the east, Chiyou of the Jiuli (九黎) tribes, at the Battle of Zhuolu and established their cultural dominance in the Central Plain region. To this day, modern Han Chinese refer themselves as "Descendants of Yan and Huang". Although study of this period of history is complicated by the absence of contemporary records, the discovery of archaeological sites has enabled a succession of Neolithic cultures to be identified along the Yellow River. Along the central reaches of the Yellow River were the Jiahu culture (c. 7000 to 6600 BCE), the Yangshao culture (c. 5000 to 3000 BCE) and the Longshan culture (c. 3000 to 2000 BCE). Along the lower reaches of the river were the Qingliangang culture (c. 5400 to 4000 BCE), the Dawenkou culture (c. 4300 to 2500 BCE) and the Yueshi culture (c. 1900 to 1500 BCE). Early ancient Chinese history is largely legendary, consisting of mythical tales intertwined with sporadic annals written centuries to millennia later. Sima Qian's Records of the Grand Historian recorded a period following the Battle of Zhuolu, during the reign of successive generations of confederate overlords (Chinese: 共主) known as the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors (c. 2852–2070 BCE), who, allegedly, were elected to power among the tribes. This is a period for which scant reliable archaeological evidence exists – these sovereigns are largely regarded as cultural heroes. The first dynasty to be described in Chinese historical records is the Xia dynasty (c. 2070–1600 BCE), established by Yu the Great after Emperor Shun abdicated leadership to reward Yu's work in taming the Great Flood. Yu's son, Qi, managed to not only install himself as the next ruler, but also dictated his sons as heirs by default, making the Xia dynasty the first in recorded history where genealogical succession was the norm. The civilizational prosperity of the Xia dynasty at this time is thought to have given rise to the name "Huaxia" (simplified Chinese: 华夏; traditional Chinese: 華夏; pinyin: Huá Xià, "the magnificent Xia"), a term that was used ubiquitously throughout history to define the Chinese nation. Conclusive archaeological evidence predating the 16th century BCE is, however, rarely available. Recent efforts of the Xia–Shang–Zhou Chronology Project drew the connection between the Erlitou culture and the Xia dynasty, but scholars could not reach a consensus regarding the reliability of such history. The Xia dynasty was overthrown after the Battle of Mingtiao, around 1600 BCE, by Cheng Tang, who established the Shang dynasty (c. 1600–1046 BCE). The Shang Dynasty was the first Chinese confirmed state. The earliest archaeological examples of Chinese writing date back to this period – from characters inscribed on oracle bones used for divination – but the well-developed characters hint at a much earlier origin of writing in China. During the Shang dynasty, people of the Wu area in the Yangtze River Delta were considered a different tribe, and described as being scantily dressed, tattooed and speaking a distinct language. Later, Taibo, elder uncle of Ji Chang – on realising that his younger brother, Jili, was wiser and deserved to inherit the throne – fled to Wu and settled there. Three generations later, King Wu of the Zhou dynasty defeated King Zhou (the last Shang king), and enfeoffed the descendants of Taibo in Wu – mirroring the later history of Nanyue, where a Chinese king and his soldiers ruled a non-Han population and mixed with locals, who were sinicized over time. After the Battle of Muye, the Shang dynasty was overthrown by Zhou (led by Ji Fa), which had emerged as a western state along the Wei River in the 2nd millennium BCE. The Zhou dynasty shared the language and culture of the Shang people, and extended their reach to encompass much of the area north of the Yangtze River. Through conquest and colonization, much of this area came under the influence of sinicization and this culture extended south. However, the power of the Zhou kings fragmented not long afterwards, and many autonomous vassal states emerged. This dynasty is traditionally divided into two eras – the Western Zhou (1046–771 BCE) and the Eastern Zhou (770–256 BCE) – with the latter further divided into the Spring and Autumn (770–476 BCE) and the Warring States (476–221 BCE) periods. It was a period of significant cultural and philosophical diversification (known as the Hundred Schools of Thought) and Confucianism, Taoism and Legalism are among the most important surviving philosophies from this era.[citation needed] The chaotic Warring States period of the Eastern Zhou dynasty came to an end with the unification of China by the western state of Qin after its conquest of all other rival states[when?] under King Ying Zheng. King Zheng then gave himself a new title "First Emperor of Qin" (Chinese: 秦始皇帝; pinyin: Qín Shǐ Huángdì), setting the precedent for the next two millennia. To consolidate administrative control over the newly conquered parts of the country, the First Emperor decreed a nationwide standardization of currency, writing scripts and measurement units, to unify the country economically and culturally. He also ordered large-scale infrastructure projects such as the Great Wall, the Lingqu Canal and the Qin road system to militarily fortify the frontiers. In effect, he established a centralized bureaucratic state to replace the old feudal confederation system of preceding dynasties, making Qin the first imperial dynasty in Chinese history. This dynasty, sometimes phonetically spelt as the "Ch'in dynasty", has been proposed in the 17th century by Martino Martini and supported by later scholars such as Paul Pelliot and Berthold Laufer to be the etymological origin of the modern English word "China". The reign of the first imperial dynasty was to be short-lived. Due to the First Emperor's autocratic rule and his massive labor projects, which fomented rebellion among the populace, the Qin dynasty fell into chaos soon after his death. Under the corrupt rule of his son and successor Huhai, the Qin dynasty collapsed a mere three years later. The Han dynasty (206 BC–220 CE) then emerged from the ensuing civil wars and succeeded in establishing a much longer-lasting dynasty. It continued many of the institutions created by the Qin dynasty, but adopted a more moderate rule. Under the Han dynasty, arts and culture flourished, while the Han Empire expanded militarily in all directions. Many Chinese scholars such as Ho Ping-ti believe that the concept (ethnogenesis) of Han ethnicity, though an ancient one, was formally entrenched in the Han dynasty. The Han dynasty is considered one of the golden ages of Chinese history, and to this day, the modern Han Chinese people have since taken their ethnic name from this dynasty and the Chinese script is referred to as "Han characters". The fall of the Han dynasty was followed by an age of fragmentation and several centuries of disunity amid warfare among rival kingdoms. During this time, areas of northern China were overrun by various non-Han nomadic peoples, which came to establish kingdoms of their own, the most successful of which was Northern Wei (established by the Xianbei). From this period, the native population of China proper was referred to as Hanren, or the "People of Han", to distinguish them from the nomads from the steppe. Warfare and invasion led to one of the first great migrations of Han populations in history, as they fled south to the Yangzi and beyond, shifting the Chinese demographic center and speeding up sinicization of the far south. At the same time most of the nomads in northern China came to be sinicized as they ruled over large Chinese populations and adopted elements of their culture and administration. Of note, the Xianbei rulers of Northern Wei ordered a policy of systematic sinicization, adopting Han surnames, institutions and culture, so the Xianbei became Han Chinese. The Sui (581–618) and Tang (618–907) dynasties saw the continuation of the complete sinicization of the south coast of what is now China proper, including what are now the provinces of Fujian and Guangdong. The later part of the Tang era, as well as the Five Dynasties period that followed, saw continual warfare in north and central China; the relative stability of the south coast made it an attractive destination for refugees. The next few centuries saw successive invasions of Han and non-Han peoples from the north. In 1279, the Mongols conquered all of China, becoming the first non-Han ethnic group to do so, and established the Yuan dynasty. The Mongols divided society into four classes, with themselves occupying the top class and Han Chinese into the bottom two classes. The Yuan Dynasty implemented a policy of heavy national oppression against the Han people, and the Qing Dynasty later did the same but to a much lighter degree. Emigration, seen as disloyal to ancestors and ancestral land, was banned by the Song and Yuan dynasties. Zhu Yuanzhang, who had Han-centered concept of China and regarded expelling “barbarians” and restoring Han people's China as mission, established the Ming dynasty and later ended the Mongol Yuan dynasty in 1368 after the Red Turban Rebellions. During this period, China referred to the Ming Empire and to the Han people living in them, and non-Han communities were separated from China. Early Manchu rulers treated China as equivalent to both the Ming Empire and to the Han group. In 1644, the Ming capital, Beijing, was captured by Li Zicheng's peasant rebels and the Chongzhen Emperor committed suicide. The Manchus of the Qing dynasty then allied with former Ming general Wu Sangui and seized control of Beijing. Remnant Ming forces were beaten in South China and part of them led by Koxinga fled to the island of Taiwan and established the Kingdom of Tungning, which eventually capitulated to Qing forces in 1683. Taiwan, previously inhabited mostly by non-Han aborigines, was sinicized during this period via large-scale migration accompanied by assimilation, despite efforts by the Manchus to prevent this, as they found it difficult to maintain control over the island. In 1681, the Kangxi Emperor ordered construction of the Willow Palisade to prevent Han Chinese migration to the three northeastern provinces, which nevertheless had harbored a significant Chinese population for centuries, especially in the southern Liaodong area. The Manchus designated Jilin and Heilongjiang as the Manchu homeland, to which the Manchus could hypothetically escape and regroup if the Qing dynasty fell. While the Yuan Dynasty had little integration with Han society and culture, the Qing Dynasty saw the regime heavily influenced by the Han people. Because of increasing Russian territorial encroachment and annexation of neighboring territory, the Qing later reversed its policy and allowed the consolidation of a demographic Han majority in northeast China. The Han Chinese anti-Manchu violent revolt Taiping Rebellion erupted in 1850 is one of the bloodiest conflicts in history that killed at least twenty million people. Late Qing revolutionary intellectual Zou Rong famously proclaimed that "China is the China of the Chinese. We compatriots should identify ourselves with the China of the Han Chinese." In the early 1900s, the Han nationalist revolutionary Sun Yat-sen made Han nationalism a basic tenet of the Chinese revolution and stressed Han Chinese "superiority". In Sun's revolutionary philosophy, the Han identity is exclusively possessed by the so-called civilized Hua Xia people originating from the Central Plains who were former subjects of the Celestial empire and espousers of Confucianism. Restoring Chinese rule to the Han majority was one of the motivations for supporters of the 1911 Revolution, which established the Republic of China (now Taiwan) and later ended the Manchu Qing dynasty in 1912. The Han Chinese are the majority ethnicity who played a main role in both societies of Taiwan and the People's Republic of China (Mainland China or China, founded in 1949). In China, Mao Zedong was critical of Han chauvinism. In the latter half of the 20th century, Chinese official policy marked Han chauvinism as anti-Marxist. Today, the tension between Han Chinese and ethnic minorities is compounded by China's contemporary ethnicpolicies in a direction that benefits non-Han Chinese ethnic groups (minorities). And led to the Chinese government scaling back on affirmative action under Xi Jinping. Chinese civilization is one of the world's oldest and most complex civilizations, whose culture dates back thousands of years. Overseas Han Chinese maintain cultural affinities to Chinese territories outside of their host locale through ancestor worship and clan associations, which often identify famous figures from Chinese history or myth as ancestors of current members. Such patriarchs include the Yellow Emperor and the Yan Emperor, who according to legend lived thousands of years ago and gave Han people the sobriquet "Descendants of Yan and Huang Emperor" (炎黃子孫, 炎黄子孙), a phrase which has reverberative connotations in a divisive political climate, as in that of major contentions between Mainland China and Taiwan. The Han Chinese also share a distinct set of cultural practices, traditions, and beliefs that have evolved over centuries. Traditional Han customs, art, dietary habits, literature, religious beliefs, and value systems have not only deeply influenced Han culture itself, but also the cultures of its East Asian neighbors as well. Chinese art, Chinese architecture, Chinese cuisine, Chinese dance, Chinese fashion, Chinese festivals, Chinese holidays, Chinese language, Chinese literature, Chinese music, Chinese mythology, Chinese numerology, Chinese philosophy, and Chinese theatre all have undergone thousands of years of development and growth, while numerous Chinese sites, such as the Great Wall and the Terracotta Army, are World Heritage Sites. Since this program was launched in 2001, aspects of Chinese culture have been listed by UNESCO as Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity. Throughout the history of China, Chinese culture has been heavily influenced by Confucianism. Credited with shaping much of Chinese philosophical thought, Confucianism was the official state philosophical doctrine throughout most of Imperial China's history, institutionalizing values such as filial piety, which implied the performance of certain shared rituals. Thus, villagers lavished on funeral and wedding ceremonies that imitated the Confucian standards of the Emperors. Educational achievement and academic success gained through arduous study and mastery of classical Confucian texts was an imperative duty for defending and protecting one's family honor while also providing the primary qualifying basis criterion for entry into the imperial bureaucracy. But even among successful test takers and degree-holders who did not enter the bureaucracy or who left it opting out to pursue other careers experienced significant improvements with respect to their pedigree, social status, and societal influence, resulting in a considerable amelioration with regards to the esteem, honor, prestige, glory, and recognition that they brought and garnered to their families, social circles, and the localities that they hailed from. This elevation in their social standing, respectability, and pedigree was greatly augmented both within their own family circles, as well as among their neighbors and peers compared with the regular levels of recognition that they would have typically enjoyed had they only chosen to remain as mere commoners back in their ancestral regions. Yet even such a dynamic social phenomenon has greatly influenced Han society, leading to the homogenization of the Han populace. Additionally, it has played a crucial role in the formation of a socially cohesive and distinct shared Han culture as well as the overall growth and integration of Han society. This development has been facilitated by various extraneous factors, including periods of rapid urbanization and sprouts of geographically extensive yet interconnected commodity markets. Han Chinese speak various forms of the Chinese language that are descended from a common early language; one of the names of the language groups is Hanyu (simplified Chinese: 汉语; traditional Chinese: 漢語), literally the "Han language". Similarly, Chinese characters, used to write the language, are called Hanzi (simplified Chinese: 汉字; traditional Chinese: 漢字) or "Han characters". In the late imperial period, more than two-thirds of the Han Chinese population used a variant of Mandarin Chinese as their native tongue. However, there was a larger variety of languages in certain areas of Southeast China, like Shanghai, Guangzhou and Guangxi. Since the Qin dynasty, which standardized the various forms of writing that existed in China, a standard literary Chinese had emerged with vocabulary and grammar that was significantly different from the various forms of spoken Chinese. A simplified and elaborated version of this written standard was used in business contracts, notes for Chinese opera, ritual texts for Chinese folk religion and other daily documents for educated people. During the early 20th century, written vernacular Chinese based on Mandarin dialects, which had been developing for several centuries, was standardized and adopted to replace literary Chinese. While written vernacular forms of other varieties of Chinese exist, such as written Cantonese, written Chinese based on Mandarin is widely understood by speakers of all varieties and has taken up the dominant position among written forms, formerly occupied by literary Chinese. Thus, although residents of different regions would not necessarily understand each other's speech, they generally share a common written language, Standard Written Chinese and Literary Chinese (these two writing styles can merge into a 半白半文 writing style). From the 1950s, Simplified Chinese characters were adopted in mainland China and later in Singapore and Malaysia, while Chinese communities in Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and overseas countries continue to use Traditional Chinese characters. Although significant differences exist between the two character sets, they are largely mutually intelligible. Through China, the notion of hundred surnames (百家姓) is crucial identity point of the Han people. Han Chinese clothing has been shaped through its dynastic traditions as well as foreign influences. Han Chinese clothing showcases the traditional fashion sensibilities of Chinese clothing traditions and forms one of the major cultural facets of Chinese civilization. Hanfu (漢服) or traditional Han clothing comprises all traditional clothing classifications of the Han Chinese with a recorded history of more than three millennia until the end of the Ming Dynasty. During the Qing dynasty, Hanfu clothing was mostly replaced by the Manchu style until the dynasty's fall in 1912, yet Han women continued to wear clothing from Ming dynasty. Manchu and Han fashions of women's clothing coexisted during the Qing dynasty. Moreover, neither Taoist priests nor Buddhist monks were required to wear the queue by the Qing; they continued to wear their traditional hairstyles, completely shaved heads for Buddhist monks, and long hair in the traditional Chinese topknot for Taoist priests. During the Republic of China period, fashion styles and forms of traditional Qing costumes gradually changed, influenced by fashion sensibilities from the Western World resulting modern Han Chinese wearing Western style clothing as a part of everyday dress. Han Chinese clothing has continued to play an influential role within the realm of traditional East Asian fashion as both the Japanese Kimono and the Korean Hanbok were influenced by Han Chinese clothing designs. Han Chinese families throughout China have had certain traditionally prescribed roles, such as the family head (家長, jiāzhǎng), who represents the family to the outside world and the family manager (當家, dāngjiā), who is in charge of the revenues. Because farmland was commonly bought, sold or mortgaged, families were run like enterprises, with set rules for the allocation (分家, fēnjiā) of pooled earnings and assets. Han Chinese houses differ from place to place. In Beijing, the whole family traditionally lived together in a large rectangle-shaped house called a siheyuan. Such houses had four rooms at the front – guest room, kitchen, lavatory and servants' quarters. Across large double doors was a wing for the elderly in the family. This wing consisted of three rooms: a central room where the four tablets – heaven, earth, ancestor and teacher – were worshipped and two rooms attached to the left and right, which were bedrooms for the grandparents. The east wing of the house was inhabited by the eldest son and his family, while the west wing sheltered the second son and his family. Each wing had a veranda; some had a "sunroom" made with surrounding fabric and supported by a wooden or bamboo frame. Every wing was also built around a central courtyard that was used for study, exercise or nature viewing. There is no one specific uniform cuisine of the Han Chinese since the culinary traditions and food consumed varies from Sichuan's famously spicy food to Guangdong's dim sum and fresh seafood. Analyses throughout the reaches of Northern and Southern China have revealed their main staple to be rice (more likely to consumed by Southerners) as well as noodles and other wheat-based food items (which are more likely to be eaten by Northerners). During China's Neolithic period, southwestern rice growers transitioned to millet from the northwest, when they could not find a suitable northwestern ecology – which was typically dry and cold – to sustain the generous yields of their staple as well as it did in other areas, such as along the eastern Chinese coast. With a rich historical literary heritage spanning over three thousand years, the Han Chinese have continued to push the boundaries that have circumscribed the standards of literary excellence by showcasing an unwaveringly exceptional caliber and wealth of literary accomplishments throughout the ages. The Han Chinese possess a vast catalogue of classical literature that can be traced back as far as three millennia, with a body of literature encompassing significant early works such as the Classic of Poetry, Analects of Confucius, I Ching, Tao Te Ching and the Art of War. Han literature itself has a rich tradition dating back thousands of years, from the earliest recorded dynastic court archives to the mature vernacular fiction novels that arose during the Ming dynasty which were employed as a source of cultural pleasure to entertain the masses of literate Chinese. Some of the most important Han Chinese poets in the pre-modern era were Li Bai, Du Fu and Su Dongpo. The most esteemed and noteworthy novels of great literary significance in Chinese literature, otherwise known as the Four Great Classical Novels are: Dream of the Red Chamber, Water Margin, Romance of the Three Kingdoms and Journey to the West. Drawing upon their extensive literary heritage rooted in a historical legacy spanning over three thousand years, the Han Chinese have continued to demonstrate a uniformly high level of literary achievement throughout the modern era as the reputation of contemporary Chinese literature continues to be internationally recognized. Liu Cixin's San Ti series won the Hugo Award. Gao Xingjian became the first Chinese novelist to receive the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2000. In 2012, the novelist and short story writer Mo Yan also received the Nobel Prize in Literature. In 2015, children's writer Cao Wenxuan was bestowed with the Hans Christian Andersen Award, the first Chinese recipient of the esteemed international children's book prize. The Han Chinese have made significant contributions to various fields in the advancement and progress of human civilization, including business, culture and society, governance, and science and technology, both historically and in the modern era. They have also played a crucial role in shaping the geopolitical landscape of China and the wider encompassing region of East Asia at large. The invention of paper, printing, the compass and gunpowder are celebrated in Chinese society as the Four Great Inventions. Medieval Han Chinese astronomers were also among the first peoples to record observations of a cosmic supernova in 1054 AD. The work of medieval Chinese polymath Shen Kuo (1031–1095) of the Song dynasty theorized that the sun and moon were spherical and wrote of planetary motions such as retrogradation as well postulating theories for the processes of geological land formation. Throughout much of history, successive Chinese dynasties have exerted enormous influence on its East Asian neighbors in the areas of culture and society, economy, governance, and science and technology. In modern times, the Han Chinese form the largest ethnic group in China, while an overseas Han Chinese diaspora numbering in the tens of millions have settled in and contributed to the development and growth of their respective host countries across the world. In the contemporary era, Han Chinese have continued to contribute to the growth and development of modern science and technology. Among such prominently illustrious names that have been honored, recognized, and respected for their historical groundbreaking achievements include Nobel Prize laureates Tu Youyou, Steven Chu, Samuel C.C. Ting, Chen Ning Yang, Tsung-Dao Lee, Yuan T. Lee, Daniel C. Tsui, Roger Y. Tsien and Charles K. Kao (known as the "Godfather of Broadband" and "Father of Fiber Optics"); Fields Medalists Terence Tao and Shing-Tung Yau as well as Turing Award winner Andrew Yao. Tsien Hsue-shen was a prominent aerospace engineer who helped to establish NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The 1978 Wolf Prize in Physics inaugural recipient and physicist Chien-Shiung Wu, nicknamed the "First Lady of Physics" contributed to the development of the Manhattan Project and radically altered modern physical theory and changed the conventionally accepted view of the structure of the universe. The geometer Shiing-Shen Chern has been regarded as the "father of modern differential geometry" and has also been recognized as one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th-century. Chern was also one of the foremost leaders and leading figures within the field differential geometry throughout the course of the 20th century and was awarded the 1984 Wolf Prize in mathematics in recognition for his fundamental contributions to the growth and development of differential geometry and topology. The botanist Shang Fa Yang was well-noted for his research that unlocked the key to prolonging freshness in fruits and flowers and "for his remarkable contributions to the understanding of the mechanism of biosynthesis, mode of action and applications of the plant hormone, Ethylene." The agronomist Yuan Longping, regarded as the "Father of Hybrid Rice" was famous for developing the world's first set of hybrid rice varieties in the 1970s, which was then part of the Green Revolution that marked a major scientific breakthrough within the field of modern agricultural research. The physical chemist Ching W. Tang, was the inventor of the organic light-emitting diode (OLED) and hetero-junction organic photovoltaic cell (OPV) and is widely considered the "Father of Organic Electronics". Biochemist Chi-Huey Wong is well known for his pioneering research in glycoscience research and developing the first enzymatic method for the large-scale synthesis of oligosaccharides and the first programmable automated synthesis of oligosaccharides. The chemical biologist Chuan He is notable for his work in discovering and deciphering reversible RNA methylation in post-transcriptional gene expression regulation. Chuan is also noteworthy for having invented TAB-seq, a biochemical method that can map 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) at base-resolution genome-wide, as well as hmC-Seal, a method that covalently labels 5hmC for its detection and profiling. Other prominent Han Chinese who have made notable contributions the development and growth of modern science and technology include the medical researcher, physician, and virologist David Ho, who was one of the first scientists to propose that AIDS was caused by a virus, thus subsequently developing combination antiretroviral therapy to combat it. In recognition of his medical contributions, Ho was named Time magazine Person of the Year in 1996. The physician and physiologist Thomas Ming Swi Chang is the inventor of the world's first artificial cell made from a permeable plastic sack that would effectively carry hemoglobin around the human circulatory system. Chang is also noteworthy for his development of charcoal-filled cells to treat drug poisoning in addition to the discovery of enzymes carried by artificial cells as a medical tool to correct the faults within some metabolic disorders. Min Chueh Chang was the co-inventor of the combined oral contraceptive pill and is known for his pioneering work and significant contributions to the development of in vitro fertilization at the Worcester Foundation for Experimental Biology. Biochemist Choh Hao Li discovered human growth hormone (and subsequently used it to treat a form of dwarfism caused by growth hormone deficiency), beta-endorphin (the most powerful of the body's natural painkillers), follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone (the key hormone used in fertility testing, an example is the ovulation home test). Joe Hin Tjio was a cytogeneticist renowned as the first person to recognize the normal number of human chromosomes, a breakthrough in karyotype genetics. The bio-engineer Yuan-Cheng Fung, was regarded as the "Father of modern biomechanics" for pioneering the application of quantitative and analytical engineering principles to the study of the human body and disease. China's system of "barefoot doctors" was among the most important inspirations for the World Health Organization conference in Alma Ata, Kazakhstan in 1978, and was hailed as a revolutionary breakthrough in international health ideology emphasizing primary health care and preventive medicine. Confucianism, Daoism, and Chinese Buddhism, as well as other various traditional homegrown Chinese philosophies, have influenced not only Han Chinese culture, but also the neighboring cultures in East Asia. Chinese spiritual culture has been long characterized by religious pluralism and Chinese folk religion has always maintained a profound influence within the confines of Chinese civilization both historically and in the modern era. Indigenous Confucianism and Taoism share aspects of being a philosophy or a religion and neither demand exclusive adherence, resulting in a culture of tolerance and syncretism, where multiple religions or belief systems are often practiced in conjunction with local customs and traditions. Han culture has for long been influenced by Mahayana Buddhism, while in recent centuries Christianity has also gained a foothold among the population. Chinese folk religion is a set of worship traditions of the ethnic deities of the Han people. It involves the worship of various extraordinary figures in Chinese mythology and history, heroic personnel such as Guan Yu and Qu Yuan, mythological creatures such as the Chinese dragon or family, clan and national ancestors. These practices vary from region to region and do not characterize an organized religion, though many traditional Chinese holidays such as the Duanwu (or Dragon Boat) Festival, Qingming Festival, Zhongyuan Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival come from the most popular of these traditions. Taoism, another indigenous Han philosophy and religion, is also widely practiced by the Han in both its folk forms and as an organized religion with its traditions having been a source of vestigial perennial influence on Chinese art, poetry, philosophy, music, medicine, astronomy, Neidan and alchemy, dietary habits, Neijia and other martial arts and architecture. Taoism was the state religion during the Han and Tang eras where it also often enjoyed state patronage under subsequent emperors and successive ruling dynasties. Confucianism, although sometimes described as a religion, is another indigenous governing philosophy and moral code with some religious elements like ancestor worship. It continues to be deeply ingrained in modern Chinese culture and was the official state philosophy in ancient China during the Han dynasty and until the fall of imperial China in the 20th century (though it is worth noting that there is a movement in China today advocating that the culture be "re-Confucianized"). During the Han dynasty, Confucian ideals were the dominant ideology. Near the end of the dynasty, Buddhism entered China, later gaining popularity. Historically, Buddhism alternated between periods of state tolerance (and even patronage) and persecution. In its original form, certain ideas in Buddhism was not quite compatible with traditional Chinese cultural values, especially with the Confucian sociopolitical elite, as certain Buddhist values conflicted with Chinese sensibilities. However, through centuries of mutual tolerance, assimilation, adaptation, and syncretism, Chinese Buddhism gained an respectable place in the culture. Chinese Buddhism was also influenced by Confucianism and Taoism and exerted influence in turn – such as in the form of Neo-Confucianism and Buddhist influences in Chinese folk religion, such as the cult of Guanyin, who is treated as a Bodhisattva, immortal, goddess or exemplar of Confucian virtue, depending on the tradition. The four largest schools of Han Buddhism (Chan, Jingtu, Tiantai and Huayan) were all developed in China and later spread throughout the Chinese sphere of influence. Though Christian influence in China existed as early as the 7th century, Christianity did not gain a significant foothold in China until the establishment of contact with Europeans during the Ming and Qing dynasties. Christian beliefs often had conflicts with traditional Chinese values and customs which eventually resulted in the Chinese Rites controversy and a subsequent reduction in Christian influence in the country. Christianity grew considerably following the First Opium War, after which foreign missionaries in China enjoyed the protection of the Western powers and engaged in widespread proselytizing. Modern Southern Han Chinese – such as the Hoklo, Cantonese, and Hakka – all claim Northern Han Chinese ancestry derived from their forebearers who migrated from Northern China's Yellow River Valley between the 4th to 12th centuries. Hoklo clans living in southeastern coastal China, such as in Chaozhou and Quanzhou–Zhangzhou, originated from northern China's Henan province during the Tang dynasty. There were several periods of mass migration of Han people to Southeastern and Southern China throughout history. The ancestors of the Cantonese are said to be Northern Han Chinese who moved to Guangdong, while the Yue descendants were the indigenous minorities who practised tattooing, as described in "The Real Yue People" (真越人; zhēn yuèrén) essay by Qu Dajun, a Cantonese scholar who extolled his people's Chineseness. Northern Vietnam, Guangdong and Yunnan all experienced a major surge in Han Chinese migrants during Wang Mang's reign.: 126  Hangzhou's coastal regions and the Yangtze valley were settled in the 4th century AD by Northern Han Chinese families descended from the Han nobility.: 181  Special "commanderies of immigrants" and "white registers" were created for the massive number of Han Chinese of northern origin who moved south during the Eastern Jin dynasty.: 182  The southern Chinese aristocracy was formed from the offspring of these migrants; Celestial Masters and the nobility of Northern China subdued the aristocracy of Southern China during the Eastern Jin and Western Jin, particularly in Jiangnan. With the depopulation of the north, due to this migration of Northern Han Chinese, the south became the most populous region of China. The Han Chinese "Eight Great Surnames" were eight noble families who migrated from Northern China to Fujian in Southern China due to the uprising of the five barbarians when the Eastern Jin was founded, the Hu, He, Qiu, Dan, Zheng, Huang, Chen and Lin surnames. The Ming dynasty pirate Zheng Zhilong and his son Koxinga's ancestors in the Zheng family originated in Northern China but due to the Uprising of the Five Barbarians and Disaster of Yongjia by the Five Barbarians, the Zheng family were among the Northern Han Chinese refugees who fled to Southern China and settled in Putian, Fujian. They later moved to Zhangzhou and moved on to Nan'an. Different waves of migration of Han Chinese belonging to the aristocracy from Northern China to the south at different times – with some arriving in the 300s–400s and others in the 800s–900s – resulted in the formation of distinct lineages. During the 700s (Tang dynasty), Han migrants from northern China flooded into the south. Hong Kong history books record migrations of the Song and Tang dynasties to the south, which resulted in Hong Kongers that are descended from the incoming Han settlers that originated from northern China. Since it was during the Tang dynasty that Guangdong was subjected to settlement by many incoming Northern Han Chinese; many Cantonese, Hokkien, and Teochew call themselves "Tang people." Several wars in northern China such as the Uprising of the Five Barbarians, An Lushan Rebellion, Huang Chao Rebellion, the wars of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms and Jin–Song Wars caused a mass migration of Han Chinese from Northern China to Southern China called 衣冠南渡 (yì guān nán dù). These mass migrations led to Southern China's population growth, economic, agricultural and cultural development as it stayed peaceful unlike the north. The Mongol invasion during the thirteenth century caused a surging influx of Northern Han Chinese refugees to move south to settle and develop the Pearl River delta. The first Ming dynasty emperor Zhu Yuanzhang resettled his home city Fengyang and capital Nanjing with people from Jiangnan. The Han Chinese show a close genetic relationship with other modern East Asian populations such as the Koreans and Yamato. A 2018 research paper found that while the Han Chinese are closely related to the Koreans and Yamato in terms of a correlative genetic relationship, they are also easily genetically distinguishable from them. And that the same Han Chinese subgroups are genetically closer to each other relative to their Korean and Yamato counterparts, but are still easily distinguishable from each other. Research published in 2020 found the Yamato Japanese population to be overlapped with that of the northern Han Chinese. The genetic makeup of the modern Han Chinese is not purely uniform in terms of physical appearance and biological structure due to the vast geographical expanse of China and the migratory percolations that have occurred throughout it over the last three millennia. This has also engendered the emergence and evolution of the diverse multiplicity of assorted Han subgroups found throughout the various regions of modern China today. Comparisons between the Y chromosome single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) of modern Northern Han Chinese and 3000 year old Hengbei ancient samples from China's Central Plains show that they are extremely similar to each other, which confirms the genetic continuity bequeathed by the ancient Chinese of Hengbei and the present-day Northern Han Chinese inheritors that currently inhabit it in the contemporary era. These findings demonstrate that the core fundamental structural basis that shaped the genetic makeup of the present-day Northern Han Chinese was already formed three thousand years ago. The reference population for the Chinese used in Geno 2.0 Next Generation is 81% Eastern Asia, 2% Finland and Northern Siberia, 8% Central Asia, and 7% Southeast Asia & Oceania. Y-chromosome haplogroup O2-M122 is a common DNA marker found among modern Han Chinese, as it appeared in China in prehistoric times. It is found in more than half of all present-day Han males (204/361 = 56.5%), with proportions in published samples ranging from as low as 29.7% (30/101) in a pool of samples of Pinghua speakers from Guangxi and 32.5% (13/40) in a sample of Guangdong Han (but 18/35 = 51.4% in a sample of Han from Meixian in northeastern Guangdong and 48/80 = 60.0% in another sample of Han from Guangdong) to as high as 60.0% (33/55) in a sample of Fujian Han, 84/139 = 60.4% in a sample of Shandong Han, 61.1% (215/352) in a pool of samples of Taiwan Han, 62.0% (189/305) in a sample of Han from Zibo, Shandong, 65.7% (23/35) in a sample of Han from Harbin, 65.8% (123/187) in another sample of Shandong Han, and 65.9% (29/44) in a sample of Han from Shanxi or Shaanxi. Other Y-DNA haplogroups that have been found with notable frequency in samples of Han Chinese include O-P203 (15/165 = 9.1%, 217/2091 = 10.38%, 47/361 = 13.0%), C-M217 (10/168 = 6.0%, 27/361 = 7.5%, 176/2091 = 8.42%, 187/1730 = 10.8%, 20/166 = 12.0%), N-M231 (6/166 = 3.6%, 94/2091 = 4.50%, 18/361 = 5.0%, 117/1729 = 6.8%, 17/165 = 10.3%), O-M268(xM95, M176) (78/2091 = 3.73%, 54/1147 = 4.7%, 8/168 = 4.8%, 23/361 = 6.4%, 12/166 = 7.2%), and Q-M242 (2/168 = 1.2%, 49/1729 = 2.8%, 61/2091 = 2.92%, 12/361 = 3.3%, 48/1147 = 4.2%). However, the mtDNA of Han Chinese increases in diversity as one looks from northern to southern China, which suggests that the influx of male Han Chinese migrants intermarried with the local female non-Han aborigines after arriving in what is now modern-day Guangdong, Fujian, and other regions of southern China. Despite this, tests comparing the genetic profiles of northern Han, southern Han, and non-Han southern natives determined that haplogroups O1b-M110, O2a1-M88 and O3d-M7, which are prevalent in non-Han southern natives, were only observed in some southern Han Chinese (4% on average), but not in the northern Han genetic profile. Therefore, this proves that the male contribution of the southern non-Han natives in the southern Han genetic profile is limited, assuming that the frequency distribution of Y lineages in southern non-Han natives represents that prior to the expansion of Han culture which originated two thousand years ago from the north. In contrast, there is evidence that consistently shows the strong genetic similarities in the Y chromosome haplogroup distribution between the modern southern and northern Han Chinese population, and the result of principal core component analysis indicates that almost all modern Han Chinese populations form a tight cluster in their Y chromosome. However, other biological research findings have also demonstrated that the paternal lineages Y-DNA O-M119, O-P201, O-P203 and O-M95 are found in both Southern Han Chinese and Southern non-Han minorities, but more commonly in the latter. In fact, these paternal markers are in turn less frequent in northern Han Chinese. Another study puts the Han Chinese into two groups: Northern and southern Han Chinese, and it demonstrates that the core genetic characteristics of the present-day northern Han Chinese was already formed more than three-thousand years ago in the Central Plain area. The estimated contribution of northern Han to the southern Han is substantial in the paternal ancestral lineages in addition to a geographic cline that exists for its corresponding maternal ancestry. As a result, the northern Han Chinese are the primary benefactors that contributed to the paternal gene pool of the modern southern Han Chinese as a result of the successive migratory waves that have occurred from the north to what is now modern Southern China. However, it is noteworthy that the southward expansion process that occurred two thousand years ago was largely dominated by males, as is shown by a greater contribution to the Y-chromosome than the mtDNA from northern to southern Han. These genetic findings and observations are in concurrence with historical records confirming the continuous and large migratory waves of northern Han Chinese inhabitants escaping dynastic changes, geopolitical upheavals, instability, warfare and famine into what is now today modern Southern China. Successive waves of Han migration and subsequent intermarriage and cross-cultural dialogue between the northern Han migrants and the non-Han aborigines gave rise to modern Chinese demographics with a dominant Han Chinese super-majority and minority non-Han Chinese indigenous peoples in the south over the past two thousand years. Aside from these large migratory waves, other smaller southward migrations occurred during almost all periods over the past two millennia. A study by the Chinese Academy of Sciences into the gene frequency data of Han sub-populations and ethnic minorities in China, showed that Han sub-populations in different regions are also genetically quite close to the local ethnic non-Han minorities, meaning that in many cases, the blood of ethnic minorities had mixed into Han genetic substrate through varying degrees of intermarriage, while at the same time, the blood of the Han had also mixed into the genetic substrates of the local ethnic non-Han minorities. A recent, and to date the most extensive, genome-wide association study of the Han population, shows that geographic-genetic stratification from north to south has occurred and centrally placed populations act as the conduit for outlying ones. Ultimately, with the exception in some ethnolinguistic branches of the Han Chinese, such as Pinghua and Tanka people, there is a "coherent genetic structure" found in the entirety of the modern Han Chinese populace. Typical Y-DNA haplogroups of present-day Han Chinese include Haplogroup O-M122, C, Haplogroup N and Haplogroup Q-M120, and these haplogroups also have been found (alongside some members of Haplogroup N-M231, Haplogroup O-M95, and unresolved Haplogroup O-M175) among a selection of ancient human remains recovered from the Hengbei archeological site in Jiang County, Shanxi Province, China, an area that was part of the suburbs of the capital (near modern Luoyang) during the Zhou dynasty. Of the 710,000 Chinese nationals living in Korea in 2016, 500,000 are ethnic Koreans. simplified Chinese: 汉族; traditional Chinese: 漢族; pinyin: Hànzú; lit. 'Han ethnic group' or simplified Chinese: 汉人; traditional Chinese: 漢人; pinyin: Hànrén; lit. 'Han people' Minahan, James B. (2014). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 89–95. ISBN 978-1-61069-018-8. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2020. CIA Factbook Archived 13 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine: "Han Chinese 91.1%" out of a reported population of 1,410,539,758 (2022 est.) "Taiwan snapshot". Archived from the original on 15 March 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. "Population structure of Han Chinese in the modern Taiwanese population based on 10,000 participants in the Taiwan Biobank project | Human Molecular Genetics | Oxford Academic". Academic.oup.com. Archived from the original on 8 September 2020. Retrieved 14 February 2022. "Overseas Compatriot Affairs Commission, R.O.C." Archived from the original on 4 January 2011. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "confirmed latest statistics". 2022. Archived from the original on 14 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022. "Race Reporting for the Asian Population by Selected Categories: 2010 more information". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2014. "Selected Population Profile in the United States". census.gov. United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 5 February 2024. "Jumlah dan Persentase Penduduk menurut Kelompok Suku Bangsa" (PDF). media.neliti.com (in Indonesian). Kewarganegaraan, suku bangsa, agama dan bahasa sehari-hari penduduk Indonesia. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2022. "Topic: Demographics of Singapore". Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "The World Factbook". Archived from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2016. Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada. "Population by Ethnic Origin by Province". Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. Macrohon, Pilar (21 January 2013). "Senate declares Chinese New Year as special working holiday" (Press release). PRIB, Office of the Senate Secretary, Senate of the Philippines. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. "Australia". 2016 Census QuickStats. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018. Poston, Dudley; Wong, Juyin (2016). "The Chinese diaspora: The current distribution of the overseas Chinese population". Chinese Journal of Sociology. 2 (3): 348–373. doi:10.1177/2057150X16655077. S2CID 157718431. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "在日华人统计人口达92万创历史新高". www.rbzwdb.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2020. "2011 Census: Ethnic group, local authorities in the United Kingdom". Office for National Statistics. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2015. "South America: Peru". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2020. "Cittadini Non Comunitari: Presenza, Nuovi Ingressi e Acquisizioni di Cittadinanza: Anni 2015–2016" (PDF). Istat.it. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "2018 Census totals by topic – national highlights | Stats NZ". Stats.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2020. "BiB – Bundesinstitut für Bevölkerungsforschung – Pressemitteilungen – Zuwanderung aus außereuropäischen Ländern fast verdoppelt". Bib-demografiie.de (in German). Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Foreign national population in Korea up more than 40% in 5 yrs". Maeil Business News Korea. 8 September 2016. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "Chinese living in Kingdom more than doubles since '17". 14 September 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2018. "Argentina-China Relations Archives". Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Chinese Argentines and the Pace of Cultural Integration". 26 July 2011. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Cifras de Población a 1 de enero de 2016 : Estadística de Migraciones 2015 : Adquisiciones de Nacionalidad Española de Residentes 2015" (PDF). Ine.es (in Spanish). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Chinese-Mexicans celebrate repatriation to Mexico". The San Diego Union-Tribune. 23 November 2012. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 20 August 2017. "Population by Religion, Sex and Census Year". Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "Национальный состав населения по субъектам Российской Федерации". Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 5 April 2020. Gómez, Diana A.; Díaz, Luz M.; Gómez, Diana A.; Díaz, Luz M. (2016). "Las organizaciones chinas en Colombia". Migración y desarrollo (in Spanish). 14 (26): 75–110. doi:10.35533/myd.1426.dag.lmd. "X Censo Nacional de Población y VI de Vivienda 2011, Características Sociales y Demográficas" (PDF). National Institute of Statistics and Census of Costa Rica. July 2012. p. 61. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Cuadro 23. Costa Rica: Población total por autoidentificación étnica-racial, según provincia, zona y sexo. Chino(a) 9,170 [1] Archived October 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine 2010 Chinese Spiritual Life Survey conducted by Dr. Yang Fenggang, Purdue University's Center on Religion and Chinese Society. Statistics published in: Katharina Wenzel-Teuber, David Strait. People's Republic of China: Religions and Churches Statistical Overview 2011 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Religions & Christianity in Today's China, Vol. II, 2012, No. 3, pp. 29–54, ISSN 2192-9289 Measuring Religion in China. 30 August 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. 中華民國國情簡介 [ROC Vital Information]. Executive Yuan (in Chinese (Taiwan)). 2016. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 23 August 2016. 臺灣住民以漢人為最大族群，約占總人口97% Executive Yuan (2014). The Republic of China Yearbook 2014 (PDF). Government Information Office. p. 36. ISBN 978-986-04-2302-0. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "Home" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2016. Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (2023), "Rethinking Han Chinese Identity", China Review, 23 (2): 58–59, doi:10.1093/jdh/epw042 Karl Hack; Kevin Blackburn (2012). War Memory and the Making of Modern Malaysia and Singapore. NUS Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-9971-69-599-6. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Liu, Xingwu (2004). "Han". In Ember, Carol R.; Ember, Melvin (eds.). Encyclopedia of Medical Anthropology. Springer US. pp. 703–17. doi:10.1007/0-387-29905-X_73. ISBN 978-0-306-47754-6. The name "Han" was derived from the Han River, an upper tributary of the Yangtze River. It was further strengthened by the famous Han Empire (206 BC–220 AD) which lasted for several hundred years when the people began active interactions with the outside world. Cioffi-Revilla, Claudio; Lai, David (September 1995). "War And Politics in Ancient China, 2700 B.C. to 722 B.C.: Measurement and Comparative Analysis". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 39 (3): 467–494. doi:10.1177/0022002795039003004. JSTOR 174577. S2CID 156043981. Minahan, James B. (2015). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 89–90. ISBN 978-1-61069-017-1. Schliesinger, Joachim (2016). Origin of Man in Southeast Asia 2: Early Dominant Peoples of the Mainland Region. Booksmango. pp. 13–14. Liu, Hong (2017). Chinese Business: Landscapes and Strategies. Routledge. p. 34. ISBN 978-1-138-91825-2. Wilkinson, Endymion Porter (2015). Chinese History: A New Manual. Harvard University Asia Center. p. 709. ISBN 978-0-674-08846-7. Yuan, Haiwang (2006). The Magic Lotus Lantern and Other Tales from the Han Chinesen. Libraries Unlimited. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-59158-294-6. Duara, Prasenjit (2003). Sovereignty and authenticity : Manchukuo and the East Asian modern. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 7. ISBN 0-7425-2577-5. OCLC 50755038. Erica Fox Brindley (2015). Ancient China and the Yue: Perceptions and Identities on the Southern Frontier, c. 400 BCE–50 CE. Cambridge University Press. pp. 9–10. ISBN 978-1-316-35228-1. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Gyanendra Pandey; Peter Geschiere (2003). The Forging of Nationhood. Manohar. p. 102. ISBN 978-81-7304-425-0. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. Perkins, Dorothy (1998). Encyclopedia of China: History and Culture. Checkmark Books. p. 202. ISBN 978-0-8160-2693-7. Schliesinger, Joachim (2016). Origin of Man in Southeast Asia 2: Early Dominant Peoples of the Mainland Region. Booksmango. p. 14. Holcombe, Charles (2017). A History of East Asia: From the Origins of Civilization to the Twenty-First Century (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-10754489-5. Chang, Hui-Ching; Holt, Richard (20 November 2014). Language, Politics and Identity in Taiwan: Naming China. Routledge. pp. 162–64. ISBN 978-1-135-04635-4. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Sheng Lijun (2002). China and Taiwan: Cross-strait Relations Under Chen Shui-bian. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 53. ISBN 978-981-230-110-9. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Schliesinger, Joachim (2016). Origin of Man in Southeast Asia 2: Early Dominant Peoples of the Mainland Region. Booksmango. pp. 10–17. Dingming, Wu (2014). A Panoramic View of Chinese Culture. Simon & Schuster. Minahan, James B. (2015). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 91. ISBN 978-1-61069-017-1. Cohen, Warren I. (2000). East Asia At The Center: Four Thousand Years of Engagement With The World. Columbia University Press. p. 59. Minahan, James B. (2015). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 92. ISBN 978-1-61069-017-1. Walker, Hugh Dyson (2012). East Asia: A New History. AuthorHouse. p. 119. Kang, David C. (2012). East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute. Columbia University Press. pp. 33–34. ISBN 978-0-231-15319-5. Tanner, Harold Miles (2010). China: A History: From the Great Qing Empire through the People's Republic of China, 1644–2009. Hackett Pub Co. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-60384-204-4. Ueda, Reed (2017). America's Changing Neighborhoods: An Exploration of Diversity through Places. Greenwood. p. 403. ISBN 978-1-4408-2864-5. Eno, R. The Han Dynasty (206 B.C. – A.D. 220) (PDF). Indiana University Press. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Li, Xiaobing (2012). China at War: An Encyclopedia: An Encyclopedia. Pentagon Press (published 30 June 2012). p. 155. ISBN 978-81-8274-611-4. Schaefer (2008), p. 279. Schaefer, Richard T. (2008). Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society. Sage Publications. p. 279. ISBN 978-1-4522-6586-5. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2016. Although the term han has its roots in the Han dynasty (206 BC–220 AD), which began around the Yellow River and then spread out, the concept really became nationalized early in this century. Hsu, Cho-yun; Lagerwey, John (2012). Y.S. Cheng, Joseph (ed.). China: A Religious State. Columbia University Press. p. 126. "Definition of Han by Oxford". Oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2017. West, Barbara A. (2010). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-1913-7. "Definition of Han by Merriam-Webster". Merriam-webster.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Leung, Genevieve Y.; Wu, Min-Hsuan (2012). "Linguistic landscape and heritage language literacy education". Written Language & Literacy. 15 (1): 114–140. doi:10.1075/wll.15.1.06leu. Zhang, Feng; Su, Bing; Zhang, Ya-ping; Jin, Li (22 February 2007). "Genetic Studies of Human Diversity in East Asia". Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 362 (1482): 987–996. doi:10.1098/rstb.2007.2028. PMC 2435565. PMID 17317646. Zhao, Yong-Bin; Zhang, Ye; Zhang, Quan-Chao; Li, Hong-Jie; Cui, Ying-Qiu; Xu, Zhi; Jin, Li; Zhou, Hui; Zhu, Hong (2015). "Ancient DNA Reveals That the Genetic Structure of the Northern Han Chinese Was Shaped Prior to three-thousand Years Ago". PLoS ONE. 10 (5): e0125676. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1025676Z. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125676. PMC 4418768. PMID 25938511. Jacques Gernet (1996). A History of Chinese Civilization. Cambridge University Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7. Wen, Bo; Li, Hui; Lu, Daru; Song, Xiufeng; Zhang, Feng; He, Yungang; Li, Feng; Gao, Yang; Mao, Xianyun; et al. (2004). "Genetic evidence supports demic diffusion of Han culture". Nature. 431 (7006): 302–05. Bibcode:2004Natur.431..302W. doi:10.1038/nature02878. PMID 15372031. S2CID 4301581. Edward Vickers (2013). History Education and National Identity in East Asia. Routledge. pp. 191–. ISBN 978-1-135-40500-7. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. CIA Factbook Archived 13 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine: "Han Chinese 91.6%" out of a reported population of 1,384,688,986 billion (July 2018 est.) Chua, Amy (2003). World On Fire. Knopf Doubleday Publishing. p. 177. ISBN 978-0-385-72186-8. Chua, Amy L. (2000). "The Paradox of Free Market Democracy: Rethinking Development Policy". Harvard International Law Journal. 41: 325. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2018. 2016 Population By-census – Summary Results (Report). Census and Statistics Department. February 2016. p. 37. Archived from the original on 20 November 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2017. 2016 Population By-Census Detailed Results (Report). Statistics and Census Service. May 2017. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2019. Chua, Amy L. (2000). "The Paradox of Free Market Democracy: Rethinking Development Policy". Harvard International Law Journal. 41: 328. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2018. Chua, Amy (2003). World On Fire. Knopf Doubleday Publishing. p. 178. ISBN 978-0-385-72186-8. Han, Enze (28 December 2017). "Bifurcated Homeland and Diaspora Politics in China and Taiwan towards the Overseas Chinese in Southeast Asia". Politics and Public Administration. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. 45 (1). Hong Kong: Routledge: 582. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2017.1409172. Yim, Onn Siong (2005). Y chromosome diversity in Singaporean Han Chinese population subgroups (Master). National University of Singapore. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2016. Vatikiotis, Michael (12 February 1998). Entrerepeeneurs (PDF). Bangkok: Far Eastern Economic Review. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Taiwan Population (2017) – World Population Review". worldpopulationreview.com. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2017. "Chinese education companies scramble to teach Overseas Children to learn Chinese language". GETChina Insights. 2021 [December 2, 2021]. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Zhuang, Guotu (2021). "The Overseas Chinese: A Long History". UNESDOC. p. 24. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Suryadinata, Leo (2017). "Blurring the Distinction between huaqiao and huaren: China's Changing Policy towards the Chinese Overseas". Southeast Asian Affairs. 2017 (1): 101–113. doi:10.1355/aa17-1f. JSTOR 26492596. Project MUSE 658015. "American FactFinder - Results". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2018. "Immigration and Ethnocultural Diversity Highlight Tables". statcan.gc.ca. 25 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2020. "Immigration and Ethnocultural Diversity in Canada". statcan.gc.ca. 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 3 November 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2020. China and Africa: Stronger Economic Ties Mean More Migration Archived 29 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine, By Malia Politzer, Migration Information Source, August 2008. Roberts, John A.G (2001). A History of China. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 5. Jacques, Martin (26 October 2012). "A Point Of View: How China sees a multicultural world". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 July 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Minahan, James (2014). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO (published 10 February 2014). p. 90. ISBN 978-1-61069-017-1. Lung, Rachel (2011). Interpreters in Early Imperial China. John Benjamins Publishing. p. 5. ISBN 978-90-272-2444-6. Zhang, Qizhi (2016). An Introduction to Chinese History and Culture. Springer. p. 26. ISBN 978-3-662-51507-5. Guo, Rongxing (2016). An Introduction to the Chinese Economy: The Driving Forces Behind Modern Day China. Wiley. pp. 66–67. ISBN 978-3-319-32305-3. Cioffi-Revilla, C.; Lai, D. (1995). "War and Politics in Ancient China, 2700 B.C. To 722 B.C.: Measurement and Comparative Analysis". Journal of Conflict Resolution. 39 (3): 467–94. doi:10.1177/0022002795039003004. S2CID 156043981. West, Barbara A (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania. Infobase. ISBN 978-1-4381-1913-7. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "Common traits bind Jews and Chinese". Asia Times. 10 January 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 23 September 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Him, Mark Lai; Hsu, Madeline (2004). Becoming Chinese American: A History of Communities and Institutions. AltaMira Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-7591-0458-7. Stuart-Fox, Martin (2003). A Short History of China and Southeast Asia: Tribute, Trade and Influence. Allen & Unwin (published 1 November 2003). p. 21. Miller, David (2007). Modern East Asia: An Introductory History. Routledge. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-7656-1823-8. Gan, Rui-Jing; Pan, Shang-Ling; Mustavich, Laura F.; Qin, Zhen-Dong; Cai, Xiao-Yun; Qian, Ji; Liu, Cheng-Wu; Peng, Jun-Hua; Li, Shi-Lin; Xu, Jie-Shun; Jin, Li; Li, Hui (2008). "Pinghua population as an exception of Han Chinese's coherent genetic structure". Journal of Human Genetics. 53 (4): 303–313. doi:10.1007/s10038-008-0250-x. PMID 18270655. Allan, Sarah (1991), The Shape of the Turtle, Albany, NY: SUNY Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-0460-7, archived from the original on 14 December 2021, retrieved 5 October 2020 Guo, Rongxing (2010). An Introduction to the Chinese Economy: The Driving Forces Behind Modern Day China. Wiley. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-470-82604-1. Theobald, Ulrich. "The Feudal State of Wu 吳 (www.chinaknowledge.de)". Chinaknowledge.de. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "China The Zhou Period". Lcweb2.loc.gov. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Clayton D. Brown Research on Chinese History: Ethnology, Archaeology, and Han Identity". Claytonbrown.org. Archived from the original on 18 January 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Nyíri, Pál; Rostislavovich Savelʹev, Igorʹ (2002). Globalizing Chinese migration: trends in Europe and Asia. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 208. ISBN 978-0-7546-1793-8. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Yonglin Jiang (2018). "Thinking About the 'Ming China' Anew: The Ethnocultural Space In A Diverse Empire-With Special Reference to the 'Miao Territory'" (pdf). Bryn Mawr College. Elliott, Mark C. (August 2000). "The Limits of Tartary: Manchuria in Imperial and National Geographies". The Journal of Asian Studies. 59 (3): 603–46. doi:10.2307/2658945. JSTOR 2658945. S2CID 162684575. Ian Buruma (February 2022). "The Great Wall of Steel". Harper's Magazine. Weiying Wu (2023). "Han-Nationalism Throughout the Ages" (pdf). Washington University in St. Louis. "Han Chauvinism/Exceptionalism: The Problem with it". The SAIS Observer. 7 April 2014. "Revolution of 1911". China Daily. 27 July 2011. Mimi Lau (5 December 2019). "China's ethnic groups face end to affirmative action in education, taxes". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Cohen, Myron L. "Late Imperial China and Its Legacies". Kinship, Contract, Community, And State: Anthropological Perspectives on China. pp. 41–45, 50. Goscha, Christopher (2016). The Penguin History of Modern Vietnam: A History. Allen Lane. ISBN 978-1846143106. Amy Chua; Jed Rubenfeld (2014). The Triple Package: How Three Unlikely Traits Explain the Rise and Fall of Cultural Groups in America. Penguin Press HC. p. 122. ISBN 978-1594205460. Walker, Hugh Dyson (2012). East Asia: A New History. AuthorHouse. p. 2. Lewis, Mark Edward (2012). China's Cosmopolitan Empire: The Tang Dynasty. Belknap Press (published 9 April 2012). p. 156. ISBN 978-0674064010. Reischauer, Edwin O. (1974). "The Sinic World in Perspective". Foreign Affairs. 52 (2): 341–348. doi:10.2307/20038053. JSTOR 20038053. Lim, SK (1 November 2011). Asia Civilizations: Ancient to 1800 AD. ASIAPAC. p. 89. ISBN 978-9812295941. Richter, Frank-Jurgen (2002). Redesigning Asian Business: In the Aftermath of Crisis. Quorum Books. p. 15. ISBN 978-1567205251. Amy Chua; Jed Rubenfeld (2014). The Triple Package: How Three Unlikely Traits Explain the Rise and Fall of Cultural Groups in America. Penguin Press HC. p. 121. ISBN 978-1594205460. Kang, David C. (2012). East Asia Before the West: Five Centuries of Trade and Tribute. Columbia University Press. pp. 33–34. ISBN 978-0231153195. Goucher, Candice; Walton, Linda (2012). World History: Journeys from Past to Present. Routledge (published 11 September 2012). p. 232. ISBN 978-0415670029. Smolnikov, Sergey (2018). Great Power Conduct and Credibility in World Politics. Springer. ISBN 9783319718859. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Guo, Xiaolin (17 March 2022). "The Relationship Between Filial Piety and the Academic Achievement and Subjective Wellbeing of Chinese Early Adolescents: The Moderated Mediation Effect of Educational Expectations". Frontiers in Psychology. 13: 2–3. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2022.747296. PMC 8970312. PMID 35369161. Minahan, James B. (2014). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. p. 93. ISBN 9781610690188. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2021. Ebrey, Patricia Surnames and Han Chinese Identity Archived 22 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine, University of Washington Yang, Shaorong (2004). Chinese Clothing: Costumes, Adornments and Culture (Arts of China). Long River Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-59265-019-4. Brown, John (2006). China, Japan, Korea: Culture and Customs. Createspace Independent Publishing. p. 79. ISBN 978-1-4196-4893-9. Zhou, Xibao (周锡保) (2002). 《中国古代服饰史》. 中国戏剧出版社. p. 449. ISBN 978-7-104-00359-5. Shaorong Yang (2004). Traditional Chinese Clothing Costumes, Adornments & Culture. Long River Press. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-59265-019-4. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2018. Men's clothing in the Qing Dyansty consisted for the most part of long silk gowns and the so-called "Mandarin" jacket, which perhaps achieved their greatest popularity during the latter Kangxi Period to the Yongzheng Period. For women's clothing, Manchu and Han systems of clothing coexisted. Edward J.M. Rhoads (2000). Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928. University of Washington Press. pp. 60–. ISBN 978-0-295-98040-9. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2018. Gerolamo Emilio Gerini (1895). "Chŭlăkantamangala: Or, The Tonsure Ceremony as Performed in Siam". The Bangkok Times. pp. 11–. Archived from the original on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2018. Mei Hua, Chinese Clothing, Cambridge University Press, 2010, pp. 133–34 Lacouture, Elizabeth (2017), "Elizabeth LaCouture", Journal of Design History, 30 (3): 300–314, doi:10.1093/jdh/epw042 Liddell, Jill (1989), J. Liddell, The story of the kimono, EP Dutton New York, 1989, E.P. Dutton, ISBN 978-0-525-24574-2, archived from the original on 3 August 2020, retrieved 21 May 2020 Stevens, Rebecca (1996). The kimono inspiration: art and art-to-wear in America. Pomegranate. pp. 131–42. ISBN 978-0-87654-598-0. Dalby, Liza (2001). Kimono: Fashioning Culture. Washington: University of Washington Press. pp. 25–32. ISBN 978-0-295-98155-0. Sandra Lee Evenson (2014). "Hanfu Chinese robes". In Annette Lynch; Mitchell D. Strauss (eds.). Ethnic Dress in the United States A Cultural Encyclopedia. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp. 135–36. ISBN 978-0-7591-2150-8. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 14 September 2018. Montgomery County Public Schools Foreign Language Department (August 2006). Si-he-yuan. Montgomery County Public Schools. pp. 1–8. Archived from the original on 22 March 2007. Retrieved 15 April 2007. "十大经典川菜 你吃过哪些？". 阿波罗新闻网 (in Chinese (China)). 18 November 2014. Archived from the original on 4 December 2014. Retrieved 5 November 2020. Eberhard, Wolfram (December 1965). "Chinese Regional Stereotypes". Asian Survey. 5 (12). University of California Press: 596–608. doi:10.2307/2642652. JSTOR 2642652. Sagart, Laurent (January 2008). "The expansion of Setaria farmers in East Asia: A linguistic and archaeological model". Past Human Migrations in East Asia: Matching: 137. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2014. Julia Lovell (5 February 2016). "'The Big Red Book of Modern Chinese Literature,' Edited by Yunte Huang". The New York Times. Kevin (23 August 2015). "2015 Hugo Award Winners Announced". The Hugo Awards. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015. Retrieved 6 August 2017. "HCAA 2016 Winners". Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2016. Yigitcanlar, Tan (2016). Technology and the City: Systems, Applications and Implications. Routledge (published 10 May 2016). p. 19. ISBN 978-1138826700. O'Doherty, Mark (24 November 2012). Let There be Peace - Ascension to Ivisimara. Lulu.com. p. 57. ISBN 978-1291208917. Ferguson, Ben (7 October 2009). "'Master of Light' awarded Nobel Prize". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2017. "Qian Xuesen". The Daily Telegraph. 22 November 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Chien-Shiung Wu". National Women's Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2012. O'Connor, J J; Robertson, E F. "Chern biography: Shiing-shen Chern". MacTutor History of Mathematics archive. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Sanders, Robert (6 December 2004). "Renowned mathematician Shiing-Shen Chern, who revitalized the study of geometry, has died at 93 in Tianjin, China". Berkeley News. Archived from the original on 8 June 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Chang, Kenneth (7 December 2004). "Shiing-Shen Chern, 93, Innovator in New Geometry, Dies". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2017. "Interview with Shiing Shen Chern" (PDF). Notices of the MS. 45 (7). Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2024. Simon, Udo; Tjaden, Ekkehard-H.; Wefelscheid, Heinrich (2011). "Shiing-Shen Chern's Centenary". Results in Mathematics. 60 (1–4): 13–51. doi:10.1007/s00025-011-0196-8. S2CID 122548419. "Taking the Long View: The Life of Shiing-shen Chern". zalafilms.com. Archived from the original on 16 December 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2019. "The Wolf Prize in Agriculture". Archived from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2023. "Obituary Yuan Longping". The Economist. Vol. 439 Number 9247. 29 May 2021. p. 86. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 23 August 2023. Bradsher, Keith; Buckley, Chris (23 May 2021). "Yuan Longping, Plant Scientist Who Helped Curb Famine, Dies at 90". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Dr. Monty Jones and Yuan Longping". World Food Prize. 2004. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2017. "CCTV-"杂交水稻之父"袁隆平" ["Father of hybrid rice" Yuan Longping]. China Central Television. Archived from the original on 9 September 2020. Retrieved 24 October 2017. Forrest, Stephen (2012). "Energy efficiency with organic electronics: Ching W. Tang revisits his days at Kodak". MRS Bulletin. 37 (6): 552–53. Bibcode:2012MRSBu..37..552F. doi:10.1557/mrs.2012.125. He C (November 2010). "Grand Challenge Commentary: RNA epigenetics?". Nat. Chem. Biol. 6 (12): 863–865. doi:10.1038/nchembio.482. PMID 21079590. Yu M, Hon GC, Szulwach KE, Song CX, Zhang L, Kim A, Li XK, Dai Q, Shen Y, Park B, Min JH, Jin P, Ren B, He C (June 2012). "Base-resolution analysis of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the mammalian genome". Cell. 149 (6): 1368–1380. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.027. PMC 3589129. PMID 22608086. Song CX, Szulwach KE, Fu Y, Dai Q, Yi C, Li X, Li Y, Chen CH, Zhang W, Jian X, Wang J, Zhang L, Looney TJ, Zhang B, Godley LA, Hicks LM, Lahn BT, Jin P, He C (2011). "Selective chemical labeling reveals the genome-wide distribution of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine". Nat. Biotechnol. 29 (1): 68–72. doi:10.1038/nbt.1732. PMC 3107705. PMID 21151123. "Dr David Ho, Man of the Year". Time. 30 December 1996. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011. Retrieved 17 October 2012. Thomas Chang, Professor of Physiology | About McGill – McGill University Archived 27 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Mcgill.ca. Retrieved on 2012-05-25. The Governor General of Canada > Honours > Recipients > Thomas Ming Swi Chang Archived 6 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Gg.ca. Retrieved on 2020-03-03. "Min Chueh Chang". National Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "Chang Min-Chueh". Britannica Online for Kids. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 6 January 2013. Maugh II, Thomas (2 December 1987). "Discovered Human Growth Hormone: Choh Hao Li, 74; Endocrinologist at UC". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 26 November 2012. "Choh Hao Li". National Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 2 October 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2012. Wright, Pearce (11 December 2001). "Joe Hin Tjio The man who cracked the chromosome count". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2016. Saxon, Wolfgang (7 December 2001). "Joe Hin Tjio, 82; Research Biologist Counted Chromosomes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2017. "News from the National Academies". National Academy of Sciences. 4 January 2007. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2012. "Dr. Yuan-Cheng 'Bert' Fung". National Academy of Engineering. 2007. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2012. "Consensus during the Cold War: back to Alma-Ata". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 86 (10): 737–816. October 2008. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. "China's village doctors take great strides". Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 86 (12): 909–88. December 2008. Archived from the original on 12 December 2008. Anderlini, Jamil (7 November 2014). "The rise of Christianity in China". www.ft.com. Archived from the original on 15 December 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Jiang, Yi-Huah (2018). "Confucian Political Theory in Contemporary China". Annual Review of Political Science. 21: 155–173. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-041916-020230. S2CID 148800029. Austin, Alvyn (2007). China's Millions: The China Inland Mission and Late Qing Society. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-2975-7. Sow-Theng Leong; Tim Wright; George William Skinner (1997). Migration and Ethnicity in Chinese History: Hakkas, Pengmin, and Their Neighbors. Stanford University Press. pp. 78–. ISBN 978-0-8047-2857-7. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2016. Shmuel Noah Eisenstadt; Wolfgang Schluchter; Björn Wittrock. Public Spheres and Collective Identities. Transaction Publishers. pp. 213–14. ISBN 978-1-4128-3248-9. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2016. Nicolas Olivier Tackett. "The Transformation of Medieval Chinese Elites (850–1000 C.E.)" (PDF). History.berkeley.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2017. John Lagerwey; Pengzhi Lü (2009). Early Chinese Religion: The Period of Division (220–589 AD). Brill. pp. 831–. ISBN 978-90-04-17585-3. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2016. Historical Atlas of the Classical World, 500 BC–AD 600. Barnes & Noble Books. 2000. p. 2.25. ISBN 978-0-7607-1973-2. Archived from the original on 19 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2015. Haywood, John; Jotischky, Andrew; McGlynn, Sean (1998). Historical Atlas of the Medieval World, AD 600–1492. Barnes & Noble. p. 3.21. ISBN 978-0-7607-1976-3. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2015. Dean, Kenneth; Zheng, Zhenman (2009). Ritual Alliances of the Putian Plain. Volume One: Historical Introduction to the Return of the Gods. BRILL. p. 341. ISBN 978-9047429463. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2019. Xu, Bin; Xie, Bizhen (2013). "The Rise and Fall of Nestorianism in Quanzhou during the Yuan dynasty". In Li, Tang; Winkler, Dietmar W. (eds.). From the Oxus River to the Chinese Shores: Studies on East Syriac Christianity in China and Central Asia (illustrated ed.). LIT Verlag Münster. p. 270. ISBN 978-3643903297. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2019. Szonyi, Michael (2002). Practicing Kinship: Lineage and Descent in Late Imperial China (illustrated ed.). Stanford University Press. p. 27. ISBN 0804742618. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2019. Zheng, Zhenman (2001). Family Lineage Organization and Social Change in Ming and Qing Fujian. University of Hawaii Press. p. 190. ISBN 0824823338. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2019. Hugh R. Clark (2007). Portrait of a Community: Society, Culture, and the Structures of Kinship in the Mulan River Valley (Fujian) from the Late Tang Through the Song. Chinese University Press. pp. 37–38. ISBN 978-962-996-227-2. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 10 May 2016. Hugh R. Clark (2007). Portrait of a Community: Society, Culture, and the Structures of Kinship in the Mulan River Valley (Fujian) from the Late Tang Through the Song. Chinese University Press. pp. 78–79. ISBN 978-962-996-227-2. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved 10 May 2016. Endymion Porter Wilkinson (2000). Chinese History: A Manual. Harvard University Asia Center. pp. 752–. ISBN 978-0-674-00249-4. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Yao, Yifeng (2016). Nanjing: Historical Landscape and Its Planning from Geographical Perspective (illustrated ed.). Springer. p. 95. ISBN 978-9811016370. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "Six Dynasties". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, inc. 4 December 2008. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Entenmann, Robert Eric (1982). Migration and settlement in Sichuan, 1644-1796. Harvard University. p. 14. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Shi, Zhihong (2017). Agricultural Development in Qing China: A Quantitative Study, 1661-1911. The Quantitative Economic History of China. BRILL. p. 154. ISBN 978-9004355248. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. Hsu, Cho-yun (2012). China: A New Cultural History. Masters of Chinese Studies (illustrated ed.). Columbia University Press. p. 194. ISBN 978-0231528184. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Pletcher, Kenneth, ed. (2010). The History of China. Understanding China. Rosen Publishing. p. 127. ISBN 978-1615301096. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Chinese journal of international law, Volume 3. 2004. p. 631. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Foster, Simon (2010). China's Pearl River Delta, Guangzhou & Shenzhen. Hunter travel guides. Hunter Publishing, Inc. ISBN 978-1588438119. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Marks, Robert B. (2017). China: An Environmental History (2 ed.). Rowman & Littlefield. p. 177. ISBN 978-1442277892. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Zhao, Zhenzhou; Lee, Wing On (2010). China's Mongols at University: Contesting Cultural Recognitio. Emerging Perspectives on Education in China. Lexington Books. p. 243. ISBN 978-1461633112. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Marks, Robert (1998). Tigers, Rice, Silk, and Silt: Environment and Economy in Late Imperial South China. Studies in Environment and History. Cambridge University Press. p. 53. ISBN 113942551X. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Herklots, Geoffrey Alton Craig (1932). The Hong Kong Naturalist, Volumes 3-4. Newspaper Enterprise Limited. p. 120. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Lai, H. Mark; Hsu, Madeline (2004). Becoming Chinese American: A History of Communities and Institutions. Vol. 13 of Critical perspectives on Asian Pacific Americans series. Rowman Altamira. p. 11. ISBN 0759104581. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Lu, Hanchao (2005). Street Criers: A Cultural History of Chinese Beggars. Stanford University Press. p. 59. ISBN 080475148X. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2019. Li, Dun Jen (1975). Street Criers: A Cultural History of Chinese Beggars [The civilization of China, Volume 1]. Simon & Schuster. p. 278. ISBN 068413943X. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2019. Horai, Satoshi; Murayama, Kumiko (1996). "mtDNA Polymorphism in East Asian Populations, with Special Reference to the Peopling of Japan". American Journal of Human Genetics. 59 (3). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cell Press: 579–590. PMC 1914908. PMID 8751859. Yi, SoJeong; An, Hyungmi; Lee, Howard; Lee, Sangin (2014). "Ancestry informative SNP panels for discriminating the major East Asian populations: Han Chinese, Japanese and Korean". Annals of Human Genetics. 35 (10). Cambridge: John Wiley & Sons (published 2013): 477–485. doi:10.1097/FPC.0000000000000075. PMID 25029633. Pan, Ziqing; Xu, Shuhua (2019). "Population genomics of East Asian ethnic groups". Hereditas. 157 (49). Berlin: BioMed Central (published 2020): 49. doi:10.1186/s41065-020-00162-w. PMC 7724877. PMID 33292737. Shi, Cheng-Min; Liu, Qi; Zhao, Shilei; Chen, Hua (21 March 2019). "Ancestry informative SNP panels for discriminating the major East Asian populations: Han Chinese, Japanese and Korean". Annals of Human Genetics. 29 (2). Cambridge: John Wiley & Sons: 348–354. doi:10.1111/ahg.12320. PMID 31025319. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021. Siska, Veronika; Jones, Eppie Ruth; Jeon, Sungwon; Bhak, Youngjune; Kim, Hak-Min; Cho, Yun Sung; Kim, Hyunho; Lee, Kyusang; Veselovskaya, Elizaveta; Balueva, Tatiana; Gallego-Llorente, Marcos; Hofreiter, Michael; Bradley, Daniel G.; Eriksson, Anders; Pinhasi, Ron; Bhak, Jong; Manica, Andrea (1 February 2017). "Genome-wide data from two early Neolithic East Asian individuals dating to 7700 years ago". Science Advances. 3 (2): e1601877. Bibcode:2017SciA....3E1877S. doi:10.1126/sciadv.1601877. PMC 5287702. PMID 28164156. Wang, Yuchen; Lu Dongsheng; Chung Yeun-Jun; Xu Shuhua (2018). "Genetic structure, divergence and admixture of Han Chinese, Japanese and Korean populations". Hereditas. 155: 19. doi:10.1186/s41065-018-0057-5. PMC 5889524. PMID 29636655. Wang, Yuchen; Lu, Dongsheng; Chung, Yeun-Jun; Xu, Shuhua (2018). "Genetic structure, divergence and admixture of Han Chinese, Japanese and Korean populations". Hereditas. 155 (published 6 April 2018): 19. doi:10.1186/s41065-018-0057-5. PMC 5889524. PMID 29636655. Cao, Yanan; Li, Lin; Xu, Min; et al. (2020). "The ChinaMAP analytics of deep whole genome sequences in 10,588 individuals". Cell Research. 30 (9): 717–731. doi:10.1038/s41422-020-0322-9. PMC 7609296. PMID 32355288. Feng, Qidi; Lu, Yan; Ni, X.; Yuan, K.; Yang, Ya-jun; Yang, Xiong; Liu, Chang; Lou, H.; Ning, Zhilin; Wang, Yuchen; Lu, Dongsheng; Zhang, Chao; Zhou, Ying; Shi, Meng; Tian, L. (2017). "Genetic History of Xinjiang's Uyghurs Suggests Bronze Age Multiple-Way Contacts in Eurasia". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 34 (10): 2572–2582. doi:10.1093/molbev/msx177. PMID 28595347. S2CID 28730957. Zhao, Yong-Bin; Zhang, Ye; Zhang, Quan-Chao; Li, Hong-Jie; Cui, Ying-Qiu; Xu, Zhi; Jin, Li; Zhou, Hui; Zhu, Hong (4 May 2015). Hofreiter, Michael (ed.). "Ancient DNA Reveals That the Genetic Structure of the Northern Han Chinese Was Shaped Prior to 3,000 Years Ago". PLOS ONE. 10 (5): e0125676. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1025676Z. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125676. PMC 4418768. PMID 25938511. Reference Populations - Geno 2.0 Next Generation . (2017). The Genographic Project. Retrieved 15 May 2017, from link. Archived 7 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Yan, Shi; Wang, Chuan-Chao; Li, Hui; Li, Shi-Lin; Jin, Li (September 2011). "An updated tree of Y-chromosome Haplogroup O and revised phylogenetic positions of mutations P164 and PK4". European Journal of Human Genetics. 19 (9): 1013–1015. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2011.64. PMC 3179364. PMID 21505448. Rui-Jing Gan, Shang-Ling Pan, Laura F. Mustavich, Zhen-Dong Qin, Xiao-Yun Cai, Ji Qian, Cheng-Wu Liu, Jun-Hua Peng, Shi-Lin Li, Jie-Shun Xu, Li Jin, Hui Li, and The Genographic Consortium, "Pinghua population as an exception of Han Chinese’s coherent genetic structure." J Hum Genet (2008) 53:303–313. DOI 10.1007/s10038-008-0250-x Karafet, Tatiana; Xu, Liping; Du, Ruofu; Wang, William; Feng, Shi; Wells, R.S.; Redd, Alan J.; Zegura, Stephen L.; Hammer, Michael F. (September 2001). "Paternal Population History of East Asia: Sources, Patterns, and Microevolutionary Processes". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 69 (3): 615–628. doi:10.1086/323299. PMC 1235490. PMID 11481588. Hammer, Michael F.; Karafet, Tatiana M.; Park, Hwayong; Omoto, Keiichi; Harihara, Shinji; Stoneking, Mark; Horai, Satoshi (January 2006). "Dual origins of the Japanese: common ground for hunter-gatherer and farmer Y chromosomes". Journal of Human Genetics. 51 (1): 47–58. doi:10.1007/s10038-005-0322-0. PMID 16328082. S2CID 6559289. Xue, Yali; Zerjal, Tatiana; Bao, Weidong; Zhu, Suling; Shu, Qunfang; Xu, Jiujin; Du, Ruofu; Fu, Songbin; Li, Pu; Hurles, Matthew E; Yang, Huanming; Tyler-Smith, Chris (1 April 2006). "Male Demography in East Asia: A North–South Contrast in Human Population Expansion Times". Genetics. 172 (4): 2431–2439. doi:10.1534/genetics.105.054270. PMC 1456369. PMID 16489223. Fan, Haoliang; Xie, Qiqian; Wang, Lingxiang; Ru, Kai; Tan, Xiaohui; Ding, Jiuyang; Wang, Xiao; Huang, Jian; Wang, Zhuo; Li, Yanning; Wang, Xiaohan; He, Yitong; Gu, Cihang; Liu, Min; Ma, Shiwen; Wen, Shaoqing; Qiu, Pingming (July 2022). "Microhaplotype and Y-SNP/STR (MY): A novel MPS-based system for genotype pattern recognition in two-person DNA mixtures". Forensic Science International: Genetics. 59: 102705. doi:10.1016/j.fsigen.2022.102705. PMID 35462161. Trejaut, Jean A; Poloni, Estella S; Yen, Ju-Chen; Lai, Ying-Hui; Loo, Jun-Hun; Lee, Chien-Liang; He, Chun-Lin; Lin, Marie (2014). "Taiwan Y-chromosomal DNA variation and its relationship with Island Southeast Asia". BMC Genetics. 2014 (15): 77. doi:10.1186/1471-2156-15-77. PMC 4083334. PMID 24965575. Li, Min; Zhang, Yilun; Luo, Li; Bian, Yingnan; Li, Chengtao (December 2020). "Development and validation of a custom panel including 183 Y-SNPs for Chinese Y-chromosomal haplogroups dissection using a MALDI-TOF MS system". Electrophoresis. 41 (23): 2047–2054. doi:10.1002/elps.202000145. PMID 32854146. S2CID 221359145. Yin, Caiyong; Su, Kaiyuan; He, Ziwei; Zhai, Dian; Guo, Kejian; Chen, Xueyun; Jin, Li; Li, Shilin (3 July 2020). "Genetic Reconstruction and Forensic Analysis of Chinese Shandong and Yunnan Han Populations by Co-Analyzing Y Chromosomal STRs and SNPs". Genes. 11 (7): 743. doi:10.3390/genes11070743. PMC 7397191. PMID 32635262. Jinke, Zhang; Wei, Dong; Guangfeng, Tang; Xiaoliang, Huang; Zhen, Yang; Xiaojun, Wang; Jie, Zhang; Yingjian, Zhao; Yiqing, Z. H. U.; Li, Jiang (15 February 2022). "Paternal genetic structure of Han and Hui male populations in Shandong". Acta Anthropologica Sinica. 41 (1): 65. doi:10.16359/j.1000-3193/AAS.2021.0007. Hurles, M; Sykes, B; Jobling, M; Forster, P (2005). "The Dual Origin of the Malagasy in Island Southeast Asia and East Africa: Evidence from Maternal and Paternal Lineages". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 76 (5): 894–901. doi:10.1086/430051. PMC 1199379. PMID 15793703. He, Guanglin; Wang, Mengge; Miao, Lei; Chen, Jing; Zhao, Jie; Sun, Qiuxia; Duan, Shuhan; Wang, Zhiyong; Xu, Xiaofei; Sun, Yuntao; Liu, Yan; Liu, Jing; Wang, Zheng; Wei, Lanhai; Liu, Chao; Ye, Jian; Wang, Le (28 March 2023). "Multiple founding paternal lineages inferred from the newly-developed 639-plex Y-SNP panel suggested the complex admixture and migration history of Chinese people". Human Genomics. 17 (1): 29. doi:10.1186/s40246-023-00476-6. PMC 10045532. PMID 36973821. Lu, Chuncheng; Zhang, Jie; Li, Yingchun; Xia, Yankai; Zhang, Feng; Wu, Bin; Wu, Wei; Ji, Guixiang; Gu, Aihua; Wang, Shoulin; Jin, Li; Wang, Xinru (2009). "The b2/b3 subdeletion shows higher risk of spermatogenic failure and higher frequency of complete AZFc deletion than the gr/gr subdeletion in a Chinese population". Human Molecular Genetics. 18 (6): 1122–30. doi:10.1093/hmg/ddn427. PMID 19088127. Wen, B.; Li, H.; Lu, D.; Song, X.; Zhang, F.; He, Y.; Li, F.; Gao, Y.; et al. (September 2004). "Genetic evidence supports demic diffusion of Han culture" (PDF). Nature. 431 (7006): 302–05. Bibcode:2004Natur.431..302W. doi:10.1038/nature02878. PMID 15372031. S2CID 4301581. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009. Xue, Fuzhong; Wang, Yi; Xu, Shuhua; Zhang, Feng; Wen, Bo; Wu, Xuesen; Lu, Ming; Deka, Ranjan; Qian, Ji; et al. (2008). "A spatial analysis of genetic structure of human populations in China reveals distinct difference between maternal and paternal lineages". European Journal of Human Genetics. 16 (6): 705–17. doi:10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201998. PMID 18212820. Li, Hui (2008). "Paternal genetic affinity between western Austronesians and Daic populations". BMC Evolutionary Biology. 8 (1): 146. Bibcode:2008BMCEE...8..146L. doi:10.1186/1471-2148-8-146. PMC 2408594. PMID 18482451. Karafet, Tatiana; Hallmark, B; Cox, M.P.; Sudoyo, H; Downey, S; Lansing, J.S.; Hammer, M.F. (August 2010). "Major East–West Division Underlies Y Chromosome Stratification across Indonesia". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 27 (8): 1833–44. doi:10.1093/molbev/msq063. PMID 20207712. Karafet, Tatiana; Hagberg, L; Hanson, L. A.; Korhonen, T; Leffler, H; Olling, S (1981). "Balinese Y-chromosome perspective on the peopling of Indonesia: genetic contributions from pre-Neolithic hunter-gatherers, Austronesian farmers, and Indian traders". Ciba Found Symp. 80: 161–87. doi:10.1002/9780470720639.ch11. PMID 6114819. Yan, Shi; Wang, C.C.; Li, H; Li, S.L.; Jin, L (2011). "An updated tree of Y-chromosome Haplogroup O and revised phylogenetic positions of mutations P164 and PK4". European Journal of Human Genetics. 19 (9): 1013–15. doi:10.1038/ejhg.2011.64. PMC 3179364. PMID 21505448. Zhao, Yong-Bin; Zhang, Ye; Zhang, Quan-Chao; Li, Hong-Jie; Cui, Ying-Qiu; Xu, Zhi; Jin, Li; Zhou, Hui; Zhu, Hong (2015). "Ancient DNA Reveals That the Genetic Structure of the Northern Han Chinese Was Shaped Prior to three-thousand Years Ago". PLoS ONE. 10 (5): e0125676. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1025676Z. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125676. PMC 4418768. PMID 25938511. Gernet, Jacques (1996). A History of Chinese Civilization (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7. Wen, Bo; Li, Hui; Lu, Daru; Song, Xiufeng; Zhang, Feng; He, Yungang; Li, Feng; Gao, Yang; Mao, Xianyun; Zhang, Liang; Qian, Ji; Tan, Jingze; Jin, Jianzhong; Huang, Wei; Deka, Ranjan; Su, Bing; Chakraborty, Ranajit; Jin, Li (2004). "Genetic evidence supports demic diffusion of Han culture". Nature. 431 (7006): 302–305. Bibcode:2004Natur.431..302W. doi:10.1038/nature02878. PMID 15372031. S2CID 4301581. Crawford, Dorothy H.; Rickinson, Alan; Johannessen, Ingolfur (2014). Cancer Virus: The story of Epstein-Barr Virus. Oxford University Press (published 14 March 2014). p. 98. Entenmann, Robert Eric (1982). Migration and settlement in Sichuan, 1644-1796. Harvard University. p. 14. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Shi, Zhihong (2017). Agricultural Development in Qing China: A Quantitative Study, 1661-1911. The Quantitative Economic History of China. BRILL. p. 154. ISBN 978-9004355248. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. Du, R; Xiao, C; Cavalli-Sforza, LL (1997). "Genetic distances between Chinese populations calculated on gene frequencies of 38 loci". Science China Life Sciences. 40 (6): 613–21. doi:10.1007/BF02882691. PMID 18726285. S2CID 1924085. Chen, Jieming; Zheng, Houfeng; Bei, Jin-Xin; Sun, Liangdan; Jia, Wei-hua; Li, Tao; Zhang, Furen; Seielstad, Mark; Zeng, Yi-Xin; et al. (2009). "Genetic Structure of the Han Chinese Population Revealed by Genome-wide SNP Variation". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 85 (6): 775–85. doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.10.016. PMC 2790583. PMID 19944401. McFadzean A.J.S., Todd D. (1971). "Cooley's anaemia among the tanka of South China". Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 65 (1): 59–62. doi:10.1016/0035-9203(71)90185-4. PMID 5092429. Gan, Rui-Jing; Pan, Shang-Ling; Mustavich, Laura F.; Qin, Zhen-Dong; Cai, Xiao-Yun; Qian, Ji; Liu, Cheng-Wu; Peng, Jun-Hua; Li, Shi-Lin; Xu, Jie-Shun; Jin, Li; Li, Hui (2008). "Pinghua population as an exception of Han Chinese's coherent genetic structure". Journal of Human Genetics. 53 (4): 303–13. doi:10.1007/s10038-008-0250-x. PMID 18270655. Zhao, Yong-Bin; Zhang, Ye; Zhang, Quan-Chao; Li, Hong-Jie; Cui, Ying-Qiu; Xu, Zhi; Jin, Li; Zhou, Hui; Zhu, Hong (4 May 2015). "Ancient DNA Reveals That the Genetic Structure of the Northern Han Chinese Was Shaped Prior to 3,000 Years Ago". PLOS ONE. 10 (5): e0125676. Bibcode:2015PLoSO..1025676Z. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0125676. PMC 4418768. PMID 25938511. Library resources about Han Chinese Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Yuan, Haiwang (2006). The Magic Lotus Lantern and Other Tales from the Han Chinese. Westport, Conn.: Libraries Unlimited. ISBN 978-1-59158-294-6. OCLC 65820295. Mullaney, Thomas Shawn (2012). Critical Han Studies: The History, Representation, and Identity of China's Majority. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0984590988. Joniak-Lüthi, Agnieszka (2015). The Han: China's Diverse Majority. Washington, DC: University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-99467-3 (hardcover). ISBN 978-0295741789 (paperback: 2017). Media related to Han Chinese people at Wikimedia Commons