Qatar (/ˈkɑːtɑːr, kəˈtɑːr/; Arabic: قطر Qaṭar [ˈqɑtˤɑr], local vernacular pronunciation: [ˈɡɪtˤɑr]), officially the State of Qatar, is a country in West Asia. It occupies the Qatar Peninsula on the northeastern coast of the Arabian Peninsula in the Middle East; it shares its sole land border with Saudi Arabia to the south, with the rest of its territory surrounded by the Persian Gulf. The Gulf of Bahrain, an inlet of the Persian Gulf, separates Qatar from nearby Bahrain. The capital is Doha, home to over 80% of the country's inhabitants, and the land area is mostly made up of flat, low-lying desert. Qatar has been ruled as a hereditary monarchy by the House of Thani since Mohammed bin Thani signed "an agreement, not a formal treaty" with Britain in 1868 that recognised its separate status. Following Ottoman rule, Qatar became a British protectorate in 1916 and gained independence in 1971. The current emir is Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, who holds nearly all executive, legislative, and judicial authority in autocratic manner under the Constitution of Qatar. He appoints the prime minister and cabinet. The partially-elected Consultative Assembly can block legislation and has a limited ability to dismiss ministers. In early 2017, the population of Qatar was 2.6 million, although only 313,000 of them are Qatari citizens and 2.3 million being expatriates and migrant workers. Its official religion is Islam. The country has the fourth-highest GDP (PPP) per capita in the world and the eleventh-highest GNI per capita (Atlas method). It ranks 42nd in the Human Development Index, the third-highest HDI in the Arab world. It is a high-income economy, backed by the world's third-largest natural gas reserves and oil reserves. Qatar is one of the world's largest exporters of liquefied natural gas and the world's largest emitter of carbon dioxide per capita. In the 21st century, Qatar emerged as both a major non-NATO ally of the United States and a middle power in the Arab world. Its economy has risen rapidly through its resource-wealth, and its geopolitical power has risen through its media group, Al Jazeera Media Network, and reported support for rebel groups financially during the Arab Spring. Qatar also forms part of the Gulf Cooperation Council. Pliny the Elder, a Roman writer, documented the earliest account pertaining to the inhabitants of the peninsula around the mid-first century AD, referring to them as the Catharrei, a designation that may have derived from the name of a prominent local settlement. A century later, Ptolemy produced the first known map to depict the peninsula, referring to it as Catara. The map also referenced a town named "Cadara" to the east of the peninsula. The term "Catara" (inhabitants, Cataraei) was exclusively used until the 18th century, after which "Katara" emerged as the most commonly recognised spelling. Eventually, after several variations — "Katr", "Kattar" and "Guttur" — the modern derivative Qatar was adopted as the country's name.In Standard Arabic, the name is pronounced [ˈqɑtˤɑr], while in the local dialect it is [ˈɡɪtˤɑr]. English speakers use different approximate pronunciations of the name as the Arabic pronunciations use sounds not often used in English. Human habitation in Qatar dates back to 50,000 years ago. Settlements and tools dating back to the Stone Age have been unearthed in the peninsula. Mesopotamian artifacts originating from the Ubaid period (c. 6500–3800 BC) have been discovered in abandoned coastal settlements. Al Da'asa, a settlement located on the western coast of Qatar, is the most important Ubaid site in the country and is believed to have accommodated a small seasonal encampment. Kassite Babylonian material dating back to the second millennium BC found in Al Khor Islands attests to trade relations between the inhabitants of Qatar and the Kassites in modern-day Bahrain. Among the findings were crushed snail shells and Kassite potsherds. It has been suggested that Qatar is the earliest known site of shellfish dye production, owing to a Kassite purple dye industry which existed on the coast. In 224 AD, the Sasanian Empire gained control over the territories surrounding the Persian Gulf. Qatar played a role in the commercial activity of the Sasanids, contributing at least two commodities: precious pearls and purple dye.[citation needed] Under the Sasanid reign, many of the inhabitants in eastern Arabia were introduced to Christianity following the eastward dispersal of the religion by Mesopotamian Christians. Monasteries were constructed and further settlements were founded during this era. During the latter part of the Christian era, Qatar comprised a region known as 'Beth Qatraye' (Syriac for "house of the Qataris"). The region was not limited to Qatar; it also included Bahrain, Tarout Island, Al-Khatt, and Al-Hasa. In 628, the Islamic prophet Muhammad sent a Muslim envoy to a ruler in eastern Arabia named Munzir ibn Sawa Al-Tamimi and requested that he and his subjects accept Islam. Munzir obliged his request, and accordingly most of the Arab tribes in the region converted to Islam. In the middle of the century, the Muslim conquest of Persia resulted in the fall of the Sasanian Empire. Qatar was described as a famous horse and camel breeding centre during the Umayyad period. In the 8th century, it started benefiting from its commercially strategic position in the Persian Gulf and went on to become a centre of pearl trading. Substantial development in the pearling industry around the Qatari Peninsula occurred during the Abbasid era. Ships voyaging from Basra to India and China would make stops in Qatar's ports during this period. Chinese porcelain, West African coins, and artefacts from Thailand have been discovered in Qatar. Archaeological remains from the 9th century suggest that Qatar's inhabitants used greater wealth to construct higher quality homes and public buildings. Over 100 stone-built houses, two mosques, and an Abbasid fort were constructed in Murwab during this period. When the caliphate's prosperity declined in Iraq, so too did it in Qatar. Qatar is mentioned in 13th-century Muslim scholar Yaqut al-Hamawi's book, Mu'jam Al-Buldan, which alludes to the Qataris' fine striped woven cloaks and their skills in improvement and finishing of spears. Much of eastern Arabia was controlled by the Usfurids in 1253, but control of the region was seized by the prince of Ormus in 1320. Qatar's pearls provided the kingdom with one of its main sources of income. In 1515, Manuel I of Portugal vassalised the Kingdom of Ormus. Portugal went on to seize a significant portion of eastern Arabia in 1521. In 1550, the inhabitants of Al-Hasa voluntarily submitted to the rule of the Ottomans, preferring them to the Portuguese. After the fall of the Jabrid Dynasty with the conquest of Bahrain by the Portuguese, the Arabian coast up to Al Hassa came under the rule and influence of the Portuguese empire. Attempts by the Ottomans to dominate the region were eliminated with the reconquest of the castle of Tarout or Al Qatif in 1551. Archaeological finds are still being excavated from one of the Portuguese fortresses that served as a base to dominate the region as Ruwayda. The first representation of Qatar appears on the Portuguese map by Luis Lázaro in 1563, showing the "city of Qatar" as a fortress. Having retained a negligible military presence in the area, the Ottomans were expelled by the Bani Khalid tribe and their emirate in 1670. In 1766, members of the Al Khalifa family of the Utub tribal confederation migrated from Kuwait to Zubarah in Qatar. By the time of their arrival, the Bani Khalid exercised weak authority over the peninsula, notwithstanding the fact that the largest village was ruled by their distant kin. In 1783, Qatar-based Bani Utbah clans and allied Arab tribes invaded and annexed Bahrain from the Persians. The Al Khalifa imposed their authority over Bahrain and retained their jurisdiction over Zubarah. Following his swearing-in as crown prince of the Wahhabi in 1788, Saud ibn Abd al-Aziz moved to expand Wahhabi territory eastward towards the Persian Gulf and Qatar. After defeating the Bani Khalid in 1795, the Wahhabi were attacked on two fronts. The Ottomans and Egyptians assaulted the western front, while the Al Khalifa in Bahrain and the Omanis launched an attack against the eastern front. Upon being made aware of the Egyptian advance on the western frontier in 1811, the Wahhabi amir reduced his garrisons in Bahrain and Zubarah in order to redeploy his troops. Said bin Sultan, ruler of Muscat, capitalised on this opportunity and raided the Wahhabi garrisons on the eastern coast, setting fire to the fort in Zubarah. The Al Khalifa was effectively returned to power thereafter. As punishment for piracy, an East India Company vessel bombarded Doha in 1821, destroying the town and forcing hundreds of residents to flee. In 1825, the House of Thani was established with Sheikh Mohammed bin Thani as the first leader. Although Qatar was considered a dependency of Bahrain, the Al Khalifa faced opposition from the local tribes. In 1867, the Al Khalifa, along with the ruler of Abu Dhabi, sent a massive naval force to Al Wakrah in an effort to crush the Qatari rebels. This resulted in the maritime Qatari–Bahraini War of 1867–68, in which Bahraini and Abu Dhabi forces sacked and looted Doha and Al Wakrah. The Bahraini hostilities were in violation of the Perpetual Truce of Peace and Friendship of 1861. The joint incursion, in addition to the Qatari counter-attack, prompted British Political Resident, Colonel Lewis Pelly to impose a settlement in 1868. His mission to Bahrain and Qatar and the resulting peace treaty were milestones because they implicitly recognised the distinctness of Qatar from Bahrain and explicitly acknowledged the position of Mohammed bin Thani. In addition to censuring Bahrain for its breach of agreement, Pelly negotiated with Qatari sheikhs who were represented by Mohammed bin Thani. The negotiations were the first stage in the development of Qatar as a sheikhdom. Under military and political pressure from the governor of the Ottoman Vilayet of Baghdad, Midhat Pasha, the ruling Al Thani tribe submitted to Ottoman rule in 1871. The Ottoman government imposed reformist (Tanzimat) measures concerning taxation and land registration to fully integrate these areas into the empire. Despite the disapproval of local tribes, Al Thani continued supporting the Ottoman rule. Qatari-Ottoman relations stagnated, and in 1882 they suffered further setbacks when the Ottomans refused to aid Al Thani in his expedition of Abu Dhabi-occupied Khawr al Udayd. In addition, the Ottomans supported the Ottoman subject Mohammed bin Abdul Wahab who attempted to supplant Al Thani as kaymakam of Qatar in 1888. This eventually led Al Thani to rebel against the Ottomans, whom he believed were seeking to usurp control of the peninsula. He resigned as kaymakam and stopped paying taxes in August 1892. In February 1893, Mehmed Hafiz Pasha arrived in Qatar in the interests of seeking unpaid taxes and accosting Jassim bin Mohammed's opposition to proposed Ottoman administrative reforms. Fearing that he would face death or imprisonment, Jassim retreated to Al Wajbah (16 km or 10 mi west of Doha), accompanied by several tribe members. Mehmed's demand that Jassim disband his troops and pledge his loyalty to the Ottomans was met with refusal. In March, Mehmed imprisoned Jassim's brother and 13 prominent Qatari tribal leaders on the Ottoman corvette Merrikh as punishment for his insubordination. After Mehmed declined an offer to release the captives for a fee of 10,000 liras, he ordered a column of approximately 200 troops to advance towards Jassim's Al Wajbah Fort under the command of Yusuf Effendi, thus signalling the start of the Battle of Al Wajbah. Effendi's troops came under heavy gunfire by a sizable troop of Qatari infantry and cavalry shortly after arriving at Al Wajbah. They retreated to Shebaka fortress where they were again forced to draw back from a Qatari incursion. After they withdrew to Al Bidda fortress, Jassim's advancing column besieged the fortress, resulting in the Ottomans' concession of defeat and agreement to relinquish their captives in return for the safe passage of Mehmed Pasha's cavalry to Hofuf by land. Although Qatar did not gain full independence from the Ottoman Empire, the result of the battle forced a treaty that would later form the basis of Qatar's emerging as an autonomous country within the empire. By the Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1913, the Ottomans agreed to renounce their claim to Qatar and withdraw their garrison from Doha. However, with the outbreak of World War I, nothing was done to carry this out, and the garrison remained in the fort at Doha, although its numbers dwindled as men deserted. In 1915, with the presence of British gunboats in the harbour, Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani (who was pro-British) persuaded the remainder to abandon the fort, and when British troops approached the following morning they found it deserted. Qatar became a British protectorate on 3 November 1916 when the United Kingdom signed a treaty with Sheikh Abdullah bin Jassim Al Thani to bring Qatar under its Trucial System of Administration. The treaty reserved foreign affairs and defence to the United Kingdom but allowed internal autonomy. While Abdullah agreed not to enter into any relations with any other power without the prior consent of the British government, the latter guaranteed the protection of Qatar from aggression by sea and provide its 'good offices' in the event of an attack by land. This latter undertaking was left deliberately vague. On 5 May 1935, while agreeing an oil concession with the Anglo-Persian Oil Company, Abdullah signed another treaty with the British government which granted Qatar protection against internal and external threats. Oil reserves were first discovered in 1939. Exploitation and development were, however, delayed by World War II. The focus of British interests in Qatar changed after the Second World War with the independence of India, the creation of Pakistan in 1947, and the development of oil in Qatar. In 1949, the appointment of the first British political officer in Doha, John Wilton, signified a strengthening of Anglo-Qatari relations. Oil exports began in 1949, and oil revenues became the country's main source of revenue; the pearl trade had gone into decline. These revenues were used to fund the expansion and modernisation of Qatar's infrastructure. When Britain officially announced in 1968 that it would withdraw from the Persian Gulf in three years' time, Qatar joined talks with Bahrain and seven other Trucial States to create a federation. Regional disputes, however, persuaded Qatar and Bahrain to withdraw from the talks and become independent states separate from the Trucial States, which went on to become the United Arab Emirates. Under an agreement with the United Kingdom, on 3 September 1971, the "special treaty arrangements" that were "inconsistent with full international responsibility as a sovereign and independent state" were terminated. In 1991, Qatar played a significant role in the Gulf War, particularly during the Battle of Khafji in which Qatari tanks rolled through the streets of the town and provided fire support for Saudi Arabian National Guard units that were engaging Iraqi Army troops. Qatar allowed coalition troops from Canada to use the country as an airbase to launch aircraft on combat air patrol duty and also permitted air forces from the United States and France to operate in its territories. In 1995, Emir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani seized control of the country from his father Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani, with the support of the armed forces and cabinet, as well as neighbouring states and France. Under Emir Hamad, Qatar experienced a moderate degree of liberalisation, including the launch of the Al Jazeera television station (1996), the endorsement of women's suffrage or right to vote in municipal elections (1999), drafting its first written constitution (2005) and inauguration of a Roman Catholic church (2008).[citation needed] Qatar's economy and status as a regional power rapidly grew in the 2000s. According to the UN, the nation's economic growth, measured by GDP, was the fastest in the world during this decade. The basis of this growth lay in the exploitation of natural gas in the North Field during the 1990s. At the same time, the population tripled between 2001 and 2011, mostly from an influx of foreigners. In 2003, Qatar served as the United States Central Command headquarters and one of the main launching sites of the invasion of Iraq. In March 2005, a suicide bombing killed a British teacher at the Doha Players Theatre, shocking the country, which had not previously experienced acts of terrorism. The bombing was carried out by Omar Ahmed Abdullah Ali, an Egyptian resident in Qatar who had suspected ties to Al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. The increased influence of Qatar and its role during the Arab Spring, especially during the Bahraini uprising in 2011, worsened longstanding tensions with Saudi Arabia, the neighboring United Arab Emirates, and Bahrain.[citation needed] In 2010, Qatar won the right to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup, making it the first country in the Middle East to be selected to host the tournament. The awarding increased further investment and developments within the nation during the 2010s. In June 2013, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani became the emir of Qatar after his father handed over power. Sheikh Tamim has prioritised improving the domestic welfare of citizens, which includes establishing advanced healthcare and education systems, and expanding the country's infrastructure in preparation for the hosting of the 2022 World Cup. Qatar hosted the 2022 FIFA World Cup from 21 November to 18 December, becoming the first Arab and Muslim-majority country to do so, and the third Asian country to host it following the 2002 FIFA World Cup in Japan and South Korea. Qatar is officially a semi-constitutional monarchy, but the wide powers retained by the monarchy have it bordering an absolute monarchy ruled by the Al Thani family. The Al Thani dynasty has been ruling Qatar since the family house was established in 1825. In 2003, Qatar adopted a constitution that provided for the direct election of 30 of the 45 members of a legislature. The constitution was overwhelmingly approved in a referendum, with almost 98% in favour. Despite this, the government remains authoritarian. According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Qatar is 2023 the second least electoral democratic country in the Middle East. Qatari law does not permit the establishment of political bodies or trade unions. The eighth emir of Qatar is Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani. The emir has the exclusive power to appoint the prime minister and cabinet ministers who, together, constitute the Council of Ministers, which is the supreme executive authority in the country. The Council of Ministers also initiates legislation. The Consultative Assembly is made up of 30 popularly-elected members and 15 appointed by the emir. It can block legislation with a simple majority and can dismiss ministers, including the prime minister, with a two-thirds vote. The assembly had its first elections in October 2021 after several postponements. According to Qatar's Constitution, Sharia law is the main source of Qatari legislation, although in practice Qatar's legal system is a mixture of civil law and Sharia. Sharia is applied to family law, inheritance, and several criminal acts (including adultery, robbery, and murder). In some cases, Sharia-based family courts treat a female's testimony as being worth half that of a man. Codified family law was introduced in 2006. Islamic polygyny is permitted. Judicial corporal punishment is a punishment in Qatar. Only Muslims considered medically fit are liable to have such sentences carried out. Flogging is employed as a punishment for alcohol consumption or illicit sexual relations. Article 88 of the criminal code declares that the penalty for adultery is 100 lashes. Stoning is a legal punishment in Qatar, and apostasy and homosexuality are crimes punishable by the death penalty; however, the penalty has not been carried out for either crime. Blasphemy can result in up to seven years in prison, while proselytising can incur a 10-year sentence. Alcohol consumption is partially legal; some five-star luxury hotels are allowed to sell alcohol to non-Muslim customers. Muslims are not allowed to consume alcohol, and those caught consuming it are liable to flogging or deportation. Non-Muslim expatriates can obtain a permit to purchase alcohol for personal consumption. The Qatar Distribution Company (a subsidiary of Qatar Airways) is permitted to import alcohol and pork; it operates the only liquor store in the country, which also sells pork to holders of liquor licences. Qatari officials had indicated a willingness to allow alcohol in "fan zones" at the 2022 FIFA World Cup. However, on 18 November, two days before the start of the games, Qatari officials announced alcoholic beverages would not be permitted within the stadiums. In 2014, a modesty campaign was launched to remind tourists of the country's restrictive dress code. Female tourists were advised not to wear leggings, miniskirts, sleeveless dresses, or short or tight clothing in public. Men were warned against wearing shorts and singlets. Qatar's international profile and active role in international affairs have led some analysts to identify it as a middle power. Since 2022, it has been a major non-NATO ally of the United States. Qatar also has particularly strong ties with France, China, Iran, Turkey, as well as a number of Islamist movements in the Middle East such as the Muslim Brotherhood. The country is an early member of OPEC and a founding member of the Gulf Cooperation Council, as well as a member of the Arab League. Diplomatic missions to Qatar are based in its capital, Doha. Regional relations and foreign policies are characterized by the strategy of balancing and alliance building among regional and great powers. It maintains independent foreign policy and engages in regional balancing to secure its strategic priorities and to have recognition on the regional and international level. As a comparatively small state in the gulf, Qatar established an "open-door" foreign policy where Qatar maintains ties to all parties and regional players in the region. In 2011, Qatar joined NATO operations in Libya and reportedly armed Libyan opposition groups. It was also a major funder of weapons for rebel groups in the Syrian civil war. Qatar participated in the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against the Houthis and forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh. Since the 2000s, Qatar increasingly emerged on a wider foreign policy stage especially as a mediator, such as for Middle Eastern conflicts; for example, Qatar mediated between the rival Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas in 2006 and helped unite Lebanese leaders into forming a political agreement during the 2008 crisis. Qatar has also emerged as mediators in African and Asian affairs, notably holding a peace process for Sudan amid the Darfur conflict and facilitating peace talks for Afghanistan, setting up a political "office" for the Afghan Taliban to facilitate talks. Ahmed Rashid, writing in the Financial Times, stated that through the office Qatar has "facilitated meetings between the Taliban and many countries and organisations, including the US state department, the UN, Japan, several European governments and non-governmental organisations, all of whom have been trying to push forward the idea of peace talks." It played a major role in establishing the first ceasefire in the 2023 Israel-Hamas war and the concurrent initial hostage exchange. These high-risk diplomatic middle man endeavors (and its own rigorous defense stance) have thus earned it a reputation as "a prickly Switzerland". In June 2017, Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Bahrain, Egypt and Yemen broke diplomatic ties with Qatar, accusing Qatar of supporting terrorism. The crisis escalated a dispute over Qatar's support of the Muslim Brotherhood, which is considered a terrorist organization by some Arab nations. The diplomatic crisis ended in January 2021 with the signing of AlUla declaration. On 2 October 2020, Qatari authorities strip-searched 13 Australian women on a plane at Hamad International Airport over a premature baby found in a bathroom at the terminal. This caused an international incident with Australia. In September 2023, Qatar mediated the US- Iran prisoners swap deal. Iran freed five Americans in exchange for five Iranians held in the US and transfer $6 billion in frozen Iranian money from South Korea to Qatar. In October 2023 United States President Joe Biden thanked to the Qatar's Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani for his help in mediating a landmark prisoner swap deal with Iran. The Qatar Armed Forces consist of 12,000 personnel in the Qatari Emiri Land Forces, 2,500 in the Navy, 2,000 in the Air Force, and 5,000 in the Internal Security Forces. In 2008 Qatar spent US$2.3 billion on its military, which was 2.3% of the GDP, and its military spending increased to US$7.49 billion as of 2022. After the Arab spring events in 2011 and a diplomatic incident with Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries in 2014, Qatar started expanding its armed forces. The country introduced conscription in 2013, the first Gulf state to do so in recent years. It is mandatory for Qatari male citizens to serve for up to 4 months, though not all of them are called up. The national service term was extended to one year in 2018. About 2,000 conscripts pass through the Qatar Armed Forces annually. Military service has become more popular in Qatar due to the recent tensions with Saudi Arabia and the UAE. Since 2017, Qatar has also purchased large quantities of equipment from European countries and the United States, making its air force one of the largest among the Gulf states. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) found that in 2010–14 Qatar was the 46th-largest arms importer in the world. SIPRI writes that Qatar's plans to transform and significantly enlarge its armed forces have accelerated. In 2015, Qatar was the 16th largest arms importer in the world, and in 2016, it was the 11th largest, according to SIPRI. Qatar has signed defense pacts with the United States, the United Kingdom, and France. The forward headquarters of United States Central Command, Al Udeid Air Base, is located in Qatar and houses about 10,000 American military personnel. During the 2011 military intervention in Libya, Qatar deployed six Mirage 2000 fighter jets to assist the NATO air campaign against the Libyan government and special forces to provide training to Libyan rebels. Since the start of Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war, by September 2015 Qatar sent 1,000 troops, 200 armored vehicles, and 30 Apache helicopters to assist Saudi Arabia with its military operations in Yemen. In June 2017, at the start of the diplomatic crisis with Saudi Arabia, Qatar withdrew its forces from Yemen. Qatar's human rights record has been regarded by academics and non-governmental organisations as being generally poor, with restrictions on civil liberties such as the freedoms of association, expression and the press, as well as its treatment of thousands of migrant workers amounting to forced labour for projects in the country. In May 2012, Qatari officials declared their intention to allow the establishment of an independent trade union. In 2014, Qatar commissioned international law firm DLA Piper to produce a report investigating the immigrant labour system. In May 2014, DLA Piper released more than 60 recommendations for reforming the kafala system including the abolition of exit visas and the introduction of a minimum wage, which Qatar has pledged to implement. Qatar also announced it would scrap its sponsor system for foreign labour, which requires that all foreign workers be sponsored by local employers. The UN Committee Against Torture found that the provisions for flogging and stoning within the Qatari criminal code constituted a breach of the obligations imposed by the UN Convention Against Torture. Homosexual acts are illegal and can be punished by death. However, there is no such evidence that the death penalty has been given for same-sex relations due to homosexual acts. Under the provisions of Qatar's sponsorship law, sponsors had the unilateral power to cancel workers' residency permits, deny workers' ability to change employers, report a worker as "absconded" to police authorities, and deny permission to leave the country. As a result, sponsors may restrict workers' movements, and workers may be afraid to report abuses or claim their rights. According to the ITUC, the visa sponsorship system allows the exaction of forced labour by making it difficult for a migrant worker to leave an abusive employer or travel overseas without permission. Qatar also did not maintain wage standards for its immigrant labourers. Additional changes to labour laws include a provision guaranteeing that all workers' salaries are paid directly into their bank accounts and new restrictions on working outdoors in the hottest hours during the summer. In 2016 laws were reformed to mandate that companies that fail to pay workers' wages on time could temporarily lose their ability to hire more employees. Human Rights Watch claimed that the changes might fail to address some labour rights issues. A minimum wage was instituted in 2021. The country enfranchised women at the same time as men in connection with the 1999 elections for a Central Municipal Council. These elections—the first-ever in Qatar—were intentionally held on 8 March 1999, International Women's Day. Qatar is divided into eight municipalities (Arabic: baladiyah). Al Shamal Al Khor Al-Shahaniya Umm Salal Al Daayen Doha Al Rayyan Al Wakrah For statistical purposes, the municipalities are further subdivided into 98 zones, which are in turn subdivided into blocks. Al Jemailiya (until 2004) Al Ghuwariyah (until 2004) Jariyan al Batnah (until 2004) Mesaieed (Umm Sa'id) (until 2006) The Qatari peninsula protrudes 160 kilometres (100 mi) into the Persian Gulf, north of Saudi Arabia. It lies between latitudes 24° and 27° N, and longitudes 50° and 52° E. Most of the country consists of a low, barren plain, covered with sand. To the southeast lies the Khor al Adaid ("Inland Sea"), an area of rolling sand dunes surrounding an inlet of the Persian Gulf. The highest point is Qurayn Abu al Bawl at 103 metres (338 ft) in the Jebel Dukhan to the west, a range of low limestone outcroppings running north–south from Zikrit through Umm Bab to the southern border. The Jebel Dukhan area also contains Qatar's main onshore oil deposits, while the natural gas fields lie offshore, to the northwest of the peninsula.[citation needed] Qatar became part of the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity in 1996. It subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan in 2005. A total of 142 fungal species have been recorded from Qatar. A book recently produced by the Ministry of Environment documents the lizards known or believed to occur in Qatar, based on surveys conducted by an international team of scientists and other collaborators. According to the Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research, carbon dioxide emissions per person average over 30 tonnes, one of the highest in the world. Before the discovery of oil, the economy focused on fishing and pearl hunting. A report prepared by local governors of the Ottoman Empire in 1892 states that income from pearl hunting in 1892 is 2,450,000 kran. After the introduction of the Japanese cultured pearl onto the world market in the 1920s and 1930s, Qatar's pearling industry crashed. Oil was discovered in Qatar in 1940, in Dukhan Field. The discovery transformed the state's economy. Now, the country has a high standard of living for its legal citizens. With no income tax, Qatar (along with Bahrain) is one of the countries with the lowest tax rates in the world. The unemployment rate in June 2013 was 0.1%. Corporate law mandates that Qatari nationals must hold 51% of any venture in the emirate. Trade and industry is overseen by the Ministry of Business and Trade. As of 2016[update], Qatar has the fourth highest GDP per capita in the world, according to the International Monetary Fund. It relies heavily on foreign labor to grow its economy, to the extent that migrant workers compose 86% of the population and 94% of the workforce. Economic growth has been almost exclusively based on its petroleum and natural gas industries, which began in 1940. Qatar is the leading exporter of liquefied natural gas. In 2012, it was estimated that Qatar would invest over $120 billion in the energy sector in the next 10 years. The country was a member state of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), having joined in 1961, and having left in January 2019. In 2012, Qatar retained its title of richest country in the world (according to per capita income) for the third time in a row, having first overtaken Luxembourg in 2010. According to the study published by the Washington-based Institute of International Finance, the per capita GDP at purchasing power parity (PPP) was $106,000 (QR387,000) in 2012, helping the country retain its ranking as the world's wealthiest nation. Luxembourg came a distant second with nearly $80,000 and Singapore third with per capita income of about $61,000.The research put Qatar's GDP at $182bn in 2012 and said it had climbed to an all-time high due to soaring gas exports and high oil prices. Its population stood at 1.8 million in 2012. Established in 2005, Qatar Investment Authority is the country's sovereign wealth fund, specializing in foreign investment. In 2012, with assets of $115bn, QIA was ranked 12th among the richest sovereign wealth funds in the world. With billions of dollars in surpluses from the oil and gas industry, the Qatari government has directed investments into United States, Europe, and Asia Pacific. Qatar Holding is the international investment arm of QIA. Since 2009, Qatar Holding has received $30–40bn per year from the state. As of 2014[update], it has investments around the world in Valentino, Siemens, Printemps, Harrods, The Shard, Barclays Bank, Heathrow Airport, Paris Saint-Germain F.C., Volkswagen Group, Royal Dutch Shell, Bank of America, Tiffany, Agricultural Bank of China, Sainsbury's, BlackBerry, and Santander Brasil. The country has no taxes on non-companies, but authorities have announced plans to levy taxes on junk food and luxury items. The taxes would be implemented on goods that harm the human body—for example, fast food, tobacco products, and soft drinks. The rollout of these initial taxes is believed to be the result of the fall in oil prices and a deficit that the country faced in 2016. Additionally, the country saw job cuts in 2016 from its petroleum companies and other sectors in the government. As of 2012[update], Qatar has proven oil reserves of 15 billion barrels and gas fields that account for more than 13% of the global resource. The economy was in a downturn from 1982 to 1989. OPEC quotas on crude oil production, the lower price for oil, and the generally unpromising outlook on international markets reduced oil earnings. In turn, the Qatari government's spending plans had to be cut to match lower income. The resulting recessionary local business climate caused many firms to lay off expatriate staff. With the economy recovering in the 1990s, expatriate populations, particularly from Egypt and South Asia, have grown again.[citation needed] Qatar's proven reserves of gas are the third-largest in the world, exceeding 250 trillion cubic feet (7,000 km3). The economy was boosted in 1991 by completion of the $1.5-billion Phase I of North Field gas development. In 1996, the Qatargas project began exporting liquefied natural gas to Japan. Qatar's heavy industrial projects, all based in Umm Said, include a refinery with a 50,000 barrels (8,000 m3) per day capacity, a fertiliser plant for urea and ammonia, a steel plant, and a petrochemical plant. All these industries use gas for fuel. Most are joint ventures between European and Japanese firms and the state-owned QatarEnergy. The US is the major equipment supplier for Qatar's oil and gas industry, and US companies are playing a major role in North Field gas development. In 2008 Qatar launched its National Vision 2030 which highlights environmental development as one of the four main goals for Qatar over the next two decades. The National Vision pledges to develop sustainable alternatives to oil-based energy to preserve the local and global environment. Qatar has made investment in renewable resources a major goal for the country over the next two decades. By 2030, Qatar has set the goal of attaining 20% of its energy from solar power. The country is well-positioned to capitalize on photovoltaic systems, as it has a global horizontal irradiance value of approximately 2,140 kWh per square meter annually. Furthermore, the direct irradiance parameter is roughly 2,008 kWh per square meter annually, implying that it would be able to benefit from concentrated solar power as well. Qatar Foundation has been active in helping the solar power goals. It established Qatar Solar, which, together with Qatar Development Bank and German company SolarWorld, embarked on a joint venture resulting in the creation of Qatar Solar Technologies (QSTec). In 2017, QSTec commissioned its polysillicon plant in Ras Laffan. This plant has a capacity of 1.1 MW of solar power. Qatar pursues a vigorous programme of "Qatarisation", under which all joint venture industries and government departments strive to move Qatari nationals into positions of greater authority. Growing numbers of foreign-educated Qataris, including many educated in the US, are returning home to assume key positions formerly occupied by expatriates. To control the influx of expatriate workers, Qatar has tightened the administration of its foreign manpower programmes over the past several years. Security is the principal basis for Qatar's strict entry and immigration rules and regulations. Qatar is one of the fastest growing countries in the field of tourism. According to the World Tourism rankings, more than 2.3 million international tourists visited in 2017. Qatar has become one of the most open countries in the Middle East due to its recent visa facilitation improvements, including allowing nationals of 88 countries to enter visa-free and free-of charge. Qatar was recently put in the top eight in market climate in the Middle East by the Travel & Tourism Competitiveness Survey 2019 of the World Economic Forum. Doha is one of the fastest-growing hotel and hospitality markets in the world. The $220 billion spent on infrastructure since the successful World Cup bid of 2010 has helped boost the industry. Hotels have also been helped by the country’s geographic location. The tourism sector continues to witness a strong recovery with more than 729,000 international visitors in the first half of 2022, marking a 19% increase compared to the full year of 2021, and the aim is to raise tourism to 12% of GDP by 2030. The nation is also on course to experience a major jump in athletic and corporate tourism with hosting world-class tournaments such as the 2030 Asian Games and the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Qatar National Airlines, as well as Hamad International Airport, provide travelers with one of the best transportation services in the world, and this has increased tourism in Qatar. Gulf News, a research center in Qatar, by examining the statistics of recent years and upcoming events, has predicted that this country will earn 11 billion and 900 million dollars from attracting foreign travelers by 2020, This is achieved with the reason for this upward trend is the increase in hospitality and attention to the country's culture in Qatar. In 2008 the public works authority (Ashghal), one of the bodies that oversees infrastructure development, underwent a major reorganisation in order to streamline and modernise the authority in preparation for major project expansions across all segments in the near future. Ashghal works in tandem with the Urban Planning and Development Authority, the body that designed the transportation master plan, instituted in March 2006 and running to 2025.[citation needed] The road network is a major focus of the plan. Project highlights in this segment include the multibillion-dollar Doha Expressway and the Qatar Bahrain Causeway. Mass-transit options, such as a Doha metro, light-rail system and more extensive bus networks are also under development to ease road congestion. In addition, the railway system is being significantly expanded and could eventually form an integral part of a GCC-wide network linking all the Arab states of the Persian Gulf. Hamad International Airport is located in Doha. In 2014, it replaced the former Doha International Airport as Qatar's principal airport. In 2016, the airport was named the 50th busiest airport in the world by passenger traffic, serving 37,283,987 passengers, a 20.2% increase from 2015.[citation needed] Qatar Airways is one of the largest airlines in the world that serves in six continents connecting more than 160 destinations every day. It has won Airline of the Year in 2011, 2012, 2015, 2017 and 2019 and employs more than 46,000 people. Qatar is increasingly activating its logistics and ports in order to participate in trade between Europe and China or Africa.[citation needed] For this purpose, ports such as Hamad Port are rapidly expanded and investments are made in their technology.[citation needed] The country is historically and currently part of the Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast to the south via the southern tip of India to Mombasa, from there through the Red Sea via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, there to the Upper Adriatic region to the northern Italian hub of Trieste with its rail connections to Central Europe, Eastern Europe and the North Sea. Hamad Port is Qatar's main seaport, located south of Doha in the Umm Al Houl area. Construction of the port began in 2010; it became operational in December 2016. Capable of handling up to 7.8 million tonnes of products annually, the bulk of trade which passes through the port consists of food and building materials. On the northern coast, Ras Laffan Port serves as the most extensive liquid natural gas export facility in the world. The number of people in Qatar fluctuates considerably depending on the season, since the country relies heavily on migrant labour. In early 2017, the population was 2.6 million, with foreigners making up a vast majority. Only 313,000 (12%) were Qatari citizens, while the remaining 2.3 million were expatriates. The combined number of South Asians (from the countries of the Indian subcontinent including Sri Lanka) represent over 1.5 million people (60%). Among these, Indians are the largest community, numbering 650,000 in 2017, followed by 350,000 Nepalese, 280,000 Bangladeshis, 145,000 Sri Lankans, and 125,000 Pakistanis. The contingent of expatriates which are not of South Asian origin represent around 28% of Qatar's population, of which the largest group is 260,000 Filipinos and 200,000 Egyptians, plus many other nationalities (including nationals of other Arab countries, Europeans, etc.). Qatar's first demographic records date back to 1892, conducted by Ottoman governors in the region. Based on this census, which includes only the residents in cities, the population in 1892 was 9,830. At the time of the first census, held in 1970, the population was 111,133. The 2010 census recorded the population at 1,699,435. In January 2013, the Qatar Statistics Authority estimated the population at 1,903,447, of which 1,405,164 were males and 498,283 females. The influx of male labourers has skewed the gender balance, and women are now just one-quarter of the population. Islam is the predominant religion and is the state religion although not the only religion practiced in the country, and the constitution guarantees freedom to practise any faith within "moral" bounds. Most citizens belong to the Salafi Muslim movement of Wahhabism, and 5–15% of Muslims follow Shia Islam with other Islamic sects being very small in number. In 2010, Qatar's population was 67.7% Muslim, 13.8% Christian, 13.8% Hindu, and 3.1% Buddhist; other religions and religiously unaffiliated people accounted for the remaining 1.6%. Sharia is the main source of legislation according to the constitution. Qatar's interpretation of Sharia is said to be not as "strict" as neighboring Saudi Arabia but not as "liberal" as Dubai. The vision of the Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs is "to build a contemporary Islamic society along with fostering the Sharee’ah and cultural heritage". The non-Muslim population is composed almost entirely of foreigners. Since 2008, Christians have been allowed to build churches on ground donated by the government, Active churches include the Mar Thoma Church, Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, the Roman Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Rosary and the Anglican Church of the Epiphany. There are also two Mormon wards and a Bahá'í community. Arabic is the official language, with Qatari Arabic the local dialect. Qatari Sign Language is the language of the deaf community. English is commonly used as a second language, and a rising lingua franca, especially in commerce, to the extent that steps are being taken to try to preserve Arabic from English's encroachment. English is particularly useful for communication with Qatar's large expatriate community. In the medical community, and in situations such as the training of nurses to work in Qatar, English acts as a lingua franca. Reflecting the multicultural make-up of the country, many other languages are also spoken, including Persian, Baluchi, Brahui, Hindi, Malayalam, Urdu, Pashto, Kannada, Tamil, Telugu, Nepali, Sinhalese, Bengali, Tagalog, Tulu and Indonesian. Healthcare standards are generally high. Qatari citizens are covered by a national health-insurance plan, while expatriates must either receive health insurance from their employers, or in the case of the self-employed, purchase insurance. Government healthcare spending is among the highest in the Middle East, with $4.7 billion being invested in healthcare in 2014. This was a $2.1 billion increase from 2010. The premier healthcare provider is Hamad Medical Corporation, established by the government as a non-profit healthcare provider, which runs a network of hospitals, ambulance services, and a home healthcare service, all of which are accredited by the Joint Commission.[citation needed] In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 2.2% of the country's GDP; the highest in the Middle East. In 2006, there were 23.12 physicians and 61.81 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 82.08 years in 2014, or 83.27 years for males and 77.95 years for females, rendering it the highest life expectancy in the Middle East. Qatar has a low infant mortality rate of 7 in 100,000. In 2006, there were 25 beds per 10,000 people, and 27.6 doctors and 73.8 nurses per 10,000 people. In 2011, the number of beds decreased to 12 per 10,000 people, whereas the number of doctors increased to 28 per 10,000 people. While the country has one of the lowest proportions of hospital beds in the region, the availability of physicians is the highest in the GCC. The culture of Qatar is similar to other countries in Eastern Arabia, being significantly influenced by Islam. Qatar National Day, hosted annually on 18 December, has had an important role in developing a sense of national identity. It is observed in remembrance of Jassim bin Mohammed Al Thani's succession to the throne and his subsequent unification of the country's various tribes. The Doha Cultural Festival is one of the cultural activities carried out annually by the Qatari Ministry of Culture, Arts and Heritage, which began in 2002 with the aim of spreading Qatari culture inside and outside Qatar.[citation needed] Qatari officials, especially the Al Thani family and the sister of the Emir of Qatar, Al-Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, pay special attention to art. Al-Mayassa leads the Qatar Museums Authority. The Museum of Islamic Art, opened in 2008, is regarded as one of the best museums in the region. This and several other Qatari museums, like the Arab Museum of Modern Art, fall under the Qatar Museums Authority, which also sponsors artistic events abroad, such as major exhibitions by Takahashi Murakami in Versailles (2010) and Damien Hirst in London (2012). Qatar is the world's biggest buyer in the art market by value. The Qatari cultural sector is being developed to enable the country to reach world recognition to contribute to the development of a country that comes mainly from its resources from the gas industry. Qatari literature traces its origins back to the 19th century. Originally, written poetry was the most common form of expression. Abdul Jalil Al-Tabatabai and Mohammed bin Abdullah bin Uthaymeen, two poets dating back to the early 19th century, formed the corpus of Qatar's earliest written poetry. Poetry later fell out of favor after Qatar began reaping the profits from oil exports in the mid-20th century and many Qataris abandoned their Bedouin traditions in favor of more urban lifestyles. Due to the increasing number of Qataris who began receiving formal education during the 1950s and other significant societal changes, 1970 witnessed the introduction of the first short story anthology, and in 1993 the first locally authored novels were published. Poetry, particularly the predominant nabati form, retained some importance but would soon be overshadowed by other literary types. Unlike most other forms of art in Qatari society, females have been involved in the modern literature movement on a similar magnitude to males. Qatar's media was classified as "not free" in the 2014 Freedom of the Press report by Freedom House. TV broadcasting was started in 1970. Al Jazeera is a main television network headquartered in Doha. Al Jazeera initially launched in 1996 as an Arabic news and current affairs satellite TV channel of the same name and has since expanded into a global network of several speciality TV channels. It has been reported that journalists practice self-censorship, particularly in regards to the government and ruling family of Qatar. Criticism of the government, emir, and ruling family in the media is illegal. According to article 46 of the press law "The Emir of the state of Qatar shall not be criticised and no statement can be attributed to him unless under a written permission from the manager of his office." Journalists are also subject to prosecution for insulting Islam. In 2014, a Cybercrime Prevention Law was passed. The law is said to restrict press freedom and carries prison sentences and fines for broad reasons such as jeopardising local peace or publishing false news. The Gulf Center for Human Rights has stated that the law is a threat to freedom of speech and has called for certain articles of the law to be revoked. Press media has undergone expansion in recent years. There are currently seven newspapers in circulation in Qatar, with four being published in Arabic and three being published in English. There are also newspapers from India, Nepal and Sri Lanka with editions printed from Qatar.[citation needed] In regards to telecommunication infrastructure, Qatar is the highest-ranked Middle Eastern country in the World Economic Forum's Network Readiness Index (NRI)—an indicator for determining the development level of a country's information and communication technologies. Qatar ranked number 23 overall in the 2014 NRI ranking, unchanged from 2013. The music of Qatar is based on Bedouin poetry, song and dance. Traditional dances in Doha are performed on Friday afternoons; one such dance is the Ardah, a stylised martial dance performed by two rows of dancers who are accompanied by an array of percussion instruments, including al-ras (a large drum whose leather is heated by an open fire), tambourines and cymbals with small drums. Other percussion instruments used in folk music include galahs (a tall clay jar) and tin drinking cups known as tus or tasat, usually used in conjunction with a tabl, a longitudinal drum beaten with a stick. String instruments, such as the oud and rebaba, are also commonly used. Association football is the most popular sport in Qatar, both in terms of players and spectators. Shortly after the Qatar Football Association became affiliated with FIFA in 1970, one of the country's earliest international accolades came in 1981 when the Qatar national under-20 team's emerged as runners-up to West Germany in that year's edition of the FIFA World Youth Championship after being defeated 4–0 in the final. At the senior level, Qatar has played host to three editions of the AFC Asian Cup; the first being the ninth edition in 1988, the second being the fifteenth edition held in 2011, and the third being the eighteenth edition held in 2023. For the first time in the country's history, the Qatar national football team won the AFC Asian Cup in the 2019 edition hosted in the United Arab Emirates, beating Japan 3–1 in the final. They won all seven of their matches, conceding only a single goal throughout the tournament. As hosts and defending champions in the following 2023 edition, Qatar successfully retained their title, defeating Jordan in the final. On 2 December 2010, Qatar won their bid to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup, despite never previously qualifying for the FIFA World Cup Finals. Local organisers built seven new stadiums and expanded one existing stadium for this event. Qatar's winning bid for the 2022 World Cup was greeted enthusiastically in the Persian Gulf region as it was the first time a country in the Middle East had been selected to host the tournament. At the same time, the bid was embroiled in much controversy, including allegations of bribery and interference in the investigation of the alleged bribery. European football associations also objected to the 2022 World Cup being held in Qatar for a variety of reasons, from the impact of warm temperatures on players' fitness, to the disruption it might cause in European domestic league calendars should the event be rescheduled to take place during winter. In May 2014, Qatari football official Mohammed bin Hammam was accused of making payments totalling £3 million to officials in return for their support for the Qatar bid. A FIFA inquiry into the bidding process in November 2014 cleared Qatar of any wrongdoing. The Guardian, a British national daily newspaper, produced a short documentary named "Abuse and exploitation of migrant workers preparing emirate for 2022". A 2014 investigation by The Guardian reported that migrant workers who had been constructing luxurious offices for the organisers of the 2022 World Cup had not been paid in over a year, and were now "working illegally from cockroach-infested lodgings." For 2014, Nepalese migrants involved in constructing infrastructure for the 2022 World Cup died at a rate of one every two days. The Qatar 2022 organising committee responded to various allegations by claiming that hosting the World Cup in Qatar would act as a "catalyst for change" in the region. According to a February 2021 article in The Guardian, some 6,500 migrant construction workers had died. However, the World Cup in Qatar was the most expensive in the competition's history and had many modern technologies, with many expressing their satisfaction with the country's handling of the tournament.[failed verification] Qatar was estimated to host a football fanbase of 1.6 million for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. However, the construction work in country was expected to only take the available 37,000 hotel rooms to 70,000 by the end of 2021. In December 2019, the Qatari World Cup officials approached the organizers of the Glastonbury Festival in England and the Coachella Festival in the United States, to plan huge desert campsites for thousands of football fans. The World Cup campsites on the outskirts were reported to have licensed bars, restaurants, entertainment and washing facilities. Moreover, two cruise ships were also reserved as temporary floating accommodations for nearly 40,000 people during the tournament. Though football is the most popular sport, other team sports have experienced considerable success at senior level. In 2015, the national handball team emerged as runners-up to France in the World Men's Handball Championship as hosts, however the tournament was marred by numerous controversies regarding the host nation and its team. Further, in 2014, Qatar won the world championship in men's 3x3 basketball. Cricket is popular amongst the South Asian diaspora in Qatar. Casual street cricket is the most popular format of the game, but the Qatar Cricket Association has been a member of the International Cricket Council (ICC) since 1999 and the men's and women's national teams both play regularly in ICC competitions. The primary cricket ground in Qatar is the West End Park International Cricket Stadium. Basketball is a developed sport amongst Asian people in Qatar. Qatar hosted the 2005 FIBA Asia Championship, 2013 FIBA Asia 3x3 Championship, 2014 FIBA Asia Under-18 Championship and 2022 FIBA Under-16 Asian Championship.[citation needed] Qatar will host the 2027 FIBA Basketball World Cup making this become the first Arab country to host the FIBA Basketball World Cup. Khalifa International Tennis and Squash Complex in Doha hosted the WTA Tour Championships in women's tennis between 2008 and 2010. Doha holds the WTA Premier tournament Qatar Ladies Open annually. Since 2002, Qatar has hosted the annual Tour of Qatar, a cycling race in six stages. Every February, riders are racing on the roads across Qatar's flat land for six days. Each stage covers a distance of more than 100 km, though the time trial usually is a shorter distance. Tour of Qatar is organised by the Qatar Cycling Federation for professional riders in the category of Elite Men. The Qatar Army Skydiving Team has several different skydiving disciplines placing among the top nations in the world. The Qatar National Parachute team performs annually during Qatar's National Day and at other large events, such as the 2015 World Handball Championship. Doha four times was the host of the official FIVB Volleyball Men's Club World Championship and three times host FIVB Volleyball Women's Club World Championship. Doha also hosted the Asian Volleyball Championship once. Qatar hired the RAND Corporation to reform its K–12 education system. Through Qatar Foundation, the country has built Education City, a campus that hosts local branches of the Weill Cornell Medical College, Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, Georgetown University School of Foreign Service, Northwestern's Medill School of Journalism, Texas A&M's School of Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University School of the Arts and other Western institutions. The illiteracy rate was 3.1% for males and 4.2% for females in 2012, the lowest in the Arab-speaking world and 86th in the world. Citizens are required to attend government-provided education from kindergarten through high school. Qatar University, founded in 1973, is the country's oldest and largest institution of higher education. In November 2002, Emir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani created The Supreme Education Council. The Council directs and controls education for all ages from the pre-school level through the university level, including the "Education for a New Era" initiative which was established to try to position Qatar as a leader in education reform. According to the Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, the top-ranking universities in the country are Qatar University (1,881st worldwide), Texas A&M University at Qatar (3,905th) and Weill Cornell Medical College in Qatar (6,855th). In 2009, Qatar established the Qatar Science & Technology Park in Education City to link those universities with industry. Education City is also home to a fully accredited international Baccalaureate school, Qatar Academy. In addition, two Canadian institutions, the College of the North Atlantic (headquarters in Newfoundland and Labrador) and the University of Calgary, have inaugurated campuses in Doha. Other for-profit universities have also established campuses in the city. In 2012, Qatar was ranked third from the bottom of the 65 OECD countries participating in the PISA test of mathematics, reading and skills for 15- and 16-year-olds, despite having the highest per capita income in the world. Qatar was ranked 50th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023, up from 65th in 2019. As part of its national development strategy, Qatar has outlined a 10-year strategic plan to improve the level of education. The government has launched educational outreach programs, such as Al-Bairaq. Al-Bairaq was launched in 2010 aims to provide high school students with an opportunity to experience a research environment in the Center for Advanced Materials in Qatar University. The program encompasses the STEM fields and languages. Launched in 2006 as part of an initiative of the Qatar Foundation, the Qatar National Research Fund was created with the intent of securing public funds for scientific research. The fund functions as a means to diversify its economy from a primarily oil and gas-based one to a knowledge-based economy. The Qatar Science & Technology Park (QSTP) was established by Qatar Foundation in March 2009 as an attempt to assist the country's transition towards a knowledge economy. With a seed capital of $800 million and initially hosting 21 organizations, the QSTP became Qatar's first free-trade zone. List of Qatar-related topics Outline of Qatar The possible English pronunciations include /ˈkʌtɑːr, ˈkætɑːr, ˈkɑːtɑːr, -ər, kəˈtɑːr, kæˈtɑːr, kɑːˈtɑːr/; respectively: KUT-ar, KAT-, KAHT-, -⁠ər, kə-TAR, kat-AR, kah-TAR. (Arabic: دولة قطر, romanized: Dawlat Qaṭar "The Constitution" (PDF). Government Communications Office. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020. "Population of Qatar by nationality". Priya Dsouza. 19 August 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Qatar". CIA World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 8 February 2012. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "Population By Religion, Gender And Municipality March 2020". Qatar Statistics Authority. "The objections to Qatar hosting the World Cup reek of Eurocentrism". NBC News. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. In condemning Qatar, we should remember that the population of this authoritarian monarchy "Political Stability: the Mysterious Case of Qatar". Middle East Political and Economic Institute. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. ; the Qatari state remains fundamentally autocratic "Population structure". Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. 31 January 2020. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2017. "Populations". Qsa.gov.qa. Archived from the original on 9 July 2010. Retrieved 2 October 2010. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Qatar)". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "GINI index". World Bank. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Human Development Report 2023/24" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 13 March 2024. p. 289. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "List of left- & right-driving countries – World Standards". Archived from the original on 29 December 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Qatar". Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d., and "Qatar". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. n.d. Jones, Daniel (2011). Roach, Peter; Setter, Jane; Esling, John (eds.). "Qatar". Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0. "Definition of Qatar | Dictionary.com". www.dictionary.com. Archived from the original on 29 November 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. Johnstone, T. M. (2008). "Encyclopaedia of Islam". Ķaṭar. Brill Online. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013.(subscription required) Fromherz, Allen James (2011). Qatar: A Modern History (1st ed.). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. p. 58. ISBN 978-1626162037. "Qatar: Freedom in the World 2020 Country Report". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2021. "Population of Qatar by nationality – 2017 report". Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2017. "The Constitution". Archived from the original on 24 October 2004. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "GDP per capita, PPP (current international $) | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$) | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. Nations, United (8 September 2022). "Human Development Report 2021-22". Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2022. "Indices & Data | Human Development Reports". United Nations Development Programme. 14 March 2013. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013. "2022 World LNG Report Press Release" (PDF). International Gas Union (IGU). 6 July 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Where in the world do people emit the most CO2?". Our World in Data. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2021. Cooper, Andrew F. "Middle Powers: Squeezed out or Adaptive?". Public Diplomacy Magazine. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Kamrava, Mehran. "Mediation and Qatari Foreign Policy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Dagher, Sam (17 October 2011). "Tiny Kingdom's Huge Role in Libya Draws Concern". Online.wsj.com. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Qatar: Rise of an Underdog". Politicsandpolicy.org. Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Black, Ian (26 October 2011). "Qatar admits sending hundreds of troops to support Libya rebels". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Casey, Paula; Vine, Peter (1992). The heritage of Qatar. Immel Publishing. p. 17. ISBN 9780907151500. "History of Qatar". Qatar Statistics Authority. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 11 May 2015. "Maps". Qatar National Library. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 11 May 2015. "About us". Katara. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 11 May 2015. Hazlitt, William (1851). The Classical Gazetteer: A Dictionary of Ancient Geography, Sacred and Profane. Whittaker & co. Rahman, Habibur (2010). The Emergence of Qatar: The Turbulent Years 1627–1916. London: Routledge. p. 1. ISBN 9780710312136. Lyall, Sarah (21 November 2022). "The 2022 World Cup is being hosted in Qatar, which, as everyone knows, is pronounced..." The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022. Toth, Anthony. "Qatar: Historical Background." A Country Study: Qatar Archived 9 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine (Helen Chapin Metz, editor). Library of Congress Federal Research Division (January 1993). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Khalifa, Haya; Rice, Michael (1986). Bahrain Through the Ages: The Archaeology. Routledge. pp. 79, 215. ISBN 978-0710301123. "History of Qatar" (PDF). www.qatarembassy.or.th. Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Qatar. London: Stacey International, 2000. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2015. Rice, Michael (1994). Archaeology of the Persian Gulf. Routledge. pp. 206, 232–233. ISBN 978-0415032681. Magee, Peter (2014). The Archaeology of Prehistoric Arabia. Cambridge Press. pp. 50, 178. ISBN 9780521862318. Sterman, Baruch (2012). Rarest Blue: The Remarkable Story Of An Ancient Color Lost To History And Rediscovered. Lyons Press. pp. 21–22. ISBN 978-0762782222. Cadène, Philippe (2013). Atlas of the Gulf States. BRILL. p. 10. ISBN 978-9004245600. Gillman, Ian; Klimkeit, Hans-Joachim (1999). Christians in Asia Before 1500. University of Michigan Press. pp. 87, 121. ISBN 978-0472110407. Archived from the original on 1 August 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Commins, David (2012). The Gulf States: A Modern History. I. B. Tauris. p. 16. ISBN 978-1848852785. Habibur Rahman, p. 33 "AUB academics awarded $850,000 grant for project on the Syriac writers of Qatar in the 7th century AD" (PDF). American University of Beirut. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. Kozah, Mario; Abu-Husayn, Abdulrahim; Al-Murikhi, Saif Shaheen (2014). The Syriac Writers of Qatar in the Seventh Century. Gorgias Press LLC. p. 24. ISBN 978-1463203559. "Bahrain". maritimeheritage.org. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 17 January 2015.[better source needed] Fromherz, Allen (13 April 2012). Qatar: A Modern History. Georgetown University Press. pp. 44, 60, 98. ISBN 978-1-58901-910-2. Rahman, Habibur (2006). The Emergence Of Qatar. Routledge. p. 34. ISBN 978-0710312136. A political chronology of the Middle East. Routledge / Europa Publications. 2001. p. 192. ISBN 978-1857431155. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Page, Kogan (2004). Middle East Review 2003–04: The Economic and Business Report. Kogan Page Ltd. p. 169. ISBN 978-0749440664. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Qatar, 2012 (The Report: Qatar). Oxford Business Group. 2012. p. 233. ISBN 978-1907065682. Casey, Paula; Vine, Peter (1992). The heritage of Qatar. Immel Publishing. pp. 184–185. ISBN 9780907151500. Russell, Malcolm (2014). The Middle East and South Asia 2014. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 151. ISBN 978-1475812350. "History". qatarembassy.net. Archived from the original on 17 February 2015. Retrieved 18 January 2015. Larsen, Curtis (1984). Life and Land Use on the Bahrain Islands: The Geoarchaeology of an Ancient Society (Prehistoric Archeology and Ecology series). University of Chicago Press. p. 54. ISBN 978-0226469065. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Althani, Mohamed (2013). Jassim the Leader: Founder of Qatar. Profile Books. p. 16. ISBN 978-1781250709. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Gillespie, Carol Ann (2002). Bahrain (Modern World Nations). Chelsea House Publications. p. 31. ISBN 978-0791067796. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Anscombe, Frederick (1997). The Ottoman Gulf: The Creation of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar. Columbia University Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0231108393. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2015. "Tarot Island • MyTrip Saudi Tour Operator - رحلتي السياحية". MyTrip Saudi Tour Operator - رحلتي السياحية. Archived from the original on 11 January 2024. Retrieved 11 January 2024. Petersen, Andrew; Al-Naimi, Faisal Abdullah; Grey, Tony; Edwards, Ifan; Hill, Austin; Russ, Hannah; Williams, Dee (2016). "Ruwayda: an historic urban settlement in north Qatar". Post-Medieval Archaeology. 50 (2): 321. doi:10.1080/00794236.2016.1229093. ISSN 0079-4236. S2CID 164311802. "Lázaro Luís", Wikipédia, a enciclopédia livre (in Portuguese), 9 April 2018, archived from the original on 24 March 2024, retrieved 11 January 2024 Potter, Lawrence (2010). The Persian Gulf in History. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 262. ISBN 978-0230612822. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Heard-Bey, Frauke (2008). From Tribe to State. The Transformation of Political Structure in Five States of the GCC. EDUCatt - Ente per il diritto allo studio universitario dell'Università Cattolica. p. 39. ISBN 978-88-8311-602-5. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2015. 'Gazetteer of the Persian Gulf. Vol I. Historical. Part IA & IB. J G Lorimer. 1915' [1000] (1155/1782), p. 1001 Crystal, Jill (1995). Oil and Politics in the Gulf: Rulers and Merchants in Kuwait and Qatar. Cambridge University Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0521466356. Casey, Michael S. (2007). The History of Kuwait (The Greenwood Histories of the Modern Nations). Greenwood. pp. 37–38. ISBN 978-0313340734. "'Gazetteer of the Persian Gulf. Vol I. Historical. Part IA & IB. J G Lorimer. 1915' [843] (998/1782)". qdl.qa. Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2014. "Qatar". Teachmideast.org. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2013. Kursun, Zekeriya (2004). Katar'da Osmanlilar 1871–1916. Turk Tarih Kurumu. Zahlan, Rosemarie Said (2016). The Creation of Qatar. Routledge. p. 42. Wilkinson, John Craven (1991). Arabia's Frontiers: The Story of Britain's Boundary Drawing in the Desert. IB Tauris. pp. 46–47. Rogan, Eugene; Murphey, Rhoads; Masalha, Nur; Durac, Vincent; Hinnebusch, Raymond (November 1999). "Review of The Ottoman Gulf: The Creation of Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and Qatar by Frederick F. Anscombe; The Blood-Red Arab Flag: An Investigation into Qasimi Piracy, 1797–1820 by Charles E. Davies; The Politics of Regional Trade in Iraq, Arabia and the Gulf, 1745–1900 by Hala Fattah". British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies. 26 (2): 339–342. doi:10.1080/13530199908705688. JSTOR 195948. Habibur Rahman, pgs.143–144 Habibur Rahman, pgs.150–151 Habibur Rahman, p. 152 "Battle of Al Wajbah". Qatar Visitor. 2 June 2007. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Amiri Diwan – Shaikh Abdullah Bin Jassim Al Thani". Diwan.gov.qa. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Zahlan, Rosemarie Said (1979). The Creation of Qatar. Abingdon: Croom Helm. p. 74. ISBN 978-1-138-18167-0. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 27 May 2019. Rahman, Habibur (2005). The Emergence of Qatar: The Turbulent Years 1627–1916. Routledge. p. 235. Zahlan, Rosemarie Said (1979). The Creation of Qatar. Abingdon: Croom Helm. pp. 73–85. ISBN 978-1-138-18167-0. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 27 May 2019. Morton, Michael Quentin (2017). Empires and Anarchies: A History of Oil in the Middle East. London: Reaktion Books. pp. 139–140. ISBN 978-1-78023-810-4. Retrieved 27 May 2019. Wilton, John, unpublished memoir, ‘Qatar and Sharjah, 1949–1952’, Special Collections, University of Exeter Library, Exeter. A Treaty of Friendship and an Exchange of Notes, each entered into on 3 September 1971 Exchange of Notes constituting an Agreement between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Kuwait regarding relations between the United ... Exchange of Notes concerning the Termination of Special Treaty Relations ... Northern Ireland and the State of Qatar, 3 September 1971 "New Qatari emir Sheikh Tamim 'set to announce reshuffle'". BBC News. 26 June 2013. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2013. nouvelobs.com: "Qatar : "S'ils pouvaient, ils achèteraient la Tour Eiffel" Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, 7 April 2013 Qatar National Development Strategy 2011–2016 (PDF) (Report). Qatar General Secretariat for Development Planning. March 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "Real estate in Qatar – A growth story: The economic background". Euromoney. 5 August 2008. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Qatar's delicate balancing act". BBC News. 15 January 2013. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Qatar (01/10)". State.gov. Archived from the original on 20 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2010. "Last respects paid to teacher killed by bomb". Dorset Echo. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. Coman, Julian (21 March 2005). "Egyptian Suicide Bomber Blamed for Attack in Qatar". The Independent. Analytica, Oxford (25 March 2005). "The Advent of Terrorism in Qatar". Forbes. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2017. Reilly, Damian (9 December 2010). "Doha to overtake Dubai?". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. Nordland, Rod (24 June 2013). "In Surprise, Emir of Qatar Plans to Abdicate, Handing Power to Son". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "The World factbook". CIA.Gov. 20 June 2014. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2014. Rhys, Paul. "Blatter reaches out to Arabia". Aljazeera. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2013. BBC News, How democratic is the Middle East? Archived 11 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine, 9 September 2005. United States Department of State Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2011: Qatar Archived 26 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine, 2011. Gardener, David. "Qatar shows how to manage a modern monarchy". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2016. "Embassy of Canada to the State of Qatar". Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "BBC NEWS – Middle East – How democratic is the Middle East?". news.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Documents" (PDF). www.state.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2019. Lambert, Jennifer (2011). "Political Reform in Qatar: Participation, Legitimacy and Security". Middle East Policy. 19 (1). Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 9 January 2012. "Qatar to hold advisory council elections in 2013". Reuters (UK edition). Reuters. 1 November 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "IFES Election Guide – Elections: Qatar Referendum Apr 29 2003". www.electionguide.org. Archived from the original on 13 May 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Qatar 2003". www.princeton.edu. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "The objections to Qatar hosting the World Cup reek of Eurocentrism". nbc. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. In condemning Qatar, we should remember that the population of this authoritarian monarchy V-Dem Institute (2023). "The V-Dem Dataset". Archived from the original on 8 December 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "The People Want Reform… In Qatar, Too". Jadaliyya. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2015. "Qatari emir Sheikh Hamad hands power to son Tamim". BBC. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. "Council of Ministers". Embassy of the State of Qatar in Washington DC. Archived from the original on 12 June 2010. Retrieved 4 March 2012. Thafer, Dania (14 October 2021). "Qatar's first elected parliament may have more power than other Persian Gulf legislatures. Here's why". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2022. "Qatari elections: A PR stunt or a step toward democracy? | DW | 24 August 2021". DW.COM. Archived from the original on 24 August 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "Legislative elections in Qatar postponed until at least 2019". Doha News. 17 June 2016. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2017. "The Permanent Constitution of the State of Qatar". Government of Qatar. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "Constitution of Qatar". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 23 September 2014. According to Article 1: Qatar is an independent Arab country. Islam is its religion and Sharia law is the main source of its legislation. "The World Factbook". U.S. Central Intelligence Agency. 27 September 2021. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2021. "Qatar" (PDF). US Department of State. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "Qatar Gender Equality Profile" (PDF). UNICEF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2013. "Qatar". Amnesty International Annual Report 2012. Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 19 March 2014. "Filipino woman gets 100 lashes for giving birth in Qatar". GMA News Online. 30 June 2006. Archived from the original on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "Special report: The punishment was death by stoning. The crime? Having". The Independent. 28 September 2013. Archived from the original on 6 October 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2017. Jenifer Fenton. "Religious law, prison for "blasphemy", severe sexual inequalilty: Qatar's human rights review". Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2014. "United Explanations – What are the worst countries in the world to be gay?". 20 May 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Davies Krish (9 April 2019). "General Laws and Regulations in Qatar". OnlineQatar. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019. Alex Delmar-Morgan (7 January 2012). "Qatar, Unveiling Tensions, Suspends Sale of Alcohol". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 17 January 2012. Jenifer Fenton (16 January 2012). "Qatar's Impromptu Alcohol Ban". The Arabist. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 17 January 2012. "Qatar Distribution Company". Qatar Loving. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2015. "Purchasing Alcohol in Qatar". Qatar Visitor. 2 June 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2011. Walid, Tamara (11 November 2009). "Qatar would 'welcome' Israel in 2022". The National. Archived from the original on 31 May 2013. Retrieved 10 August 2013. "What To Know About Drinking Alcohol at the Qatar World Cup". Time. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Elgot, Jessica (28 May 2014). "'Leggings Are Not Pants' Qatar's New Modesty Campaign Aimed At Westerners'". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. Aningtias Jatmika (29 May 2014). "Qatar Bans Tourists from Wearing Leggings in Public". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2014. Shear, Michael D. (31 January 2022). "Biden Designates Qatar as a Major Non-NATO Ally". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022. "Qatar and France: 50 years of advantageous friendship". Le Monde.fr. 19 November 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022 – via Le Monde. "Qatar, China enjoy strong ties based on respect". Gulf-Times (in Arabic). 11 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 November 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2018. "Qatar and Saudi Arabia sign defense agreement". Tehrantimes.com. 25 February 2010. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 2 October 2010. "How Qatar and Turkey came together". The Economist. 21 January 2021. Archived from the original on 9 September 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2021. Mark Mazzetti; C.J. Chivers; Eric Schmitt (30 June 2013). "Taking Outsize Role in Syria, Qatar Funnels Arms to Rebels". New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2014. Boghardt, Lori Plotkin (6 October 2014). "Qatar Is a U.S. Ally. They Also Knowingly Abet Terrorism. What's Going On?". New Republic. Archived from the original on 14 September 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2014. Two overarching goals have driven Qatari policy. One has been to maximize Qatar's influence on the regional and international stage. This originally reflected the personal ambition of the former ruler and current emir's father, Shaykh Hamad bin Khalifa al Thani, and his foreign minister and eventually prime minister, Shaykh Hamad bin Jassim al Thani. The two men directed foreign policy until the father abdicated in favor of his son, Emir Tamim bin Hamad al Thani, in July 2013. The second objective has been to preserve the security of the ruling family and state. Jay Solomon (10 October 2014). "U.S.-Qatar Alliance Strains Coalition Against Islamic State". The Wall Street Journal. "Qatar's Regional Relations and Foreign Policy After Al Ula". The Arab Gulf States Institute in Washington. 14 April 2021. Archived from the original on 9 September 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2021. Kirkpatrick, David D.; Barnard, Anne (7 June 2017). "Terrorist Attacks Pour Gas on Saudi- Iranian Rivalry and Gulf Tensions". Eurasia Diary. Archived from the original on 27 July 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "Qatar Opens Its Doors to All, to the Dismay of Some". The New York Times. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 9 September 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2021. "Qatar Timeline". BBC News. 14 June 2012. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2013. Roula Khalaf & Abigail Fielding Smith (16 May 2013). "Qatar bankrolls Syrian revolt with cash and arms". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2013. ""Saudi-led coalition strikes rebels in Yemen, inflaming tensions in region". CNN. 27 March 2015. Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2015. Barakat, Sultan (July 2012). "The Qatari Spring: Qatar's emerging role in peacemaking" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. Myre, Greg (10 October 2006). "Qatar Emerges as a Mediator Between Fatah and Hamas". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Qatar pulls off mediation coup in Lebanon crisis". Reuters. 22 May 2008. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. Reeves, Eric (9 February 2009). "The Qatar "Peace Process": Less Than Meets the Eye". Sudan Tribune. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. Rashid, Ahmed (4 October 2017). "Why closing the Taliban's Qatar office would be an error". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 21 August 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2017. Kalin, Stephen (25 November 2023). "Gaza Diplomacy Cements Qatar's Global Mediator Role". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Six nations cut diplomatic ties to Qatar as Arab rift deepens". Hurriyet Daily News. 5 June 2017. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Saudi Arabia, UAE, Egypt and Bahrain break diplomatic ties with Qatar over 'terrorism'". The Guardian. 5 June 2017. Archived from the original on 5 June 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Qatar appoints first ambassador to Saudi Arabia Since Rift". Al Jazeera. August 2021. Archived from the original on 9 September 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2021. Carla Mascarenhas (26 May 2023). "'Terrified, humiliated': Invasive strip search lawsuit against Qatar Airlines gains momentum". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Victoria Pengilly; Jack Snape; Riley Stuart (26 October 2020). "Qatar airport incident in which women were invasively searched reported to Australian Federal Police". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 6 September 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2023. "Five Americans head home in $6bn US-Iran prisoner swap deal". TheGuardian.com. 18 September 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Biden thanks Qatar's emir for mediation in freeing Americans from Iran". Reuters. 3 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. IISS (2023). The Military Balance 2023. International Institute for Strategic Studies. pp. 349–350. "The SIPRI Military Expenditure Database". Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 29 October 2011. Gatopolous, Alex (5 January 2021). "How the Gulf crisis spurred Qatar to expand its military". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 January 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Ardemagni, Eleonora (25 April 2018). "Building New Gulf States Through Conscription". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Barany, Zoltan (5 June 2023). "National Service in the Gulf: Unsurprising Disparities". Italian Institute for International Political Studies. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Trends in International Arms Transfer, 2014". www.sipri.org. Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 18 March 2015. "TIV of arms imports to the top 50 largest importers, 2016-2016". SIPRI. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2017. "Background Notes: Qatar, November 1997". U.S. State Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Roberts, David (28 September 2011). "Behind Qatar's Intervention In Libya". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 2 February 2016. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Qatar deploys 1,000 ground troops to fight in Yemen". Al Jazeera. 7 September 2015. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Almeida, Alex; Knights, Michael (25 March 2016). "Gulf Coalition Operations in Yemen (Part 1): The Ground War". The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Qatar-Gulf crisis: How it all got started on June 5". Al Jazeera. 26 November 2017. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Qatar". Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Qatar". Human Rights Watch. 13 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. https://web.archive.org/web/20140812174719/http://english.alarabiya.net/articles/2012/05/01/211482.html. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 9 January 2024. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) Gibson, Owen (14 May 2014). "Qatar government admits almost 1,000 fatalities among migrants". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2024. Kelly, Tobias (2009). "The UN Committee against Torture: Human Rights Monitoring and the Legal Recognition of Cruelty". Human Rights Quarterly. 313 (3): 777–800. doi:10.1353/hrq.0.0094. hdl:20.500.11820/3b940ee1-e99f-4ab6-bbb1-37face2fae2c. S2CID 145632406. Archived from the original on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2019. Conclusions and Recommendations: Qatar (Report). UN Committee Against Torture. 25 July 2006. U.N. Doc. CAT/C/QAT/CO/1. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2012. "Certain provisions of the Criminal Code allow punishments such as flogging and stoning to be imposed as criminal sanctions by judicial and administrative authorities. These practices constitute a breach of the obligations imposed by the Convention. The Committee notes with interest that authorities are presently considering amendments to the Prison Act that would abolish flogging." (Par. 12) "LGBT relationships are illegal in 74 countries, research finds". The Independent. 17 May 2016. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 10 September 2017. Bearak, Max; Cameron, Darla (1 December 2021). "Analysis | Here are the 10 countries where homosexuality may be punished by death". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Country Narratives". Human Trafficking Report 2011. Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, United States Department of State. June 2011. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "International unions warn Qatar's work visa system allows employers to use forced labour". ITUC-CSI-IGB. 18 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2013. Wilson, Nigel (21 July 2014). "Qatar Announces New Labour Law Reforms Amid Workers' Rights Outcry". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Walker, Lesley (15 January 2015). "Firms in Qatar who fail to pay workers on time could face suspensions". Doha News. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Peter Kovessy (27 October 2015). "Qatar's Emir signs into law kafala changes (updated)". Doha News. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2015. "Qatar: New reforms Won't Protect Migrant Workers". Human Rights Watch. 8 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2015. Chris Arsenault (28 October 2015). "Qatar complicit in 'modern slavery' despite reforms – unions". Reuters. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 18 December 2015. "Qatar's new minimum wage enters into force". International Labour Organization (ILO). 19 March 2021. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. Miles, Hugh (2005). Al-Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 April 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2017. {{cite book}}: |newspaper= ignored (help) "Qatar Municipalities". Qatar Ministry of Municipality and Environment. Archived from the original on 15 February 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2017. "2015 Population census" (PDF). Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. April 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2017. "Population By Gender, Municipality And Zone, March 2004". General Secretariat for Development Planning. Archived from the original on 12 December 2006. "Population By Gender, Municipality And Zone". Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. March 2004. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "Law No. 12 of 2006 concerning the Cancelled Municipality of Mesaieed". almeezan.qa. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "List of Parties". Convention on Biological Diversity. Archived from the original on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2012. "National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan. State of Qatar" (PDF). Doha, Qatar: Convention on Biological Diversity. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2012. A. H. Moubasher (1993). Soil Fungi in Qatar and Other Arab Countries. Centre for Scientific and Applied Research, University of Qatar. ISBN 978-99921-21-02-3. Aurora M Castilla; et al. (5 June 2014). Ahmad Amer Mohamed Al Hemaidi; et al. (eds.). The Lizards Living in Qatar (PDF) (1st ed.). Doha, Qatar: Green Solutions. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2014. Fossil CO2 and GHG emissions of all world countries : 2019 report. Publications Office of the European Union. 26 September 2019. ISBN 9789276111009. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2020. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) "Doha Sea Temperature". Archived from the original on 8 August 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2021. Rasoul Sorkhabi (2010). "The Qatar Oil Discoveries". GEO ExPro Magazine. Vol. 7, no. 1. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2014. Nordland, Rod (25 June 2013). "New Hope for Democracy in a Dynastic Land". NYTimes.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "وزير التجارة و الصناعة". مكتب الاتصال الحكومي (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects (PPP valuation of country GDP)". IMF. October 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. Bill Crane (20 April 2015). Gravediggers of the Gulf Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Jacobin. Retrieved 20 April 2015. "Qatar: Migrant Construction Workers Face Abuse". Human Rights Watch. 12 June 2012. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 4 December 2016. "Qatar tourist guide". Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "The Strange Power of Qatar by Hugh Eakin". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "Doing Business in Qatar: 2012 Country Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies" (PDF). US & Foreign Commercial Service And US Department of State. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 7 January 2013. "OPEC Member Countries". Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. Archived from the original on 8 February 2019. Retrieved 20 January 2019. Kortekaas, Vanessa (28 October 2013). "New Qatar emir shakes up sovereign wealth fund". Financial Times. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "The World's Richest Countries". Forbes. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2017. "Qatar Holding LLC Among Investors in BlackBerrys $1 Billion Convertible Debt". Berryreview.com. 6 November 2013. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Hall, Camilla (30 October 2013). "Qatar fund quietly builds $1bn Bank of America stake". Financial Times. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Hall, Camilla (4 July 2013). "Qatar: what's next for the world's most aggressive deal hunter?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 19 June 2016. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Information About Education, Economy, Health, IT and Tourism in Qatar". Portal.www.gov.qa. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020. "Taxes on junk food, luxury items to be rolled out in Qatar soon". 16 February 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "layoffs Archives – Doha News". Doha News. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2017. Simon Lincoln Reader (12 November 2013). "Qatar shows how money can solve most problems". Bdlive.co.za. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Qatar National Vision 2030". Ministry of Development Planning and Statistics. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. "Qatar gets serious about solar". Oxford Business Group. 21 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Qatar's Solar Energy Ambitions". Marhaba. 10 November 2016. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Tourism in the MENA Region". World Tourism Organization. 2019. doi:10.18111/9789284420896. ISBN 9789284420896. S2CID 242610756. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 7 March 2019. "Qatar Travel and Tourism". www.trade.gov. 7 September 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Tourism in Qatar". 3 November 2020. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Qatar's $220 billion tourism boost, will it pay off?". euronews. 23 November 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Development and importance of tourism for Qatar". Worlddata.info. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Tourism". www.invest.qa. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Visiting Qatar during the FIFA World Cup? Here are eleven wonderful things to see". gulfnews.com. 4 October 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "About Qatar Airways". www.qatarairways.com. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Qatar Airways Business Class Review: Food, Seats, Fare and More". Gulf Guide. 9 October 2019. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Milaha showcases its digital transformation at Qatar Silk Road Exhibition". Gulf-Times. 5 November 2019. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021. Chaziza, Mordechai (14 February 2020). "China–Qatar Strategic Partnership and the Realization of One Belt, One Road Initiative". China Report. 56 (1): 78–102. doi:10.1177/0009445519895612. S2CID 212800716. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "KUNA : Qatar, Kuwait critical partners in China's Silk Road Initiative - Communications - 03/11/2019". www.kuna.net.kw. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "Qatar's emir officially inaugurates Hamad Port". Al Jazeera. 5 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 May 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2017. John Davison (15 June 2017). "Gulf crisis a "blessing in disguise" for Qatar seaport". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Qatar strengthens port facilities, capacity and transport links". Oxford Business Group. 2016. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2018. "World Population Prospects 2022". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "History of Census in Qatar". Qatar Statistics Authority. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "Population structure". Qatar Statistics Authority. 31 January 2013. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. "Report on International Religious Freedom – Qatar". US Department of State. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014. The official state religion follows the conservative Wahhabi tradition of the Hanbali school of Islam "Qatar". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Tiny Qatar's growing global clout". BBC. 30 April 2011. Archived from the original on 4 May 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Qatar's modern future rubs up against conservative traditions". Reuters. 27 September 2012. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. "Rising power Qatar stirs unease among some Mideast neighbors". Reuters. 12 February 2013. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2013. "2011 Report on International Religious Freedom – Qatar". US Department of State. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2014. "Religious Composition by Country" (PDF). Global Religious Landscape. Pew Forum. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Dr.Adnan (6 October 2016). "Qatar has edge in European hotel acquisitions". www.arabisklondon.com. Archived from the original on 20 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Islam in Qatar explained ahead of 2022 World Cup". The Independent. 11 November 2022. Archived from the original on 19 November 2022. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "The Ministry of Awqaf and Islamic Affairs". Afreno. 25 November 2019. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2020. "Christians to Welcome Qatar's First Christian Church". Christianpost.com. 24 February 2008. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "CIA The World Fact Book". State.gov. 29 June 2006. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 28 March 2010. "Report on Qatar". Cumorah Project. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "The Anglican Centre in Qatar". Epiphany-qatar.org. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. David B. Barrett; George Thomas Kurian; Todd M. Johnson (2001). World Christian encyclopedia: a comparative survey of churches and religions in the modern world. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. p. 617. ISBN 978-0-19-510318-2. "Qatar's claims of diversity are undermined by its treatment of Bahá'ís". The Guardian. 9 November 2022. Archived from the original on 9 November 2022. Retrieved 9 November 2022. Baker, Colin; Jones, Sylvia Prys (1998). Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education. Multilingual Matters. p. 429. ISBN 978-1853593628. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2015. Guttenplan, D. D. (11 June 2012). "Battling to Preserve Arabic From English's Onslaught". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2013. Tweedie, Gregory; Johnson, Robert. "Listening instruction and patient safety: Exploring medical English as a lingua franca (MELF) for nursing education". Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Qatar Facts". First Qatar Orthodontic Conference. Archived from the original on 12 July 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "QATAR: Compulsory health insurance leaves window for treatment abroad". International Medical Travel Journal. 21 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2015. "Qatar's 2015 healthcare expenditure worth $5.2bn". Arabian Business. 13 July 2015. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2015. Shane McGinley (30 July 2012). "Qatar is MidEast's biggest healthcare spender". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2015. Shane McGinley (30 July 2012). "Qatar is MidEast's biggest healthcare spender". Arabian Business. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 3 July 2015. "Health report". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 29 March 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Life expectancy in the Middle East". World Life Expectancy. Archived from the original on 15 April 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Mortality rate, infant (per 1,000 live births)". The World Bank. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Healthcare in Qatar". Allianz. Archived from the original on 18 June 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2015. "Report: Qatar's healthcare sector the fastest growing in the region". Doha News. 25 April 2014. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2015. Kamrava, Mehran (2013). Qatar: Small State, Big Politics. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0801452093. "Qatar National Day 2011". Time Out Doha. 29 November 2011. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Everything you need to know about Qatar National Day 2012". Doha News. 10 December 2012. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Sheikha Al Mayassa bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani". 10 September 2017. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "H.E. Sheikha Al Mayassa Bint Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani – Chairperson, Qatar Museums". www.artfortomorrow.org. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Art in Qatar: A Smithsonian in the sand". The Economist. 1 January 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "QMA Board of Trustees". Qatar Museums Authority. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Qatar revealed as the world's biggest contemporary art buyer". The Art Newspaper. Archived from the original on 7 March 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Bohas, Alexander. "The Political Trump-Cards of Cultural Potency Qatar's Policy of 'Cultural Grandeur'". Chaos International. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2013. Hassan Tawfiq (1 May 2015). الشعر في قطر علي امتداد مائة سنة (in Arabic). Al Jasra Cultural and Social Club. Archived from the original on 27 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018. Muḥammad Muṣṭafá Badawī; Muhammad Mustafa Badawi; M. M. Badawi; María Rosa Menocal; Raymond P. Scheindlin & Michael Sells (1992). Modern Arabic Literature. Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. p. 448. ISBN 9780521331975. "Qatar Freedom of the Press". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2015. Barrie Gunter; Roger Dickinson (6 June 2013). News Media in the Arab World: A Study of 10 Arab and Muslim Countries. A&C Black. p. 33. ISBN 978-1-4411-0239-3. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Blanchard, Christoper (2014). Qatar: Background and U.S. Relations. Congressional Research Service. p. 17. ISBN 9781437987089. Roth, Richard J. (8 May 2013). "Awaiting a Modern Press Law in Qatar". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "New cybercrime law could have serious consequences for press freedom in Qatar". cpj.org. 27 September 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Qatar: New Cyber Crime Law poses real threat to Freedom of Expression". gc4hr.org. 17 September 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2015. The Report: Qatar 2010. Oxford Business Group. 2010. p. 237. ISBN 9781907065446. "NRI Overall Ranking 2014" (PDF). World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 October 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2014. "Arts and Culture". Embassy of Qatar in London. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2015. "Heritage and Culture". Qatar e-Gov. Archived from the original on 4 March 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. "Qatar – a Sporting Nation". Qatar e-Government. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Gibbes, Martin; Schiller, Emma (4 January 2011). "Fox Sports brings you everything you need to know – and a few things you don't – about the Asian Cup". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Qatar stun Japan with 3–1 win to be crowned Asian Cup champions". The Guardian. 1 February 2019. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2019. "Afif stars as Qatar defeat Jordan to retain title". Asian Football Confederation. 10 February 2024. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Paul Radford (2 December 2010). "Russia, Qatar win 2018 and 2022 World Cups". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 December 2010. Retrieved 2 December 2010. "World Cup 2022: A guide to the eight World Cup stadiums in Qatar" (1 April 2022). BBC. Retrieved 3 April 2022. "Stadiums". Supreme Committee for Delivery & Legacy. 6 July 2018. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2018. "Europe's Top Leagues protest against 2022 winter World Cup in Qatar". Qatar Chronicle. 12 August 2013. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Fifa wants Qatar 2022 postponed to Winter". Qatar Chronicle. 20 July 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "BBC Sport – Qatar World Cup: '£3m payments to officials' corruption claim". BBC Sport. Retrieved 1 June 2014. Ronay, Barney (8 October 2022). "Blatter to Beckham: who was in the room when Qatar got the World Cup". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 November 2022. "World Cup inquiry clears Qatar but criticises English FA". BBC. 13 November 2014. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Ronay, Barney (8 October 2022). "Football corruption and the remarkable road to Qatar's World Cup". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Pattisson, Pete (25 September 2013). "Revealed: Qatar's World Cup 'slaves'". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 September 2013. So entrenched is this exploitation that the Nepalese ambassador to Qatar, Maya Kumari Sharma, recently described the emirate as an "open jail". Booth, Robert; Pattisson, Pete (28 July 2014). "Qatar World Cup: migrants wait a year to be paid for building offices". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Owen Gibson and Pete Pattisson (23 December 2014). Death toll among Qatar's 2022 World Cup workers revealed. The Guardian. Retrieved 29 May 2015. Gibson, Owen (14 June 2014). "Qatar hits back at allegations of bribery over 2022 World Cup". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Pattisson, Pete; et al. (23 February 2021). "Revealed: 6,500 migrant workers have died in Qatar since World Cup awarded". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "World Cup 2022: Qatar tournament to feature semi-automated offside technology with ball sensors and cameras". Sky Sports. "Football fans to sleep in Glastonbury-like tented villages at Qatar World Cup". The Florida Post. Retrieved 22 December 2019. "Match report" (PDF). International Handball Federation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "2014 FIBA 3x3 World Championships". International Basketball Federation. Archived from the original on 31 October 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. "'Adrenaline rush': How street cricket has evolved in Qatar". Al Jazeera. 5 August 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Qatar announced as host of the FIBA Basketball World Cup 2027". FIBA. 28 April 2023. Retrieved 28 April 2023. "The homepage of Tour of Qatar". Letour.fr. 1 December 1994. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Gay, Chris. "Skydive Mag – Incredible Demo at Doha". Archived from the original on 7 February 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "QVA – Qatar Volleyball Association". QVA. Retrieved 5 June 2017. Anderson, Nick (6 December 2015). "The Education City contracts: A case study from VCU in Qatar". Washington Post. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "In the occasion of Literacy Arab Day, Qatar has the Lowest Illiteracy Rates in 2012". Qatar Statistics Authority. 8 January 2013. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2013. "Qatar constitution". Archived from the original on 18 September 2013. "Our history". Qatar University. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Hendengren, Adam (25 June 2013). "SPECIAL REPORT: UNIVERSITY STUDIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST". Your Middle East. Archived from the original on 6 May 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2015. "World Data on Education – Qatar" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 21 July 2015. Anderson, Margery K.; Tarfa Nasser Alnaimi; Shaikha Hamad Alhajri (1 November 2010). "National student research fairs as evidence for progress in Qatar's Education for a New Era". Improving Schools. 13 (3): 235–248. doi:10.1177/1365480210390083. S2CID 144828063. "Education for a New Era". Supreme Education Council. Archived from the original on 13 September 2005. Retrieved 25 March 2008. "Qatar". Ranking Web of Universities. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "NHL Stenden University Qatar". Retrieved 22 May 2009. PISA 2012 Results in Focus. OECD. 2014. p. 5. "Key findings – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development". Oecd.org. Retrieved 30 December 2013. WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". www.wipo.int. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Global Innovation Index 2019". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Qatar National Development Strategy 2011~2016" (PDF). Doha, Qatar: Gulf Publishing and Printing Company. March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2015. "Welcome to Al-Bairaq World". Qu.edu.qa. 6 March 2014. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "QF partner Texas A&M at Qatar receives 11 QNRF grants for research to benefit Qatar". Texas A&M University at Qatar. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. Gremm, Julia; Barth, Julia; Fietkiewicz, Kaja J.; Stock, Wolfgang G. (2017). Transitioning Towards a Knowledge Society. Springer International Publishing. p. 49. ISBN 9783319711959. Vineetha Menon (23 February 2009). "Qatar Foundation pumps $800 million into R&D hub". Arabian Business. Retrieved 2 September 2021. Lesley Walker (14 July 2015). "Qatari-Spanish JV win QR1.6bn contract to build new economic zone". Doha News. Retrieved 2 September 2021. Bianco, C. (2020a). The GCC monarchies: Perceptions of the Iranian threat amid shifting geopolitics. The International Spectator, 55(2), 92–107. Bianco, C. (2020b). A Gulf apart: How Europe can gain influence with the Gulf Cooperation Council. European Council on Foreign Relations, February 2020. Available at [1]. Bianco, C. (2021). Can Europe Choreograph a Saudi-Iranian Détente? European University Institute, Robert Schuman Center for Advanced Studies, Middle East Directions. Available at: [2]. Bianco, C., & Stansfield, G. (2018). The intra-GCC crises: Mapping GCC fragmentation after 2011. International Affairs, 94(3), 613–635. Miniaoui, Héla, ed. Economic Development in the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries: From Rentier States to Diversified Economies. Vol. 1. Springer Nature, 2020. Guzansky, Y., & Even, S. (2020). The economic crisis in the Gulf States: A challenge to the “contract” between rulers and ruled. INSS Insight No. 1327, 1 June 2020. Available at [3]. Guzansky, Y., & Marshall, Z. A. (2020). The Abraham accords: Immediate significance and long-term implications. Israel Journal of Foreign Affairs, 1–11. Guzansky, Y., & Segal, E. (2020). All in the family: Leadership changes in the Gulf. INSS Insight No. 1378, 30 August 2020. Available at: [4] Guzansky, Y., & Winter, O. (2020). Apolitical Normalization: A New Approach to Jews in Arab States. INSS Insight No. 1332, 8 June 2020. Available at: [5]. Tausch, Arno; Heshmati, Almas; Karoui, Hichem (2015). The political algebra of global value change. General models and implications for the Muslim world (1st ed.). New York: Nova Science. ISBN 978-1-62948-899-8. Available at: (PDF) The political algebra of global value change: General models and implications for the Muslim world Tausch, Arno (2021). The Future of the Gulf Region: Value Change and Global Cycles. Gulf Studies, Volume 2, edited by Prof. Mizanur Rahman, Qatar University (1st ed.). Cham, Switzerland: Springer. ISBN 978-3-030-78298-6. Woertz, Eckart. "Wither the self-sufficiency illusion? Food security in Arab Gulf States and the impact of COVID-19." Food Security 12.4 (2020): 757–760. Zweiri, Mahjoob, Md Mizanur Rahman, and Arwa Kamal, eds. The 2017 Gulf Crisis: An Interdisciplinary Approach. Vol. 3. Springer Nature, 2020. Qatar at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Amiri Diwan (official government website). Qatar. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Qatar web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Qatar at Curlie Qatar from the BBC News. Wikimedia Atlas of Qatar Key Development Forecasts for Qatar from International Futures. Legal Portal by the Ministry of Justice, including official gazette. 25°30′N 51°15′E﻿ / ﻿25.500°N 51.250°E﻿ / 25.500; 51.250