Kim Jong Un (English: /ˌkɪm dʒɒŋˈʊn, -ˈuːn/; Korean: 김정은; born 8 January 1982, 1983 or 1984) is a North Korean politician who has been supreme leader of North Korea since 2011 and the leader of the Workers' Party of Korea (WPK) since 2012. He is the third son of Kim Jong Il, who was North Korea's second supreme leader from 1994 until his death in 2011, and Ko Yong Hui. He is a grandson of Kim Il Sung, who was the founder and first supreme leader of North Korea from its establishment in 1948 until his death in 1994. From late 2010, Kim was viewed as the successor to the North Korean leadership. Following his father's death in December 2011, state television announced Kim as the "Great Successor". Kim holds the titles of General Secretary of the Workers' Party of Korea and President of the State Affairs. He is also a member of the Presidium of the WPK Politburo, the highest decision-making body in the country. In July 2012, Kim was promoted to the highest rank of Marshal in the Korean People's Army, consolidating his position as Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. North Korean state media often refer to him as "Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un" or "Marshal Kim Jong Un". He has promoted the policy of byungjin, similar to Kim Il Sung's policy from the 1960s, referring to the simultaneous development of both the economy and the country's nuclear weapons program. He has also revived the structures of the WPK, expanding the party's power in expense of the military leadership. Kim rules North Korea as a totalitarian state, and his leadership has followed the same cult of personality as his father and grandfather. In 2014, a United Nations Human Rights Council report suggested that Kim could be put on trial for crimes against humanity. According to reports, he has ordered the purge and execution of several North Korean officials including his uncle, Jang Song-thaek, in 2013. He is also widely believed to have ordered the assassination of his half-brother, Kim Jong Nam, in Malaysia in 2017. He has presided over an expansion of the consumer economy, construction projects and tourist attractions in North Korea. Kim expanded the country's nuclear weapons program, which led to heightened tensions with the United States and South Korea, as well as China. In 2018 and 2019, Kim took part in summits with South Korean president Moon Jae-in and US president Donald Trump, leading to a brief thaw between North Korea and the two countries, though the negotiations ultimately broke down without progress on reunification of Korea or nuclear disarmament. He has claimed success in combating the COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea, as the country did not report any confirmed cases until May 2022, although many experts doubt this claim. North Korean authorities and state-run media have stated that Kim Jong Un was born on 8 January 1982, but South Korean intelligence officials believe that the actual date is a year later, in 1983. The US government lists his birth year as 1984, based on the passport he used while studying in Switzerland. It is thought that Kim's official birth year was changed for symbolic reasons; 1982 marked the seventieth birthday of his grandfather Kim Il Sung, and forty years after the official birth of his father Kim Jong Il. Kim Jong Un is the second of three children of Ko Yong Hui and Kim Jong Il; his elder brother, Kim Jong Chul, was born in 1981, while his younger sister, Kim Yo Jong, is believed to have been born in 1987. He is a grandson of Kim Il Sung, who was the founder of and led North Korea from its establishment in 1948 until his death in 1994. Kim is the first leader of North Korea to have been born a North Korean citizen, his father having been born in the Soviet Union and his grandfather having been born during the Japanese colonial period. All of Kim Jong Il's children are said to have lived in Switzerland, as well as the mother of the two youngest sons, who lived in Geneva for some time. First reports said that Kim Jong Un attended the private International School of Berne in Gümligen in Switzerland under the name "Chol-pak" or "Pak-chol" from 1993 to 1998. He was described as shy, a good student who got along well with his classmates, and was a basketball fan. He was chaperoned by an older student, thought to be his bodyguard. His elder brother Kim Jong Chul also attended the school with him. Later, it was reported that Kim Jong Un attended the Liebefeld Steinhölzli state school in Köniz, near Bern, under the name "Pak-un" or "Un-pak" from 1998 until 2000 as the son of an employee of the North Korean embassy in Bern. Authorities confirmed that a North Korean student attended the school during that period. Kim first attended a special class for foreign-language children and later attended the regular classes of the 6th, 7th, 8th and part of the final 9th year, leaving the school abruptly in the autumn of 2000. He was described as a well-integrated and ambitious student who liked to play basketball. However, his grades and attendance rating are reported to have been poor. The ambassador of North Korea in Switzerland, Ri Chol, had a close relationship with him and acted as a mentor. One of Kim's classmates told reporters that he had told him that he was the son of the leader of North Korea. According to some reports, Kim was described by classmates as a shy child who was awkward with girls and indifferent to political issues, but who distinguished himself in sports and had a fascination with the American National Basketball Association and Michael Jordan. One friend claimed that he had been shown pictures of Kim with Kobe Bryant and Toni Kukoč. In April 2012, new documents came to light indicating that Kim Jong Un had lived in Switzerland since 1991 or 1992, earlier than previously thought. The Laboratory of Anatomic Anthropology at the University of Lyon, France, compared the picture of Kim taken at the Liebefeld Steinhölzli school in 1999 with a picture of Kim Jong Un from 2012 and concluded that the faces show a conformity of 95%, suggesting that it is most likely that they are the same person. The Washington Post reported in 2009 that Kim Jong Un's school friends recalled he "spent hours doing meticulous pencil drawings of Chicago Bulls superstar Michael Jordan". He was obsessed with basketball and computer games, and was a fan of Jackie Chan action movies. Most analysts agree that Kim Jong Un attended Kim Il Sung University, a leading officer-training school in Pyongyang, from 2002 to 2007. Kim obtained two degrees, one in physics at Kim Il Sung University and another as an Army officer at the Kim Il Sung Military University. In late February 2018, Reuters reported that Kim and his father had used forged passports—supposedly issued by Brazil and dated 26 February 1996—to apply for visas in various countries. Both 10-year passports carry a stamp saying "Embassy of Brazil in Prague". Kim Jong Un's passport records the name "Josef Pwag" and a date of birth of 1 February 1983. For many years, only one confirmed photograph of him was known to exist outside North Korea, apparently taken in the mid-1990s, when he was eleven. Occasionally, other supposed images of him surfaced but were often disputed. It was only in June 2010, shortly before he was given official posts and publicly introduced to the North Korean people, that more pictures were released of Kim, taken when he was attending school in Switzerland. The first official image of him as an adult was a group photograph released on 30 September 2010, at the end of the party conference that effectively anointed him, in which he is seated in the front row, two places from his father. This was followed by newsreel footage of him attending the conference. Kim Jong Un's eldest half-brother, Kim Jong Nam, had been the favorite to succeed, but reportedly fell out of favor after 2001, when he was caught attempting to enter Japan on a fake passport to visit Tokyo Disneyland. Kim Jong Nam was killed in Malaysia in 2017 by suspected North Korean agents. Kim Jong Il's former personal chef, Kenji Fujimoto, revealed details regarding Kim Jong Un, with whom he had a good relationship, stating that he was favored to be his father's successor. Fujimoto also said that Jong Un was favored by his father over his elder brother, Kim Jong Chul, reasoning that Jong Chul is too feminine in character, while Jong Un is "exactly like his father". Furthermore, Fujimoto stated that "if power is to be handed over then Jong Un is the best for it. He has superb physical gifts, is a big drinker and never admits defeat." Also, according to Fujimoto, Jong Un smokes Yves Saint Laurent cigarettes, loves Johnnie Walker whisky and has a Mercedes-Benz 600 luxury sedan. When Jong Un was 18, Fujimoto described an episode where Jong Un once questioned his lavish lifestyle and asked, "we are here, playing basketball, riding horses, riding jet skis, having fun together. But what of the lives of the average people?" On 15 January 2009, the South Korean news agency Yonhap reported that Kim Jong Il had appointed Kim Jong Un to be his successor. On 8 March 2009, BBC News reported that Kim Jong Un was on the ballot for 2009 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly, the rubber stamp parliament of North Korea. Subsequent reports indicated that his name did not appear on the list of lawmakers, but he was later elevated to a mid-level position in the National Defense Commission, which is a branch of the North Korean military. From 2009, it was understood by foreign diplomatic services that Kim was to succeed his father Kim Jong Il as the head of the Korean Workers' Party and de facto leader of North Korea. He has been named "Brilliant Comrade". His father had also asked embassy staff abroad to pledge loyalty to his son. There have also been reports that citizens in North Korea were encouraged to sing a newly composed "song of praise" to Kim Jong Un, in a similar fashion to that of praise songs relating to Kim Jong Il and Kim Il Sung. Later, in June, Kim was reported to have visited China secretly to "present himself" to the Chinese leadership. The Chinese foreign ministry has strongly denied that this visit occurred. In September 2009, it was reported that Kim Jong Il had secured support for the succession plan, after a propaganda campaign. It is believed by some that Kim Jong Un was involved in the Cheonan sinking and the bombardment of Yeonpyeong to strengthen his military credentials and facilitate a successful transition of power from his father. Kim Jong Un was made a daejang, the equivalent of a four-star general in the United States, on 27 September 2010, a day ahead of a rare Workers' Party of Korea conference in Pyongyang, the first time North Korean media had mentioned him by name and despite him having no previous military experience. Despite the promotion, no further details, including verifiable portraits of Kim, were released. On 28 September 2010, he was named vice chairman of the Central Military Commission and appointed to the Central Committee of the Workers' Party, in an apparent nod to become the successor to Kim Jong Il. On 10 October 2010, Kim Jong Un was alongside his father when he attended the ruling Workers' Party's 65th-anniversary celebration. This was seen as confirming his position as the next leader of the Workers' Party. Unprecedented international press access was granted to the event, further indicating the importance of Kim Jong Un's presence. In January 2011, the regime reportedly began purging around 200 protégés of both Jong Un's uncle-in-law Jang Song Thaek and O Kuk Ryol, the vice chairman of the National Defence Commission, by either detention or execution to further prevent either man from rivaling Jong Un. On 17 December 2011, Kim Jong Il died. Despite the elder Kim's plans, it was not immediately clear after his death whether Kim Jong Un would in fact take full power, and what his exact role in a new government would be. Some analysts had predicted that when Kim Jong Il died, Jang Song Thaek would act as regent, as Kim Jong Un was too inexperienced to immediately lead the country. Following his father's death, Kim Jong Un was hailed as the "great successor to the revolutionary cause of Juche", "outstanding leader of the party, army and people", and "respected comrade who is identical to Supreme Commander Kim Jong Il", and was made chairman of the Kim Jong Il funeral committee. The Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) described Kim Jong Un as "a great person born of heaven", a propaganda term only his father and grandfather had enjoyed. The ruling Workers' Party of Korea also said in an editorial, "We vow with bleeding tears to call Kim Jong Un our supreme commander, our leader." He was publicly declared Supreme Commander of the Korean People's Army on 24 December 2011, and formally appointed to the position on 30 December 2011 when the Political Bureau of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea "courteously proclaimed that the dear respected Kim Jong Un, vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission of the WPK, assumed the supreme commandership of the Korean People's Army". On 26 December 2011, the leading North Korean newspaper Rodong Sinmun reported that Kim Jong Un had been acting as chairman of the Central Military Commission, and supreme leader of the country, following his father's demise. On 27 March 2012, Kim was elected to the 4th Conference of the Workers' Party of Korea. On 11 April, that conference wrote the post of general secretary out of the party charter and instead designated Kim Jong Il as the party's "Eternal General Secretary". The conference then elected Kim Jong Un as leader of the party under the newly created title of First Secretary. Kim Jong Un also took his father's post as Chairman of the Central Military Commission, as well as his father's old seat on the Politburo Presidium. In a speech made prior to the Conference, Kim Jong Un declared that "Imbuing the whole society with Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism is the highest programme of our Party". On 11 April 2012, the 5th Session of the 12th Supreme People's Assembly appointed Kim Jong Un First Chairman of the National Defence Commission. In July 2012, Kim Jong Un was promoted to wonsu (translated as marshal), the highest active rank in the military. The decision was jointly issued on by the Central Committee and the Central Military Commission of the Workers' Party of Korea, the National Defence Commission, and the Presidium of the Supreme People's Assembly, the Korean Central News Agency subsequently announced. The only higher rank is Taewonsu (roughly translated as Grand Marshal or Generalissimo) which was held by Kim's grandfather, Kim Il Sung, and which was awarded posthumously to his father, Kim Jong Il, in February 2012. The promotion confirmed Kim's role as top leader of the North Korean military and came days after the replacement of Chief of General Staff Ri Yong Ho by Hyon Yong Chol. On 9 March 2014, Kim Jong Un was elected to a seat in the Supreme People's Assembly, the country's unicameral legislature. He ran unopposed, but voters had the choice of voting yes or no. There was a record turnout of voters and, according to government officials, all voted "yes" in his home district of Mount Paekdu. The Supreme People's Assembly subsequently elected him first chairman of the National Defence Commission. Kim has changed North Korea's internal power dynamics, increasing the influence of the WPK while decreasing the power of the military. In May 2016, He organized WPK's 7th Congress in May 2016, its first congress since 1980. In the congress, Kim became the Chairman of the WPK, which replaced the First Secretary of the WPK. The Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) amended the constitution in June 2016, abolishing the National Defence Commission (NDC) except in times of war, and replacing it with the State Affairs Commission (SAC), which was named the "supreme policy-oriented leadership body of State power". Kim became the chairman of the State Affairs Commission on 29 June 2016. These amendments marked the decrease of the military's influence, with the newly established SAC including more civilian and less military members than the NDC. During the 2019 North Korean parliamentary election, Kim Jong Un became the first North Korean leader to not participate as a candidate for the SPA. The constitution was further amended in 2019 by the SPA. References to Juche and Songun were replaced by Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism, and the constitution stipulated that the mission of North Korea's armed forces was to "defend unto death the Party Central Committee headed by the great Comrade Kim Jong Un"; this made Kim the first North Korean leader to be named in the constitution while currently holding power. The chairman of the State Affairs Commission was amended to be the "supreme leader who represents the state", effectively making Kim Jong Un the head of state; previously the president of the Presidium of the SPA was the de facto head of state. The chairman also was named as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces as well as the "supreme representative of all the Korean people". In January 2021, the WPK held its 8th Congress, where Kim delivered a nine-hour-long report in which he admitted failures in carrying out the economic plan and lambasted leading officials' shortcomings. He also praised the country's nuclear capability and addressed the United States as the DPRK's main enemy. Kim Jong Un was elected General Secretary of the WPK, which replaced the WPK Chairman. Previously, the title general secretary was awarded "eternally" to Kim Jong Il in 2012. The congress also saw the WPK reassert its commitment to communism. The Control Commission was abolished, with the Central Auditing Commission taking up its duties. The Congress was also unique in that its backdrop did not include the Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il portraits that have normally been put, suggestion a desire for Kim to make his mark on the country's politics. Under Kim, North Korea has changed the names of several offices and institutions in what has been named by Yonhap News Agency as an effort to present itself as a "normal state". The Ministry of People's Armed Forces was renamed to the Ministry of Defence in January 2021, while state media began referring to Kim as "president of the State Affairs Commission" rather than "chairman" in English language articles starting from February 2021. The congress marked the consolidation of WPK control over the army, as well as a further decrease in the army's power; the number of military delegates dropped from 719 in the 7th Congress to 408. Politburo members increased from 28 to 30, though incumbent military elite membership decreased from eight to six. The influence of the KPA Party Committee and the General Political Bureau (GPB) was decreased; with the committee's ranking now equal to provincial party committees, while it was above them previously. The GPB was also no longer equal to the Central Committee, while the Central Military Commission was given effective command of the armed forces. "Military-first policy" was also removed from the charter, being replaced by "people-first politics". In November 2021, the South Korean National Intelligence Service reported that the North Korean government has begun using the term "Kimjongunism", in an effort to establish an independent ideological system centered on Kim. Analyst Ken Gause described this as Kim "now ready to put his stamp firmly on the regime". According to the North Korean constitution, Kim Jong Un is part of a triumvirate heading the executive branch of the North Korean government along with Premier Kim Tok Hun and Supreme People's Assembly president Choe Ryong Hae. Kim Jong Un commands the armed forces, Kim Tok Hun heads the cabinet and handles domestic affairs, and Choe Ryong Hae heads the legislature. However, under the constitution, Kim Jong Un is the highest-ranking of the three, with the constitution explicitly naming his post the "supreme leader who represents the state". Since 1998, the NDC chairmanship has been constitutionally defined as "the highest post in the state", and a constitutional amendment enacted by the regime explicitly named the NDC (first) chairman as "the supreme leader of the Democratic People's Republic of North Korea". However, analysts are divided about how much actual power Kim has. In July 2012, Kim Jong Un showed a change in cultural policy from his father by attending a Moranbong Band concert. The concert contained several elements of pop culture from the West, particularly the United States. Kim used this event to introduce his wife to the public, an unprecedented move in North Korea. In the same year, Kim Jong Il's personal chef Kenji Fujimoto visited North Korea and said, "Stores in Pyongyang were brimming with products and people in the streets looked cheerful. North Korea has changed a lot since Kim Jong Un assumed power. All of this is because of leader Kim Jong Un." According to analysts, Kim Jong Un has used his resemblance to his grandfather to harness Kim Il Sung's personality cult and popular nostalgia for earlier times. In 2013, Kim copied his grandfather's style when he gave his first New Year's address, a break from the approach of his father, Kim Jong Il, who never made a televised address during his 17 years in power. He has also appeared more accessible and open than his father, hugging and linking arms with young and old. In his public appearances, he appears more active than his father or grandfather, for example, weeding, riding a horse, driving a tank, riding a rollercoaster, or using information technology. In April 2012, when a satellite launch failed, the government admitted this publicly, the first time it had ever done so. In May 2014, following the collapse of an apartment building in Pyongyang, Kim Jong Un was said to be very upset at the loss of life that resulted. A statement issued by the country's official news agency the Korean Central News Agency used the rare expression "profound consolation and apology". An unnamed government official was quoted by the BBC as saying Kim Jong Un had "sat up all night, feeling painful". While the height of the building and the number of casualties was not released, media reports described it as a 23-story building and indicated that more than a hundred people may have died in the collapse. Kim Jong Un frequently performs symbolic acts that associate him with the personality cult of his father and grandfather. Like them, Kim Jong Un regularly tours the country, giving "on-the-spot guidance" at various sites. North Korean state media often refers to him as "Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un" or "Marshal Kim Jong Un". On 9 January 2012, a large rally was held by the Korean People's Army in front of the Kumsusan Palace of the Sun to honor Kim Jong Un and to demonstrate loyalty. On 15 April 2012, during a military parade to commemorate Kim Il Sung's centenary, Kim Jong Un made his first public speech, Let Us March Forward Dynamically Towards Final Victory, Holding Higher the Banner of Songun. That speech became the basis of a hymn dedicated to him, "Onwards Toward the Final Victory". In November 2012, satellite photos revealed a half-kilometer-long (1,600 ft) propaganda message carved into a hillside in Ryanggang Province, reading, "Long Live General Kim Jong Un, the Shining Sun"! Kim Jong Un has been promoting a policy of byungjin, similar to his grandfather Kim il Sung's policies from the 1960s, developing the national economy in parallel with the country's nuclear weapons program. A set of comprehensive economic measures, the "Socialist Corporate Responsible Management System [ko]", were introduced in 2013. The measures increase the autonomy of enterprises by granting them "certain rights to engage in business activities autonomously and elevate the will to labor through appropriately implementing the socialist distribution system". Another priority of economic policies that year was agriculture, where the pojon (vegetable garden) responsibility system was implemented. The system reportedly achieved a major increase in output in some collective farms. North Korean media described the economy as a "flexible collectivist system" where enterprises were applying "active and evolutionary actions" to achieve economic development. These reports reflect Kim's general economic policy of reforming management, increasing the autonomy and incentives for economic actors. This set of reforms known as the "May 30th measures" reaffirms both socialist ownership and "objective economic laws in guidance and management" to improve living standards. Other objectives of the measures are to increase the availability of domestically manufactured goods on markets, introduction of defence innovations into the civilian sector and boost international trade. There has been a construction boom in Pyongyang, bringing colour and creative architectural styles to the city. While in the past there was a concentration on building monuments, Kim Jong Un's government has constructed amusement parks, aquatic parks, skating rinks, a dolphinarium and a ski resort. Kim has been actively promoting a consumer culture, including entertainment and cosmetics. He has also overseen the construction of tourist attractions in the country. Kim has attempted to ease North Korea's food shortages, though the food situation deteriorated during the COVID-19 pandemic. In March 2023, during a WPK plenary session, he called for boosting agricultural production, saying that it is "important to concentrate on increasing the yield at all the farms". As with all reporting on North Korea, reports of purges and executions are difficult to verify. Allegations in 2013 that Kim Jong Un had his ex-girlfriend, singer Hyon Song Wol, executed for violating pornography laws turned out to be false. In May 2016, analysts were surprised to find that General Ri Yong Gil, reported by South Korea to have been executed earlier in the year, was, in fact, alive and well. In December 2013, Kim Jong Un's uncle Jang Song Thaek was arrested and executed for treachery. Jang is believed to have been executed by firing squad. Yonhap has stated that, according to multiple unnamed sources, Kim Jong Un has also put to death members of Jang's family, to completely destroy all traces of Jang's existence through "extensive executions" of his family, including the children and grandchildren of all close relatives. Those reportedly killed in Kim's purge include Jang's sister Jang Kye Sun, her husband and ambassador to Cuba, Jon Yong Jin, and Jang's nephew and ambassador to Malaysia, Jang Yong Chol. The nephew's two sons were also said to have been killed. At the time of Jang's removal, it was announced that "the discovery and purge of the Jang group ... made our party and revolutionary ranks purer ..." and after his execution on 12 December 2013 state media warned that the army "will never pardon all those who disobey the order of the Supreme Commander". O Sang Hon was a deputy security minister in the Ministry of People's Security in the government of North Korea who was reportedly killed in a political purge in 2014. According to the South Korean newspaper The Chosun Ilbo, O was executed by flamethrower for his role in supporting Kim Jong Un's uncle Jang Song Thaek. Similar to his father and grandfather, Kim rules North Korea as a totalitarian state. In January 2013, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay said that the North Korean human rights situation had not improved since Kim had taken power and called for an investigation. A report on the situation of human rights in North Korea in February 2013 by United Nations Special Rapporteur Marzuki Darusman proposed a UN commission of inquiry. The report of the commission of inquiry was published in February 2014 and suggested Kim could "possibly" be made accountable for crimes against humanity at the International Criminal Court. In July 2016, the United States Department of the Treasury imposed personal sanctions on Kim. Although his involvement in human rights abuses was cited as the reason, officials said the sanctions target the country's nuclear and missile programs. In June 2017, U.S. President Donald Trump condemned Kim Jong Un's "brutal" regime and described Kim as a "madman" after the death of American student Otto Warmbier who had been imprisoned during a visit to North Korea. However, in 2019, President Trump said that he believed Kim was not responsible for Warmbier's death. In 2012, a machine gun was discovered beneath a juniper tree in Ryugyeongwon, located near a route that Kim was going to travel. It was assumed this was part of an assassination attempt. In May 2017, the North Korean government stated that the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) of the United States and the South Korean National Intelligence Service (NIS) hired a North Korean lumberjack who worked in Russia to assassinate Kim with a "biochemical weapon" that was both radioactive and nano-poisonous, and whose effect would have been delayed by a few months. North Korea said that it would seek extradition of anyone involved in the assassination attempt. Under Kim Jong Un, North Korea has continued to develop nuclear weapons, testing bombs in February 2013, January and September 2016, and September 2017. As of 2021[update], North Korea had tested nearly 120 missiles, four times more than in the time of his father and grandfather. By 2023, this climbed up to a total of 226. According to several analysts, North Korea sees the nuclear arsenal as vital to deter an attack, and it is unlikely that North Korea would launch a nuclear war. According to a RAND Corporation senior researcher, Kim Jong Un believes that nuclear weapons are his guarantee of regime survival. In 2022, it was estimated that North Korea has around 45-55 nuclear weapons. In 2012, on the 100th anniversary of Kim Il Sung's birth, he said, "the days are gone forever when our enemies could blackmail us with nuclear bombs". At a plenary meeting of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party held on 31 March 2013, he announced that North Korea would adopt "a new strategic line on carrying out economic construction and building nuclear armed forces simultaneously". During the 7th WPK Congress in 2016, Kim Jong Un stated that North Korea would "not use nuclear weapons first unless aggressive hostile forces use nuclear weapons to invade on our sovereignty". However, on other occasions, North Korea has threatened "pre-emptive" nuclear attacks against a US-led attack. In December 2015, Kim stated that his family "turned the DPRK into a powerful nuclear weapons state ready to detonate a self-reliant A-bomb and H-bomb to reliably defend its sovereignty and the dignity of the nation". In his New Year's Day speech on 2 January 2017, Kim Jong Un said that the country was in the "last stage" of preparations to test-fire an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). On 4 July, North Korea conducted the first publicly announced flight test of its ICBM Hwasong-14, timed to coincide with the U.S. Independence Day celebrations. On 3 September, the country conducted its sixth nuclear test. On 28 November 2017, North Korea tested the Hwasong-15 missile, which became the first ballistic missile developed by North Korea that is theoretically capable of reaching all of the US mainland. In response, the United Nations Security Council enacted a series of sanctions against North Korea for its nuclear program and missile tests. Until 2022, North Korea's stated policy position was that nuclear weapons "will never be abused or used as a means for preemptive strike", but if there is an "attempt to have recourse to military force against us" North Korea may use their "most powerful offensive strength in advance to punish them". This was not a full no first use policy. This policy changed in 2022 with a law approved by the Supreme People's Assembly, which states that in the case of an attack against the top leadership or the nuclear command and control system, nuclear attacks against the enemy would be launched automatically. Additionally, the new law indicates that if Kim Jong Un was killed, the authorization of nuclear strikes would pass to a senior official. Relations between North Korea and China, long North Korea's closest partner, initially deteriorated under Kim due to his nuclear weapons program. On 30 November 2012, Kim met with Li Jianguo, member of the Politburo of the ruling Communist Party of China (CPC) and first-ranking vice chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee, who "briefed Kim on the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China", according to the state's official news agency, the Korean Central News Agency. A letter from Chinese president Xi Jinping was hand-delivered during the discussion. China condemned North Korea's nuclear tests in 2013, 2016, and 2017 China also banned imports of North Korean coal in February 2017, while enforcing UN Security Council sanctions on North Korea put in 2017. In response, the Korean Central News Agency published an unprecedented criticism of China, accusing it of "big-power chauvinism"; KCNA later published articles criticizing Chinese state-media. The relationship started improving in March 2018, when Kim visited Beijing, meeting with Xi Jinping, marking his first foreign trip since assuming power. From 7–8 May, Kim made a second visit to China, meeting with Xi in Dalian. A further third meeting happened on 19–20 June, when Kim travelled to Beijing to meet Xi. Kim again met Xi in Beijing on 7–10 January 2019. On 20–21 June 2019, Xi travelled to Pyongyang, the first visit by a Chinese leader to North Korea since Hu Jintao visited in 2005. In his 2018 New Year Speech, Kim announced that he was open to dialogue with South Korea with a view to take part in the upcoming Winter Olympics in the South. The Seoul–Pyongyang hotline was reopened after almost two years. North and South Korea marched together in the Olympics opening ceremony, and fielded a united women's ice hockey team. In addition to the athletes, Kim sent an unprecedented high-level delegation including his sister, Kim Yo Jong, and President of the Presidium, Kim Yong Nam, and performers such as the Samjiyon Orchestra. On 5 March, he had a meeting with South Korea's Chief of the National Security Office, Chung Eui Yong, in Pyongyang. At the April 2018 inter-Korean summit, Kim and South Korean President Moon Jae-in signed the Panmunjom Declaration, pledging to convert the Korean Armistice Agreement into a full peace treaty, formally ending the Korean War, by the end of the year. On 26 May, Kim had a second and unannounced meeting in the North Korean side of Panmunjom, meeting with Moon to discuss his proposed summit with US President Donald Trump in Singapore. On 10 June, Kim arrived in Singapore and met with Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong. On 12 June, Kim held his first summit with Trump and signed a declaration, affirming a commitment to peace, nuclear disarmament, and the repatriation of the remains of U.S. war dead. This marked the first-ever meeting between leaders of North Korea and the United States. In September, Kim held another summit with Moon Jae-in in Pyongyang. Kim agreed to dismantle North Korea's nuclear weapons facilities if the United States took reciprocal action. The two governments also announced that they would establish buffer zones on their borders to prevent clashes. In February 2019, Kim held another summit with Trump in Hanoi, Vietnam, which Trump cut short on the second day without an agreement. The Trump administration said that the North Koreans wanted complete sanctions relief, while the North Koreans said that they were only asking for partial sanctions relief. On 30 June 2019, in the Korean DMZ, Kim again met with Trump, shaking hands warmly and expressing hope for peace. Kim and Trump then joined Moon Jae-in for a brief chat. Talks in Stockholm began on 5 October 2019 between US and North Korean negotiating teams but broke down after one day. During this period, Trump and Kim established a personal relationship and exchanged at least 27 letters in which the two men described a warm personal friendship. However, by 2020, negotiations almost completely stalled without progress on denuclearization, with both Trump and Kim focusing on domestic issues. North Korean foreign ministry further criticized the Trump administration that year for "empty promise[s]", and further took action by demolishing the four-story joint-liaison office building it shared with South Korea on 17 June. North Korea further ignored attempts at outreach by the administration of president Joe Biden, and Kim said in October 2021 that the "US has been frequently sending signals that they are not hostile towards our country, but there is no single evidence that they are not hostile", and also criticized South Korea for "destroying the military balance in the Korean peninsula and increasing military instability and danger". In December 2023, during a speech at the 9th plenum of the 8th Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea, Kim called for a "fundamental turnabout" in North Korea's stance towards South Korea, calling the South the "enemy". He stated "the party’s comprehensive conclusion after reviewing decades-long inter-Korean relations is that reunification can never be achieved with those ROK riffraffs that defined the ‘unification by absorption’ and ‘unification under liberal democracy’ as their state policy", which he said is in "sharp contradiction with what our line of national reunification was: one nation, one state with two systems". Kim cited South Korean constitution's claims over the entire Korean Peninsula and South Korean President Yoon Suk Yeol's policy towards the north as evidence that South Korea is an unsuitable partner for reunification. He said the relations between the two Koreas currently were "states hostile to each other and the relations between two belligerent states" and no longer ones that are "consanguineous or homogeneous", continuing by saying it is "unsuitable" to discuss the issue of reunification "with this strange clan [ROK], who is no more than a colonial stooge of the U.S. despite the rhetorical word [we used to use] — ‘the fellow countrymen." Kim also instructed the WPK on reforming organizations related to inter-Korean relations, including the WPK's United Front Department. On 25 April 2019, Kim held his first summit with Russian president Vladimir Putin in Vladivostok, Russia. North Korea under Kim supported Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022, blaming the "hegemonic policy" of the US for the war, recognizing the independence of the breakaway states of Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics in Eastern Ukraine as well as recognizing Russia's unilateral annexation of Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia oblasts on 30 September. In September 2022, US intelligence said that Russia was buying millions of artillery shells and rockets from North Korea due to the sanctions caused by Russia's invasion of Ukraine. A February 2023 report by the Center for Strategic International Studies (CSIS) stated that after dropping to nearly zero during the COVID-19 era, trade between North Korea and Russia rebounded back to pre-pandemic levels. In July 2023, Russian Minister of Defence Sergei Shoigu and a Chinese delegation led by Communist Party Politburo member Li Hongzhong arrived in North Korea for the 70th anniversary of the end of the Korean War. Shoigu met with Kim Jong Un and North Korean Defense Minister Kang Sun Nam. In September 2023, Kim Jong Un visited Russia in his first foreign trip since 2019. The meeting lasted over four hours at the Vostochny Cosmodrome in the Amur Oblast, and was described as underpinning how the two countries' interests are aligning. During the meeting, Kim once again gave his support for Russia’s “sacred fight” against the west, expressing his “...support for all the measures taken by the Russian government, and [he] takes this opportunity again to affirm that [he] will always be with Russia." When asked if Russia would help North Korea build satellites, presumably in return for ammunition, Putin said “that’s why [they] came here." According to the NIS, North Korea has exported over one million shells to Russia since August 2023, compared to a combined 2 million shells provided by NATO members to Ukraine since the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War. In February 2024 Kim received a car as a gift from Russian leader Vladimir Putin. During 2020, Kim claimed success in combatting the COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea, after putting the country in isolation and limiting public gatherings. In April 2020, a three-week absence from public view led to speculation that Kim was seriously ill or dead, but no clear evidence of any health problem came to light. He appeared rarely in public over the following months, possibly because of health problems or the risk of COVID-19. In August, it was reported that Kim had ceded a degree of authority to his sister, Kim Yo Jong, giving her responsibility for relations with South Korea and the United States and making her his de facto second-in-command. On 5 September 2020, Kim toured the areas hit by Typhoon Maysak. He also replaced the local provincial party committee chairman and ordered Pyongyang officials to lead a recovery effort. His ruling party also pledged harsh punishment for the city and provincial officials, stating that they failed to protect the residents from the disaster. Kim fired Kim Song Il, who was chairman of the South Hamgyong Province Workers' Party of Korea Committee. In January 2022, a North Korean KCTV documentary, "2021, A Great Victorious Year", was released, which appeared to address Kim's sudden weight loss and infrequent public appearances. It said that Kim's body had "completely withered away" as he "suffered" for the people during 2021, completing tasks hitherto unpublicized while North Korea faced "challenges" and "worst-ever hardships". North Korea claimed to have detected no cases of COVID-19 until May 2022, although many experts doubt this claim. In May 2022, North Korea announced that its first COVID-19 outbreak had started in April. In a meeting with the WPK, Kim ordered "all the cities and counties of the whole country to thoroughly lock down", and called for the mobilization of emergency reserve medical supplies. In the days that followed the country's announcement, hundreds of thousands of new cases of fevers were reported, as well as 27 related deaths related to fever of unidentified origins, among which one death was confirmed as from the Omicron variant according to state-media KCNA. Kim spoke further at a subsequent WPK meeting, stating that the virus had brought “great turmoil” to his country, and urged the party and people to remain unified and organized in their efforts to combat the virus. Kim went on to blame the crisis on incompetence and irresponsibility on the part of the party organizations, and also cast blame on “negligence including drug overdose due to lack of knowledge of treatment methods” as the reason for most of the deaths since the outbreak. As part of the country’s response to the COVID-19 outbreak, Kim stated that he looked to learn from the response mounted by China. By the end of May, North Korean state media reported the COVID-19 outbreak was "controlled and improved across the country" following a re-evaluation by Kim and the WPK. In August 2022, Kim Yo Jong indicated that Jong Un had contracted the virus. Kenji Fujimoto, a Japanese chef who was Kim Jong Il's personal cook, described Kim Jong Un as "a chip off the old block, a spitting image of his father in terms of face, body shape, and personality". Kim is a fan of basketball, and his favorite teams include the Chicago Bulls and the Los Angeles Lakers. On 26 February 2013, Kim Jong Un met Dennis Rodman, which led many reporters to speculate that Rodman was the first American whom Kim had met. During Rodman's trip, Vice magazine correspondent Ryan Duffy said that Kim was "socially awkward" and avoided eye contact. According to Cheong Seong-chang of the Sejong Institute, Kim Jong Un has greater visible interest in the welfare of his people and engages in greater interaction with them than his father did. South Koreans who saw Kim at the summit in April 2018 described him as straightforward, humorous, and attentive. After meeting him, Donald Trump said, "I learned he was a talented man. I also learned he loves his country very much." He added that Kim had a "great personality" and was "very smart". Forbes magazine ranked Kim as the 36th most powerful person in the world in 2018, the highest amongst Koreans. In a 2013 poll, 61.7% of North Korean defectors in South Korea said that Kim Jong Un was probably supported by most of his countrymen, an increase from the 55.7% approval rating for his father in a similar survey done two years earlier. The nickname "Kim Fatty the Third" (Chinese: 金三胖; pinyin: Jīn Sān Pàng) began trending among Chinese users of the websites Baidu and Sina Weibo in late 2016. In response, the North Korean government successfully petitioned the Chinese government to censor the nickname on all Chinese websites. In a poll of South Koreans conducted following the May 2018 inter-Korean summit, 78% of respondents said they trusted Kim, compared with 10% approval a couple months prior. The International Business Times reported Kim to have 17 luxury palaces around North Korea, a fleet of 100 (mostly European) luxury cars, a private jet, and a 100-foot (30 m) yacht. Rodman described his trip to a private island owned by Kim Jong Un: "It's like Hawaii, Ibiza, or Aruba but he's the only one that lives there." In 2012, Business Insider reported that there were "[s]igns of a rise in luxury goods ... creeping out of North Korea since Kim Jong Un took over" and that his "wife Ri Sol Ju was photographed holding what appeared to be an expensive Dior handbag, worth almost $1,594 – an average year's salary in North Korea". According to diplomatic sources, "Kim Jong Un likes to drink and party all night like his father and ordered the [imported sauna] equipment to help him beat hangovers and fatigue." In 2018, Kim reportedly received delivery of two armored Mercedes-Maybach S600s, each valued at $500,000, through an illicit shipping network in violation of international sanctions. In 2009, reports suggested that Kim Jong Un was a diabetic and suffered from hypertension. He is also known to smoke cigarettes. Kim Jong Un did not appear in public for six weeks in September and October 2014. State media reported that he was suffering from an "uncomfortable physical condition". Previously he had been limping. When he reappeared, he was using a walking stick. In September 2015, the South Korean government commented that Kim appeared to have gained 30 kg (66 lb) in body fat over the previous five years, reaching a total estimated body weight of 130 kg (290 lb). In April 2020, Kim was not seen in public for 20 days, leading to rumours that he was critically ill or dead. In June 2021, following a one-month-long absence from the public eye, outside observers noted that Kim had lost considerable amount of weight. It is speculated that he had lost 10 to 20 kg (22 to 44 lb). On 25 July 2012, North Korean state media reported for the first time that Kim Jong Un was married to Ri Sol Ju. Ri, who was believed to be in her early 20s, had been accompanying Kim Jong Un to public appearances for several weeks prior to the announcement. According to a South Korean analyst, Kim Jong Il had hastily arranged the marriage after suffering a stroke in 2008, the two married in 2009, and they had a son in 2010. Dennis Rodman, after visiting in 2013, reported that they had a second newborn child, a daughter named Ju Ae. According to South Korean intelligence sources, the couple is believed to have had a third child, a daughter, in February 2017. On 18 November 2022, Kim Jong Un was seen reviewing key military arsenals with his daughter Ju Ae. The two were seen together again at a gathering with missile scientists later in the same month. She has since routinely accompanied him. Kim is sometimes accompanied by his younger sister Kim Yo Jong, who is said to be instrumental in creating his public image and organising public events for him. According to Kim Yong-hyun, a professor of North Korean studies at Dongguk University in Seoul, and others, the promotion of Yo Jong and others is a sign that "the Kim Jong Un regime has ended its co-existence with the remnants of the previous Kim Jong Il regime by carrying out a generational replacement in the party's key elite posts". On 13 February 2017, Kim Jong Nam, the exiled half-brother of Kim Jong Un, was assassinated with the nerve agent VX while walking through Terminal 2 at Kuala Lumpur International Airport. Kim Jong Un is widely believed to have ordered the assassination. Jubilee Medal "75 Years of Victory in the Great Patriotic War 1941–1945" (Russia, 2020) — awarded for his efforts at preserving the memory of Soviet soldiers who died during the Soviet–Japanese War (1945) and were buried in North Korea Kim Jong Un held the same position under the title of "First Secretary" from 11 April 2012 until 9 May 2016 and "Chairman" from 9 May 2016 until 10 January 2021. 정은 is pronounced [tsɔŋ.ɯn] in isolation. In this Korean name, the family name is Kim. Also transcribed Kim Jong-un Korean: 김정은; MR: Kim Chŏngŭn North Korean sources give Kim's birth date as 8 January 1982. For other birth years found in sources, see § Early life. As the leader of the Workers' Party of Korea, Kim held the titles of First Secretary from 2012 to 2016, Chairman from 2016 to 2021, and General Secretary since 2021. 김정은(남성). 북한정보포털 (in Korean). Ministry of Unification. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Kim Jong-un". Collins English Dictionary: Complete and Unabridged (12th ed.). HarperCollins Publishers. 2014. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2021 – via The Free Dictionary. "Everything you need to know about North Korean leader Kim Jong Un". ABC News. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. "Rodman Gives Details on Trip to North Korea". The New York Times. 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. 단독/정부 최종결론 "김정은 실제로는 84년 생" [The Government's final conclusion: 'Kim Jong Un was actually born in 1984']. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). 2 February 2012. Szoldra, Paul; Bondranenko, Veronika (19 April 2017). "How North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, 33, became one of the world's scariest dictators". The Independent. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. Lee, Young-jong; Kim, Hee-jin (8 August 2012). "Kim Jong-un's sister is having a ball". Korea JoongAng Daily. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 26 December 2015. Moore, Malcolm. Kim Jong-un: a profile of North Korea's next leader Archived 5 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. The Daily Telegraph. 2 June 2009 김일성, 쿠바의 '혁명영웅' 체게바라를 만난 날. DailyNK (in Korean). 15 April 2008. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2018. "Kim Jong-un : une éducation suisse entourée de mystères". Le Figaro (in French). 5 September 2010. Archived from the original on 19 December 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2011. Harden, Blaine (3 June 2009). "Son Named Heir to North Korea's Kim Studied in Switzerland, Reportedly Loves NBA". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 4 February 2011. Retrieved 1 December 2019. Peter Foster (8 June 2010). "Rare photos of Kim Jong-il's youngest son, Kim Jong-n, released". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010. "North Korean leader Kim Jong‑il 'names youngest son as successor'". The Guardian. London. Associated Press. 2 June 2009. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Henckel, Elisalex (24 June 2009). "Kim Jong-un und sein Unterricht bei den Schweizern". Die Welt (in German). Berlin. ISSN 0173-8437. Archived from the original on 27 July 2015. Fifield, Anna. "Kim Jong Un's undercover adolescent years in Switzerland". Politico. "Weitere nordkoreanische Spuren in Bern". Neue Zürcher Zeitung (in German). 16 June 2009. Archived from the original on 11 February 2012. Retrieved 19 December 2011. "Poor school marks of North Korea's Kim Jong-un exposed". Irish Independent. 2 April 2012. ISSN 0791-685X. Archived from the original on 26 December 2015. "Kim Jong-un's poor marks exposed". The Daily Telegraph. London. 2 April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 May 2012. Shubert, Atika (29 September 2010). "North Korea: Nuclear Tension". CNN. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015. Bernhard Odenahl (29 September 2009). "Mein Freund, der zukünftige Diktator Nordkoreas". Tages-Anzeiger (in German). Archived from the original on 2 October 2010. Retrieved 29 September 2010. "Classmates Recall Kim Jong-un's Basketball Obsession". The Chosun Ilbo. 17 July 2009. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 14 February 2017. Titus Plattner (21 April 2012). "Kim Jong-un est resté neuf ans en Suisse". Le Matin (in French). Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012. Titus Plattner; Daniel Glaus; Julian Schmidli (1 April 2012). "Der Diktator aus Liebefeld". SonntagsZeitung (in German). p. 17. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 2 April 2012. Der Schüler Un Pak ist identisch mit Kim Jong-un. Higgins, Andrew (16 July 2009). "Who Will Succeed Kim Jong Il?". The Washington Post. p. A01. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Freeman, Colin; Sherwell, Philip (26 September 2010). "North Korea leadership: 'My happy days at school with North Korea's future leader'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 14 February 2017. Fisher, Max (1 March 2013). "Kim Jong Eun inherited an eccentric obsession with basketball from father Kim Jong Il". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 14 February 2017. "How Did Kim Jong Un Become North Korea's Leader? 20 Little Known Facts About World's Youngest Leader". International Business Times. 20 February 2017. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Choe Sang-Hun; Martin Fackler (14 June 2009). "North Korea's Heir Apparent Remains a Mystery". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2012. "Kim Jong Un makes first appearance since father's death". Los Angeles Times. 20 December 2011. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 8 January 2012. Powell, Bill (22 December 2011). "The Generals Who Will Really Rule North Korea". Time. New York. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Kim Jong-un and father used fake Brazilian passports to apply for Western visas Archived 1 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters per ABC News Online. 28 February 2018. Accessed on 12 April 2018. "Tales of starvation and death in North Korea". BBC. 22 September 2010. Archived from the original on 30 September 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010. Profile: Kim Jong-un Archived 5 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 2 June 2009 Martin Fackler (24 April 2010). "North Korea Appears to Tap Leader's Son as Enigmatic Heir". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. "Confusion Over Photo of N. Korean Leader‑to‑Be". The Chosun Ilbo. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010. "The son also rises". Korea JoongAng Daily. 9 June 2010. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Peter Foster (8 June 2010). "Rare photos of Kim Jong-il's youngest son, Kim Jong-un, released". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010. New images of North Korea's heir apparent Kim Jong-un Archived 1 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 30 September 2010. "Kim Jong Il's Teen Grandson Spotted at Concert of S. Korean Pop Star". Fox News. Associated Press. 18 July 2009. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. Waters, Jimmy (31 March 2017). "THE ASSASSINATION OF KIM JONG NAM". The Intelligencer. Lynn, Hyung Gu. (2007). Bipolar orders: the two Koreas since 1989. Zed Books. p. 122. ISBN 978-1-84277-743-5. Sang-hun, Choe; Fackler, Martin. North Korea's Heir Apparent Remains a Mystery Archived 27 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. 14 June 2009 "Kim Jong-un 'Loves Nukes, Computer Games and Johnny Walker'". The Chosun Ilbo. 20 December 2010. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2019. North Korea Newsletter No. 38 Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Yonhap News. 22 January 2009. "N Korea holds parliamentary poll" Archived 4 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Retrieved 8 March 2009. Heejin Koo (9 March 2009). "Kim Jong Il's Son, Possible Successor, Isn't Named as Lawmaker". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Rosen, James (1 May 2009). "In North Korea, Ailing Kim Begins Shifting Power to Military". Fox News. Archived from the original on 4 May 2009. "N Korea names Kim's successor named". BBC. 2 June 2009. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 14 June 2009. "North Korean leader's son is 'Brilliant Comrade". The Jakarta Post. 13 June 2009. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Lee, Jean H. (2 June 2009). "Kim Jong-un: North Korea's Kim Anoints Youngest Son As Heir". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2019. Willacy, Mark (22 July 2009). "North Koreans sing praises of dynastic dictatorship". AM. Sydney: Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 25 July 2009. Lewis, Leo; Reid, Tim (17 June 2009). "Kim Jong Il's son 'made secret visit to China'". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2019. "China Dismisses Reports of Kim Jong-un Visit". The Chosun Ilbo. 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Lim, Chang-Won (6 September 2009). "NKorea backs Kim's succession plan: analysts". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Gayathri, Amrutha (24 December 2011). "North Korean Propagandists Say Kim Jong‑il's Son Planned South Korea Attacks". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 26 December 2015. "Kim Jong-un 'Masterminded Attacks on S. Korea'". The Chosun Ilbo. 3 August 2011. Archived from the original on 12 September 2011. Retrieved 13 January 2012. Chun, Kwang Ho (2011). "Korean Peninsula: After Cheonan Warship Sinking and Yeonpyeong Incidents". Jeju Peace Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 December 2015. "Is North Korea following the Chinese model?". BBC News. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 30 September 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "North Korea sets date for rare leadership conference". BBC News. 21 September 2010. Archived from the original on 24 September 2010. Retrieved 27 September 2010. "North Korean leader Kim Jong-il's son 'made a general'". BBC News. 28 September 2010. Archived from the original on 28 September 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010. "North Korea's Kim paves way for family succession". BBC News. 28 September 2010. Archived from the original on 29 September 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2010. Matt Negrin (28 September 2010). "N. Korean leader promotes his son". Politico. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2010. "North Korea leader's son given key party posts". BBC News. 28 September 2010. Archived from the original on 29 September 2010. Mark McDonald (9 October 2010). "Kim Jong-il's Heir Attends Parade". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2017. "N.Korea 'Purging Proteges of the Old Guard'". The Chosun Ilbo. 10 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2012. Retrieved 19 December 2011. Branigan, Tania (19 December 2011). "Kim Jong-il, North Korean leader, dies". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 August 2015. Wallace, Rick; Sainsbury, Michael (29 September 2010). "Kim Jong‑il's heir Kim Jong‑un made general". The Australian. ISSN 1038-8761. Archived from the original on 25 December 2013. Shim, Sung-won; Takenaka, Kiyoshi; Buckley, Chris (25 December 2011). Nishikawa, Yoko (ed.). "North Korean power‑behind‑throne emerges as neighbors meet". Reuters. Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Alastair Gale (18 December 2011). "Kim Jong Il Has Died". The Wall Street Journal Asia. Archived from the original on 23 September 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2011. "Notice to All Party Members, Servicepersons and People". Korean Central News Agency. 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 11 March 2015. "We Are under Respected Kim Jong Un". Korean Central News Agency. 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 12 October 2014. Associated Press (19 December 2011). NKorea grieves Kim Jong Il, state media hails son, Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 1 January 2012. Lee, Jiyeun (24 December 2011). "N. Korea Media Begins Calling Kim Jong Un Supreme Commander". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 April 2016. "North Korea: Kim Jong-un hailed 'supreme commander'". BBC News. 24 December 2011. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 24 December 2011. "N.Korea declares Kim Jong-Un commander of military". Agence France-Presse. 30 December 2011. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2011. N. Korean newspaper refers to successor son as head of key party organ Archived 26 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Yonhap News Agency, 26 December 2011. Scott McDonald (30 December 2011). "North Korea vows no softening toward South". USA Today. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011. Chris Green (12 April 2012). "Kim Takes More Top Posts". Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2012. Kim Jong-un (6 April 2012). Let Us Brilliantly Accomplish the Revolutionary Cause of Juche, Holding Kim Jong Il in High Esteem as the Eternal General Secretary of Our Party: Talk to Senior Officials of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea (PDF). Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. p. 6. OCLC 988748608. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2018. Choe, Sang-Hun (11 April 2012). "As Rocket Launching Nears, North Korea Continues Shift to New 'Supreme Leader'". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 September 2023. Per note at end of NYT article: 'An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the day on which North Korea had elevated Kim Jong-un to chairman of the Workers' Party's central military commission and granted him membership in the Politburo and its presidium. It was on Wednesday (11 April), not Thursday (12 April).' Green, Chris (18 July 2012). "Kim Jong Eun Promoted to Marshal". Daily NK. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2012. "North Korea's Kim Jong-un named 'marshal'". BBC News. 18 July 2012. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012. "North Korea's Kim Jong-un elected to assembly without single vote against". The Guardian. Associated Press. 10 March 2014. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2016. Choe, Sang-Hun (9 April 2014). "Leader Tightens Hold on Power in North Korea". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2016. Aoki, Naoko (21 December 2021). "A Decade of the Kim Jong Un Doctrine". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 25 June 2023. "The 7th Party Congress in North Korea: A Return to a New Normal". 38 North. 20 May 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "North Korea leader Kim becomes chairman of ruling Workers' Party: NHK". Reuters. 9 May 2016. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2020. "North Korea election: Surprise as leader Kim Jong-un 'not on ballot'". BBC News. 12 March 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2023. Atsuhito, Isozaki (26 August 2019). "North Korea Revamps Its Constitution". The Diplomat. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Smith, Josh (29 August 2019). "North Korea changes constitution to solidify Kim Jong Un's rule". Reuters. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Shin, Mitch (7 January 2021). "North Korea Party Congress Begins With Kim Jong Un's Confession of Failure on the Economy". The Diplomat. Gallo, William (8 January 2021). "RNorth Korea Calls US 'Biggest Enemy,' Vows to Develop More Nukes". Voice of America. "Mixed signals for North Korean leader's sister as Kim seeks to cement power". Reuters. 10 January 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2022. Won-Gi Jung (10 January 2021). "Kim Jong Un named general secretary — a title reserved for his late father". NK News. NK News. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "북한 노동당 규약 주요 개정 내용" [Major revisions to North Korea's Workers' Party rules]. Yonhap News Agency. 1 June 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "WPK Rules Revised at 8th Congress of WPK". KCNA Watch. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Koh, Byung-joon (17 February 2021). "N.K. state media use 'president' as new English title for leader Kim". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2021. Lee, Gee-dong (3 September 2021). "The Changing Status and Role of the North Korean Military". Global Asia. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Ji, Da-gyum (9 November 2021). "What's behind the emergence of Kim Jong-un-ism?". The Korea Herald. The Korea Herald. Retrieved 10 November 2021. Kleiner, Jürgen (2001). Korea, a Century of Change. River Edge: World Scientific. p. 296. ISBN 978-981-279-995-1. Petrov, Leonid (12 October 2009). "DPRK has quietly amended its Constitution". Leonid Petrov's KOREA VISION. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2015. "Article 100" (PDF). Socialist Constitution of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Amended and supplemented on 1 April, Juche 102 (2013), at the Seventh Session of the Twelfth Supreme People's Assembly. Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 2014. p. 22. ISBN 978-9946-0-1099-1. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016. "Kim Jong-un: North Korea's supreme leader or state puppet?". The Guardian. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Ward, Peter (20 March 2017). "The myth of Kim Jong Un's absolute power". NK News. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Bandow, Doug (25 July 2021). "What If Kim Jong-un Isn't Really in Charge of North Korea?". National Interest. Lankov, Andrei (10 April 2013). The Real North Korea: Life and Politics in the Failed Stalinist Utopia (pp. 139–141). Oxford University Press. Kindle Edition. McCurry, Justin (10 August 2012). "Kim Jong‑il's personal Japanese chef returns to land he fled". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Pak, Jung H. (February 2018). "The education of Kim Jong-un". Brookings Institution. In first New Year speech, North Korea's Kim Jong Un calls for economic revamp Archived 5 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine, CNN, 2 January 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2013. Chasmar, Jessica (18 May 2014). "North Korea offers rare apology after apartment building collapses". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on 8 January 2015. Retrieved 2 January 2015. "North Korea: Apology over Pyongyang building collapse". BBC News. 18 May 2014. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2016. "Kim Jong-un rides white horse on sacred North Korean mountain in fresh propaganda photos". ABC. 16 October 2019. Simon, Johnny (30 March 2017). "Kim Jong Un's transformation into his father is nearly complete". Quartz. Archived from the original on 3 November 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. Westcott, Kathryn (25 April 2014). "Why is Kim Jong-un always surrounded by people taking notes?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un Clarifies Plan to Form Area of Riverside Terraced Houses around Pothong Gate". KCNA. 2021. "Respected Comrade Kim Jong Un Sends Congratulations to Lao President". Chongnyon Chonwi. 26 March 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2021 – via KCNA Watch. "North Korean leader orders to turn armed forces into elite revolutionary army". Information Telegraph Agency of Russia. 2 December 2014. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "Kim Jong-un's latest no-show fuels further health rumours". The Guardian. London. 10 October 2014. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014. So Yeol Kim (10 January 2012). "Military Rallies in Keumsusan Square". Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2012. "N Korea's Kim Jong-un speaks publicly for first time". BBC News. 14 April 2012. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 14 April 2012. Branigan, Tania (6 July 2012). "North Korea's Kim Jong-un gets new official theme song". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2 August 2015. "Half-kilometre long Kim Jong-un propaganda message visible from space". National Post. 23 November 2012. ISSN 1486-8008. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Carlin, Robert (13 November 2018). "Pyongyang Warns Again on "Byungjin" Revival". 38 North. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2021. Rooks, William (12 June 2019). "Walking the byungjin line: North Korea in the Eurasian century". The Strategist. Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Katzeff Silberstein, Benjamin. "North Korea's ICBM Test, Byungjin, and the Economic Logic". The Diplomat. Retrieved 14 January 2021. ""Socialist Enterprise Management System" under Full Implementation". Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 24 February 2015. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 28 April 2015. "Kim Jong Un Stresses the Principles of Market Economy through 'May 30th Measures'". Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 15 January 2015. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 28 April 2015. Makinen, Julie (20 May 2016). "North Korea is building something other than nukes: architecture with some zing". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Salmon, Andrew (4 December 2018). "Going native in the Hermit Kingdom". Asia Times. Retrieved 2 January 2019. Ouellette, Dean J. (2020). "Understanding the "Socialist Tourism" of North Korea Under Kim Jong Un: An Analysis of North Korean Discourse". North Korean Review. 16 (1): 55–81. ISSN 1551-2789. JSTOR 26912705. Yoon, Dasl (2 March 2023). "North Korea Suffers One of Its Worst Food Shortages in Decades". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Junnosuke, Kobara (3 March 2023). "North Korea's Kim pushes farm reform as food crisis grows". Nikkei Asian Review. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Trianni, Francesca (27 January 2014). "Did Kim Jong Un Really Execute His Uncle's Extended Family?". Time. 1:04–1:10 in embedded video. Archived from the original on 9 March 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. Kretschmer, Fabian (3 June 2019). "North Korea: Fake news on both sides is the norm". Deutsche Welle. "'Executed' singer said to be ex-girlfriend of Kim Jong-un alive, North Korean TV shows". South China Morning Post, Agence France-Presse. 17 May 2014. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. "Ri Yong-gil, North Korean general thought to be executed, is actually alive". The Washington Times. 10 May 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. "Crying uncle". The Economist. 14 December 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2023. Ahn, JH (10 August 2016). "Kim Jong Un's executed uncle Jang Song Thaek reappears on N.Korean media". NKNews. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 23 January 2018. "Jang Sung-taek's remaining family executed by Kim Jong-un". Want China Times. 27 January 2014. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. "North Korea executes relatives of Kim Jong-Un's uncle Jang Song-Thaek, reports say". ABC News. 27 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. "Report on Enlarged Meeting of Political Bureau of Central Committee of WPK". KCNA. 9 December 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2019. N. Korea executes leader's uncle for 'treason': KCNA Archived 22 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine Yonhap 13 December 2013. Julian Ryall (7 April 2014). "North Korean official 'executed by flame-thrower'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. "N.Korea Shuts Down Jang Song-taek's Department". The Chosun Ilbo. 7 April 2014. Archived from the original on 7 May 2015. "U.N.'s Pillay says may be crimes against humanity in North Korea". Reuters. 14 January 2013. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2013. "Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Marzuki Darusman" (PDF). United Nations Human Rights Council. 1 February 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2013. "North Korea human rights probe urged by UN". The Christian Science Monitor. 5 February 2013. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Michael Kirby; Marzuki Darusman; Sonja Biserko (17 February 2014). "Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. Nick Cumming-Bruce (17 February 2014). "U.N. Panel Says North Korean Leader Could Face Trial". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. "Kim Jong-un placed on sanctions blacklist for the first time by US". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 6 July 2016. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2016. Solomon, Jay (6 July 2016). "U.S. Puts First Sanctions on North Korean Leader Kim Jong Un". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. "North Korea calls Donald Trump a 'psychopath' following death of Otto Warmbier". The Independent. 23 June 2017. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 9 June 2018. Bosman, Julie (1 March 2019). "Trump Faces Fury After Saying He Believes North Korean Leader on Student's Death". New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 March 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Under the Juniper Tree: The 2012 Assassination Attempt on Kim Jong-un". Sino-NK. 17 November 2014. Archived from the original on 26 September 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. Griffiths, James (5 May 2017). "North Korea claims US 'biochemical' plot to kill Kim Jong Un". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. "North Korea will seek extradition of anyone involved in alleged Kim assassination". Fox News. 11 May 2017. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. Albert, Eleanor (3 January 2018). "North Korea's Military Capabilities". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 8 October 2017. "The CNS North Korea Missile Test Database". Nuclear Threat Initiative. 16 February 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Bell, Markus; Milani, Marco (16 February 2017). "Should we really be so afraid of a nuclear North Korea?". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Hunt, Edward (31 October 2017). "North Korea's Nuclear Ticket to Survival". Foreign Policy in Focus. Archived from the original on 25 March 2017. "What's the Status of North Korea's Nuclear Program?". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 8 October 2017. Hancocks, Paula (29 October 2022). "Is it time to accept North Korea is a nuclear power?". CNN. Retrieved 11 March 2023. "Report on Plenary Meeting of WPK Central Committee". Korean Central News Agency. 31 March 2013. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. "Kim Jong Un Says Pyongyang Won't Use Nukes First; Associated Press". ABC. 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. "North Korea threatens nuclear strike over U.S.-South Korean exercises". CNN. 7 March 2016. Archived from the original on 24 May 2016. Retrieved 22 May 2016. "UN passes sanctions despite North Korea threat of 'pre-emptive nuclear attack'". NBC News. 7 March 2013. Archived from the original on 9 March 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Kim Jong-Un claims North Korea has a hydrogen bomb". Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on 13 December 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2015. Kim, Jong-Un. "Kim Jong Un's 2017 New Year's Address (KCNA – speech full text)". Korean Central News Agency – National Committee On North Korea. Archived from the original on 11 January 2017. Retrieved 10 January 2017. "North Korea's Kim Jong Un says ICBM an Independence Day 'gift' to 'American b**tards': KCNA". The Straits Times. 5 July 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "North Korea claims successful hydrogen bomb test". Deutsche Welle. 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Sabur, Rozina; Allen, Nick; Henderson, Barney; Graham, Chris (29 November 2017). "North Korea tests 'new long-range missile' capable of striking anywhere in US as Donald Trump says he will 'take care of it'". The Telegraph. "UN Security Council Resolutions on North Korea". Arms Control Association. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Kim Jong Un's October 10 Speech: More Than Missiles". 38 North. The Henry L. Stimson Center. 13 October 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2020. Smith, Josh (9 September 2022). "Analysis: Kim Jong Un's 'decapitation' fears shine through in new North Korea nuclear law". Reuters. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Yoonjung Seo, Larry Register and Heather Chen (9 September 2022). "North Korea declares itself a nuclear weapons state, in 'irreversible' move". CNN. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Kim Jong-un Gets Letter from China's New Leader". Chosun.com. 3 December 2012. Archived from the original on 6 December 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. "China opposes DPRK's nuclear test, says statement". China Daily. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013. "China firmly opposes DPRK's nuclear test". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. Eric Talmadge; Foster Klug; Youkyung Lee; Kim Tong-hyung; Gillian Wong; Mari Yamaguchi (3 September 2017). "World Nations Condemn North Korea for Sixth Nuclear Test". Chiangrai Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2017. Denyer, Simon (18 February 2017). "China suspends North Korean coal imports, striking at regime's financial lifeline". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 September 2023. "China to enforce UN sanctions against North Korea". The Guardian. 23 September 2017. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 28 December 2017. "North Korean media issues rare criticism of China over nuclear". Reuters. 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2017. "Chinese media "spoiled the atmosphere" of inter-Korean rapprochement: DPRK media". NK News. 8 February 2018. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018. "Xi Jinping, Kim Jong Un hold talks in Beijing – Xinhua". www.xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. "Kim Jong Un Pays Unofficial Visit to China". Korean Central News Agency. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. Jiang, Steven; Berlinger, Joshua (28 March 2018). "North Korea's Kim Jong Un met Xi Jinping on surprise visit to China". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. Perlez, Jane (8 May 2018). "Kim's Second Surprise Visit to China Heightens Diplomatic Drama". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 May 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2018. Lu, Zhenhua; Lee, Jeong-ho (19 June 2018). "North Korea's Kim Jong-un in China for two-day trip 'to brief Xi Jinping on Donald Trump summit'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Smith, Alexander (9 January 2019). "Kim's China visit shows Trump he's 'not the only game in town'". NBC News. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. Ben Westcott; Joshua Berlinger (21 June 2019). "North Korea holds mass celebration in Xi's honor amid talks on US tensions". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 February 2020. Retrieved 25 February 2020. "Kim Jong Un says he's 'open to dialogue' with South Korea so North Korea can compete in the Olympics — and Seoul wants to talk". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 6 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018. Kim, Hyung-Jin (3 January 2018). "North Korea reopens cross-border communication channel with South Korea". Chicago Tribune. AP. Archived from the original on 4 January 2018. Retrieved 5 January 2018. Gregory, Sean (10 February 2018). "'Cheer Up!' North Korean Cheerleaders Rally Unified Women's Hockey Team During 8–0 Loss". Time. Gangneug. Archived from the original on 9 April 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2018. Ji, Dagyum (12 February 2018). "Delegation visit shows N. Korea can take "drastic" steps to improve relations: MOU". NK News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2018. Choe, Sang-Hun (7 March 2018). "Kim Jong-un, a Mystery to the World, Surprises in Diplomatic Debut". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Klug, Foster (27 April 2018). "Kim Jong Un makes historic walk across border to meet South Korea's Moon Jae-in". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2018. "Kim Jong-un crosses into South Korea". BBC News. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "Koreas make nuclear pledge after summit". BBC News. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 27 April 2018. Retrieved 27 April 2018. "Kim Jong Un, South Korea's Moon Meet Amid Uncertainty Over U.S. Summit". The Wall Street Journal. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 27 May 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2018. Jungeun Kim; Theresa Waldrop (26 May 2018). "North and South Korean leaders hold surprise meeting". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 May 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2018. Holland, Steve; Van Der Perre, Christophe (10 June 2018). "Trump upbeat ahead of North Korean summit; Kim visits Singapore sites". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 June 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2018. Rosenfeld, Everett (12 June 2018). "Document signed by Trump and Kim includes four main elements related to 'peace regime'". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "North Korea agrees to dismantle nuclear complex if United States takes reciprocal action, South says". ABC. 19 September 2018. Rucker, Philip; Denyer, Simon; Nakamura, David (28 February 2019). "North Korea's foreign minister says country seeks only partial sanctions relief, contradicting Trump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Trump sets foot in north korea; Kim visits Freedom House". reuters.com. 30 June 2019. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 30 June 2019. Tanner, Jari; Lee, Matthew (5 October 2019). "North Korea Says Nuclear Talks Break Down While U.S. Says They Were 'Good'". Time. Archived from the original on 7 October 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. "Transcript: Kim Jong Un's letters to President Trump". CNN. 9 September 2020. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy (9 September 2020). "'A magical force': New Trump-Kim letters provide window into their 'special friendship'". CNN. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Sanger, David E.; Choe, Sang-Hun (12 June 2020). "Two Years After Trump-Kim Meeting, Little to Show for Personal Diplomacy". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Kasulis, Kelly (20 February 2020). "Diplomacy stalled a year after Trump-Kim Summit collapse". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Suliman, Adela (12 June 2020). "North Korea's Kim backs away from Trump relationship two years after historic handshake". NBC News. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2020. Cannon, Jay (17 June 2020). "North Korea releases photos showing explosion of liaison office jointly run with South Korea". USA Today. Archived from the original on 20 June 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2020. Smith, Josh (18 March 2021). "North Korea says U.S. attempt to initiate contact is 'cheap trick': KCNA". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Seo, Yoonjung; Bae, Gawon (12 October 2021). "Surrounded by missiles, North Korea's Kim Jong Un blames US for regional instability". CNN. Retrieved 20 May 2023. Smith, Josh; Cha, Sangmi (12 October 2021). "Flanked by missiles, North Korea's Kim says U.S. and South Korea threaten peace". Reuters. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Seo, Heather (31 December 2023). "North Korea says it will no longer seek reunification with South Korea, will launch new spy satellites in 2024". CNN. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Kim, Jeongmin (1 January 2024). "Why North Korea declared unification 'impossible,' abandoning decades-old goal". NK News. Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Reunification with South? No, says North Korea's Kim Jong-un". South China Morning Post. dpa. 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Berlinger, Joshua (25 April 2019). "Vladimir Putin and Kim Jong Un hold first summit". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. Reevell, Patrick (25 April 2019). "Kim Jong Un, Vladimir Putin share warm greeting at start of historic summit". ABC News. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. Jewell, Ethan; Bremer, Ifang (14 July 2022). "North Korea recognizes breakaway republics of Donetsk and Luhansk in Ukraine". NK News. Retrieved 15 July 2022. Yoon, Dasl (17 February 2023). "North Korean-Russian Trade Rebounds, Satellite Images Show". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 March 2023. "So-called referenda in Russian-controlled Ukraine 'cannot be regarded as legal': UN political affairs chief". UN News. 27 September 2022. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Barnes, Julian E. (6 September 2022). "Russia Is Buying North Korean Artillery, According to U.S. Intelligence". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 8 September 2022. "Putin thanks North Korea for supporting Ukraine war as Pyongyang displays its nukes in parade". CNN. 28 July 2023. "North Korea's Kim Meets Russian Defense Minister". VOA News. 26 July 2023. McCurry, Justin; Roth, Andrew (13 September 2023). "Kim Jong-un offers Putin 'full support' in Russia's 'sacred fight' with west". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "North Korea's Kim vows full support for Moscow at a summit with Putin in Russia". AP News. 13 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Seo, Yoojung (1 November 2023). "North Korea believed to have exported over 1 million shells to Russia". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Stone, Mike (7 November 2023). "US Army says it needs $3 billion for 155 mm artillery rounds and production". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Kim Jong-un receives car as gift from Vladimir Putin". The Guardian. Reuters. 20 February 2024. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Bicker, Laura (3 July 2020). "Coronavirus in North Korea: Kim Jong-un claims 'shining success'". BBC. Choe, Sang-Hun (1 May 2020). "Kim Jong-un Resurfaces, State Media Says, After Weeks of Health Rumors". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 May 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. O'Carroll, Chad (22 May 2020). "Amid health rumors, Kim Jong Un absent for two consecutive three-week periods". NK News. O'Carroll, Chad (29 June 2020). "Amid all-time appearance lows, Kim Jong Un absent for another three-week period". NK News. "Kim Yo-jong, sister of North Korea's Kim Jong-un, now 'de facto second in command'". The Guardian. 21 August 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2020. "Kim Jong Un surveys typhoon damage in North Korea". Sky News. Retrieved 6 September 2020. "North Korea officials to be punished after typhoon causes 'dozens of casualties'". The Guardian. 5 September 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2020. Kim, Hyung-Jin (7 September 2020). "N. Korean vows typhoon recovery". Arkansas Online. Archived from the original on 30 December 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2021. Zwirko, Colin (1 February 2022). "Kim Jong Un's body 'withered' as he 'suffered' for the people, state TV says". NK News. Shin, Mitch. "What Is the Truth About COVID-19 in North Korea?". The Diplomat. Retrieved 14 January 2021. "North Korea officially reports first COVID-19 case, orders national lockdown". UPI. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Yang, Heekyong; Kim, Jack (14 May 2022). "North Korea's Kim says COVID 'great turmoil', 21 new deaths reported". Reuters. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Choe, Sang-Hun (18 May 2022). "North Korea Wants to Follow China's Covid 'Success.' Its Plan May Backfire". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Kim, Cynthia (29 May 2022). "North Korea discusses revising COVID curbs, outbreak 'improving'". Reuters. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Shin, Hyonhee; Smith, Josh (11 August 2022). "North Korea declares victory over COVID, suggests leader Kim had it". Reuters. Retrieved 11 January 2024. McCurry, Justin (19 December 2011). "Kim Jong‑un, 'great successor' poised to lead North Korea". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. "Kim Jong Un wanted 'famous' US basketball players as part of denuclearization deal: Sources". ABC News. 9 May 2019. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Dennis Rodman: North Korea's Kim Jong Un is an 'awesome guy,' and his father and grandfather were 'great leaders' Archived 4 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Daily News. 1 March 2013. Joohee Cho (28 February 2013). "Rodman Worms His Way into Kim Jong Un Meeting". ABC News. Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. Silverman, Justin Rocket (29 May 2013). "'Vice' season finale on HBO gives fresh look at Dennis Rodman's meeting with North Korea's Kim Jong-un". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on 8 June 2013. Retrieved 16 July 2013. Song Sang-ho (27 June 2012). "N.K. leader seen moving toward economic reform". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "Kim Jong Un uncensored: 7 impressions gleaned from historic summit". Straits Times. 1 May 2018. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. Reiss, Jaclyn (12 June 2018). "Five things President Trump said about Kim Jong Un and North Korea that have critics seething". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. "The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2019. Greenwood, Faine (30 August 2013). "Kim Jong Un approval rating over 50 percent, poll of defectors finds". The World, Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 3 November 2021. "China blocks "Kim Fatty the Third" from web search results". Associated Press. 16 November 2016. Retrieved 22 February 2022 – via CBS News. "Kim Jong Un Now Has An 80% Approval Rating... in South Korea". Time. Archived from the original on 18 January 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2020. Arthur, Villasanta (23 May 2019). "Kim Jong Un Net Worth: How Is North Korea's Leader Spending His Billions?". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 23 May 2019. Retrieved 23 October 2019. "Dennis Rodman: North Korean leader Kim Jong-un is a 'good-hearted kid'". The Guardian. London. 2 November 2013. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 November 2016. Taylor, Adam (5 October 2012). "Kim Jong-un Has Massively Increased The Import of Luxury Goods into North Korea". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Kim Jong-un Inherits Father's Taste for Bling". The Chosun Ilbo. 22 August 2012. Archived from the original on 30 March 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Joseph Trevithick (16 July 2019). "Here's How North Korea Got Kim Jong Un His New Armored S600 Mercedes Maybach Limos". The Drive. Retrieved 4 September 2021. Luu, Chieu. "Kim Jong Un caught smoking during anti-smoking drive". CNN. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 10 June 2016. Justin McCurry and Enjoli Liston (26 September 2014). "North Korea admits to Kim Jong-un's ill-health for first time". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Fifield, Anna (13 October 2014). "North Korean media report that Kim Jong Un is back at work". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014. "North Korea says leader has reappeared". CNN. 13 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014. Kyodo News, "Kim has gained 30 kg, weighs 130 now: Seoul", Japan Times, 28 September 2015, p. 5 "Kim Jong-un appears in public, North Korean state media report". BBC News. 2 May 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2021. "North Korea's Kim Jong Un reportedly seen in public for first time in 3 weeks". NBC News. 2 May 2020. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Kim, Cynthia (16 February 2020). "Kim Jong Un makes first public appearance in 22 days amid virus outbreak". Reuters. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Elliott, Josh K. (28 June 2021). "'Slim' Jong Un? Kim's weight loss raises questions in North Korea and abroad". Global News. Retrieved 30 June 2021. "North Korea's Leader Kim Jong Un Has Lost Weight. Here's Why the World is Interested". News18. 10 September 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. "North Korea leader Kim Jong-un married to Ri Sol-ju". BBC. Archived from the original on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "North Korea leader Kim Jong Un projects new image by showing off wife". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. 26 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. "Meet Kim Jong Un's 'precious' child Ju Ae - and possibly his likely successor". Sky News. 27 November 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "North Korea leader Kim Jong-un married to Ri Sol-ju". BBC. 25 July 2012. Archived from the original on 7 November 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2013. Ms Ri is believed to have married Mr Kim in 2009 and given birth to a child the following year, analyst Cheong Seong-chang told the South Korean Korea Times newspaper. "Dennis Rodman lets the world know Kim Jong-un has a daughter". National Post. Associated Press. 19 March 2013. ISSN 1486-8008. Retrieved 23 March 2013. Walker, Peter (9 September 2013). "Dennis Rodman gives away name of Kim Jong‑un's daughter". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. "Keeping up with the Kims: North Korea's elusive first family". BBC. 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 April 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. "Kim Jong-un 'has fathered his third child' after wife disappeared from public eye". The Telegraph. Agence France-Presse. 29 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2020. Bisset, Victoria (19 November 2022). "Kim Jong Un's daughter seen for first time — at a missile launch site". The Washington Post. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "Kim's daughter appears again, heating up succession debate". AP News. 26 November 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Yoon, Dasl (8 July 2023). "North Korea Is Training Children to Target 'American Bastards' With Bombs". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 14 July 2023. Sherwell, Phillip (8 January 2017). "Sister helps Kim strut his stuff as key missile test looms". The Times. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2017. McCurry, Justin (9 October 2017). "Meet Kim Yo-jong, the sister who is the brains behind Kim Jong-un's image". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2018. "Kim Jong-nam killing: VX nerve agent 'found on his face'". BBC News. 24 February 2017. Archived from the original on 24 February 2017. DNA Confirms Assassination Victim Was Half Brother of Kim Jong-un, Malaysia Says Archived 5 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine New York Times. By Russell Goldman. 5 March 2017. Downloaded 6 May 2017. Kim Jong-un risks vital ties with China Archived 16 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine Korea Times. By Jun Ji-hye. 16 February 2017. Downloaded 6 May 2017. "Putin honors Kim Jong Un with a WWII memorial medal". DW News. 5 May 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Bechtol, Bruce E. Jr. (2014). North Korea and Regional Security in the Kim Jong-un Era: A New International Security Dilemma. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-40007-9. Frank, Rüdiger. "Political Economy and Ideology under Kim Jong Un." in Routledge Handbook of Contemporary North Korea (Routledge, 2020) pp. 56–74. French, Paul (2016). Our Supreme Leader: The Making of Kim Jong-un. London: Zed Books. ISBN 978-1-78360-900-0. Fifield, Anna (2019). The Great Successor: The Divinely Perfect Destiny of Brilliant Comrade Kim Jong Un. PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1541742482. Hoshino, Masahiro; Hiraiwa, Shunji (2020). "Four factors in the "special relationship" between China and North Korea: A framework for analyzing the China–North Korea Relationship under Xi Jinping and Kim Jong-un". Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies. 9: 18–28. doi:10.1080/24761028.2020.1754998. Kim, Ki-hun (2019). "Studies on the North Korean Monetary Economy in the Kim Jong-un Era". Journal of Peace and Unification. 9 (1): 109–148. doi:10.31780/jpu.2019.9.1.109. S2CID 195487251. Moreshead, Paul. "Review of The Secret Rise and Rule of Kim Jong Un" H-War, H-Net Reviews (December 2020). online Pak, Jung H. (2020). Becoming Kim Jong Un: A Former CIA Officer's Insights into North Korea's Enigmatic Young Dictator. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-1-9848-1972-7. online scholarly book review Pardo, Ramon Pacheco. North Korea-US Relations: From Kim Jong Il to Kim Jong Un (2nd ed. Routledge, 2020). excerpt Kim Jong Un Aphorisms (PDF). Vol. 1. Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 2016. ISBN 978-9946-0-1430-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. Lee, Kyo-Duk; Lim, Soon-Hee; Cho, Jeong-Ah; Song, Joung-Ho (2013). Study on the Power Elite of the Kim Jong Un Regime (PDF). Study Series 13-01. Seoul: Korea Institute for National Unification. ISBN 978-89-8479-708-6. Thak Song-il; An Su-yong, eds. (January 2014). Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un in the Year 2012 (PDF). Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. ISBN 978-9946-0-1192-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2015. An Chol-gang, ed. (November 2014). Supreme Leader Kim Jong Un in the Year 2013 (PDF). Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. ISBN 978-9946-0-1192-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. Thak Son-il; An Su-yong (2017). Anecdotes of Kim Jong Un's Life. Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. ISBN 978-9946-0-1530-9. Thak Song-il, ed. (2018). Son of the People (PDF). Translated by Mun Myong-song; Jong Myong-jin. Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. ISBN 978-9946-0-1719-8. North Korea's Young Leader on Show – video report by The New York Times Official short biography Archived 7 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine at Naenara Kim Jong Un's works at Publications of the DPRK Portals:  Biography  Communism  Politics  North Korea  2010s Kim Jong Un at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata