.sh is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for the British Overseas Territory of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, although it is primarily used in Saint Helena (Ascension Island has its own ccTLD, .ac). Registrations of internationalized domain names are also accepted. On 22 February 2010 the ISO 3166-1 code for Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha changed to reflect the SH used for the ccTLD. There are seven second level domains: co.sh – commercial entities com.sh – commercial entities org.sh – non-profit organizations gov.sh – government departments and agencies edu.sh – educational institutions net.sh – network service providers nom.sh – non-island Internet sites A majority of sites under the .sh domain have nothing to do with Saint Helena, Ascension or Tristan da Cunha. Members of DeviantArt are able to go to their "stash," a service where digital media can be uploaded, stored and published. The DeviantArt "stash" uses the .sh top level domain sta.sh. Sketch comedy YouTube channel Smosh uses the smo.sh domain name to link to addresses on their website, smosh.com. Skillshare uses the domain hack skl.sh to redirect to their website. Since the .sh filename extension is also used by Unix shell scripts, this domain has been used for websites about command-line interface programs such as Homebrew. SH is the official abbreviation for the German federal state of Schleswig-Holstein and the .sh domain is used for sites like nah.sh, a public transportation site as well as the Verbraucherzentrale (verbraucherzentrale.sh), the SPD party (spd.sh) and for some subpages by the official Schleswig-Holstein government (e.g. wahlen.sh). The rhythm game osu! and the personal landing page of its primary developer uses the ppy.sh domain, such as osu.ppy.sh, old.ppy.sh, and status.ppy.sh. The main fork of the popular movie torrent freeware program Popcorn Time is hosted at a .sh domain. .uk .ac .SH IDN Policy Archived 2014-09-25 at the Wayback Machine, NIC, Saint Helena. ".sh websites". Google.com. "What is Sta.sh?". DeviantArt. Retrieved 28 July 2013. "Smo.sh redirect". Smosh. "Homebrew, The missing package manager for OS X". Homebrew. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Nahverkehr im echten Norden » NAH.SH". "ppy". ppy.sh. Retrieved 2023-01-26. "osu.ppy.sh". osu!. "Popcorn Time's best-known app comes back to life". 2016-02-26. "Popcorn Time Fork Claims Official Relaunch After MPAA Shutdown". 2016-02-25. Dwilson, Stephanie Dube (February 25, 2016). "PopcornTime.sh: 5 Fast Facts You Need to Know". Aldershoff, Jan Willem (February 24, 2016). "Popcorn Time is back - original developers post statement". Myce.com. IANA .sh whois information