A mineraloid is a naturally occurring mineral-like substance that does not demonstrate crystallinity. Mineraloids possess chemical compositions that vary beyond the generally accepted ranges for specific minerals. For example, obsidian is an amorphous glass and not a crystal. Jet is derived from decaying wood under extreme pressure. Opal is another mineraloid because of its non-crystalline nature. Pearl is considered a mineraloid because the included calcite and/or aragonite crystals are bonded by an organic material, and there is no definite proportion of the components. Allophane, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Amber, non-crystalline structure, organic Anthracite or hard coal Bituminous coal Chlorophaeite Chrysocolla, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Deweylite, a mixture of serpentine and talc or stevensite Diatomite Ebonite,[citation needed] vulcanized natural or synthetic rubber (organic); lacks a crystalline structure Fulgurite, a variety of the mineraloid lechatelierite Jet, non-crystalline nature, organic (very compact coal) Lechatelierite, nearly pure silica glass, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Leonardite Libyan desert glass Lignite—brown coal Limonite, a mixture of oxides and hydroxides of iron Mercury, (as liquid) Moldavite Mookaite/Radiolarite Obsidian—volcanic glass; non-crystalline structure, a silica rich glass Opal, non-crystalline hydrated silica silicon dioxide, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Ozokerite, a black waxy hydrocarbon mixture Palagonite Pearl, organically produced carbonate Pele's hair Petroleum, liquid, organic Psilomelane Pumice Pyrobitumen, amorphous fossilized petroleum (noncrystalline, organic) Shungite, black, lustrous, more than 98 weight percent of carbon Sideromelane, volcanic glass – non-crystalline, an iron rich, silica poor glass Tektite, meteoritic silica rich glass Water, e.g. as inclusions in other crystals, or in the form of rain, (as liquid) Zietrisikite, a mineral hydrocarbon wax List of minerals – Mineraloids are listed after minerals in each alphabetically sorted section. Peacock, M. A.; Fuller, R. E. (1928). "Chlorophaeite, sideromelane, and palagonite from the Columbia River Plateau" (PDF). American Mineralogist. 13: 360–382. Retrieved 6 September 2017. Schandl, Eva S.; Gorton, Michael P. (1995). "Phyllosilicate Alteration of Olivine in The Lower Sheeted Dike Complex, Leg 140, Hole 504B" (PDF). Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program, Scientific Results. Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program. 137/140: 207–216. doi:10.2973/odp.proc.sr.137140.019.1995. ISSN 1096-7451. The Mineraloids Class. Amethyst Galleries. v t e