Onika Tanya Maraj-Petty (born December 8, 1982), known professionally as Nicki Minaj (/ˈnɪki mɪˈnɑːʒ/ NIK-ee min-AHZH), is a Trinidadian-born rapper and singer based in the United States. Often referred to as the "Queen of Rap", she is known for her musical versatility, animated rap flow, and alter egos. She first gained recognition after releasing three mixtapes between 2007 and 2009. Minaj's debut album, Pink Friday (2010), topped the US Billboard 200 chart; its single "Super Bass" reached number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and was later certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Its follow-up, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded (2012), explored dance-pop and topped the Billboard 200, spawning the hit single "Starships". Her next album, The Pinkprint (2014), marked a return to her hip hop roots. Its single "Anaconda" peaked at number two on the Hot 100 and became the first music video by a solo female rapper to reach one billion views on YouTube. Her 2019 collaboration with Karol G, "Tusa", became the longest-running number-one single on the Argentina Hot 100 chart. She achieved her first two US number-one singles in 2020 with the collaborations "Say So (Remix)" with Doja Cat and "Trollz" with 6ix9ine. In 2022, she earned her first solo number-one on the Hot 100 with "Super Freaky Girl", the lead single from her fifth album, Pink Friday 2 (2023), which also debuted atop the Billboard 200. Outside of music, Minaj's film and television career has included voice roles in the animated films Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012) and The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019), and supporting roles in the films The Other Woman (2014) and Barbershop: The Next Cut (2016) Minaj is one of the world's best-selling music artists with over 100 million records sold. Billboard ranked her as the top-selling female rapper of the 2010s and one of the greatest rappers of all time. She has the most number-one albums (3) and top-ten songs (23) in the US for a female rapper. Her various accolades include nine American Music Awards, eight MTV Video Music Awards (including the 2022 Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award), twelve BET Awards, five Billboard Music Awards, a Brit Award, three Guinness World Records, and twelve Grammy Award nominations. In 2016, Time included her on their annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. Throughout her career, Minaj's outspoken views, feuds with other rappers, her personal life, and her fanbase have received significant media coverage and controversy. Onika Tanya Maraj was born on December 8, 1982, in the Saint James district of Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. Her father was Robert Maraj (1956–2021), a financial executive and part-time gospel singer of Dougla (Afro-Trinidadian mother and Indo-Trinidadian father) descent. Her mother, Carol, is also a gospel singer with Afro-Trinidadian ancestry. Carol worked in payroll and accounting departments during Minaj's youth. Minaj's father was addicted to alcohol and crack cocaine and had a violent temper, burning down their house in December 1987. She has an older brother named Jelani, a younger brother named Micaiah, and a younger sister named Ming. As a child, Minaj and Jelani grew up with their grandmother in Saint James in a household with 11 cousins. Carol was working numerous jobs in Saint James before getting her green card at the age of 24. She then moved to the Bronx in New York to attend Monroe College, leaving both Minaj and Jelani in Trinidad with their grandmother. Eventually, when Minaj was five, Carol got her first house, on 147th Street in South Jamaica, Queens and brought both Minaj and Jelani to live with her and their father. Minaj claimed she came to the United States as an illegal immigrant, although by the time she moved to the United States her mother and subsequently her father had lawful permanent residency. Minaj recalled, "I don't think I had a lot of discipline in my household. My mom motivated me, but it wasn't a strict household. I kind of wanted a strict household." Minaj successfully auditioned for admission to Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, which focuses on visual and performing arts. After graduation, Minaj wanted to become an actress, and she was cast in the Off-Broadway play In Case You Forget in 2001. At the age of 19, as she struggled with her acting career, she worked as a waitress at a Red Lobster in the Bronx, but was fired for discourtesy to customers. She said she was fired from "at least 15 jobs" for similar reasons. Other jobs included customer service representative and office management on Wall Street. Minaj recalls buying a BMW as a 19-year-old with the money from waitressing. Minaj briefly signed with Brooklyn group Full Force, in which she rapped in a quartet called the Hoodstars composed of Lou$tar (son of "Bowlegged Lou"), Safaree Samuels (Scaff Beezy) and 7even Up. In 2004, the group recorded the entrance song for WWE Diva Victoria, "Don't Mess With", which was featured on the compilation album ThemeAddict: WWE The Music, Vol.6. Minaj later left Full Force and uploaded songs on her Myspace profile, sending several of her songs to people in the music industry. Later, Fendi, CEO of Brooklyn label Dirty Money Entertainment, signed Minaj to his label in 2007 under a 180-day contract. Originally adopting the stage name Nicki Maraj, she eventually changed it to Nicki Minaj stating that "my real name is Maraj. Fendi flipped it when he met me because I had such a nasty flow!" Minaj released her first mixtape, Playtime Is Over, on July 5, 2007, and her second, Sucka Free, on April 12, 2008. She released her third mixtape, Beam Me Up Scotty, on April 18, 2009; it received favorable coverage on BET and MTV. At the time, she was managed by Debra Antney. One of its tracks, "I Get Crazy", reached number 20 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Rap Songs chart and number 37 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. After Minaj was discovered by fellow rapper Lil Wayne, she signed a recording contract with his Young Money Entertainment. That November, she appeared with Gucci Mane and Trina on the remix of "5 Star Bitch" by Yo Gotti. In early February 2010, Minaj made her first two appearances on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart with her features on "Knockout" and "Up Out My Face" by Lil Wayne and Mariah Carey respectively. Minaj also appeared on "BedRock" and "Roger That" on the compilation album, We Are Young Money (2009). The singles peaked at numbers two and 56, respectively, in the U.S. Their parent album reached number nine on the U.S. Billboard 200, and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). At Jay-Z's suggestion, Robin Thicke featured Minaj on his single "Shakin' It 4 Daddy". Allison Stewart of The Washington Post stated that, during that time, she "became the go-to girl for artists who wanted to add some skank to their tracks without sullying themselves in the process". Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven singles simultaneously charting in the U.S. On March 29, 2010, Minaj released "Massive Attack" featuring Sean Garrett. Intended as the lead single from her forthcoming debut album, Pink Friday, the song was dropped from the album due to poor commercial performance. The next single, "Your Love", later became the album's lead single. Released in June, it peaked at number 14 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Rap Songs chart. In September, Minaj released "Check It Out" with will.i.am and "Right Thru Me" as follow-up singles. In October, Minaj was featured on Kanye West's "Monster", a posse cut with Jay-Z and Rick Ross featuring vocals from Justin Vernon of Bon Iver. Her verse received widespread acclaim with many critics regarding it as the best verse on that song. Complex rated Minaj's "Monster" verse as the number-one best rap verse in the past five years, while Sean Fennessey of The Village Voice stated that "Monster" was "the track that announced Minaj's "brilliance" to most people." Shortly after, she performed "Monster" with West and Jay-Z at Yankee Stadium, becoming the first ever female rapper to perform there. In November 2010, Minaj received her first Grammy Award nomination for her guest verse on Ludacris' song "My Chick Bad". Pink Friday was released on November 19, 2010, debuting at number two and later reaching number one on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 375,000 copies. It had the largest sales week for a female rap album in the 21st century and second-highest sales week overall after Lauryn Hill's The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill (1998). Upon release, the album received generally positive reviews from critics. It was certified platinum in December, with it becoming the first album by a solo female rapper to go platinum in seven years. "Moment 4 Life" featuring Drake was released as the fourth single from Pink Friday, on December 7, 2010. Minaj performed "Right Thru Me" and "Moment 4 Life" as the musical guest on the January 29, 2011, episode of Saturday Night Live. "Super Bass", the album's fifth single, was released in April 2011. It became a sleeper hit and commercially successful, ultimately peaking at number three on the Hot 100. It was eventually certified 12-times platinum in the US. Super Bass was the highest-charting solo single by a female rapper since Missy Elliott's "Work It" in 2002. The music video has over 1 billion views on YouTube as of April 2024. Early in her career, Minaj identified as bisexual and made several references to it in her music. However, she eventually stated in a 2010 Rolling Stone interview, "I think girls are sexy, but I'm not going to lie and say that I date girls." She once again addressed her sexuality in 2020 on Doja Cat's "Say So" remix. The lyrics divided members of the LGBT community, with some accusing her of "bisexual erasure" while others voicing there is nothing wrong with originally identifying as bisexual, and then later identifying as straight. Minaj was one of the opening acts on Britney Spears' 2011 Femme Fatale Tour. She and Kesha appeared on the remix of Spears' "Till the World Ends", which peaked at number three in the U.S. On August 7, 2011, Minaj experienced a wardrobe malfunction during a live performance on Good Morning America when she revealed her left nipple. Both ABC and Minaj apologized for the incident, with Minaj denying it was a publicity stunt. Minaj continued to perform at high-profile events throughout 2011 with Donatella Versace inviting her to perform with Prince for the introduction of a Versace collection for H&M. She also performed "Super Bass" at the 2011 Victoria's Secret Fashion Show. In December 2011, Minaj was nominated for three Grammy Awards, including Best New Artist and Best Rap Album for Pink Friday. Also that year, she won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip-Hop Video for "Super Bass", marking her first VMA win. "Starships" was released in February 2012 as the lead single from Minaj's forthcoming second album, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded. The song reached number five on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and went on to become the fifth best-selling single of 2012. Her crossover into pop music was criticized by some, despite her commercial success. Follow-up singles "Beez in the Trap" featuring 2 Chainz and "Right by My Side" featuring Chris Brown were released shortly after. Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded was eventually released on April 2, 2012, two months later than initially planned. It was preceded by the promotional singles "Roman in Moscow" and "Stupid Hoe". The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 253,000 copies, and was certified two-times platinum by the RIAA in March 2016. However, the mix of hip-hop songs and mainstream pop material received mixed reviews. "Pound the Alarm" and "Va Va Voom" were later released as the final singles from the album. Minaj along with fellow rapper M.I.A. joined Madonna to perform the single, "Give Me All Your Luvin" during the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show on February 6, 2012. Minaj was the first solo female rapper to perform at the Grammy Awards, performing "Roman Holiday" during the 2012 ceremony on February 12. Her exorcism-themed performance was controversial, with the American Catholic League and its president criticizing her performance. Minaj began her headlining Pink Friday Tour on May 16, 2012, which was followed by the Pink Friday: Reloaded Tour beginning October 14, 2012. Although she was scheduled to headline the June 3 Hot 97 Summer Jam at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey, at the request of Lil Wayne she canceled her appearance the day of the show after Peter Rosenberg of the station dismissed her single "Starships" as "not real hip-hop". The following month, she voiced Steffie in the animated film Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012). Minaj won awards for Best Female Video (for "Starships") at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards and Best Hip-Hop at the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards. An expanded version of Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded, subtitled The Re-Up, was released on November 19, 2012, with seven new songs. That month, she was the subject of a three-part E! documentary titled Nicki Minaj: My Truth. In September, Minaj joined the judges' panel for the twelfth season of American Idol with Mariah Carey, Keith Urban, and Randy Jackson. Throughout the show there were disagreements between Carey and Minaj, with both of them leaving the series at the end of the season. Minaj's first live-action theatrical film The Other Woman was filmed in spring 2013 and premiered on April 25, 2014. In late 2014, Minaj separated from her longtime boyfriend Safaree Samuels, whom she had dated since 2003. According to Minaj, he had proposed to her, but she declined. Several tracks on her forthcoming third album, The Pinkprint, are believed to have been heavily inspired by the end of their relationship. Minaj began dating rapper Meek Mill in early 2015, shortly after her breakup with Samuels. As she was working on The Pinkprint, she described the album as "a continuation of The Re-Up with a lot more" and said it would focus on her "hip hop roots". During an MTV interview, she additionally said that it would be "next level" and that she has "much to talk about". "Pills n Potions" was released as the lead single from The Pinkprint in May 2014. In July, she appeared as a featured artist on the song "Bang Bang" with singers Jessie J and Ariana Grande, which peaked at number three on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart. "Anaconda" was released in August as the second single from the album, peaking at number two, which became her highest-charting single in the U.S. at the time. The music video for "Anaconda" went viral upon release online; it set a 24-hour Vevo record, accumulating 19.6 million views on its first day of release, breaking the record previously held by Miley Cyrus for "Wrecking Ball". On November 9, 2014, Minaj hosted the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards in Glasgow, Scotland. She also won the Best Hip-Hop Award for a second time. The Pinkprint was officially released on December 15, 2014, and debuted at number two in the U.S., with first week sales of 244,000 equivalent units (198,000 in pure album sales and 46,000 combined album-equivalent units and streams). Upon release, critics praised the production and personal lyrics. At the 58th Grammy Awards, Minaj received three more Grammy Award nominations, including a second Best Rap Album nomination for The Pinkprint, a Best Rap Song nomination for "Anaconda" and a Best Pop Duo/Group Performance nomination for "Bang Bang". In March 2015, Minaj embarked on her third world tour entitled The Pinkprint Tour and also became the first female artist to chart four songs simultaneously in the top 10 of Billboard's Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop airplay chart. At the 2015 BET Awards, Minaj won her sixth consecutive award for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist, becoming the female rapper with most wins in that category. In August 2015, Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax figure of Minaj, which depicted a pose from the "Anaconda" music video. The attraction received criticism from some, including Angharad Welsh of The Independent, who called it "a sexist, racist mistake". Despite this, Minaj voiced her approval of the wax figure on social media. In May 2015, it was announced that Minaj would feature in the third installment of the Barbershop film series, alongside Ice Cube, Cedric the Entertainer, Eve, and other original cast members. Titled Barbershop: The Next Cut, the film was released on April 15, 2016. For Minaj's performance as a "sassy" hairdresser named Draya, she was nominated for a Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress: Comedy. In September 2015, it was announced that Minaj would executive produce and appear in a scripted single-camera comedy series for ABC Family (now Freeform) based on her life growing up in Queens, New York City. The show was titled Nicki and the pilot episode was filmed in Minaj's hometown in January 2016. In October 2016, Minaj stated the filming was postponed for undisclosed reasons. In January 2017, she announced that she had ended her relationship with Meek Mill. In February 2017, Minaj and Ty Dolla Sign was featured on Jason Derulo's single "Swalla" which reached the top ten in several countries, including a peak of number six in the UK. The following month, Minaj signed with the major modeling agency, Wilhelmina Models. On March 20, 2017, when her singles "No Frauds", "Changed It", and "Regret in Your Tears" were released simultaneously, Minaj broke the record for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries for a female artist, which at the time was previously held by Aretha Franklin. In May 2017, Minaj opened the 2017 Billboard Music Awards with a medley performance that was described by Elias Leight of Rolling Stone as "flamboyantly produced" and "dexterous". Throughout the remainder of 2017, Minaj performed guest verses on several singles, including Migos' "MotorSport" and Yo Gotti's "Rake It Up", both of which peaked inside the top ten in the US at numbers six and eight, respectively. She also featured on Katy Perry's "Swish Swish", which was certified platinum in the US and Canada. She briefly dated rapper Nas in 2017 before they broke up in January 2018. After a social media hiatus, Minaj released two singles from her fourth studio album Queen. She released "Chun-Li" and "Barbie Tingz" simultaneously on April 12, 2018, with both reaching number ten and number twenty-five in the U.S. respectively. She performed "Chun-Li" on Saturday Night Live and the 2018 BET Awards. While "Chun Li" appears on the tracklist of the album, "Barbie Tingz" is only included on the Target version of the album. On the red carpet of the 2018 Met Gala, she announced the title of the album and the original release date. The second single, "Bed", featuring Ariana Grande was released on June 14, 2018, alongside the album pre-order, reaching number 42 on the Hot 100. Additionally, Minaj appeared as a featured artist on the song "Fefe" along with Murda Beatz and Tekashi 6ix9ine. It debuted at number four in the U.S., marking Minaj's highest debut on the chart at the time, besting the sixth place start of "Bang Bang" in 2014. It later peaked at number three and was added to Queen in the middle of its first tracking week. The day before the album's release, Minaj launched her own Beats 1 radio show, Queen Radio. Queen received multiple delays before finally being released on August 10, 2018. It debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 with 185,000 album-equivalent units, of which 78,000 came from pure album sales. It also debuted at number five in the UK and at number four in Australia, marking Minaj's highest debut in the latter country. Minaj later expressed frustration and criticized several people including Travis Scott, whose album Astroworld claimed the top spot for a second week in a row, blocking Queen from the top spot. Minaj alleged that Travis Scott sold shirts, merchandise, and ticket passes for an unnannounced tour to boost his album sales. This controversy and Queen's roll-out was documented by several news outlets and commentators. Queen received generally positive reviews, with some critics deriding the album's length and direction. The album was certified Platinum by the RIAA in January 2019, for moving over 1 million equivalent units. Minaj performed at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards where she also won her fourth MTV Video Music Award for the "Chun-Li" music video. The same month, she featured on the remix of "Idol" by South Korean boy band BTS. It debuted and peaked at number eleven in the U.S. which was the group's second highest-charting song at the time. She also featured on the song "Woman Like Me" by British girl group Little Mix, which was released on October 12, 2018. A music video was shortly released after, with Minaj and Little Mix later performing the song together at the 2018 MTV Europe Music Awards. She was also featured on "Dip" by American rapper Tyga which reached number sixty-three in the U.S. making her the first female artist to have 100 entries on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. She later attended the year-end Billboard Women in Music event, receiving the Game Changer Award for the accomplishment. In September, Minaj co-headlined the annual Made in America Festival and suffered another wardrobe malfunction when the front of her outfit fell open. In November, she was invited to the DWP music festival in China but did not perform due to problems with the company hosting the event. The next year in April 2019, Minaj made a surprise guest appearance at the 2019 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival during Ariana Grande's set where they performed their collaborations "Side to Side" and "Bang Bang". However, she experienced technical difficulties with her earpiece. Later that month, Minaj parted ways with her longtime management team after a mutual agreement, with American entertainment executive Irving Azoff serving as her new manager. In June 2019, Minaj released a standalone single titled "Megatron" along with an accompanying music video. In the U.S., the song debuted at number twenty. A month later, she provided information on her upcoming fifth studio album, appearing on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, stating that "there's definitely a new album, of course." She featured on the song "Hot Girl Summer" alongside fellow female rapper Megan Thee Stallion in August 2019, which reached number eleven in the U.S. Minaj had a voice role as Pinky in The Angry Birds Movie 2, which was released in August 2019. In November, Minaj appeared on the Charlie's Angels: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack on the song "Bad To You", along with Ariana Grande and Normani, marking her sixth collaboration with Grande. Minaj also collaborated with Colombian singer Karol G on the song "Tusa", which was released to streaming platforms on November 7. The song reached forty-two in the U.S. and reached the top of many other charts including the "Hot Latin Songs" chart, which made it the first song with two lead female artists to debut in such position. "Tusa" later became the longest-running number one single in Argentina, spending five months on the top of the chart. In January 2020, Minaj was featured on "Nice to Meet Ya" by American singer-songwriter Meghan Trainor. In February, she released a standalone song called "Yikes" as a promotional single. By the end of that month, Minaj appeared as a guest judge on the twelfth season's premiere of the reality television show RuPaul's Drag Race. In May, fellow rapper Doja Cat announced a collaboration with Minaj on two remixes of her song "Say So". The remix later debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, becoming both Minaj and Doja Cat's first single to reach number one in the U.S. It became the first all-female collaboration that had reached number one in the U.S. since "Fancy" by Australian rapper Iggy Azalea featuring English singer Charli XCX did it in 2014. It marked the first time that a song by two female rappers reached the top, for which Guinness World Records later gave them an award. A month later, she released a collaboration with 6ix9ine called "Trollz", which debuted at number one in the U.S. becoming her second number one single. This made her the first female rapper to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 since Lauryn Hill did so in 1998 with "Doo Wop (That Thing)". Minaj featured on singer Ty Dolla Sign's track "Expensive". She continued to appear as a featured artist on several songs in late 2020 and released "What That Speed Bout!?" with producer Mike Will Made It and rapper YoungBoy Never Broke Again on November 6. On the 10th anniversary of her debut album Pink Friday (2010), Minaj announced a six-part docuseries about her, produced by Bron Studios and was originally said to premiere on HBO Max. In 2022, the streaming platform confirmed it dropped the still-unreleased project. In May 2021, Minaj released a reissue of her mixtape Beam Me Up Scotty (2009), including new songs previously unavailable on streaming services. The reissue debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200, which gave it the highest debut for a female rap mixtape in the U.S. A song from the reissue, titled "Seeing Green" featuring fellow Young Money rappers Drake and Lil Wayne reached number twelve in the U.S. In July, Minaj collaborated with fellow rapper Bia on the remix of her song Whole Lotta Money. In September, Minaj collaborated with English singer-songwriter Elton John's fifth collaboration album The Lockdown Sessions (2021). She appeared on the song "Always Love You" with John and rapper Young Thug. Later that month, she split with her previous manager Irving Azoff and is now being managed by Wassim Slaiby, also known by his management company SALXCO, who is best known for managing The Weeknd and Doja Cat. English singer Jesy Nelson released her solo debut, called "Boyz", which Minaj features on. The song peaked at number four in the UK and number sixteen in Ireland. In October 2021, Minaj appeared as a surprise host for the season six reunion of the reality television show The Real Housewives of Potomac. In November 2021, her 2011 Pink Friday single "Super Bass" received a Diamond certification by the RIAA, making her the second solo female rapper to receive a diamond certification. Minaj won the Best Hip Hop award in the MTV Europe Music Awards 2021, becoming the sixth time she has won this award. After a social media hiatus, Minaj released a song collaboration with rapper Lil Baby called "Do We Have a Problem?" in February. The track was accompanied with a music video that featured guest appearances from actors Joseph Sikora and Cory Hardrict. The video contained a snippet of another Lil Baby collaboration titled "Bussin", released a week later, on February 11. "Do We Have a Problem?" debuted and peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100. In a promotional Apple Music interview with DJ Zane Lowe, Minaj said her forthcoming fifth studio album is "coming very soon". She described it as "fun, gutta, and back to the basics". In March, Minaj and fellow rapper Coi Leray's collaboration "Blick Blick", was released—from the former's debut studio album, Trendsetter (2022). Minaj revealed that her verse was almost scrapped due to American rapper Benzino (who is also Coi Leray's father) leaking the collaboration. Later that month, she surprise-released the standalone single "We Go Up" featuring rapper Fivio Foreign. The drill track was initially teased on Minaj's social media as a scrapped song from her album, before fans had requested her to release the song. In April, Minaj appeared on English television host James Corden's Carpool Karaoke segment, kickstarting the return of its broadcast on The Late Late Show with James Corden after a two-year hiatus. In early July, Minaj headlined the 2022 editions of Essence Music Festival in New Orleans and the Wireless Festival in London. On July 28 she released a two-minute trailer of her upcoming six-part docu-series titled "Nicki", produced by Canadian production company Bron Studios. In August, Minaj released "Super Freaky Girl" as the lead single of her upcoming fifth studio album. The track samples American singer Rick James's 1981 song, "Super Freak." After its initial release, "Super Freaky Girl" received an extended version called the "Roman Remix", which features the return of her alter ego Roman Zolanski. "Super Freaky Girl" debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, marking Minaj's third U.S. number-one and her first unaccompanied chart-topper. It became the first solo song by a female rapper to debut at number one in the U.S. in 22 years, since fellow rapper Lauryn Hill's song "Doo Wop (That Thing)" in 1998. Later in August, Minaj released a compilation album titled Queen Radio: Volume 1 with one new track, "Likkle Miss (Remix)" with Skeng. In September, she released a remix of "Super Freaky Girl" called "Queen Mix", which features 5 other female rappers: JT, Bia, Katie Got Bandz, Akbar V, and Maliibu Miitch. Also in September, Yung Bleu released his single "Love in the Way" featuring Minaj. In October, Minaj and Skeng released a remix of "Likkle Miss" called "The Fine Nine Remix" featuring Spice, Destra Garcia, Patrice Roberts, Lady Leshurr, Pamputtae, Dovey Magnum, Lisa Mercedez, and London Hill. Later that month, rapper YoungBoy Never Broke Again released a collaboration with Minaj titled "I Admit". In November 2022, Minaj collaborated with Lebanese singer Myriam Fares and Colombian singer Maluma on "Tukoh Taka" which was the official FIFA Fan Festival anthem. On March 3, 2023, Minaj released "Red Ruby da Sleeze" as the second single from her upcoming album. Her first solo single since "Super Freaky Girl" (2022), the song's music video was filmed during the Trinidad and Tobago Carnival. The song samples Lumidee's 2003 single "Never Leave You (Uh Oooh, Uh Oooh)". It debuted and peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 while hitting number one on the U.S. Digital Songs and Hot Rap Songs charts. On March 5, Minaj appeared as a surprise performer during Lil Wayne's set at the 2023 Rolling Loud California festival. In April 2023, Minaj featured on "WTF," the lead single from YoungBoy Never Broke Again's third studio album, Don't Try This At Home. She teamed up with Ice Spice on the remix to the latter's song "Princess Diana", released on April 14, 2023—the first-ever release on Minaj's record label, Heavy On It. The remix became the first collaboration between two women to top the Hot Rap Songs chart and made Minaj the woman with the most number-ones on the chart (10). It peaked at number four on the Hot 100 and atop the Digital Song Sales chart. Minaj's next collaboration was German singer Kim Petras's "Alone", released on April 21. It samples "Better Off Alone" (1999) by Alice Deejay. The single reached the top 40 in the United Kingdom. In May, she featured on "Pound Town 2", the remix to St. Louis rapper Sexyy Red and Tay Keith's single, "Pound Town". It reached the summit of the Digital Songs chart. On June 5, 2023, Minaj announced via Twitter that her fifth studio album would be released on October 20, 2023. On June 30, she announced the album's title, Pink Friday 2, via her social media, and that the release date was rescheduled to November 17. The album was ultimately pushed back to and released on December 8, 2023. Pink Friday 2 debuted atop the Billboard 200, with 228,000 album-equivalent units—Minaj's first album in over 11 years to do so. It made her the female rapper with the most US number-one albums (3) in chart history, surpassing Foxy Brown. The record earned the largest sales week (overall and pure) of the decade for a rap album by a woman and for an R&B/hip-hop album by a woman of 2023. It garnered the highest first-week vinyl sales for a female rap album in US history. Additionally, Pink Friday 2 achieved the largest streaming week for a female rap album of the decade, and for a female R&B/hip-hop album of 2023. 14 tracks from the album debuted on the Billboard Hot 100, of which two charted in the top 40—"Everybody" featuring Lil Uzi Vert and "Needle" featuring Drake. Aided by "Everybody", "FTCU", and "Barbie Dangerous", Minaj tied Kanye West for the third-most top-tens (50) on Hot Rap Songs. Multiple deluxe editions of Pink Friday 2 were released. It became Minaj's fifth album to be certified platinum. Also in June 2023, she and Ice Spice released their second collaboration, "Barbie World" with europop band Aqua, from the Barbie film soundtrack. The song samples Aqua's 1997 single, "Barbie Girl". Peaking at number seven on the Hot 100 and atop Digital Song Sales, it extended her record as the female rapper with the most US top-tens (23) and number-ones on the latter chart (16). Minaj made guest appearances on Young Thug and Lil Uzi Vert's albums, Business Is Business and Pink Tape, on the songs: "Money" with the late Juice Wrld, and the US top-20 "Endless Fashion". "Last Time I Saw You" was released on September 1, 2023, as the third single from Pink Friday 2. It made Minaj the act with the most number-ones (25) on the R&B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Sales, surpassing Drake. On September 12, she hosted the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards, marking her second consecutive year in the role. In October, Minaj released "Bahm Bahm", an outtake of Pink Friday 2, as a limited-time website exclusive. Pirated versions of the song were uploaded to streaming services and entered the Apple Music charts, before being taken down. The song ultimately made the final tracklist and was released as part of the album. Days later, she released "For All the Barbz", her freestyle of Drake's "All the Parties" (featuring Chief Keef), exclusively via her YouTube channel. With the 2023 MTV Europe Music Awards, she became the first black artist and female rapper to win Best US Act in the award show's history. An extended remix of the Pink Friday 2 track "Beep Beep", featuring 50 Cent, was released as a promotional single from the album on December 12, 2023. Also in December, Minaj performed on the Atlanta and Miami dates of iHeartRadio's Jingle Ball Tour 2023. She was originally set to perform on the Chicago date but canceled her headlining slot due to the then-forthcoming release of Pink Friday 2, which resulted in Lil Wayne replacing her on the lineup. She conducted a New Year's Eve concert at the E11Even nightclub in Miami. In January 2024, "Everybody" and "FTCU" were released as subsequent singles from Pink Friday 2. After their releases as singles, the tracks reached the top 25 and top 15 on the Hot 100, respectively. "FTCU" topped the Digital Songs, R&B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Sales, and Hot Rap Digital Song Sales charts, becoming Minaj's 17th, 26th, and 22nd number-ones on the tallies. On January 26, 2024, Minaj teased a diss track against fellow rapper Megan Thee Stallion called "Big Foot" on Instagram live in response to the latter's "Hiss" single, which was followed by a series of tweets concerning the feud by Minaj within the course of hours. It was officially released on January 28. The track was accompanied by an acapella version, so that, in Minaj's words: "other producers all around the world can make their own beat." "Big Foot" was poorly received by critics and fans, who criticized the production, the rap flow, and the shots at Megan for being lacking in quality. The song broke first-day records for the highest solo female rap debut in Apple Music history and the biggest solo female rap debut on YouTube in 2024. However, after its strong first-day debut, it fell off quickly in streams and ultimately debuted at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100. It extended Minaj's record as the female rapper with the most, and woman with the second-most, top-tens (46) on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, behind Aretha Franklin (52). Minaj was nominated for Best Rap Song and Best Song Written for Visual Media for "Barbie World" at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards. In support of Pink Friday 2, she embarked on its namesake world tour, her most extensive tour yet. It began on March 1, 2024, in Oakland, California, and will conclude on July 14, 2024, in Liège, Belgium. It includes Minaj's headlining slots at ten festivals in the US and Europe. When I started rapping, people were trying to make me like the typical New York rapper, but I'm not that. No disrespect to New York rappers, but I don't want people to hear me and know exactly where I'm from. — Minaj on her rapping style in a Billboard interview Minaj is known for her animated rapping style and "unique" flow. Her rapping is distinctive for its speed and the use of alter egos and accents, primarily British cockney. She often both sings and raps in her songs, and has made use of metaphors, punch lines, and word play. The alter egos are incorporated with her lyrics in British accents (Roman Zolanski) or soft-spokenness (Harajuku Barbie). Ice-T said about Minaj's rapping style, "[Minaj] does her thing. She has her own way of doing it. She has an ill vocal delivery. She kind of reminds me of a female Busta Rhymes, like how she throws her voice in different directions." Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called Minaj "a sparkling rapper with a gift for comic accents and unexpected turns of phrase. She's a walking exaggeration, outsize in sound, personality and look. And she's a rapid evolver, discarding old modes as easily as adopting new ones." Although many critics describe her technique as bubblegum rap, Minaj said: "What people don't know is that before I was doing that craziness I was doing me, I was just doing regular sounding rap that anyone could hear and identify with. But once I started doing all that weird shit—I'm not mad at it because it got everyone's attention." Robby Seabrook III of XXL included Minaj in list of "most unique flows from rappers over the last five years", saying that she "has solidified her spot as a leader of the pack for her animated flows, inspiring many other women in hip-hop to play with their vocals. She goes from campy to bellicose, excited to eccentric, oftentimes all on one song." Noted as a rap artist, she also occasionally lends herself to electronic music genres (especially electropop). Pink Friday marked her exploration of the genres, spawning electro songs including the pop-laden "Super Bass". Also combining rap with synthesizer music, Minaj's second album, Pink Friday Roman Reloaded, had a number of electro-hop and electro pop songs: "HOV Lane", "Whip It", "Automatic", "Come on a Cone", "Young Forever", "Fire Burns", "Roman Holiday", "The Boys" and "Beez in the Trap"; while "Starships" is a eurodance song. Her verse on Kanye West's "Monster" was critically acclaimed and contributed greatly to her popularity; many critics said she had the best verse in the song. West claimed at one point he considered deleting her verse from the track, because he was worried it would outshine his own work: It was like that moment when I thought about taking Nicki's verse off of 'Monster' because I knew people would say that was the best verse on the best Hip Hop album of all time or arguably top ten albums of all time. And I would do all that work, eight months of work on Dark Fantasy and people to this day would say to me 'My favorite thing was Nicki Minaj's verse'. So if I let my ego get the best of me instead of letting that girl get the shot to get that platform to be all she could be, I would take it off or marginalize her, try to stop her from having that shining moment… Tara Colley of The Conversation described Minaj as a "pre-eminent female rapper" and that she has "consistently straddled the distinct personas of gangsta boss and sexy pop siren without truly committing to either" and that "her chameleonic ability" matches "some of rap's most verbose, witty, filthy and pop-friendly" stars such as Eminem and Lil Wayne. Zoe Johnson of XXL, stated that in recent years Minaj's "beat selection has moved to refined production full of grit and hip-hop flare in recent years". With her parents frequently fighting during her childhood, Minaj lived through characters she created as a means of escape. She recalled that "fantasy was my reality" and her first identity was Cookie, who became Harajuku Barbie and (later) Nicki Minaj. In November 2010, Minaj assumed the alter ego Nicki Teresa, wearing a colorful headdress and calling herself "healer to her fans" during a visit to the Garden of Dreams Foundation at Fuse Studios in New York. She introduced another alter ego, Rosa (pronounced with an exaggerated R), to commemorate her December 2010 appearance on Lopez Tonight. One of Minaj's most well-known alter-egos is "a demon inside her" named Roman Zolanski (named after film director Roman Polanski with modified surname), Minaj's "twin brother", whose character she assumes when she is angry. Roman has been compared to Eminem's alter ego Slim Shady, and on "Roman's Revenge" Minaj and Eminem collaborate as their alter egos. On her next album, she said that there would be a lot of Roman: "And if you're not familiar with Roman, then you will be familiar with him very soon. He's the boy that lives inside of me. He's a lunatic and he's gay and he'll be on there a lot." Roman has a mother, Martha Zolanski, who appeared on "Roman's Revenge" with a British accent and singing on "Roman Holiday" for the first time. Martha appeared in the "Moment 4 Life" video as Minaj's apparent fairy godmother. In December 2023, in response to a fan inquiry on Martha ever returning, Minaj confirmed that Martha had died of old age. Minaj cites Lil Wayne, Foxy Brown, and Jay-Z as major influences: "I can't even imagine my career, my creative spirit without Wayne [...] I feel like I'm still intertwined with him creatively". Minaj has called Lil Wayne her mentor and credited him with discovering her. On Foxy Brown and Jay-Z, Minaj said: "I really loved [Foxy] as a female rapper. I was really interested in her mind and her aura [and] I was really, really into Jay-Z. Me and my friends in high school, we were reciting all of the Jay lyrics. His words were our words in our conversations all the time." She said, further: "I never really told Foxy how much she has influenced me and how much she changed my life" adding that Foxy Brown was "the most influential female rapper" for her. Minaj said in a T Magazine interview in 2017: "Jay-Z, Lil Wayne, Foxy Brown... [...] Those are the three I keep in my head when I'm writing because they've influenced me so much, [...] I feel like I'm a part of all of them." In 2023, Minaj revealed that popular music singer Whitney Houston is one of her major influences, stating: "I don’t think people realize how much singing or singers like Whitney [influenced me]. Whitney’s first album, I know it front to back." Jada Pinkett Smith is one of Minaj's role models in her acting career. Minaj was inspired by R&B singer Monica, singing "Why I Love You So Much" at every talent show she entered. While performing in Atlanta as part of her Pink Friday Tour, she called Monica one of her all-time greatest musical influences. Lauryn Hill is also one of Minaj's major influences, with Minaj quoting her lyrics in a high school yearbook. Minaj has also cited Beyoncé, Marilyn Monroe, Madonna, Enya, Eminem, Kanye West, Trina, Drake, Lil' Kim, Lisa Left Eye Lopes, Janet Jackson, Grace Jones, Britney Spears, Remy Ma and Missy Elliott as influences. She called Betsey Johnson a fashion inspiration: "[Betsey] is a free spirit. When I met her the other day, I felt like I knew her for my whole life. She's so warm and considerate and caring. She's amazingly talented and I've been wearing her clothes forever, so to meet her was like, 'Yay!' [I was] bowing down to her; she's dope!" Minaj has also expressed appreciation for Cyndi Lauper's style and how her videos inspired her as a teenager: "When I first went to get my hair colored, I was about 14 and I wanted blonde highlights. The beautician said, 'No, you have to get your mother on the phone,' and I was just crying and begging. I've always been experimenting. Cyndi Lauper's videos – that's what intrigued me." Billboard listed Minaj as the fourth-most-active musician on social media on its March 2011 Social 50 chart. She is the most followed rapper on Instagram with over 229 million followers—the first to surpass 200 million followers—and one of the most followed musicians on the social media platform. On Twitter, she is one of the most followed rappers, with over 28 million followers on the app, as of February 2024. She was the most followed rapper on Twitter in 2012. BET has named Minaj as a "gay icon". Minaj was a vocal proponent of streams counting towards an artist's RIAA certifications. The organization later announced in 2016 that it would be modernizing the certification process for albums, including on-demand audio and video streams. Minaj has been called as a "fashion icon" by Allure, Time, XXL and has been called a "camp style icon" by Refinery29. She has cited Alexander McQueen, Gianni Versace, and Christian Louboutin as her favorite designers. The Huffington Post described her style as "risk-taking" and "far-out", with "bold sartorial choices"; Minaj has been included on the annual Maxim Hot 100 list several times. In 2014, Minaj underwent a reinvention in her image sporting a "natural" and "softer" look, wearing fewer wigs and less colourful costumes. She stated that she "went so far to the other side that there's only one place to go from there. You can either continue doing costumes or you can just say, "Hey guess what? This will shock them even more. Doing nothing will shock them even more"". Her physique, notably her buttocks, has attracted significant attention from the media. Early in her career, she made autographing breasts part of her movement to empower women. In 2010, she said that although she originally felt obligated to mimic the provocative behavior of the "female rappers of [her] day", she intended to subdue her sexuality because she "[wants] people—especially young girls—to know that in life, nothing is going to be based on sex appeal. You've got to have something else to go with that." Minaj talked about feminism in an interview with Vogue in 2015, saying "There are things that I do that feminists don't like, and there are things that I do that they do like. I don't label myself. I just say the truth about what I feel. I feel like women can do anything that they put their minds to." In 2018, an interview with Elle, in which she discussed sex workers, her own sex appeal, and sexuality in music and on social media, attracted criticism. In The New York Times Magazine, music critic Vanessa Grigoriadis said that Minaj "has become expert at modelling the ways that women can wield power in the industry. But she has also drawn attention to the ways in which power can be embodied by a woman standing up for herself and speaking her own mind." The cover art and music video for her 2014 single, "Anaconda", attracted significant media attention upon release. The music video was viewed 19.6 million times in its first 24 hours of release. The Guardian called the video "racy" but noted that she "doesn't shy from ruffling her audience's feathers", while others praised Minaj for "owning her sexuality", examining her work through a feminist perspective. Another writer for The Guardian said, of the "Anaconda" video, Minaj turns "the classic song into a conversation, and [refuses] to let the camera objectify her lap dance by keeping it zoomed out, at a distance." Minaj's fanbase, known as the "Barbz", have been reported as often being militant towards Minaj's critics, including incidents of reported doxxing, cyberbullying, and death threats. In September 2021, Minaj announced she would not be attending the 2021 Met Gala due to the COVID-19 vaccine requirement. She stated that she has avoided public appearances and traveling after contracting the virus herself and having to quarantine from her son as a result. She shared several tweets about her unvaccinated status and claimed she wanted to do more research and be comfortable with her decision first. She alleged in a Tweet that her cousin's friend in Trinidad suffered swollen testicles and became impotent as a result of the vaccine. These tweets received backlash where her story about her cousin's friend became the subject of jokes and memes. Trinidad and Tobago health minister Terrence Deyalsingh declared that her claims were false and that no such report existed. Shortly after, Minaj recommended other people get the vaccine and set up a Twitter poll on COVID-19 vaccine brands. She tweeted that she was sure she would get vaccinated herself because of touring. The White House offered her a phone call with a doctor to answer questions about the safety of the vaccine. In an Instagram Live response two days later, she claimed that she was simply asking questions and she did not give any facts about the vaccine. Minaj alleged that reporters harassed her family for a story, with her sharing some text messages she alleged were harassment on social media. In May 2022, Olivia Truffaut-Wong of The Cut alleged that Minaj had gotten vaccinated, as the 2022 Met Gala (which Minaj attended) required proof of vaccination and a negative COVID-19 PCR test to attend. In 2010, Minaj performed a cover of "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun", alongside singer Katy Perry, for service members during the 2010 VH1 Divas Salute the Troops concert. The two would later collaborate in 2017 on "Swish Swish". In 2011, Mattel created a Barbie doll with Minaj's likeness to auction for Project Angel Food, a charity that provides food for people afflicted with HIV and AIDS. In 2012, in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, Minaj donated $15,000 to the Food Bank For New York City and held a turkey drive at her alma mater, PS 45. In May 2017, Minaj offered via Twitter to pay college tuition fees and student loans for 30 of her fans. She appeared to grant their requests, ranging from $500 to school supplies to $6,000 for tuition, promising to respond to more requests in a month or two. She also announced that she would launch an official charity for student loans and tuition payments in the near future. In the same month, Minaj revealed on Instagram that she has been donating money to a village in India for a few years via her pastor, Lydia Sloley. These donations helped the village get a computer center, a tailoring institute, a reading program, and two water wells. "This is the kind of thing that makes me feel the most proud", she said about the new additions to the village. In August 2017, after Hurricane Harvey hit the city of Houston, Texas, Minaj answered a social media challenge by comedian and actor Kevin Hart and donated $25,000 to the Red Cross, saying she was "praying for everyone there". On September 4, 2018, Minaj appeared as a guest and performed several songs on The Ellen DeGeneres Show. Throughout the episode, Minaj and Degeneres, with the participation of Walmart, gave out over $150,000 in donations to fans. In 2019, Minaj pulled out of headlining a concert in Saudi Arabia following online backlash from activists, after women's rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul was detained and arrested for speaking out against the Saudi regime. Minaj was praised by Thor Halvorssen of The Human Rights Foundation, who criticized her initial plan to perform in a letter, and released a statement saying, "After careful reflection ... I believe it is important for me to make clear my support for the rights of women, the LGBTQ community and freedom of expression." In 2020, Minaj donated $25,000 to the St. Jude's Home for Girls school after visiting the school in her native country of Trinidad. In a speech, Minaj encouraged the girls to push through hard obstacles, even referencing her own experience with domestic violence: "I've experienced being in a home with domestic violence. I've experienced, you know, being at a very difficult crossroads in my life as a teenager. And sometimes as a teenager when things happen, you feel like there's no up from there." In the same year, following the release of Minaj and 6ix9ine's collaboration, "Trollz", Minaj announced that a portion of the proceeds from the song, along with profits from all merchandise, will go towards the Bail Project amid the Black Lives Matter protests sparked by the murder of George Floyd. Various media outlets, such as Billboard, Time, NME, Rolling Stone, NBC News and Cosmopolitan, have referred to Minaj as the "Queen of Rap" and The New York Times, The Washington Post, NPR, and The Los Angeles Times have referred to her as the "Queen of Hip Hop". Several media outlets, including The New York Times, Evening Standard, and Nylon, have also called her one of the most influential rappers. Minaj was ranked as the tenth greatest rapper of all time on Billboard and Vibe's list of the 50 greatest rappers (2023). In 2012, Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called Minaj "the most influential female rapper of all time", and in 2015 Vanessa Grigoriadis from its magazine called her "the world's biggest female rap superstar". In Evening Standard, Jochan Embley called her one of the most influential rap artists of all time, saying that "Everything she does is bold, fearless and distinct – whether that be her eye-popping stage attire or her expertly delivered lyrics, which stare gender and race dead in the eye." Zoe Johnson from XXL called her "one of the most versatile MCs" and that she has "made millions off upbeat pop hits and traditional hip-hop sounds that cater to both her femininity and her assertive side". For NPR Music, Sowmya Krishnamurthy noted that Minaj has portrayed "the quirky, life-size Barbie, glamorous vixen and girl-next-door", arguing that she "changed the landscape for artists in hip-hop for the past decade" with said alter egos. In 2017, Patrik Sandberg of Dazed argued that Minaj has "surpassed every other female hip hop artist to become the most successful in history" in 2017. In 2020, Nick Soulsby of PopMatters called her the "best female rapper and the best rapper of the past ten years – no gender preposition required." Glamour included Minaj in their list of 104 women who defined 2010s pop culture. In XXL, Madeline Roth commented that Minaj "has helped birth a new generation of rappers that mimic her style". She has influenced several artists, including Tinashe, Cher Lloyd, Cupcakke, Billie Eilish, Lil Nas X, Ms Banks, Asian Doll, Doja Cat, Megan Thee Stallion, Latto, Shenseea, BIA, Lakeyah, Luísa Sonza, Coi Leray, Maliibu Miitch, City Girls, Baby Tate, Ice Spice, Rico Nasty, Flo Milli, Ivorian Doll, Angel Haze, Rubi Rose, and Saweetie. Billboard credited her for bringing female rap back to the mainstream in the US. With over 140 features, the magazine has called Minaj a "rap and pop icon" adding that "she's been one of popular music's most reliable guest performers, notching dozens of chart hits as a supporting presence on other artists' singles." Minaj has been credited by Complex for being able to "take a simple song and turn it into a smash hit just because she's featured on it." In 2012, Caramanica in The New York Times said that: Minaj "became a nimble, evocative rapper. She became an intricate lyricist. She became a thoughtful singer. She became a risky performer. She invented new personae. More than any other rapper in the mainstream, she pushed hard against expectations ... with no one around to compare herself to, or for others to compare her to, she became her own watermark." In 2014, NPR's Erik Nielson said that Minaj's "success over the last decade has stood as an exception to the unwritten rule that women rappers no longer have a place among elite artists". Nylon writer, Demicia Inman, also credited Minaj for her influence which "stands as one of the most successful rappers of the millennium", also going on to say that Minaj "battled misogyny and industry bias against black women to carve her own identity and sound" thus impacting her career. Complex also commented that, "From her bold outfits to her multi-colored wigs, Minaj oozed confidence that inspired others who were watching closely... [she] doesn't need anything but her art to speak for itself". Minaj is the recipient of numerous accolades, including nine American Music Awards, twelve BET Awards, eight BET Hip Hop Awards, four Billboard Music Awards, eight MTV Video Music Awards, ten MTV Europe Music Awards, four People's Choice Awards, one Soul Train Music Award, and four Teen Choice Awards. Minaj has received a total of 10 Grammy Award nominations. She received her first Grammy nomination in 2010 for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group ("My Chick Bad" with Ludacris). In 2012, Minaj received three nominations, including Best New Artist and Best Rap Album (Pink Friday). In 2014, she received her second nomination for Best Rap Album (The Pinkprint). She has won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip-Hop Video four times ("Super Bass", "Anaconda", "Chun-Li" and "Do We Have a Problem?") and has won the Best Female Video Award once ("Starships"). Minaj is the first woman to have appeared on the Forbes "Hip Hop Cash Kings" list since its inception in 2007, having made four consecutive appearances between 2011 and 2014. In 2010, Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven songs on the Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously, and the first woman to appear on MTV's Annual Hottest MC List since its inception in 2007. In 2011, Minaj was ranked sixth on the Rolling Stone master ranking of the "Kings of Hip Hop" which is based on record sales and social media metrics. She is the only rapper to win the BET Award for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist seven consecutive times. In 2013, Minaj became the most-charted female rapper on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time, with 44 entries, tying Mariah Carey as seventh among women of all genres. Minaj has twenty-one top 10 singles on the chart, the most for any female rapper, with six of those being solo songs. In 2017, Minaj broke the record for most Hot 100 entries by any female artist, surpassing Aretha Franklin, and in 2018, she became the first female artist to accumulate 100 entries on the Hot 100. She held the mentioned record for most Hot 100 entries by a female artist until it was broken in December 2020 by singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. She is the female artist with the second-most Hot 100 entries, behind Swift. In 2019, Billboard Women in Music awarded her with the Game Changer Award. In 2019, her collaboration with Karol G, named "Tusa", received two nominations at the Latin Grammys. The song became the longest-running number-one single on the Argentina Hot 100, having spent 25 weeks on the position. In 2020, Minaj become the second female rapper to chart at number one on the Hot 100 more than once with her 6ix9ine collaboration "Trollz". She also became the second woman to debut atop the chart since Lauryn Hill in 1998. In the same year, she also was the most streamed female rapper on Spotify. In 2021, the music video for "Anaconda" became the first female rap solo song to reach one billion views on YouTube. In total, Minaj has eight music videos with more than one billion views across all credits on YouTube, becoming the first female rapper to do so. She is only one of two female artists to have eight music videos reaching more than one billion views, tying with Rihanna . In 2016, she was listed on the Time 100 annual list of the most influential people in the world. She was also featured on one of the physical covers of the issue. Complex ranked her eighth on their list of best rappers of the 2010s, being the only female rapper on the list, and named her "Best Rapper Alive" of 2014. Minaj has a line of fragrances first launched in September 2012. She partnered with 'Give Back Brands' to introduce her first fragrance "Pink Friday", which was nominated for three FiFi Awards for Fragrance of the Year, Best Packaging, and Media Campaign of the Year. Flanker editions "Pink Friday: Special Edition" and "Pink Friday: Deluxe Edition" were released in April and December 2013 respectively. Her fourth fragrance "Minajesty" was launched in September 2013, followed by "Minajesty: Exotic Edition", which was released exclusively to the Home Shopping Network in June 2014. This was followed by the launch of her sixth fragrance "Onika" in September 2014. A year later in 2015, Minaj released "The Pinkprint", her seventh fragrance in support of her third studio album of the same name. In 2016, Minaj launched her eighth fragrance "Trini Girl". In 2018, in support of her fourth studio album, she released her ninth fragrance, "Queen". Minaj's tenth fragrance "Pink Friday 2" was released to JCPenney in December 2023, in support of her fifth album of the same name. It was released early on the outlet's webstore and retail stores for a limited time, with no prior announcement, in late November. Minaj revealed she did not know about the initial release. The fragrance was also released on Amazon in December 2023. Minaj has been affiliated with several manufacturing companies and has endorsed several products during her career. In November 2010, she collaborated with MAC Cosmetics and launched the lipstick "Pink 4 Friday", which was sold for four consecutive Fridays to promote her debut studio album Pink Friday. In 2011, Mattel crafted a Barbie doll with the avatar of Minaj, inspired by the rapper's likeness for charity, which she described as a "major moment" in her career. It was auctioned on the Charitybuzz website; proceeds benefited nonprofit Project Angel Food. A spokesperson for Mattel stated that, "Barbie is obviously a pop culture icon [...] and Nicki is a big part of pop culture and also huge within the fashion industry, as well as a big Barbie fan." Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone stated that the "Minaj Barbie doll is notable in that the rapper has made Barbie dolls a crucial part of her aesthetic." Minaj helped introduce the Casio TRYX in Times Square, and created a six-piece nail polish collection for OPI Products with colors named after her songs. In February 2012, Minaj launched her own range of lip products for MAC Cosmetics' Viva Glam. In April 2012, Minaj helped launch the Nokia Lumia 900 in Times Square. The following month, Minaj appeared in television and internet advertisements for Pepsi's "LiveForNow" campaign, which featured a remix of her single "Moment 4 Life". She endorsed the 2012 Viva Glam campaign with Ricky Martin—which raised $270 million for the Mac AIDS Fund—and was the face of the lip product line that year along with him. With designer Jeremy Scott, Minaj signed an endorsement deal with Adidas for the brand's fall and winter 2012 campaign to appear in internet advertisements and commercials for Adidas Originals. Set to her song, "Masquerade", her segment of the advertisement was filmed in Brooklyn and also featured Big Sean, Derrick Rose, Sky Ferreira and 2NE1 in other locations worldwide. She fronted the Viva Glam spring campaign by herself, which also introduced her limited-edition lip product collection, "Nicki 2", which was launched in early 2013. In February 2013, Minaj starred in Bluewater Comics' Fame biographical-comic series, with her comic book, titled Fame: Nicki Minaj. She partnered with Beats Electronics to introduce her "Pink Pill" speakers in April 2013, appearing with DeRay Davis in a commercial for the speakers that same month. She introduced her lifestyle product line, "The Nicki Minaj Collection" for Kmart, composed of clothing, accessories and houseware. In June 2013, Minaj and Mona Scott-Young launched MYX Fusions, a line of fruit-infused, single serve moscato wine beverages. Minaj is a co-owner, creative director, and ambassador of the brand. Throughout 2014, Minaj released spring, summer, and fall-themed clothing collections for Kmart. Minaj was the face of Roberto Cavalli's spring-summer 2015 campaign. In March 2015, it was announced that Minaj was a co-owner of the music streaming service Tidal. The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. In addition to Minaj and company owner Jay-Z, sixteen stakeholders including Beyoncé, Madonna, Rihanna, and Kanye West own a 3% equity stake in the service. In November 2015, Minaj released a holiday capsule clothing collection for Kmart and its affiliated e-commerce platform, ShopYourWay; and a limited-edition couture collection which was available via Kmart and her website. In September 2017, she released two lipsticks called "Nicki's Nude" and "The Pinkprint" (named after her third studio album) in collaboration with MAC Cosmetics. In November 2017, Minaj starred in H&M's holiday campaign along with Anna Ewers, Mariacarla Boscono, Jesse Williams, Charlee Fraser, and Elibeidy Dani. In March 2018, the rapper appeared in a commercial for the Mercedes-Benz A-class car. In August 2018, Minaj starred in the trailer for EA Sports' Madden NFL 19 video game alongside Lil Dicky, Quavo and other celebrities. The following month, she appeared alongside Gucci Mane, Bella Thorne, Tommy Dorfman, Yoo Ah-in, and Jonathan Bellini in the campaign for Italian clothing brand Diesel's "Haute Coture" collection; she also co-designed a t-shirt and denim jacket, titled "The Bad Guy". In November 2018, she co-starred with Quavo and Saturday Night Live member Chris Redd in the holiday campaign for Madden NFL 19. In 2019, Minaj announced a collaboration with luxury fashion house Fendi. Chief executive officer Serge Brunschwig stated the brand "shares great affinity with her. [Minaj] represents the fun aspect of the brand", and that the collaboration "made sense". A capsule collection titled "Fendi Prints On"—after by the lyric containing the same words on her 2018 single, "Chun-Li"—was released on October 14, 2019. In March 2022, Minaj fronted the campaign for the "Heaven" spring 2022 collection by Marc Jacobs. In July, she collaborated with Rap Snacks and released her own potato chip flavor, "Barbie-Que Honey Truffle". The following month, Mattel sued Rap Snacks, claiming the company violated the Barbie trademark and had made a "deliberate and calculated" choice to do so. The lawsuit was settled in September after the company changed the snack's name to "Bar-B-Quin". Minaj released a "variety pack" with Rap Snacks in October, and a "Nocho Nachos" nachos flavor in March 2023, inspired by her 2023 single, "Red Ruby Da Sleeze". Also in October, the rapper appeared alongside Lil Baby, Kane Brown, Pete Davidson, and Bukayo Saka in a trailer for the first-person shooter video game, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II. In March 2024, Minaj launched her press-on nails brand, Pink Friday Nails. A vegan and cruelty-free brand, it was launched DTC via its webstore, and later made available via Shopify as well. Pop-up stations dedicated to the range were held exclusively to VIP ticket holders on the Pink Friday 2 World Tour. On March 3, 2023, Minaj announced the launch of her record label imprint on an episode of her radio show, "Queen Radio". Minaj did not reveal the name of the label but did say her long-time friend Patty "Patty Duke" Lauren has signed on as the label's A&R. Minaj also unveiled her starting roster: Nana Fofie, Tate Kobang, Rico Danna, and London Hill. On March 13, 2023, Minaj revealed the name of her imprint as "Heavy On it Records". The label currently has a venture with Republic Records. In May 2022, Minaj was named the new creative director of American men's magazine Maxim and became the global ambassador and advisor for MaximBet, a sports betting brand launched by the magazine. She also came on board as a stakeholder. A playable character model of Minaj in her "Red Ruby" persona was released as downloadable content to the first-person shooter video game, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II in July 2023 alongside those of rappers Snoop Dogg and 21 Savage to commemorate the 50th anniversary of hip-hop music's origin; her character marked the first woman "operator" of the game. On December 8, 2023, she and Roblox introduced the virtual world Gag City on the game platform to promote her fifth album, Pink Friday 2 (2023). Days before the launch, Minaj's fanbase, the Barbz, heavily circulated AI-generated content of the fan-made cityscape Gag City, a pink futuristic metropolis inspired by the cover artwork of the album, which the rapper herself coined on her social media. In her songs "All Things Go" and "Autobiography", Minaj revealed that she had an abortion as a teenager. She has said that although it has "haunted" her, she stands by her decision. In July 2011, her cousin Nicholas Telemaque was murdered near his home in Brooklyn, an incident she references in her songs "All Things Go" and "Champion". Minaj's father, Robert Maraj, died in February 2021, while walking along a road on Long Island, in a hit-and-run accident. Charles Polevich, a 70-year-old man, was charged as the suspect of Maraj's death. Polevich was arraigned and charged with two felonies, which were leaving scene of incident involving death of a person and tampering with or suppressing physical evidence. Three months later, she commented on her father's death in a letter, saying, "[...] it has been the most devastating loss of my life. I find myself wanting to call him all the time, more so now that he's gone. [...] May his soul rest in paradise. He was very loved & will be very missed." In late 2014, Minaj separated from her longtime boyfriend Safaree Samuels, whom she had dated since 2003. According to Minaj, he had proposed to her, but she declined. Several tracks on The Pinkprint are believed to have been inspired by the end of their relationship. Minaj began dating rapper Meek Mill in early 2015. In January 2017, she announced that she had ended their relationship. She briefly dated fellow rapper Nas in 2017. Minaj began dating her childhood friend Kenneth "Zoo" Petty (born 7 April 1978) in December 2018, and after less than a year of dating, filed for a marriage license in August 2019. She announced that they had officially married in October, hyphenating his last name to hers upon marriage. Petty was convicted of first-degree attempted rape in 1994. He served four years in prison and was required to register as a sex offender upon release. In 2006, Petty was convicted of first-degree manslaughter, for which he served an additional six years and eleven months in prison. In July 2020, Minaj announced via Instagram that she was expecting her first child. She gave birth to a son on September 30, whom she refers to publicly as "Papa Bear". His real name is still unknown. After facing charges for failing to register as a sex offender in California, Minaj's husband Kenneth Petty was entered into the California Megan's Law database in 2020, having been convicted of attempted rape in 1995 in New York. He previously served nearly four years in prison for the mentioned crime. In August 2021, her husband's victim, named Jennifer Hough, filed a lawsuit against the couple for alleged harassment and intimidation, and alleged infliction of emotional distress, and did an interview about the mentioned lawsuit on the talk show The Real. Minaj has not addressed the accusations publicly, but has spoken about it in a private case filing. Minaj claimed she "never asked [Hough] to change her story" and "never offered her any money in return for a statement". Hough later voluntarily dismissed the case against Minaj whilst the case against Petty is still pending. Speaking to a federal judge, Hough's lawyers expressed that they were going to refile the lawsuit in California due to jurisdictional issues while Minaj's lawyer said that the refiling was a "frivolous gambit to avoid a sanctions motion" and that "their claims received an aggressive response". Minaj has been embroiled in several feuds with other artists, including female rappers Lil' Kim, Remy Ma, Cardi B, Latto, and Megan Thee Stallion. After Lil' Kim and media critics noticed resemblances between Minaj and her on the Sucka Free mixtape, Lil' Kim accused Minaj of copying her image saying, "If you are going to steal my swag, you gonna have to pay. Something gotta give. You help me, I help you. That's how it goes to me." Minaj's single "Roman's Revenge" with Eminem was believed by critics to be a response to Lil' Kim's comments, although at the time she denied this. However, in a 2018 interview with Genius, Minaj seemingly confirmed that the track "Roman's Revenge" was about the feud, saying, "Someone got at me. A veteran got at me, and I hit them with 'Roman's Revenge' and then I kept on going." Lil' Kim reignited the feud following the release of her mixtape Black Friday, an album that directly referenced Nicki Minaj, including artwork that showed Lil' Kim decapitating Minaj with a sword. A fragment of Minaj's diss track "Tragedy" was released online in April 2011, featuring lyrics "Pink Friday, Eminem, 8 Mile/ It must hurt to sell your album on PayPal." Following the release of Minaj's second album, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded, critics suggested that the track "Stupid Hoe" may have contained attacks at Lil' Kim. In 2007, Nicki Minaj released her debut mixtape, Playtime is Over, featuring the song "Dirty Money", on which she raps, "Tell that bitch with the crown to run it like Chris Brown," over the beat of rapper Remy Ma's song "Yeah Yeah Yeah". Ma, who frequently referred to herself in lyrics as the "queen of rap", believed the verse to be directed towards her and confronted Minaj during a release party about the lyric. Ma was later sentenced to eight years in prison; upon her release in 2014, Ma spoke kindly about Minaj in interviews, stating that she was supported by Minaj during her time in jail and that she wanted to record a song with her. However, Ma rapped several verses which fans perceived to be against Minaj, including in a cypher during the 2016 BET Hip Hop Awards, on her song "Money Showers" with Fat Joe, on a remix of the Phresher song "Wait a Minute", and in a freestyle on Funkmaster Flex's show on the radio station Hot 97. In 2017, Minaj featured on the songs "Swalla" with Jason Derulo and "Make Love" with Gucci Mane, in which she took apparent shots at Ma, including criticizing her disses and mocking her low album sales. One day after the release of "Make Love", Ma recorded and released the song "Shether", a diss track in which she attacked Minaj for allegedly using a ghostwriter, her alleged plastic surgery, her fashion, her record deal, and the child sexual assault charges against Minaj's brother, and more. Minaj responded on Instagram by posting a screenshot of an article showing the opening week sales of Ma's album Plata O Plomo as well as a video of Beyoncé calling Minaj a "rap queen". Ma later released a second diss track directed at Minaj, "Another One"; in response, Minaj released "No Frauds" with Drake and Lil Wayne, a diss track aimed at Remy Ma whose title and chorus references the lyric "I swear to God, this chick a real fraud" from "Another One". In "No Frauds", Minaj criticizes Ma for her time in jail and her record sales, while also accusing Ma of getting plastic surgery and not being able to get clearance from Jay-Z to include the remix of "All the Way Up" on Plata O Plomo. Following its release, Minaj posted to Instagram, writing that she was issuing a challenge to Ma, giving her "72 hours to drop a hit" and promising her half a million dollars if she was able to "book any show or interview" without mentioning Minaj, adding "Here @ Young Money, we don't do diss records, we drop HIT RECORDS & diss u ON them." She also responded to critics who criticized the delayed timing of her response to Ma, writing, "The greats took 3 months to respond to diss records. Queens don't move on peasant time." "No Frauds" was negatively received by critics, who felt that it was not as impressive as Ma's "Shether" and that the appearance of Drake and Lil Wayne on the diss track was a mistake. At a New York Fashion Week after-party in September 2018, fellow rapper Cardi B threw one of her high heel shoes at Minaj and attempted to physically attack her; bodyguards intervened before she could reach Minaj, leaving her a large bump on her forehead. Following the altercation, she alleged on Instagram that Minaj had previously "liked" social media comments that spoke negatively of Cardi B's ability to take care of her newborn daughter. Minaj denied the allegations on her Queen Radio show, claiming she "would never talk about anyone’s child or parenting", and expressed embarrassment at the fight. She accused Cardi B of building "her career off of sympathy and payola" and of bribing DJs and radio outlets with sex to play her records. Minaj also criticized Cardi B's rapping ability, saying, "Do you know what it’s like to sit in your room for hours writing raps? You came into my fucking culture. I never had to fuck a DJ to play my songs." Minaj also called Cardi B a "disgusting pig" for allegedly cyberbullying a guest caller on Minaj's show and for unearthed posts calling dark-skinned black women “cockroaches.” In 2022, a feud ignited between Minaj and fellow rapper Latto after Minaj went on Instagram Live to express her frustration with her song "Super Freaky Girl" reportedly being placed in the pop categories instead of the rap categories for voting consideration at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. By way of comparison, Minaj mentioned Latto's 2021 song "Big Energy" being potentially considered for the rap categories, saying that if Minaj's own single is not being qualified as a rap song, neither should be Latto's. She further alleged that there is a "concerted effort to give newer artists things that they really don’t deserve" and that soon the female rap genre will no longer "have any black women", which was taken to be a dig against Latto, whose mother is white and father is black. Latto then tweeted, "Damn I can’t win for losing… all these awards/noms I can’t even celebrate," which was perceived as a response to Minaj’s commentary. Minaj responded with a tweet calling Latto a "Karen", a term typically reserved for white women, and criticizing her for previously claiming to be a fan yet not standing up for her. Latto then tweeted that she agreed with Minaj's case but felt the way she brought up Latto's song "seems malicious", alleging that Minaj had been making subliminal tweets about her and had said on the phone that Latto is not "flourishing" and that no one cares about her "little song." This sparked a heated back-and-forth exchange of tweets, in which Latto insulted Minaj's age and her family members by saying she is "married and related to rapists", while Minaj insulted Latto's appearance for looking like "the one pushing 40" and for "wiping that spray tan off & being a Karen", continuing to use the slang term usually for white women. The back-and-forth carried on through the night, with Latto airing out past subliminal digs by Minaj and Minaj posting a screenshot of a text Latto sent her, followed by Latto releasing an audio recording of a phone conversation the two had. In the end, Minaj deleted all of her tweets to Latto, only leaving behind a video clip of Whitney Houston laughing uncontrollably in a music video, while Latto continued to declare that Minaj is a "40 Year Old Bully." Although having collaborated together on the 2019 single "Hot Girl Summer", Minaj's relationship with fellow rapper Megan Thee Stallion grew cold after Megan collaborated with Cardi B on their 2020 single "WAP". In response, Minaj threw subliminal shots at Megan in her 2023 singles "Red Ruby da Sleeze" and "FTCU", both of which make references to the 2020 shooting of Megan by Tory Lanez according to critics and fans. In 2024, Megan Thee Stallion released the song "Hiss", in which she raps the line that people "don't be mad at Megan", but that they're "mad at Megan's Law", naming the law regarding sex offenders. Believing it to be directed at her and her husband, registered sex offender Kenneth Petty, Minaj took to Instagram Live to preview her own song, a diss track against Megan called "Big Foot", alluding to the shooting of Megan's foot. For the next several days, Minaj continued to attack Megan on social media, calling the rapper a "pathological and manipulative liar", accusing her of winning "fraudulent awards", and describing her as a "flop" compared to her own success. She addressed Megan on Instagram Live by saying, "You bringing up 30-year-old tea from when this man was a 15-year-old child. You bringing up 30-year-old tea cause no man will ever fucking love you, and lying on your dead mother", referencing Megan's mother, who died of brain cancer in March 2019. On the radio app Stationhead, Minaj continued to discuss Megan's mother, as well as Tory Lanez and former collaborator DaBaby: "You let everyone be thrown under the bus. You let DaBaby be thrown under the bus, Tory, your best friend, your mom... You better go conjure up your mother and apologize. That’s disgusting." Megan posted an Instagram story where she was doubled over with her left hand on her mouth, seemingly laughing at Minaj's response. Two days after the release of "Hiss", Minaj released the song "Big Foot", a diss track against Megan Thee Stallion. A few hours prior to the release of "Big Foot", Minaj disclosed that her team was waiting for producer Lil Juju to clear the beat "that [she] had for 6 years" and suggested that Megan tried to prevent the diss track from coming out. In the song, Minaj taunts Megan over her dead mother, her appearance, and her ex-boyfriend Pardison Fontaine; various publications reported that the song was poorly received by critics and fans, who criticized the production, the rap flow, and the shots at Megan for being lacking in quality. On the fifth day of Minaj's continued "intense fixation" with Megan following "Hiss", as Rolling Stone labeled it, she speculated on Twitter's Spaces that Megan’s management company, Roc Nation, had launched a smear campaign against her and accused Megan of seeking sympathy as a victim of violence to further her career, saying "She wanted a Rihanna moment so bad", an allusion to Chris Brown's 2009 assault on Rihanna. Studio albums Pink Friday (2010) Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded (2012) The Pinkprint (2014) Queen (2018) Pink Friday 2 (2023) Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012) The Other Woman (2014) Barbershop: The Next Cut (2016) The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019) Pink Friday Tour (2011–2012) Pink Friday: Reloaded Tour (2012) The Pinkprint Tour (2015–2016) Pink Friday 2 World Tour (2024) The Nicki Wrld Tour (2019) Lil Wayne – America's Most Wanted Tour (2008) Lil Wayne – I Am Music II Tour (2011) Britney Spears – Femme Fatale Tour (2011) Trinidad and Tobago portal New York City portal List of Trinidadians East Coast hip hop List of most-followed Instagram accounts List of best-selling music artists Minaj claims she came to the United States as an illegal immigrant, although by the time she moved to the United States her mother and subsequently her father had lawful permanent residency. (See early life.) Minaj states she was in an 11-year relationship with Samuels. Minaj states in the "My Time Again" documentary, released in 2014, that she was in an 11-year relationship. Aniftos, Rania (February 5, 2020). "A Timeline of Nicki Minaj & Meek Mill's Post-Breakup Feud". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Haramis, Nick (August 3, 2011). "In the pink: First lady of hip-hop Nicki Minaj is a bewigged global phenomenon". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved October 5, 2017. "Nicki Minaj, Doja Cat Makes Guinness World Record With 'Say So'". urbanislandz.com. December 15, 2021. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Nicki Minaj is quickly cementing herself as one of the greatest rappers of the decade as she continues to rake in accolades over her illustrious career. "Pop is Not a Dirty Word: Nicki Minaj is an ex-pop star. Good for her". NME. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2021. Shepherd, Julianne Escobedo (December 11, 2023). "Pink Friday 2". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 11, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Penrose, Nerisha (June 21, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Weighs In on Children Border Crisis: 'I Came to This Country as an Illegal Immigrant'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. "Rapper Nicki Minaj's father killed in hit-and-run". The New Zealand Herald. February 15, 2021. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "Top Artists". Billboard. October 31, 2019. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Lamarre, Carl; Mitchell, Gail; Murphy, Keith; Saponara, Michael; Thomas, Datwon; Elibert, Mark; Diep, Eric; III, William E. Ketchum; Mamo, Heran (February 8, 2023). "50 Greatest Rappers of All Time". Billboard. Retrieved March 3, 2023. "Nicki Minaj's swipe at Grammys for changing song category pulls Latto into Twitter feud". Los Angeles Times. October 14, 2022. Archived from the original on December 17, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Elibert, Mark (September 13, 2018). "From Cardi B to Remy Ma, Here's a Look at All of Nicki Minaj's Beefs". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Mamo, Heran (December 8, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Celebrates 39th Birthday in Her Birthday Suit: See the Pics". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "Birthday girl Nicki Minaj has a very interesting Indian connection you didn't know about!". India Today. December 8, 2016. Archived from the original on December 24, 2017. Retrieved August 30, 2017. "Nicki Minaj Biography: Rapper (1982–)". Biography. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2013. Jeffries, David. "Nicki Minaj Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. "Nicki Minaj's father, Robert Maraj, killed in hit-and-run accident". The Guardian. February 14, 2021. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. "New Music: Carol Maraj – 'God's Been Good'". Rap-Up. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2016. "Carol Maraj Exclusive: Nicki Minaj's Mom Says Tithing Helped Rapper, Shares Gospel Music, Abuse". The Christian Post. June 26, 2014. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2016. "Nicki Minaj's Mom, Carol Maraj, Hopes To Inspire Abused Women With Her Music". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 29, 2022. Retrieved March 14, 2016. Nicki Minaj, "My Time Again", 2014 MTV Documentary "Carol Maraj, Mother of Hip Hop Star Nicki Minaj". Trinidad Express Newspapers. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved July 29, 2013. Henderson, Cydney (January 27, 2020). "Nicki Minaj's brother Jelani Maraj sentenced to 25 years to life for raping 11-year-old". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 16, 2022. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Haylock, Zoe (February 5, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Accuses Meek Mill of Physical Abuse During Explosive Twitter Fight". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Mill also seems to accuse Minaj's younger brother, Micaiah Maraj, of committing sexual abuse. Marie, Erika (April 25, 2020). "Nicki Minaj's Little Sister Ming Maraj Raps Along To 'Moment 4 Life': Report". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Minaj on The View as quoted by Scott, Tracy. "Nicki Minaj advises parents to parent". S2SMagazine.com (Interactive One). Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved July 29, 2013. "Nicki Minaj Tells All in Her New E! Special". Desihits. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2012. Hope, Clover (July 15, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Does Jay Leno Performance, Discusses Red Lobster Job". Vibe. New York City: Eldridge Industries. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved August 2, 2012. "Nicki Minaj: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2012. RuPaul Charles & Michelle Visage (March 4, 2020). "Episode 245: Nicki Minaj & Leslie Jones". What's The Tee (Podcast). Event occurs at 5:47. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2021. "LOU$TAR- H.O.O.D.S.T.A.R.S Feat. Nicki Minaj & 7even-up | LISTEN". Def Pen. September 12, 2010. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved August 2, 2012. "Nicki Minaj As A 'Hoodstar' Before The Glitz, The T*ts, The Glam, And The Cakes!". Bossip. Molguldom Media Group. July 19, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Big Fendi Calls Nicki Minaj 'a Groupie'". Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2015. "Nicki Minaj: On The Rise". Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012. Rose, Lilah (July 10, 2007). "Nicki Minaj – Playtime Is Over". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj – Sucka Free (Hosted By Lil Wayne) – Young Money Ent". LiveMixtapes. April 12, 2008. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj – Beam Me Up Scotty Hosted by DJ Holiday & The Trapaholics". DatPiff. April 18, 2009. Archived from the original on February 13, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "SoundOff TV: One On One With LowKey & Nicki Minaj". BET. Viacom. May 1, 2009. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Reid, Shaheem (May 1, 2009). "Lil Wayne Introduces Nicki Minaj". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj: Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Concepcion, Mariel (January 15, 2010). "Nicki Minaj: Artists To Watch 2010". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Signs With Young Money/Universal". XXL. Harris Publications. August 31, 2009. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "iTunes – Music – 5 Star (Remix) [feat. Gucci Mane, Trina & Nicki Minaj] – Single". iTunes Store. Apple Inc. November 9, 2009. Archived from the original on August 26, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Makes History as First Woman With 100 Appearances on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved May 26, 2021. "Mariah Carey Hot 100 Chart History". Billboard. May 3, 2008. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved September 27, 2015. O'Keeffe, Kevin; Reid, Joe (August 1, 2014). "A Definitive Ranking of Nicki Minaj Guest Verses". The Wire. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "We Are Young Money by Young Money". iTunes Store. Apple Inc. December 21, 2009. Archived from the original on August 25, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Young Money: Awards". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "American album certifications – Young Money – We Are Young Money". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Reid, Shaheem (February 5, 2010). "Nicki Minaj Gets 'Stamp Of Approval' From Jay-Z". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Stewart, Allison (January 12, 2010). "Reviews of singles from Justin Vernon, Mariah Carey, Maino, Quasi and Tony Yayo". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 27, 2015. MTV News Staff. "Nicki Minaj Makes History With Seven Billboard Hot 100 Songs". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. "New Music: Nicki Minaj f/ Sean Garrett – 'Massive Attack'". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. March 29, 2010. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Announces Album Title". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. August 3, 2010. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Concepcion, Mariel (October 20, 2010). "Sean Garrett: Nicki Minaj's Failed Single Was 'Out Of My Control'". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Single Cover: Nicki Minaj – 'Your Love'". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. May 20, 2010. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "iTunes – Music – Check It Out – Single by will.i.am & Nicki Minaj". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. September 3, 2010. Archived from the original on September 6, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Brooks Adickman, Erika (September 22, 2010). "Nicki Minaj's 'Right Thru Me' Asks, 'How Do You Do That Sh*t?'". Idolator. Spin Media. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Says Kanye West's 'Monster' Almost Didn't Make His 'MBDTF' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved April 30, 2019. "The 25 Best Rap Verses of the Last 5 Years". Complex. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Fennessey, Sean (November 17, 2010). Review: My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy Archived October 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The Village Voice. Retrieved on August 10, 2020. "Nicki Minaj". GRAMMY.com. November 28, 2017. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "Pink Friday". Amazon Germany. November 19, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (April 11, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's 'Roman Reloaded' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Pink Friday — Metacritic Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2010. "Nicki Minaj's 'Pink Friday' Certified Platinum". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. January 5, 2011. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Conteh, Mankaprr (May 19, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Revisits a Distant Golden Age With 'Beam Me Up Scotty'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 20, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "FMQB: Radio Industry News, Music Industry Updates, Nielsen Ratings, Music News and more!". FMQB. Archived from the original on July 5, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2014. O'Donnell, Kevin (January 30, 2011). "Nicki Minaj Dominates 'Saturday Night Live'". Spin. Spin Media. Archived from the original on November 25, 2015. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "iTunes – Music – Super Bass – Single by Nicki Minaj". iTunes Store (AU). Apple Inc. May 13, 2011. Archived from the original on June 2, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "American single certifications – Nicki Minaj – Super Bass". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Nicki Minaj – Super Bass, archived from the original on August 13, 2021, retrieved August 13, 2021 "New 102.7". Twitter. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Greene, Andy (December 1, 2010). "Nicki Minaj Opens Up on Childhood Abuse, Sexuality". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. "Nicki Minaj slammed over 'problematic' lyrics about her sexuality". Capital XTRA. May 4, 2020. Archived from the original on May 10, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Milton, Josh (May 1, 2020). "Nicki Minaj just came out as heterosexual on new Doja Cat remix: 'Used to be bi now I'm just hetero'". PinkNews. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Vena, Jocelyn (April 12, 2011). "Britney Spears To Tour With Nicki Minaj". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 27, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Britney Spears: Awards". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "The 10 Most Controversial Moments of Nicki Minaj's Career, Pg. 8." Vibe. June 5, 2012. Johnson, Zach. "Nicki Minaj addresses Good Morning America nip slip, 'it wasn't a stunt.'" Archived July 31, 2023, at the Wayback Machine US Magazine. April 10, 2012. Nika, Colleen. "Nicki Minaj Wows Fashion World With Versace for H&M and Victoria's Secret Gigs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 12, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2012. "Nicki Minaj, J. Cole Nominated For Best New Artist Grammy". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Wins Best Hip-Hop Video VMA". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2018. Murray, Michael (February 14, 2014). "World Premiere: Listen To Nicki Minaj's New Single 'Starships'". On Air with Ryan Seacrest. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Gotye has best-selling single of 2012". The Nation. Katrina vanden Heuvel. December 3, 2012. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Kaufman, Gil (April 5, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Looking For Ultimate Hip-Hop/Pop Crossover". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2015. "Nicki Minaj f. 2 Chainz – Beez In The Trap". HipHopDX. March 21, 2012. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "New Music: Nicki Minaj f/ Chris Brown – 'Right By My Side'". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. March 20, 2012. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Daniels, Colin (January 21, 2012). "Nicki Minaj delays new album 'Roman Reloaded' release". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "iTunes – Music – Roman In Moscow – Single by Nicki Minaj". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. December 2, 2011. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "iTunes – Music – Stupid Hoe – Single by Nicki Minaj". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. December 20, 2011. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "American album certifications – Nicki Minaj – Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Bell, Crystal (April 2, 2012). "'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded' Reviews: Nicki Minaj's New Album Gets Mixed Reviews". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2013. "Nicki Minaj And Cover Drive's New Songs Join Capital FM Playlist (15th June)". Capital FM. June 15, 2012. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "12 September 2012". BBC Radio 1. BBC. September 12, 2012. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Super Bowl: Madonna gives 'shot of brass'". BBC News. February 6, 2012. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Comes in First: A Look at Her Milestones". BET. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "The 10 Most Controversial Moments of Nicki Minaj's Career, Pg. 2." Vibe. June 5, 2012. "Nicki Minaj's Vulgar Grammys Exorcism Angers Catholic League". February 13, 2012. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Is Nicki Minaj Possessed?" Archived April 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine CatholicLeague.org. The Catholic League. February 13, 2012. Wass, Mike (May 16, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's Pink Friday World Tour Pops Open In Sydney: Concert Review". Idolator. Spin Media. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Daniels, Colin (July 5, 2012). "Nicki Minaj extends UK arena tour". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Defends Her Decision to Drop Out of Hot 97 Summer Jam Concert". OK!. Northern & Shell. June 5, 2012. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Harp, Justin (July 4, 2012). "Nicki Minaj: 'Ice Age 4 is a blessing and an honor'". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Rigby, Sam (November 11, 2012). "MTV EMAs 2012 winners: Taylor Swift, One Direction, Bieber celebrate". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on May 13, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "iTunes – Music – Pink Friday Roman Reloaded the Re-Up by Nicki Minaj". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. November 19, 2012. Archived from the original on June 2, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Serpe, Gina (October 26, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's 'Va Va Voom' Music Video Premiere". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Nicki Minaj and Keith Urban Confirmed As American Idol Judges". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media, LLC. September 16, 2012. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn. "Nicki Minaj, Mariah Carey: A Timeline To Their 'American Idol' Beef". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 10, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Mariah Carey and Nicki Minaj's American Idol Feud: 5 Best Moments". E! News. March 14, 2013. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Carlson, Erin (May 2, 2013). "Nicki Minaj Slams Mariah Carey as 'Bitter,' 'Insecure'". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Nicki Minaj and Mariah Carey Leaving 'American Idol'". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media, LLC. May 31, 2013. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Nicki Minaj to make movie debut in new Cameron Diaz comedy". NME. IPC Media. April 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Minaj, Nicki (2014). My Time Again. MTV. "Meek Mill Confirms Relationship With Nicki Minaj". Vibe. April 10, 2015. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Kreps, Daniel. "Watch Nicki Minaj's Breakup-Inspired 'Pinkprint Movie'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2014. Ramirez, Erika (May 28, 2013). "Nicki Minaj Will 'Focus On Rap' For Upcoming Album". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on September 14, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Loren, Arielle (November 30, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Says Third Album Will Be an Extension of The Re-Up". BET.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 11, 2013. Markham, Rob (November 4, 2013). "Nicki Minaj 'Delving Into Deep Sh--' on 2014 Album". MTV.com. Viacom. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Nicki Minaj Reveals 'Pills N Potions' Single at Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Previews Steamy 'Anaconda' Video, Unleashes Full Track". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on August 7, 2014. Retrieved August 29, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Chart History". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "Nicki Minaj's 'Anaconda' Video Breaks Vevo Record". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. August 22, 2014. Archived from the original on August 28, 2014. Retrieved August 29, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Dropped Endless F-Bombs While Hosting The 2014 MTV EMA". MTV.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2018. Caulfield, Keith (December 24, 2014). "Taylor Swift Back at No. 1 on Billboard 200, Nicki Minaj Debuts at No. 2". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 21, 2015. Mendizabal, Amaya (December 26, 2014). "Nicki Minaj's 'The Pinkprint' Debuts at No. 1 on Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved October 27, 2015. "Reviews for The Pinkprint by Nicki Minaj". Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Retrieved December 15, 2014. "Nicki Minaj". grammy.com. November 28, 2017. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2018. "Grammys 2015: List of nominees". Los Angeles Times. December 5, 2014. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. "Nicki Minaj the First Woman With 4 Simultaneous Top 10 Hits on Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Chart". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on March 19, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2015. "Nicki Minaj wins Best Female Hip-Hop Artist at the 2015 BET Awards". XXL Magazine. June 29, 2015. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2015. "Nicki Minaj wax figure". madametussauds.com. Madame Tussauds Las Vegas. Archived from the original on October 27, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. "Here Is the Unfortunate Tale of Nicki Minaj's Madame Tussauds Wax Figure". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 27, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. "Azealia Banks was right about the Nicki Minaj waxwork: it's a sexist, racist mistake". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 20, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2018. LaFata, Alexia. "Nicki Minaj Owned Her Sexuality And People Tried To Take It From Her". Elite Daily. Archived from the original on October 27, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. "Nicki Minaj's Wax Figure Gets Extra Security And The Museum Explains Why They Chose That Pose". The FADER. Archived from the original on October 27, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Weiner, Natalie. "Nicki Minaj Headed for the Big Screen in 'Barbershop 3'". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. Vulpo, Mike (May 24, 2016). "Teen Choice Awards 2016 Nominations Announced: See the 'First Wave' of Potential Winners". E!. Archived from the original on May 26, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (September 29, 2015). "Nicki Minaj Comedy Gets ABC Family Series Commitment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. "Nicki Minaj's ABC Show Postponed". Pitchfork. October 17, 2016. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2016. "Nicki Minaj and Meek Mill Split After Nearly 2 Years of Dating". People.com. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Confirms Meek Mill Breakup". eonline.com. January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Nicki Minaj & Meek Mill Have Officially Broken Up". HipHopDX. January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Mansfield, Aaron (March 17, 2017). "Nicki Minaj and Her Visor Star in the Video For Jason Derulo's 'Swalla'". Complex UK. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Official Singles Chart Top 100". officialcharts.com. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Nicki Minaj Just Signed a Major Modeling Contract". Vogue. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2017. "Nicki Minaj Passes Aretha Franklin for Most Billboard Hot 100 Hits of Any Female Artist". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2018. "Watch Nicki Minaj Open BBMAs With Star-Studded Medley". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018. "Nicki Minaj (Chart History): Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2018. "RIAA Presents Katy Perry With Record=Breaking Three Diamond Song Awards During D.C. Stop of Witness: The Tour". RIAA.com. September 26, 2017. Archived from the original on August 22, 2023. Retrieved May 6, 2018. Saponara, Michael (January 5, 2018). "A Timeline of Nas & Nicki Minaj's Relationship". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Miller, Kai (January 4, 2018). "Here's Why Nicki Minaj And Nas Have Reportedly Broken Up". BET.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2022. "Nicki Minaj's 'Chun-Li' Is Her First Solo Hot 100 Top 10 Since 'Anaconda' in 2014". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2018. "'SNL': Nicki Minaj Performs 'Chun-Li' and 'Poke it Out,' Appears in Unaired Sketch". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2018. Reed, Ryan (June 25, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Performs Intense 'Chun Li,' 'Rich Sex' at BET Awards". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Fans Are Bursting Into Rage After Discovering This One Thing Missing From Her Album." www.bet.com. June 14, 2018. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Announces New Album 'Queen' at Met Gala". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Strauss, Matthew (June 11, 2018). "Listen to Nicki Minaj and Lil Wayne's New Song 'Rich Sex'". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2018. Strauss, Matthew (June 11, 2018). "Listen to Nicki Minaj and Lil Wayne's New Song 'Rich Sex'". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2018. "Nicki Minaj on Instagram". Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2018 – via Instagram. Trust, Gary (August 6, 2018). "Drake Dominates Hot 100 for Fourth Week With 'In My Feelings,' DJ Khaled's All-Star 'No Brainer' Debuts at No. 5". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2018. Trust, Gary (July 30, 2018). "Drake's 'In My Feelings' No. 1 For Third Week on Hot 100, Drake Passes Rihanna For Most Weeks at No. 1 This Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Adds 6ix9ine Collaboration 'Fefe' to 'Queen' Tracklist". Billboard. August 15, 2018. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 15, 2018. Goldfine, Jael (August 8, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Launches 'Queen Radio'". Paper. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2018. McKinney, Jessica (August 8, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Announces Queen Radio On Beats 1". Vibe. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved August 10, 2018. Garca, Anna (May 24, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Delays 'Queen' Album Release to August". Spin. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved August 10, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Pushes Back 'Queen' Album to August 17". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2018. Melas, Chloe. "Nicki Minaj drops 'Queen'". CNN. Archived from the original on August 10, 2018. Retrieved August 11, 2018. "Travis Scott's 'Astroworld' Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. August 19, 2018. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2018. "Drake returns to #1 with Scorpion". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2018. "Super Troupers! Mamma Mia's Motion Picture Cast Recording scores fourth week at Albums Chart top spot". Official Charts Company. August 17, 2018. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved August 17, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Tells Ellen That She 'Wanted to Punch' Travis Scott After 'Queen' Failed to Go No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2018. Kornhaber, Spencer (August 15, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Guards a Shrinking Kingdom". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on August 15, 2018. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Nicki Minaj and Travis Scott Fumble Toward Yesterday's Prize: A No. 1 Album". The New York Times. August 20, 2018. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "Nicki Minaj's 'Queen' May Not Survive Its Own Rollout". The Ringer. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Reviews for Queen by Nicki Minaj". Metacritic. Archived from the original on September 5, 2018. Retrieved September 14, 2018. "Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Berry, Peter A. (August 20, 2018). "Nicki Minaj's "Chun-Li" Wins Best Hip-Hop at 2018 MTV VMAs – XXL". XXL Mag. Archived from the original on August 1, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2018. "BTS' 'IDOL,' Featuring Nicki Minaj, Debuts at No. 11 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Little Mix Announces New Single 'Woman Like Me,' Featuring Nicki Minaj". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 1, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Legaspi, Althea (October 26, 2018). "Watch Little Mix, Nicki Minaj Challenge Stereotypes in 'Woman Like Me' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Trust, Gary (November 5, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Makes History as First Woman With 100 Appearances on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2018. "Alanis Morissette, Nicki Minaj, Brandi Carlile & Desiree Perez to Be Honored at Billboard's 2019 Women in Music". Billboard. November 15, 2019. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved November 15, 2019. Lockett, Dee. "The Best and Worst Moments From the 2018 Made in America Festival". Vulture. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Nicki Minaj flew 6,000 miles to China for a counterfeit music festival". Consequence of Sound. November 21, 2018. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2019. Oldham, Stuart (April 15, 2019). "Sound Fails Nicki Minaj and Ariana Grande During Coachella Performance". Variety. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019. Aswad, Jem (April 18, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Parts Ways With Longtime Managers". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Willman, Chris (June 24, 2019). "Irving Azoff Assures Nicki Minaj That Travis Scott Doesn't Hate Her: 'It's All Show Biz'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Takes Jimmy Fallon to Red Lobster, Plays 'Wheel of Freestyle' and Talks New Album: Watch". Billboard. June 28, 2019. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Anderson, Trevor (August 21, 2019). "Megan Thee Stallion, Nicki Minaj & Ty Dolla $ign's 'Hot Girl Summer' Debuts in Top 10 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. McNary, Dave (December 24, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Joins 'Angry Birds Movie 2' Voice Cast (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2018. Zemler, Emily (October 11, 2019). "Ariana Grande to Collaborate With Normani and Nicki Minaj on 'Charlie's Angels' Soundtrack". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Karol G & Nicki Minaj's 'Tusa' Becomes First Song by Two Lead Female Artists to Debut at No. 1 on Hot Latin Songs". Billboard. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on November 26, 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Armendariz, Josefina (June 11, 2020). "Billboard Argentina Hot 100: Anuel AA y Bad Bunny lograron el Hot Shot Debut". Billboard Argentina (in Spanish). Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2020. Saponara, Michael (January 31, 2020). "Meghan Trainor Links Up With Nicki Minaj at the Office for Colorful 'Nice to Meet Ya' Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Mamo, Heran (February 13, 2020). "Here Are the Lyrics to Meghan Trainor's 'Nice to Meet Ya,' Feat. Nicki Minaj". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Saponara, Michael (February 4, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Slammed For Rosa Parks Reference in Preview of New Song 'Yikes'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (February 7, 2020). "In Case You Forgot, Nicki Minaj Proclaims Herself Queen on Fiery 'Yikes': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Nolfi, Joey (February 25, 2020). "Nicki Minaj comes for RuPaul's throne in Drag Race premiere clip". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2022. Griffiths, George (February 26, 2020). "Nicki Minaj replaces RuPaul on Drag Race season 12 runway". Metro. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Trust, Gary (May 11, 2020). "Doja Cat's 'Say So,' Featuring Nicki Minaj, Tops Billboard Hot 100, Becoming Their First No. 1 Each". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Five Burning Questions: Doja Cat & Nicki Minaj's 'Say So'". Billboard. May 12, 2020. Archived from the original on September 27, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2020. ...and the first collaboration between two female rappers to reach the chart's apex. Robinson, Joshua (December 15, 2021). "Doja Cat & Nicki Minaj's "Say So" Remix Earns Them A New Guinness World Record". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Over a year later, that achievement has now been recorded in the history books, as the Guinness World Records have officially recognized the "Say So" remix as the first song from a female rap duo to become a Hot 100 chart-topper. Trust, Gary (June 22, 2020). "6ix9ine & Nicki Minaj's 'Trollz' Launches at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100, Lil Baby's 'The Bigger Picture' Debuts at No. 3". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Reacts to Going Number One in 2020 — Again". PAPER. June 22, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2021. Triscari, Caleb (August 28, 2020). "Ty Dolla $ign Announces New Single 'Expensive', Featuring Nicki Minaj". NME. Archived from the original on September 5, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Aniftos, Rania. "Major Lazer & Mr Eazi Call on K4mo & Nicki Minaj for 'Oh My Gawd'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Links With Sada Baby for "Whole Lotta Choppas" Remix". Complex. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2020. "Nicki Minaj and YoungBoy Never Broke Again Join Mike WiLL Made-It on New Song: Listen". Pitchfork. November 6, 2020. Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Strauss, Matthew (November 20, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Announces New HBO Max Documentary Series". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 6, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (November 20, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Announces 'Raw, Unfiltered' HBO Max Docuseries". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Alessandrini, Kyra (August 5, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Shares First Trailer For Six-Part Documentary Series". Essence. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Corrine, Amber (August 1, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Drops Trailer For Intimate 'Nicki' Documentary Series". Vibe. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (May 23, 2021). "J. Cole Collects Sixth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'The Off-Season'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Nick Minaj's Beam Me Up Scotty mixtape debuts at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 with 80,000 equivalent album units earned. Of that sum, SEA units comprise 63,000 (equaling 85.57 million on-demand streams of the album's tracks), album sales comprise 11,000 and TEA units comprise 6,000. Star, Regina (June 13, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Teases Fifth Album, Hints Its Title Is 'Officially Locked In'". iHeart. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2021. The reissue pulled off some impressive feats in its waking, having debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200, becoming the highest-debuting female rap mixtape in the chart's history. "Elton John Teams Up With Lil Nas X, Dua Lipa & More for New Collaborations Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Halperin, Shirley (September 14, 2021). "Nicki Minaj No Longer Managed by Irving Azoff; In Talks With SALXCO, Home to the Weeknd and Doja Cat (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Ainsley, Helen (October 15, 2021). "Elton John & Dua Lipa's Cold Heart (Pnau Remix) climbs to Number 1". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2021. "Official Irish Singles Chart Top 50 | Official Charts Company". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Crist, Allison (October 29, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Steals the Show in The Real Housewives of Potomac Reunion Trailer". E! News. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. Bowenbank, Starr (November 10, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Celebrates 'Super Bass' Being Certified Diamond by RIAA After 'Over a Decade of Support'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Ed Sheeran wins best artist as MTV Europe Music Awards 2021 returns to live format". Reuters. November 15, 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Nicki Minaj earned a top award for best hip-hop, Olivia Rodrigo was awarded best push, Maluma won best Latin, and YUNGBLUD snagged the award for best alternative. Legaspi, Althea (February 4, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Is a Double-Crossing Agent in 'Do We Have a Problem?' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Minsker, Evan (February 4, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and Lil Baby Share Video for New Song "Do We Have a Problem?"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 6, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. Gawley, Paige (February 4, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Drops 'Do We Have a Problem' Song and Music Video With Lil Baby". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Legaspi, Althea (February 11, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and Lil Baby Reteam for 'Bussin'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Rose, Jordan (February 11, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and Lil Baby Link Up Again for New Song "Bussin"". Complex. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Mahadevan, Tara C. (February 4, 2022). "Watch Nicki Minaj and Lil Baby in Video for New Song "Do We Have a Problem?"". Complex. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved February 6, 2022. Musa, Masani (March 3, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Describes New Album As "Fun, Gutta, & Back To The Basic."". Culture Unfiltered. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2022 – via YouTube. Legaspi, Althea (March 18, 2022). "Coi Leray, Nicki Minaj Get What They Want on Commanding 'Blick Blick'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Gularte, Alejandra (March 18, 2022). "Nicki Minaj's Collab With Coi Leray Dropped Despite Benzino". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Dailey, Hannah (March 25, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Drops New Track 'We Go Up' With Fivio Foreign: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Cowen, Trace William (March 25, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and Fivio Foreign Link for New Song "We Go Up"". Complex. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved March 25, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Goes Drill On Fivio Foreign-Assisted "We Go Up"". HotNewHipHop. March 25, 2022. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Mier, Tomás (April 7, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Flaunts Her Best Adele, Gets Vulnerable, and Plays Clarinet on 'Carpool Karaoke'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved April 7, 2022. Muhammad, Latifah (June 29, 2022). "Essence Festival 2022: Where You Can Buy Tickets Before They Sell Out & How to Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Wireless: Nicki Minaj, Dave and Cardi B headline festival". BBC News. February 25, 2022. Archived from the original on February 25, 2022. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Garcia, Thania (July 28, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Shares Trailer for Six-Part Docu-Series, 'Nicki'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Gale, Ashley (August 3, 2022). "Nicki Minaj asks fans to help rename anticipated single "Freaky Girl"". Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Cole, Alexander (August 5, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Reveals Cover Art For "Super Freaky Girl," Snippet Leaks Online". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Williams, Aaron (August 18, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Releases A Ferocious 'Roman Remix' Of Her New Single, 'Super Freaky Girl'". Uproxx. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Brings Out Roman For Extended Version Of "Super Freaky Girl"". HotNewHipHop. August 18, 2022. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Robinson, Ellie (August 23, 2022). "Nicki Minaj becomes the first solo female rapper to have a single debut at Number One since 1998". NME. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Releases Greatest Hits Compilation". Paper. August 26, 2022. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (September 9, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Drops 'Super Freaky Girl (Queen Mix)': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 9, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2022. Porter, Rania Aniftos,Sierra; Aniftos, Rania; Porter, Sierra (September 22, 2022). "Yung Bleu Reveals He Was 'Nervous' to Film 'Love In The Way' Video With Nicki Minaj". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Banks, Lamar (October 6, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Drops "Likkle Miss" (Fine Nine) Remix With Spice, London Hill & More". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (October 21, 2022). "NBA YoungBoy & Nicki Minaj Team Up for 'I Admit': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Peters, Mitchell (November 20, 2022). "Fans Choose Nicki Minaj, Maluma & Myriam Fares' 'Tukoh Taka' as This Week's Favorite New Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Blistein, Jon (March 3, 2023). "You Can't Walk in Her Crocs: Nicki Minaj Drops First Song of 2023 'Red Ruby Da Sleeze'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 10, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Legaspi, Althea (May 13, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Drops Early Mother's Day Gift With 'Red Ruby Da Sleeze' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Renshaw, David (March 3, 2023). "Nicki Minaj samples a Lumidee classic on "Red Ruby Da Sleeze"". The Fader. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (March 16, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Scores Back-to-Back No. 1 Debuts on Hot Rap Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Srour, Yousef (March 5, 2023). "Rolling Loud: Travis Scott's Set Cut Short Due to Curfew; Nicki Minaj, Justin Bieber, Kali Uchis Among Surprise Guests at L.A. Festival". Variety. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Lamarre, Carl (April 7, 2023). "YoungBoy Never Broke Again Recruits Nicki Minaj For Hard-Hitting Single 'WTF': Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 19, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. O'Donnell, Eoghan (April 14, 2023). "Ice Spice and Nicki Minaj remix hints at name of Minaj's record label". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Breihan, Tom (April 14, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Joins Ice Spice On "Princess Diana" Remix: Listen". Stereogum. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (April 25, 2023). "Ice Spice & Nicki Minaj's 'Princess Diana' Reigns on Hot Rap Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Darville, Jordan (April 21, 2023). "Kim Petras enlists Nicki Minaj for "Alone"". The Fader. Archived from the original on April 29, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Bandle, Lars (May 1, 2023). "Calvin Harris and Ellie Goulding's 'Miracle' Wins Nail-Biting U.K. Chart Race". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. * Kearns, Sarah (May 27, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Jumps on St. Louis Rapper Sexxy Red's "Pound Town 2" Remix". Hypebeast. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Gonzalez, Alex (May 26, 2023). "Sexyy Red And Tay Keith Enlist Nicki Minaj For 'Pound Town 2', An Even Saucier Remix Of Their Viral Hit". Uproxx. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. McIntyre, Hugh (June 15, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Ties BTS's Jimin For The Most No. 1 Sales Hits Of 2023". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Mamo, Heran (June 5, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Announces Album Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 6, 2023. Lamarre, Carl (June 29, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Announces 'Pink Friday 2' & Album's Delayed Release Date: 'It'll Be Well Worth the Wait'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Bloom, Madison (October 25, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Delays New Album Pink Friday 2 Again". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on October 25, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Mier, Tomás (December 8, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Finally Delivers 'Pink Friday 2'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (December 17, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Scores Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 With 'Pink Friday 2'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Legaspi, Althea (December 17, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Makes Chart History as 'Pink Friday 2' Debuts at Number One". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 17, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Zellner, Xander (December 18, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Charts 14 Songs From 'Pink Friday 2' on the Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 19, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (December 19, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Lands 50th Top 10 on Hot Rap Songs Chart, Ties for Third Place All-Time". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2023. Retrieved December 20, 2023. Horvath, Zachary (December 13, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Preaches Self-Worth On "Love Me Enough" With Monica And Keyshia Cole". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Singleton, Isaiah (December 19, 2023). "The Re-emergence of Nicki Minaj: Pink Friday 2". The Atlanta Voice. Archived from the original on February 22, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Turner-Williams, Jaelani (January 13, 2024). "Nicki Minaj and Future Double Up on 'Pink Friday 2' Collaboration "Press Play"". Complex. Complex Networks. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Corrine, Amber (March 29, 2024). "Nicki Minaj's "Super Bass" Dethrones Cardi B's "Bodak Yellow" As Highest Certified Single By A Woman Rapper". Vibe. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Trust, Gary (July 3, 2023). "Morgan Wallen Adds 13th Week Atop Hot 100, Nicki Minaj, Ice Spice & Aqua Debut in Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Minsker, Evan (June 27, 2023). "Young Thug Shares New Song "Money" With Juice WRLD and Nicki Minaj: Listen". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Pointer, Flisadam (June 30, 2023). "Lil Uzi Vert & Nicki Minaj's 'Endless Fashion' Just Gave Fans Another High-End Collaboration To Add To Their Collection". Uproxx. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Zellner, Xander (July 10, 2023). "Lil Uzi Vert Debuts 18 Songs on Hot 100 From New Album 'Pink Tape', Reaches Historic Milestone". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (September 12, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Breaks Record for Most No. 1s on R&B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Sales With 'Last Time I Saw You'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 14, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Grein, Paul (September 8, 2023). "Nicki Minaj to 'Emcee' and Perform at 2023 MTV Video Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 10, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Wilkes, Emma (October 14, 2023). "Nicki Minaj drops confident new track 'Bahm Bahm'". NME. Archived from the original on October 15, 2023. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Corrine, Amber (November 22, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Speaks On Streaming Services After 'Pink Friday 2' Song Leaks". Vibe. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Madarang, Charisma (December 7, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Reveals 'Pink Friday 2' Track List Ahead of Release". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Kreps, Daniel (October 20, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Hops on Drake's "All the Parties' Beat on New Freestyle". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Walcott, Escher (November 6, 2023). "Taylor Swift, Billie Eilish and Nicki Minaj Among 2023 MTV EMA Winners After Ceremony Cancellation". People. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Mier, Tomás (December 12, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Speeds Into Gag City With 50 Cent on 'Beep Beep'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 13, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Iasimone, Ashley (December 3, 2023). "Lil Wayne Replaces Nicki Minaj on Chicago Jingle Ball Lineup a Day Before the Show". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Armstrong, Megan (December 4, 2023). "Will Nicki Minaj Perform At iHeartRadio Jingle Ball Chicago?". Uproxx. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Davis, Ahmad (January 1, 2024). "Nicki Minaj's New Year's Resolution Goes Viral". Rap-Up. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Your Radio Add Recaps". Hits. January 9, 2024. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 9, 2024. * "Your Radio Add Recaps". Hits. January 9, 2024. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. McIntyre, Hugh (January 10, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Is Trying To Help Her Latest Single Up The Charts–And Her Plan May Work". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. McIntyre, Hugh (January 19, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Scores Three New No. 1 Hit Singles On The Billboard Charts". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 21, 2024. Retrieved January 21, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Is Hella Pressed Over Megan Thee Stallion's Apparent 'Hiss' Diss". Rolling Stone. January 26, 2024. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Makes a Whole List That Seems to Point Out Megan Thee Stallion's Flops". XXL. January 26, 2024. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Claims Megan Thee Stallion Told Her Team Not to Approve Beat for "Big Foot" Track: 'She Don't Want That Song Out'". Complex. Archived from the original on January 28, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Drops Megan Thee Stallion Diss Track 'Big Foot'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Unleashes Megan Thee Stallion Diss Track "Big Foot": Stream". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Mendez II, Moises (January 29, 2024). "The Backstory Behind 'Bigfoot,' Nicki Minaj's Megan Thee Stallion Diss Track". Time. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Ahlgrim, Callie (January 29, 2024). "Nicki Minaj fans say they're losing respect for the rapper amid her 'embarrassing' attacks on Megan Thee Stallion". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 31, 2024. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Cunningham, Kyndall (February 1, 2024). "Why are Megan Thee Stallion and Nicki Minaj fighting?". Vox. Archived from the original on February 2, 2024. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Nevares, Gabriel Bras (January 30, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Nabs Another Record-Breaking Achievement With "Big Foot"". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on January 30, 2024. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Blake, Cole (January 30, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Brags About "Big Foot" Numbers, Calls Out Megan "Thee Machine"". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on January 30, 2024. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Untenberger, Andrew (February 5, 2024). "The Beef Business: Nicki Minaj & Megan Thee Stallion's Feud Has Been a Money-Maker". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 5, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024. Anderson, Trevor (February 7, 2024). "'Big Foot' Spotted in Top 10 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 8, 2024. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Horton, Adrian; Lee, Benjamin (February 5, 2024). "Grammy awards 2024: list of winners". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 5, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024. Wu, Valerie; Horowitz, Steven J. (January 16, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Announces Additional 'Pink Friday 2' Tour Dates". Variety. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Festivals headlined by Minaj during the Pink Friday 2 World Tour: Horowitz, Steven J. (November 14, 2023). "Nicki Minaj, Post Malone, Lil Uzi Vert to Headline Rolling Loud California 2024". Variety. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Williams, Aaron (December 11, 2023). "Is Nicki Minaj Performing At The 2024 Dreamville Festival?". Uproxx. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Zasada, Zuzanna (February 20, 2024). "Orange Warsaw Festival 2024: W końcu poznaliśmy pierwszych artystów, którzy wystąpią na festiwalu. Na headlinerkę czekali wszyscy. Hot, hot, hot" [Orange Warsaw Festival 2024: We finally know the first artists who will perform at the festival. Everyone was waiting for the headliner. Hot, hot, hot]. Glamour Poland (in Polish). Retrieved February 20, 2024. Williams, Kyann-Sian (January 23, 2024). "Nicki Minaj added to Afro Nation Portugal 2024 line-up". NME. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "Nicki Minaj e Jorja Smith dal vivo in Italia quest'estate" [Nicki Minaj and Jorja Smith live in Italy this summer]. Billboard Italia (in Italian). February 21, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Zeidler-Künz, Thomas (March 19, 2024). "Nicki Minaj kommt zum Rolling Loud Festival nach Ebreichsdorf" [Nicki Minaj comes to the Rolling Loud Festival in Ebreichsdorf]. oe24 (in German). Retrieved March 19, 2024. Schär, Saskia (March 5, 2024). "Apache 207 und Nicki Minaj kommen ans Openair Frauenfeld" [Apache 207 and Nicki Minaj come to the Openair Frauenfeld]. Blick (in Swiss German). Retrieved March 5, 2024. G., Dragomir (March 18, 2024). "Nicki Minaj, pentru prima dată în România la SAGA Festival!" [Nicki Minaj, for the first time in Romania at SAGA Festival!] (in Romanian). Kiss FM. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Collins, Riyah (January 29, 2024). "Nicki Minaj tops Wireless festival line-up with 21 Savage and Doja Cat". BBC News. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Lefèbvre, Eléna (February 5, 2024). "Les Ardentes: Nicki Minaj confirmée, l'été des festivals s'annonce épique" [Les Ardentes: Nicki Minaj confirmed, the summer of festivals promises to be epic] (in French). RTBF. Retrieved February 20, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Biography, Songs, & Albums". AllMusic. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "13 Lyrics That Prove Nicki Minaj Is One of the Greatest Rappers of All Time". Mic. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2018. Caramanica, Jon (March 30, 2012). "A Singular Influence". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "This hard and complex work has paid off: when she releases her second album, 'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded,' this week, it will be as the most influential female rapper of all time." Krishnamurthy, Sowmya (June 11, 2012). "QA: Ice-T on 'The Art of Rap,' Why Nicki Minaj Is 'Real Hip-Hop' | Music News". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 9, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2012. Nigel D. (July 7, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Speaks On Her Rap Style | RealTalkNY". Realtalkny.uproxx.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012. Seabrook III, Robby (September 1, 2021). "Here Are the Most Unique Flows From Rappers Over the Last Five Years". XXL Mag. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Rogulewski, Charley (April 2, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's 'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded' Album Track-by-Track Preview". The Boom Box. AOL. Retrieved November 3, 2012. "[Opinion] Nicki Minaj Out for Pop or Hip Hop?". Ebony. April 20, 2012. Retrieved March 3, 2016. Newstead, Al. "Nicki Minaj : Pink Friday Review". Beat. Furst Media. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved November 3, 2012. Bain, Becky (March 29, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's 'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded' Leaks: Listen". Idolator. Spin Media. Retrieved November 3, 2012. Jeffries, David. "Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded – Review". Allmusic. Rovi. Retrieved November 3, 2012. Rosen, Jody (April 6, 2012). "Nicki Minaj". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Sherman, Maria (February 14, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Debuts New Single 'Starships': Listen". Billboard. Rovi. Retrieved February 15, 2012. "3 Reasons Nicki Minaj Crushes All The Boys On Kanye West's "Monster"". Vibe. August 31, 2010. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Rick Ross Says 'Monster' Proves Nicki Minaj Is 'One Of The Greatest'". MTV News. Retrieved March 8, 2017. Kyles, Yohance (November 26, 2013). "Kanye West Talks Potentially Cutting Nicki Minaj's "Monster" Verse & His Issues With Nike". Exclusive Hip Hop News, Interviews, Rumors, Rap & Music Videos | Allhiphop. Retrieved March 8, 2017. Colley, Tara (August 19, 2018). "Nicki Minaj flips the script on hip-hop hypermasculinity with her album Queen". The Conversation. Retrieved September 15, 2020. "Nicki Minaj 2021 Type Beats". XXL. April 16, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2021. Goodman, Lizzy (June 20, 2010). "Nicki Minaj, the Rapper With a Crush on Meryl Streep". New York. Retrieved July 22, 2010. "Nicki Minaj Has Healing Powers". Rap-Up. November 18, 2010. Retrieved February 16, 2011. "Nicki Minaj Introduces New Alter Ego". Rap-Up. December 6, 2010. Retrieved February 16, 2011. Rose, Sandra (July 14, 2010). "Was That Nicki Minaj's Alter Ego in the Now Classic "Ate the Box" Video?". Retrieved July 22, 2010. Dawson, Imani A. "Nicki Minaj Gets 'Revenge' With Eminem". Rap-Up. Retrieved November 4, 2010. Vena, Jocelyn (February 13, 2012). "Nicki Minaj's Alter Ego Roman Zolanski Makes Grammy Debut – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Nicki Minaj Turns Heads In London". Blogs To Die For. January 20, 2011. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved February 16, 2011. DAT1GH3TTOKID (November 1, 2010). "Roman's Revenge – Nicki Minaj & Eminem [With Lyrics]". YouTube. Retrieved November 20, 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Farber, Jim (April 3, 2012). "Nicki Minaj, 'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded |". Daily News. New York. Retrieved April 14, 2012. "Now You're in the Parade". March 22, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2012. "'RIP Martha': Nicki Minaj's post causes Martha Stewart panic and confusion, Internet relieved to learn chef is alive". meaww. Retrieved December 4, 2023. "Nicki Minaj on Lil Wayne". Interview Magazine. March 25, 2011. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "Lil Wayne: 'Nicki Minaj is an icon, a boss and a role model'". EW.com. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Talks Arena Tour, Hints at 'Big Surprise'". Rap-Up. June 27, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Nicki Minaj calls Foxy Brown "The Most Influential Female Rapper"". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved August 23, 2012. Gay, Roxane (October 16, 2017). "Nicki Minaj, Always in Control". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Talks About Her 'Connection' to Whitney Houston, Dishes on Pink Friday 2 World Tour Details". Billboard. December 15, 2023. Ziegbe, Mawuse (June 27, 2010). "Nicki Minaj Dedicates BET Award To Lil Wayne, Shouts Out Female Rappers – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Excuse me while I have an outer body experience. Shaking, crying, a MESS!!!! 😩 this lady is the reason. Omg. The QUEEN. Goddess! The epitome! The bar! The *faints*. Ms Lauryn Hill told me to keep "spittin dat fire". Is this real life!???? 🙏🏽🙏🏽🙏🏽🙏🏽🙏🏽". Instagram. Retrieved August 9, 2021. "I quoted her in my HS Yearbook!!!!! Like 😢😢😢😢😢😢😢😢". Instagram. Retrieved August 9, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Shares How Beyoncé Inspired Her to Have a Family and Career". BET. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Nicki Minaj talks up Beyoncé and Jay Z inspiration". Pressparty. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Hajdu, David (August 5, 2012). "What Nicki Minaj Learned From Marilyn Monroe". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved April 5, 2023. "Nicki Minaj: 'I'm inspired by Madonna'". NME. April 12, 2012. Retrieved April 11, 2013. Lee, Bill (June 11, 2014). "Nicki Minaj: 'New album was inspired by Enya'". Digital Spy. Retrieved February 1, 2019. Enos, Morgan (May 29, 2018). "Here's a Timeline of Eminem & Nicki Minaj's Relationship". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Banks, Thembi (December 3, 2010). "Exclusive: Nicki Minaj on Image, Criticism and Success". Essence. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Nicki Minaj Shouts Out Lil' Kim for Her Influence in Fashion". Yahoo Entertainment. March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Nicki Minaj Says Lil Kim Deserves Credit For Her Influence". UPROXX. March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Brown, Preezy (March 10, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Gives Lil Kim Props For Being A Fashion Icon". VIBE.com. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Macias, Ernesto (October 18, 2022). "Nicki Minaj, in Conversation With Jada Pinkett Smith". Interview Magazine. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Picks and Pans Review: Nicki Minaj's Top 5 Style Idols : People.com". January 9, 2014. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Dressedmen.com (January 24, 2012). "Old: Music: Nicki Minaj Channels Grace Jones In "Stupid Hoe" Music Video". Old. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Imitation Situation: 8 Stars Inspired By Grace Jones' IDGAF Style". Global Grind. May 19, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Catching Up With Nicki Minaj". www.out.com. Retrieved March 26, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Gives Props to Lil' Kim, Foxy Brown, and Remy Ma". Rap-Up. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Garibaldi, Christina (September 13, 2011). "Nicki Minaj Is Betsey Johnson's 'Most Favorite Girl'". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Wenn (February 17, 2012). "Nicki Minaj – Nicki Minaj's Style Inspired By Cyndi Lauper". Contact Music. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Nick Minaj – Chart History". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved August 20, 2012. "Nicki Minaj Becomes First Rapper To Reach 200 Million Instagram Followers". Maxim. July 26, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Gupta, Manas Sen (January 21, 2024). "These Are The Most-Followed Instagram Accounts In The World". August Man. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Minaj, Nicki. "Nicki Minaj". Twitter. Gipson, Brooklyne (May 1, 2012). "Nicki Minaj: Most Followed Rapper on Twitter". BET. BET Interactive, LLC. Retrieved November 21, 2013. "Gay Icons". BET. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Schrodt, Paul. "Nicki Minaj just won a major fight for streaming that will change the music industry". Business Insider. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (December 17, 2015). "Nicki Minaj Argues Streaming Should Count Toward Album Sales". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 16, 2021. "In Search of the Real Nicki Minaj". Time. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Nicki Minaj's Iconic Barbie Pink Hair Is Back and Better (and Longer) Than Ever". Allure. May 28, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. III, Robby Seabrook (October 20, 2020). "Here's a Look at the Freshest Rappers of the Modern Era". XXL Mag. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Doesn't Understand Camp But It's Not Her Fault". Refinery29. Retrieved May 10, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Interview – Celebrity Style". Teen Vogue. April 17, 2011. Retrieved August 14, 2012. Gregoire, Carolyn (October 5, 2011). "Nicki Minaj's Most Memorable Moments". The Huffington Post. Retrieved August 14, 2012. "2011 Hot 100 List". Maxim. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "Camila Cabello, Taylor Swift, Dua Lipa, Rihanna, More Make Maxim's Hot 100 List". Headline Planet. June 14, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "The Real Reason Nicki Minaj Has Gone For A More 'Natural' Look". Huff Post. April 23, 2014. Retrieved July 6, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Isn't Bringing Her Crazy Wigs Back Anytime Soon". Cosmpolitan. April 21, 2014. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Medina, Portia (April 27, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Premieres Sexy 'Starships' Clip". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved May 19, 2012. "Nicki Minaj". Maxim. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "Nicki Minaj: "I Think Boobs Are Very Empowering"". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Nicki Minaj & Friends Cover Vibe Magazine". Vibe. Vibe Media. June 2, 2010. Retrieved November 21, 2013. Rachel, T. Cole (April 2010). "Nicki Minaj". Interview Magazine. Retrieved July 19, 2010. Frank, Alex (February 12, 2015). "Newly Single Nicki Minaj on Feminism, Meek Mill, and Rapping at 50". Vogue.com. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. "Nicki Minaj Goes Off on Critics Who Claim Her Lyrics Are 'Hypocritical'". Complex. Retrieved October 26, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Responds To Claims That Her Sexual Lyrics Are Hypocritical". Vibe. June 17, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Grigoriadis, Vanessa (October 7, 2015). "The Passion of Nicki Minaj". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Nicki Minaj's Feminism Isn't About Your Comfort Zone: On "Anaconda" and Respectability Politics". Autostraddle. August 25, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2018. "Nicki Minaj's 'Anaconda' Video Breaks Vevo Record". Billboard. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Mokoena, Tshepo (July 25, 2014). "Nicki Minaj's Anaconda cover artwork: too racy for its own good?". the Guardian. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Brown, Kara. "Nicki Minaj Doesn't Need Your Advice or Input". Jezebel. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Halliday, Aria S (2017). "Envisioning Black Girl Futures Nicki Minaj's Anaconda Feminism and New Understandings of Black Girl Sexuality in Popular Culture". Departures in Critical Qualitative Research. 6 (3): 65–77. doi:10.1525/dcqr.2017.6.3.65. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Clifton, Derrick (August 4, 2014). "Nicki Minaj's 'Anaconda' Is the Fiercest Take on Female Sexuality of the Year". Mic. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "Nicki Minaj, Feminism and the Message Behind 'Anaconda' | The Young Folks". www.theyoungfolks.com. August 30, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Lhooq, Michelle (August 23, 2014). "Shocked and outraged by Nicki Minaj's Anaconda video? Perhaps you should butt out". the Guardian. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Coscarelli, Joe (July 10, 2018). "How One Tweet About Nicki Minaj Spiraled Into Internet Chaos". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Tiffany, Kaitlyn (September 25, 2021). "Tucker Carlson Makes a Play for the Barbz". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Nicki Minaj's Dark Bargain with Her Fans". The New Yorker. August 22, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Weekman, Kelsey (September 15, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Has Been Trending This Week And The Whole Situation Is A Hot Mess". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Nicki Minaj says she didn't attend Met Gala because of Covid vaccination requirement". NBC News. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Towey, Robert (September 15, 2021). "Rap artist Nicki Minaj faces backlash after tweeting inaccurate information about Covid vaccines". CNBC. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Nicki Minaj Interview: Mom Guilt, COVID-19 & Having To Quarantine From Her Son!, retrieved February 3, 2022 "Nicki Minaj says she will get COVID-19 vaccine "once I feel I've done enough research"". NME. September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Even the Met Gala Can't Convince Nicki Minaj to Get Vaxxed". September 13, 2021. "Nicki Minaj mocked over story on why cousin isn't getting COVID-19 vaccine". The Hill. September 13, 2021. Falcon, Russell (September 15, 2021). "Trinidad & Tobago health minister: Nicki Minaj's 'swollen testicle' COVID-19 vaccine claims are false". KXAN-TV. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Nicki Minaj tweets coronavirus vaccine conspiracy theory, spotlighting struggle against misinformation". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Kirkl, Justin (September 15, 2021). "Trinidad & Tobagao Has Confirmed They Have No Record of Nicki Minaj's Cousin's Friend's Swollen Balls". Esquire. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Lukpat, Alyssa; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan (September 16, 2021). "White House offers a call to Nicki Minaj to discuss vaccine safety". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 16, 2021. "Nicki Minaj vows "I'll never use Twitter again" after backlash over viral COVID vaccine post". Salon. September 15, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Calls Out Reporters for Allegedly Harassing Her Family Amid Vaccine Comments Criticism". Complex. Retrieved January 7, 2022. Truffaut-Wong, Olivia (May 2, 2022). "So … Does This Mean Nicki Minaj Got Vaccinated?". The Cut. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Katy Perry Leads All-Star Cast at 'VH1 Divas Salute the Troops'". Billboard. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "Nicki Minaj and Katy Perry Cover "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" For The Troops". December 6, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Perpetua, Matthew (December 2, 2011). "Nicki Minaj Barbie Doll Made for Charity". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 16, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Donates $15,000 To Aid New York Hunger Charity". Contact Music: News. November 20, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Calfas, Jennifer (May 7, 2017). "Nicki Minaj Offers to Pay College Tuition for Fans". Money. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Strachan, Maxwell (May 13, 2017). "Nicki Minaj Is Starting An 'Official Charity' to Pay Off Student Loans". HuffPost. Retrieved August 30, 2017.[permanent dead link] Lamarre, Carl (May 22, 2017). "Nicki Minaj Donates Money to Struggling Village in India". Billboard. Retrieved August 30, 2017. India, Lindsey (August 29, 2017). "Here's What Drake, Nicki Minaj and More Are Doing to Help Houston After Hurricane Harvey Hit". XXL. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Howard, Jacinta (August 29, 2017). "Chris Brown, Nicki Minaj, T.I. and DJ Khaled Answer Kevin Hart's Challenge to Donate $25K to Hurricane Harvey Relief". The Boombox. Retrieved August 30, 2017. "Nicki Minaj Explains Why She Doesn't Need a Man to Be Happy". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Gives Away $150,000 to Students on 'Ellen'". XXL Mag. Retrieved September 6, 2018. "Nicki Minaj pulls out of Saudi Arabia performance following backlash from human rights activists". ABC. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "Nicki Minaj pulls out of Saudi Arabia concert after backlash". The Guardian. July 9, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "Nicki Minaj is donating $25,000 to St. Jude's Home for Girls in Trinidad". Dazed. February 28, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2021. "Tekashi 6ix9ine, Nicki Minaj drop 'Trollz,' proceeds going to Bail Project". Global News. Retrieved August 27, 2020. Sources for Minaj being cited the "Queen of Rap": "GQ Editors Pick the Best Nicki Minaj Verses". GQ. August 10, 2018. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Jesy Nelson Gets Post-Little Mix Career Underway With 'Boyz' Featuring Nicki Minaj: Stream It Now". Billboard. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Nicki Minaj x Lil Baby, Mitski & More: What's Your Favorite Music Release of the Week? Vote!". Billboard. February 4, 2022. Retrieved February 7, 2022. "Nicki Minaj backs Texas councilman who gave her a birthday shoutout". NBC News. December 13, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2022. Lang, Cady (March 14, 2017). "Watch Nicki Minaj Flawlessly Lip Sync to Celine Dion". Time. Retrieved November 11, 2021. "BTS' 'Fit Coordination Breaks the Internet, Doja Looks Smokin': See All the Red Carpet Fashion at the 2022 Grammys". Rolling Stone. April 3, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2022. Fivio Foreign, who just joined Nicki Minaj on 'We Go Up', poses with The Kid Laroi. Yeah, we'll bring up the queen of rap every chance we get. "Nicki Minaj is the queen of rap. She needs to start acting like it". Mic. Retrieved October 26, 2018. Mappoura, Lia (February 15, 2022). "This throwback picture of Nicki Minaj is proof that she ages backwards". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Wang, Steffanee (February 4, 2022). "Nicki Minaj & Lil Baby Pull Of A Heist On 'Do We Have A Problem". Nylon. Retrieved February 17, 2022. "Nicki Minaj: every album ranked and rated". NME. September 16, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Pulled Out Of The 2021 VMAs For A Mysterious Reason". Bustle. September 12, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Sources for Minaj being cited the "Queen of Hip-Hop": "From Queens to Queen: Nicki Minaj, 'Pink Friday'". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 11, 2021. Krishnamurthy, Sowmya (October 3, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Is The 21st Century's Insatiable Hip-Hop Monarch". National Public Radio. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Fitzgerald, Trent (December 8, 2020). "Nicki Minaj's Most Essential Songs You Need to Hear". XXL Mag. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Best, Tamara; Chow, Andrew R. (August 30, 2015). "VMAs 2015: Moments to Watch". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 11, 2021. "Nicki Minaj's 13 Most Priceless Music Moments". Billboard. Retrieved November 3, 2021. "Review: BET Experience 2015: Nicki Minaj fails to impress". Los Angeles Times. June 27, 2015. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Sources that comment on Minaj's influence: Caramanica, Jon (March 30, 2012). "A Singular Influence". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 30, 2022. This hard and complex work has paid off: when she releases her second album, 'Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded', this week, it will be as the most influential female rapper of all time. Embley, Jochan (June 16, 2020). "From Nas to Drake, the most influential hip hop artists of all time". Evening Standard. Retrieved March 30, 2022. For many, it was an searing introduction to [Minaj] who would dominate pop music, fashion and social politics for much of this decade, repeatedly breaking down barriers for female artists in the scene. Harrington, Jim (August 6, 2020). "Top 10 female rappers of all time: Did your favorite make our list?". The Mercury News. Retrieved March 30, 2022. [Minaj] has breathtaking talent and is able to accomplish things on the microphone that are simply spellbinding. Ramirez, Erika (March 31, 2014). "Ladies First: 31 Female Rappers Who Changed Hip-Hop". Billboard. Retrieved March 30, 2022. Many female rhymers, from Queen Latifah to Nicki Minaj, have destroyed the proverbial glass ceiling to become legends in their own right. In celebration of women's history month, we're spotlighting 31 of the greatest female rappers of all time. Staples, Brent (July 7, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Crashes Hip-Hop's Boys Club". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 30, 2022. Two albums later ... [Minaj] is already being hailed, with some justification, as the most influential female rapper of all time. "Saweetie, City Girls and the Female Rapper Renaissance". The New York Times. November 29, 2020. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 30, 2022. Now, finally, things appear to be evolving in a more progressive direction. Nicki Minaj has been one of the most influential rappers of the last decade. Inman, Demicia (November 24, 2020). "10 years after 'Pink Friday', a look at Nicki Minaj's enduring Legacy". Nylon. Retrieved February 15, 2021. In 2020, her influence stands as one of the most successful rappers of the millennium, regardless of gender identity – which only confirms her power. She battled misogyny and industry bias against Black women to carve her own identity and sound. "From Nas to Drake, the most influential hip hop artists of all time". Evening Standard. Retrieved October 29, 2018. Krishnamurthy, Sowmya (October 3, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Is The 21st Century's Insatiable Hip-Hop Monarch". National Public Radio. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Dazed (September 19, 2017). "Nicki Minaj on ten years of revolutionising rap". Dazed. Retrieved October 29, 2018. Soulsby, Nick (May 11, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Is the Greatest Rapper of the Decade Bar None, PopMatters". PopMatters. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "104 Women Who Defined the Decade in Pop Culture". Glamour. December 20, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Roth, Madeline. "Tinashe on Nicki Minaj's Best Quality: 'She's Unapologetic'". MTV. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "Cher Lloyd Says Nicki Minaj Helped Change Pop Music: 'I Admire How Brave She Is'". Capital FM. Retrieved August 13, 2020. CupcakKe Interview – New Album, Hosting Hot Haus TV Show, Going to School With Chief Keef, October 29, 2021, retrieved November 12, 2021 Kaufman, Gil. "Here Are the Artists Who Inspired Billie Eilish Over the Years". Billboard. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Lil Nas X on 'Montero (Call Me By Your Name)', forgiving himself, and being a Barb". EW.com. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Mylrea, Hannah (November 14, 2017). "Meet Ms Banks, Nicki Minaj's New Favourite Rapper". NME. Retrieved September 15, 2020. "Asian Doll Talks Nicki Minaj Co-Sign: 'I Was the First One to Say She's My Idol'". May 11, 2018. Stacy-Ann Ellis (January 30, 2020). "Doja Cat Is Here to Stay With Whimsical Wordplay and Bars That Bite". XXL. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "'She's An Inspiration' – Megan Thee Stallion Gush Over Nicki Minaj". Information Nigeria. March 11, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2021. "Mulatto Says Nicki Minaj Inspired Her to Become a Rapper". Rap-Up. Retrieved April 6, 2021. "Shenseea Was Inspired by Nicki Minaj and Rihanna". BET. August 5, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2022. "Who is BIA? Meet the Boston rapper on the 'Whole Lotta Money' remix with Nicki Minaj". USA Today. Retrieved July 10, 2021. Torres, Bianca (July 2, 2021). "Lakeyah Names Her Top Five Favorite Rappers". XXL Mag. Retrieved January 9, 2022. Internet (amdb.com.br), AMDB (December 8, 2021). "Luísa Sonza lança 'Anaconda *o* ~~~', feat. com Mariah Angeliq: 'Fiz a cama; e ela deitou'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 9, 2021. "Nicki Minaj probably one of the biggest female Trendsetters of all time. #inspired". Twitter. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "Bronx native Maliibu Miitch is going back to the roots of rap". Wonderland. October 28, 2019. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Bustard, Andy (August 10, 2021). "City Girls Still 'Hoping' To Work With Nicki Minaj Despite Yung Miami Instagram Block". HipHopDX. Retrieved January 8, 2022. III, Robby Seabrook (February 6, 2019). "The Break Presents: Yung Baby Tate". XXL Mag. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Ice Spice on Becoming The Female Face of Bronx Drill, retrieved December 31, 2022 Williams, Kyann-Sian (September 11, 2020). "Rico Nasty: 'I definitely resonate with being a pop-punk princess'". NME. Retrieved January 8, 2022. I, Kathy; oli (January 18, 2021). "Flo Milli Looks to Nicki Minaj for Career Inspiration". XXL Mag. Retrieved January 9, 2022. "'I'm Just Trying To Compete With The Boys': An Interview With Ivorian Doll". Complex. Retrieved January 9, 2022. "Angel Haze Speaks On Learned Technique, Inspiration From Drake & Nicki Minaj". HipHopDX. September 6, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Lyle, Ashley (February 14, 2018). "Rising MC Saweetie Talks Viral Hit 'Icy Grl', Signing With Warner Bros. Records & the Value of Education". Billboard. Retrieved September 10, 2019. "29 Black Music Milestones: Nicki Minaj Puts Female Rap Back On the Map". Retrieved April 30, 2020. "Nicki Minaj's 20 Best Features". Billboard. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "The Best Nicki Minaj Features". Complex. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Caramanica, Jon (March 30, 2012). "A Singular Influence". The New York Times. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Nielson, Erik (March 4, 2014). "Where Did All The Female Rappers Go?". NPR. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "The Lasting Legacy of Nicki Minaj". Complex. Retrieved May 1, 2021. "10 Years After 'Pink Friday', A Look At Nicki Minaj's Enduring Legacy". Nylon. November 23, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack. "Cash Kings 2011: Hip-Hop's Top Earners". Forbes. Greenburg, Zack. "Cash Kings 2012: Hip-Hop's Top Earners". Forbes. Retrieved September 5, 2012. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack. "Cash Kings 2013: The World's Highest-Paid Hip-Hop Artists". Forbes. Retrieved November 20, 2013. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack. "Cash Kings 2014: The World's Highest-Paid Hip-Hop Acts". Forbes. Retrieved October 2, 2014. "Nicki Minaj Makes History With Seven Billboard Hot 100 Songs". MTV RapFix. Viacom. October 8, 2010. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Cantor, Paul (October 21, 2010). "Nicki Minaj Makes Hottest MCs In The Game Debut At #6!". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved August 13, 2014. "Rolling Stone Master Ranking King Of Hip Hop". idolator. August 15, 2011. "Nicki Minaj Wins Best Female Hip-Hop Artist For The 7th Year In A Row". BET. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Nicki Minaj, Miguel, Kendrick Lamar win at BET Awards". Fox News. 21st Century Fox. June 30, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2014. "Weekly Chart Notes: Nicki Minaj Matches Mariah Carey's Hot 100 Mark". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. April 12, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Nilles, Billy (December 8, 2020). "The Ultimate Ranking of Nicki Minaj's 19 Top 10 Hits". E! Online. Retrieved March 9, 2021. "Nicki Minaj's 20 Biggest Billboard Hits". Billboard. August 12, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Makes History as First Woman With 100 Appearances on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 21, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Passes Aretha Franklin for Most Billboard Hot 100 Hits of Any Female Artist". Billboard. Retrieved March 21, 2021. Music, News-2 years ago (November 6, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Becomes First Woman Ever With 100 Billboard Hot 100 Entries". Okayplayer. Retrieved March 21, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Doja Cat's 'Say So,' Featuring Nicki Minaj, Tops Billboard Hot 100, Becoming the First No. 1 For Each". Billboard. Retrieved March 21, 2021. "Taylor Swift Sends All 15 Songs From 'Evermore' Onto Hot 100". Billboard. December 21, 2020. "Taylor Swift Breaks Record for Most Billboard Hot 100 Hits Among Women, Thanks to 'Folklore'". Billboard. Stone, Alexis (November 16, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Will Be Honored With Billboard's 'Game Changer' Award". Breaking Celebrity News, Entertainment News, and Celebrity Gossip – Celebrity Insider. "Billboard Gamechanger Nicki Minaj on Why She'll Never 'Completely' Step Away From Music". Billboard. Retrieved August 26, 2021. "See the full winners list for the 2020 Latin Grammys". Entertainment Weekly. June 22, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Karol G and Nicki Minaj's "Tusa" Hits 13 Weeks on Top of Argentina Hot 100". Billboard. April 16, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2021. "Megan Thee Stallion, Cardi B, Nicki Minaj and More – How Female Rappers Dominated in 2020". WKYC. December 3, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "The Queens rapper, who reigns as Spotify's most streamed female rapper for 2020, celebrated the 10-year anniversary of her Pink Friday debut last month." Nicki Minaj – Anaconda, retrieved April 3, 2021 "Nicki Minaj Shatters Another Record After "Anaconda" Video Hits 1 Billion Views". HotNewHipHop. April 3, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Reportedly Sets New Youtube Record Thanks to Her Sexually-Charged 'Anaconda' Video". HipHopDX. April 4, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2021. "Nicki Minaj "Anaconda" Music Video Hits 1 Billion Views On YouTube, Sets Record". BET. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "Nicki Minaj & Kendrick Lamar Named TIME's 100 Most Influential People". Rap-Up. April 21, 2016. Archived from the original on September 30, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Lil Wayne (April 21, 2016). "Nicki Minaj". Time. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Skelton, Eric; Diaz, Angel; Tharpe, Frazier; Ortiz, Edwin; McKinney, Jessica; Thompson, Paul; Weiss, Jeff (November 18, 2019). "The Best Rappers of the 2010s". Complex. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "The Best Rapper Alive, Every Year Since 1979". Complex. Retrieved January 20, 2022. "Nicki Minaj, maybe 'Idol' judge, unveils new fragrance". CNN Entertainment. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "2013 FiFi Finalists Announced! Which Celebrity Fragrances Should Win an Award?". InStyle.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved March 9, 2018. "New Nicki Minaj Fragrance: 'Pink Friday Special Edition'". The Honesty Hour. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Nicki Minaj Perfume | The Perfume Shop". www.theperfumeshop.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. "Nicki Minaj Dropping New "Minajesty" Fragrance". Hip-Hop Wired. July 29, 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2013. "Nicki Minaj's Barbz gets a sophisticated makeover for new ONIKA perfume – Beauty News – Reveal". Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2015. "The Pinkprint Nicki Minaj Perfume – For Women". Retrieved August 16, 2020. Wilson, Julee (October 19, 2016). "Nicki Minaj Just Launched Her Eighth Fragrance Called 'Trini Girl'". Essence. Retrieved September 25, 2019. "Nicki Minaj Queen Limited Edition". Retrieved August 16, 2020. Muhammad, Latifah (December 8, 2023). "Nicki Minaj's Pink Friday 2 Perfume Is Out Now: Get It Before It Sells Out". Billboard. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Major, Michael (November 25, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Didn't Know Her Own Fragrance Was Released". The Messenger. Archived from the original on November 26, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023. "Nicki Minaj Hilariously Had 'No Idea' Her New Fragrance Was Being Released Last Week: 'Was Informed of Nothing'". People. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Titus, Alexis (October 25, 2023). "Nicki Minaj is Releasing a New Perfume Alongside Her Upcoming Album". Glitter Magazine. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Saad, Nardine (October 25, 2023). "Nicki Minaj delays Pink Friday 2. Fear not, Barbz: It'll be her 'biggest gift' to 'humanity thus far'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "Nicki Minaj and M.A.C Launch Pink Friday Lipstick". People. Dotdash Meredith. November 24, 2010. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Schneider, Marc (December 2, 2011). "Nicki Minaj: Barbie Doll a 'Very Major Moment' for Me". Billboard. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved September 16, 2020. Hampp, Andrew (December 2, 2011). "Exclusive: See One-of-a-Kind Nicki Minaj Barbie Doll (Photo)". Billboard. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Perpetua, Matthew (December 2, 2011). "Nicki Minaj Barbie Doll Made for Charity". Rolling Stone. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved September 16, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Unveils Casio TRYX Digital Camera in Times Square". Complex. April 8, 2011. Retrieved August 14, 2012. "Nicki Minaj Reveals OPI Nail Polish Collection". MTV News. October 21, 2011. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Ramos, Dorkys (February 4, 2012). "Pucker Up: Nicki Minaj's and Ricky Martin's Viva Glam Lipstick". BET. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Burton, Cinya (April 26, 2013). "Nicki Minaj's MAC Lipstick Is Viva Glam's Best-Selling Ever". E! Online. Retrieved August 24, 2022. "Nicki Minaj & Ricky Martin Team Up In The Newest MAC Viva Glam Campaign". Teen Vogue. February 2, 2012. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Helps Launch Nokia Lumia 900 In Times Square". Universal Music. Retrieved August 14, 2012. "Nicki Minaj's Pepsi Ad: Company Debuts 3-D 'Now In A Moment' Commercial". The Huffington Post. May 7, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Nicki Minaj: 'Beyonce Gave Me Inspiration To Do Pepsi Advert'". TaleTela. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Rodriguez, Cindy Y. "Nicki Minaj And Ricky Martin Promote MAC Viva Glam, Bring HIV/AIDS Awareness To Latin America". The Huffington Post. Retrieved May 27, 2012. White, Belinda (July 26, 2012). "MAC VIVA GLAM sales raise $250 million for AIDS Fund". Telegraph. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "Ricky Martin and Nicki Minaj becomes face of MAC lipstick". Elle Canada. July 27, 2011. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Sanchez, Karizza. "Nicki Minaj Signs Endorsement Deal With adidas". Complex Media. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Mangum, Ade. "NIcki Minaj, Big Sean Star In Adidas Commercial With Jeremy Scott". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 20, 2013. DelliCarpini, Gregory Jr. (December 5, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Debuts Lavender Lipstick for MAC Viva Glam". Billboard. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Chan, Jennifer (December 5, 2012). "Nicki Minaj Unveils New MAC Cosmetics Ad for Viva Glam Campaign". E! Online. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Brandle, Lars (February 14, 2013). "Adele, Nicki Minaj & Robbie Williams Take Comic Turn". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Thornton, Cedric (March 7, 2013). "Nicki Minaj is Officially a Comic Book Character". Black Enterprise. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Beats By Dr. Dre Portable Pill Speaker Now Pretty In Pink, Compliments of Superstar Nicki Minaj, Exclusively From AT&T". Beats Electronics LLC. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Gleckman, Alexander. "Watch Nicki Minaj Behind the Scenes at Her "Pink Pill Commercial"". Complex Media. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Adam Levine And Nicki Minaj To Launch New Clothing And Accessory Range For Kmart". Capital FM. January 9, 2013. Retrieved January 17, 2013. "Nicki Minaj Launches K-Mart Clothing Line". MTV. October 17, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Unveils Kmart Clothing Line". Billboard. October 16, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "Nicki Minaj's MYX Fusion Beverages Launches Single-Serve Chardonnay and Rose". BrewBound (Press release). July 23, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2022. Smith, Christian (September 1, 2022). "Nicki Minaj's Myx Fusions launches Watermelon-infused Moscato wine". The Drinks Business. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Baker, C. Daniel (June 5, 2013). "Mona Scott-Young and Nicki Minaj Launch New Moscato, 'Myx Fusions'". Black Enterprise. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Rys, Dan (June 5, 2013). "Nicki Minaj Gets Set To "Revolutionize" the Wine Industry". XXL. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "Nicki Minaj is in The Myx!" (Press release). PR Newswire. June 5, 2013. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Keirans, Maeve (February 25, 2014). "Nicki Minaj's Kmart Spring Collection Is Full Of Chain Prints". MTV. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Nostro, Lauren (January 30, 2014). "EXCLUSIVE: Here's a Sneak Peek of Nicki Minaj's Spring Collection For Kmart Paired With Lyrics For Every Outfit". Vice. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "Nicki Minaj's Summer 2014 Collection for Kmart: 10 Looks We Love". BET. Retrieved August 22, 2022. The Nicki Minaj Holiday '14 Collection at Kmart. Nicki Minaj. October 23, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2022 – via YouTube. Eytan, Declan (December 18, 2014). "Nicki Minaj Becomes New Face Of Roberto Cavalli". Forbes. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Bayley, Leanne (December 18, 2014). "Nicki Minaj is the new face of Roberto Cavalli SS15". Glamour UK. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Friedman, Megan (January 13, 2015). "Watch Nicki Minaj's Glam New Ad for Roberto Cavalli". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Flanagan, Andrew (March 30, 2015). "It's Official: Jay Z's Historic Tidal Launches With 16 Artist Stakeholders". Billboard. Retrieved March 31, 2015. "Nicki Minaj's latest fashion collection unveiled at Kmart" (Press release). Agence France-Presse. December 1, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2022 – via Yahoo! News. "Nicki Minaj Models Kmart Couture Collection". HipHopDX. November 28, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Turns Up Cyber Monday With Exclusive Holiday Capsule Collection At Kmart" (Press release). PR Newswire. November 30, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Hubbard, Lauren (August 17, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and MAC Are Teaming Up for a New Collection". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Saunders, Nicole (August 22, 2017). "Nicki Minaj and MAC Cosmetics Are Together Again With #NickiNudes". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Alexis-Fisher, Lauren (November 9, 2017). "Nicki Minaj Transforms From Mom-Next-Door Into Magical Fairy in H&M Holiday Video". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Williams, Aaron (March 29, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Is The Best Driving Buddy Around In A New Mercedes Benz Commercial". Uproxx. Warner Music Group. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Fogel, Stefanie (August 2, 2018). "New 'Madden 19' Trailer Features Nicki Minaj, Lil Dicky And More". Variety. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Traina, Jimmy (August 2, 2018). "New 'Madden NFL 19' trailer features slew of stars". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Chan, Tim (September 20, 2018). "Nicki Minaj Draws Heat for 'Anti-Bullying' Fashion Collab With Diesel". Variety. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Ruppert, Liana (November 15, 2018). "'Madden NFL 19' Celebrates the Holidays With Nicki Minaj, SNL's Chris Redd, and More". Comicbook. Retrieved August 27, 2022. Rashed, Ayana (November 15, 2018). "Here's A New Madden NFL '19 Holiday Ad w/ Nicki Minaj & Chris Redd". Respect. Archived from the original on August 27, 2022. Retrieved August 27, 2022. Rogo, Paula (September 8, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Gives Sneak Peek Of Her Fendi Capsule Collection". Essence. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Multiple sources: Leong, Abigail (September 30, 2019). "Prints On: Fendi X Nicki Minaj". L'Officiel Singapore. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Penrose, Nerisha (October 14, 2019). "Nicki Minaj's New Fendi Prints On Collection Is Here". Elle. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Rearick, Lauren (October 14, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Designed a Fendi Capsule Collection, and Wow, It's Bright". Teen Vogue. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Murphy, Megumi (October 11, 2019). "Fendi Prints On X Nicki Minaj". Flaunt. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Arter, Neesha (October 16, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Celebrated Her "Prints On" Capsule Collection for Fendi With a Very Pink Party". Vogue. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Cowen, Trace William (March 4, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Showcases New Heaven by Marc Jacobs Collection". Complex. Archived from the original on March 6, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Muhammad, Latifah (March 7, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Stars in Marc Jacobs Spring 2022 Campaign: Shop the Collection Before It Sells Out". Billboard. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Weiss, Sabrina (June 30, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Debuts 'Barbie-Que' Chips with Rap Snacks Ahead of Headlining Spot at ESSENCE Festival". People. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Griffin, Marc (July 2, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Collaborates With Rap Snacks For Signature "Barbie-Que" Flavor". Vibe. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Donahue, Bill (September 14, 2022). "Mattel Drops Lawsuit Over Nicki Minaj-Branded 'Barbie-Que' Chips". Billboard. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (October 24, 2022). "Nicki Minaj's Rap Snacks Are Back in Stock: Where to Buy Them Online". Billboard. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Jones, Cierra (March 9, 2023). "Rap Snacks introduces Nicki Minaj's "Red Ruby Da Sleeze"-inspired Nocho Nachos". Revolt. Retrieved March 31, 2023 – via Yahoo! Entertainment. Bowenbank, Starr (October 10, 2022). "Nicki Minaj, Lil Baby, Kane Brown & More 'Sqaud Up' for 'Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II' Trailer: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved March 31, 2023. Johnston, Rylee (March 15, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Launches Her Press-On Nail Brand & We Tried It: Here's What to Know About Pink Friday Nails". Billboard. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Ruben, Howard (March 18, 2024). "Nicki Minaj launches press-on nail brand". Retail Dive. Retrieved March 26, 2024. "Nicki Minaj taps Shopify platform for launch of press-on nail brand Pink Friday Nails e-commerce offering". Retail Tech Innovation Hub. March 18, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2024. "Nicki Minaj launches innovative new nail brand Pink Friday Nails" (Press release). PR Newswire. March 15, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Peters, Mitchell (March 4, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Announces Launch of Her Own Record Label on 'Queen Radio'". Billboard. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Savoy, Starr (March 5, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Announces Launch of Record Label, Reveals Roster". Complex. Retrieved April 16, 2023. McKinney, Jessica (March 10, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Launched Her Own Record Label. Here's What You Should Know About Her Roster". Complex. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Tyler Darama Kelly (April 14, 2023). "Nicki Minaj officially announces record label and shares Ice Spice remix "Princess Diana"". The Line of Best Fit. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Rowley, Glenn (May 31, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Named 'Maxim' Creative Director & Global Ambassador of Sports Gambling Brand MaximBet". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Yates, Shanique (June 1, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Becomes MaximBet Investor, Advisor, And Ambassador As She Gears Up To Disrupt Another Male-Dominated Industry". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Is Maxim's New Creative Director". Maxim. May 31, 2022. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. Chelosky, Danielle (May 31, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Is The New Creative Director Of Maxim". Uproxx. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. Louallen, Doc (July 27, 2023). "Nicki Minaj is coming to Call of Duty as first female Operator". USA Today. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Baszucki, David [@DavidBaszucki] (December 8, 2023). "Happy birthday @NICKIMINAJ and excited to have you on Roblox. Gag City is awesome..." (Tweet). Retrieved December 9, 2023 – via Twitter. Kemp, Chadley (December 8, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Joins Roblox for 'Pink Friday 2' Album Launch". GINX TV. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Mendez II, Moises (December 7, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Fans Create AI Metropolis Called 'Gag City' Ahead of New Album". Time. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Sung, Morgan (December 9, 2023). "Gag City is a viral win for Nicki Minaj". TechCrunch. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Ramirez, Erika (December 31, 2014). "Nicki Minaj Opens Up About Her Abortion: 'I Thought I Was Going to Die'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019. "Nicki Minaj Mourns Cousin Nicholas Telemaque's Death". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2012. "Man charged after Nicki Minaj's father killed in hit-and-run". BBC News. February 18, 2021. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Byrne, Suzy (May 15, 2021). "Nicki Minaj breaks silence on father's 'devastating' hit-and-run death". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Tho I can't really bring myself to discuss the passing of my father as yet," she wrote in a letter to fans posted on her website Friday, "I can say it has been the most devastating loss of my life. She says this in the "My Time Again" MTV documentary from 2014. Kreps, Daniel. "Watch Nicki Minaj's Breakup-Inspired 'Pinkprint Movie'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Meek Mill Confirms Relationship With Nicki Minaj". Vibe. April 10, 2015. "Nicki Minaj and Meek Mill Split After Nearly 2 Years of Dating". Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Confirms Meek Mill Breakup". January 5, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2018. "Nicki Minaj & Meek Mill Have Officially Broken Up". HipHopDX. January 5, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Saponara, Michael (January 5, 2018). "A Timeline of Nas & Nicki Minaj's Relationship". Billboard.com. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "5 Things to Know About Kenneth Petty, Nicki Minaj's Husband". Billboard. Henderson, Cydney. "Nicki Minaj marries Kenneth Petty after a year of dating: The 'Clyde to my Bonnie'". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Bailey, Alyssa (October 22, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Announces She Married Kenneth Petty". ELLE. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 8, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (October 22, 2019). "Nicki Minaj Announces She's Married to Kenneth 'Zoo' Petty". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved October 22, 2019. Singh, Olivia; Ahlgrim, Callie (January 30, 2024). "A timeline of Nicki Minaj's biggest controversies and problematic comments". Business Insider. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Minaj has also been accused of more serious offenses, especially involving her husband, a registered sex offender. Kaufman, Gil (July 20, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Is Pregnant: See the Announcement". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020. Weaver, Hilary (May 31, 2021). "Nicki Minaj Shared a Rare Video of Her Baby Boy in an Adorable Burberry Teddy Bear Outfit". Elle. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Mamo, Heran (October 1, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Welcomes First Child With Husband Kenneth Petty". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Saad, Nardine (October 1, 2020). "Mama Barbie! Nicki Minaj gives birth to her first child". Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Aiello, Mckenna (October 16, 2020). "Nicki Minaj Reveals the Sex of Her First Baby". E! News. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Henderson, Cydney. "Nicki Minaj's husband, Kenneth Petty, arrested for failing to register as a sex offender". USA TODAY. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Aniftos, Rania (March 9, 2020). "Nicki Minaj's Husband Kenneth Petty Registers as Sex Offender in California". Billboard. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Blakemore, Peyton (January 21, 2021). "Nicki Minaj's Husband Kenneth Petty's Alleged Rape Victim Speaks Out". iHeartRadio. Jacobs, Julia (August 13, 2021). "Nicki Minaj and Husband Sued, Accused of Harassing Sexual Assault Victim". The New York Times. Retrieved August 14, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (August 13, 2021). "Nicki Minaj, Kenneth Petty Sued Over Intimidation of Sexual Assault Victim". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "Nicki Minaj & Kenneth Petty Accuser Speaks Out After Harassment Lawsuit: 'I'm Tired of Being Afraid'". Billboard. September 22, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Reportedly Comments on Bribery Allegations Against Her and Husband in Harassment Case". Complex. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "Nicki Minaj Harassment Lawsuit Dropped, Vows To Go After Accuser". TMZ. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Donahue, Bill (January 12, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Dropped From Harassment Lawsuit Filed by Husband's Accuser". Billboard. Retrieved January 13, 2022. "The Nicki Minaj Harassment Suit Is Not Over, Lawyer Says. It's Just Moving to California". Rolling Stone. January 20, 2022. "Lil' Kim 'Black Friday' mixtape cover decapitates Nicki Minaj; rapper's old rival laughs off diss". NY Daily News. New York. February 16, 2011. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Is Nicki Minaj attacking Lil' Kim on 'Roman's Revenge'?". Billboard. November 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Nicki Minaj says 'Roman's Revenge's is not about Lil' Kim". Billboard. November 4, 2010. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Nicki Minaj Reveals The Real Reason Behind Her Lil' Kim Diss On 'Roman's Revenge'". Capital XTRA. Retrieved July 9, 2021. "Lil' Kim 'Black Friday' mixtape cover decapitates Nicki Minaj; rapper's old rival laughs off diss". Daily News. New York. February 16, 2011. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Music Nicki Minaj aims new diss at "tragic" Lil' Kim". DigitalSpy. April 4, 2011. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "Lil Kim Addresses Nicki Minaj's 'Stupid Hoe'". Billboard. February 16, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. Lamarre, Carl (February 28, 2017). "A Timeline of Nicki Minaj & Remy Ma's Rocky Relationship". Billboard. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Nicki Minaj Vs. Remy Ma: Rap Queens' Beef History Explained". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Simmons, Ted (December 27, 2016). "Is Remy Ma Throwing Shots at Nicki Minaj in Phresher's 'Wait a Minute (Remix)' Video? - XXL". XXL. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Setaro, Shawn (February 26, 2017). "A Prelude to "ShETHER": The History of Beef Between Remy Ma and Nicki Minaj". Complex. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Nelson, Jeff (March 22, 2017). "Jason Derulo on Nicki Minaj-Remy Ma Feud, "Swalla": I Don't Know That It's a Diss". People. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Cowen, Trace William (February 24, 2017). "People Think Nicki Minaj Took Shots at Remy Ma on New Song". Complex. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Guan, Frank (February 27, 2017). "Remy Ma and the Power of Pettiness". Vulture. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Duster, Chandelis R. (March 10, 2017). "Nicki Minaj claps back at Remy Ma with new song 'No Frauds'". NBC News. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Jensen, Erin (March 10, 2017). "Nicki Minaj fans the Remy Ma feud flames with 'No Frauds'". USA Today. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Nicki Minaj hurls disses back at Remy Ma, drops new songs with Drake and Lil Wayne". Revolt. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Krishnamurthy, Sowmya (March 10, 2017). "Nicki Minaj Goes for Hype With 'No Frauds' Release: Critic's Take". Billboard. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Zisook, Brian "Z" (February 12, 2018). "Nicki Minaj's "No Frauds" is a Fraud, But She's Still the Winner". DJBooth. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Cardi B Jokes About Nicki Minaj Fight — and That Knot on Her Forehead — One Week Later". people.com. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Ngwadla, Nkosazana. "Cardi B opens up about why she attacked Nicki Minaj". Drum. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Cardi B Reveals Why She Attacked Nicki Minaj With Shoe At New York Fashion Week". Capital XTRA. September 8, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "Everything We Know About Cardi B and Nicki Minaj's Fight at Harper's Bazaar's ICONS Party". Elle. September 8, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. "Nicki Minaj denies insulting Cardi B's parenting skills – Independent.ie". Independent.ie. Retrieved November 10, 2018. "Nicki Minaj Opens Up About Cardi B Altercation, Plus More Revelations From Queen Radio Episode 8". Billboard. Retrieved April 23, 2021. "Nicki Minaj Denies Mocking Cardi B's Daughter On 'Queen Radio'". UPROXX. September 10, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2018. Willman, Chris (October 13, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Calls Out Grammys for Moving 'Super Freaky Girl' From Rap to Pop, Claims Latto Is Treated Differently". Variety. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Kaufman, Gill (October 18, 2022). "Nicki Minaj Slams Grammys Again Over 'Super Freaky Girl' Category Change: 'Certain Members Are Afraid to Keep It in the Competition'". Billboard. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Rouhani, Neena (October 14, 2022). "Here's Why Nicki Minaj & Latto Are Beefing". Billboard. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Gee, Andre (October 14, 2022). "Nicki Minaj and Latto Get Into a Twitter Spat After a Perplexing Grammy Choice". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Saponara, Michael (January 26, 2024). "Here Are the 5 People Fans Think Megan Thee Stallion Is Dissing on 'Hiss'". Billboard. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Brasil, Sydney (March 3, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Seemingly Disses Megan Thee Stallion on New Single "Red Ruby Da Sleaze"". Exclaim!. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Breihan, Tom (March 3, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Goes After Megan Thee Stallion On Her New Single "Red Ruby Da Sleeze"". Stereogum. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Coleman II, C. Vernon (March 3, 2023). "Fans Think Nicki Minaj Disses Megan Thee Stallion and Latto on New Song 'Red Ruby Da Sleeze'". XXL. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Cowen, Trace William (December 8, 2023). "Nicki Minaj Fans Are Convinced She's Dissing Latto and Megan Thee Stallion on 'Pink Friday' Sequel". Complex. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Bell, Sadie (January 26, 2024). "Fans Speculate Megan Thee Stallion Addresses Nicki Minaj Beef on 'Hiss' as She Sinks Fangs into Haters on New Track". People. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Craighead, Olivia (January 26, 2024). "Untangling the Megan Thee Stallion and Nicki Minaj Beef". The Cut. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Mier, Tomás (January 26, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Is Hella Pressed Over Megan Thee Stallion's Apparent 'Hiss' Diss". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Peters, Mitchell (January 27, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Fires Back at Megan Thee Stallion After Apparent Diss on New Song 'Hiss'". Billboard. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Stahl, Jay (January 26, 2024). "Megan Thee Stallion, Nicki Minaj feud escalates with 'get up on your good foot' lyric". USA Today. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "Nicki Minaj Drops Megan Thee Stallion Diss Track 'Big Foot'". Rolling Stone. January 29, 2024. Conteh, Mankaprr (January 31, 2024). "Nicki Minaj Says Megan Thee Stallion 'Wanted a Rihanna Moment' After Being Shot". Rolling Stone. Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5. Nicki Minaj at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Official website Nicki Minaj at AllMusic Nicki Minaj discography at Discogs Nicki Minaj at IMDb  Portals:  Biography  Pop music  New York City  Trinidad and Tobago