This is an incomplete list of areas with either multilingualism at the community level or at the personal level. There is a distinction between social and personal bilingualism. Many countries, such as Belarus, Belgium, Canada, Finland, India, Ireland, South Africa and Switzerland, which are officially multilingual, may have many monolinguals in their population. Officially monolingual countries, on the other hand, such as France, can have sizable multilingual populations. Some countries have official languages but also have regional and local official languages, notably Brazil, China, Indonesia, Mexico, Philippines, Russia, Spain and Taiwan. Cameroon: French and English (both official), as well as Cameroonian Pidgin. Many ethnic and tribal languages including Basaa, Duala, Manenguba, Bikya, Bung, Fula, Kanuri, Ngumba, Yeni, Bamum, Bafia, Bakweri language and many others. Some also have fluency in the German, Portuguese and Spanish languages. Central African Republic: French & Sango (both official) and 50 other African languages. Chad: French and Arabic (both official) + more than 100 African languages. Democratic Republic of the Congo: French (official) + Lingala, Kongo, Swahili & Tshiluba (national languages) + 238 other languages. Equatorial Guinea: Spanish, French and Portuguese are the official languages of the country. Fang, Bube, Igbo, Pidgin English, Annobonese are also spoken. Republic of the Congo: French (official), Lingala and Kituba national languages plus other dialects, including Kikongo and Kituba. Burundi: Kirundi (national and official), French and English (both official). Kenya: English (official), Swahili (national and official) and 100+ other languages (Bantu, Nilotes, Cushites, Indians). Rwanda: French, English, Swahili and Kinyarwanda (co-official; Kinyarwanda is also a national language). Seychelles: French, English & Seychellois Creole are official. Tanzania: Swahili is the national language and English and many other indigenous languages. Swahili and English are de facto official languages and Arabic is spoken in Zanzibar. Uganda: English (official), Swahili (second official), Arabic, Luganda, other Bantu and. Nilo-Saharan languages. Djibouti: French and Arabic (official) plus Somali (official) & Afar. Eritrea: Tigrinya, Arabic and English are predominantly used in commerce and government affairs. The use and development of nine Eritrean languages (Tigrinya, Bilen, Afar, Saho, Rashaida, Tigre, Kunama, Nara and Hidarib) is encouraged at the local level and children attend primary school through the fifth grade in their mother tongue. Italian is an additional language spoken in commerce. Ethiopia: The federal working language is Amharic. At a regional level, working languages are Tigrigna in Tigray, Afarigna in Afar, Afaan Oromoo in Oromia, Somali in Somali region, Harari in Harari region Somalia: Somali (official) and Arabic ("second language" official). plus English and Italian (foreign languages) Algeria: Classic Arabic and Amazigh (both official and national language in the constitution) plus Algerian Arabic and French (in media, education and business). Egypt: Arabic (official), Coptic, Egyptian Arabic, English and French. Libya: Arabic (official), Amazigh, Tamahaq, Italian and English. Mauritania: Arabic (official and national), French, Poular, Soninke, and Wolof (national). Morocco: Arabic and Amazigh (co-official). Moroccan Arabic, Hassaniya (present in the media), French (its wide use in education is legally established), Spanish. Western Sahara (under Moroccan control): Hassaniya, Berber, Moroccan Arabic, Spanish and French. Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (in exile): Arabic (official) and Spanish (official) and French. Sudan: Arabic and English (official working languages) plus indigenous African languages. South Sudan: Arabic, English and other indigenous languages. Tunisia: Modern Standard Arabic (official), Tunisian Arabic, French, Berber language, and English language. Angola: Portuguese (official language), Cokwe, Kikongo, Oshiwambo, Umbundu, Kimbundu and 32 additional indigenous African languages Botswana: English, Tswana, Kalanga, Khoi, Herero, Afrikaans, Nama, San, Ndebele, Sign language, and 21 others. Comoros: Comorian, French (official) and Arabic. Eswatini (Swaziland): English and Swati. Lesotho: English and Sotho. Madagascar: French and Malagasy. Malawi: Chewa (de facto language of national identity) and English (statutory national working language). Both are official. Mauritius: English (official, national), French (administrative, national), Mauritian Creole (lingua franca), Hindi, Mandarin, Tamil, Telugu, Hakka, Urdu, Marathi, Bhojpuri and Arabic. Mozambique: Portuguese (official language) and 43 additional indigenous African languages Namibia: English (official), German, Afrikaans, and Ovambo (recognised regional languages) South Africa: Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Northern Sotho, Sotho, Swazi, Tswana, Tsonga, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu (co-official), sign language, Khoi, Nama and San (the languages, which the government is obliged to promote and to create conditions for their development). Zambia: English (official), Bemba, Nyanja, Tonga, Lozi, Lunda, Kaonde, Luvale, Ila, Mambwe, Namwanga, Tumbuka, Aushi, Lenje, Lala and Lamba, and 57 others (72 in total). Zimbabwe: Chewa, Chibarwe, English, Kalanga, Koisan, Nambya, Ndau, Ndebele, Shangani, Shona, sign language, Sotho, Tonga, Tswana, Venda and Xhosa (officially recognised). Benin: French (official) and many indigenous languages including Fon, Yoruba & Songhay (specifically Dendi). Burkina Faso: French (official), Moore and Jula (regional languages) and indigenous Sudanic languages. Cape Verde: Portuguese and Cape Verdean Creole. Côte d'Ivoire: French (official), Baule, Jula, and 60 other indigenous languages. Gambia: English (official), Mandinka, Wolof, Fula and others. Ghana: English (official), Akan, Dagaare/Wale, Dagbane, Dangme, Ewe, Ga, Gonja, Kasem, Nzema and 70 others. Guinea: French (official), Maninka, Fula and Susu. Guinea-Bissau: Portuguese (official), Kriol and indigenous languages. Liberia: English (official) and 20 African languages. Mali: French (official), Bambara (most widely spoken), Fula and Songhay (specifically Dendi). 11 languages are used as mediums of instruction in primary schools Niger: French (official) plus ten other languages recognised as national ones, including Hausa (spoken by half the population) and Songhay (specifically Zarma) Nigeria: English (official), Yoruba, Hausa and Igbo are the four languages of the parliament (each of which has over 20 million speakers) plus 529 other African languages (some of which have over a million speakers) and Pidgin. Senegal: French (official), Wolof (widely spoken), Fula (specifically Pulaar), Diola, Malinké, Sérère, Soninké (national languages) plus other African languages Sierra Leone: English (official), Krio (most widely spoken), Mende, Temne and other African languages Togo: French (official), Ewe, Mina and Kabiyé. Aruba: Papiamento and Dutch are the official languages, with Spanish and English also widely spoken. All four languages are taught in schools. Caribbean Netherlands – Dutch (overall), English (Sint Eustatius and Saba) and Papiamentu (Bonaire) Curaçao – Papiamento, Dutch and English are official languages. Spanish is also widely spoken. Haiti: Creole and French Jamaica: English and Jamaican Patois Puerto Rico's official languages and languages of legislature are Spanish and English, yet 85 percent of its inhabitants reported that they did not speak English "very well." Saint Lucia: English and Saint Lucian French Creole Trinidad and Tobago – in the predominantly Trinidadian English Creole-speaking country where Trinidadian English is official, Spanish was introduced as the second language of bilingual traffic signs and is spoken among 5% of the population fluently. and is generally the "first foreign language". Trinidadian Hindustani is rarely used, only spoken among Indo Trinidadian families, mostly the elders who preserve their ancestral language. Sanskrit/Hindi is also used when singing songs of East Indian origins and in the Hindu Temples. Trinidadian French Creole (Patois) is widely spoken in the communities of the northern suburbs of Port of Spain such as Maraval and Paramin, where there are descendants of the early French Immigrants to Trinidad. Belize: English, Spanish and Mayan languages have some official usage,[citation needed] although the legacy of British rule emphasised English to be most commonly used for official purposes though the majority are Hispanophone. Guatemala has one official language which is Spanish, however, there are 22 distinct Mayan languages. Maya, Garifuna and Xincan languages are recognized to be essential elements of the national identity. Honduras: Spanish is the official language, despite Afro-Caribbean English, Garifuna and indigenous languages can be found in the rural outskirts of the country. In Nicaragua, even while Spanish is the official language (spoken by almost 95%, according to some sources), there are other de facto languages such as Creole, English, Miskitu, Rama and Mayangna (Sumu) in their own linguistic communities. According to the Constitution, the languages of the Atlantic Coasts should be used officially in cases established by law. In Panama, Spanish is the official language, and seven indigenous languages have been given official recognition Canada is officially bilingual under the Official Languages Act and the Constitution of Canada that require the federal government to deliver services in both official languages: English and French. As well, minority language rights are guaranteed where numbers warrant. 56.9% of the population speak English as their first language while 22.9% are native speakers of French. The remaining population belong to some of Canada's many immigrant populations or to the indigenous population. See Bilingualism in Canada Alberta has a specific French policy since 2017. The Canadian province of British Columbia has a sizable population that speaks Mandarin or Cantonese, particularly in the city of Vancouver and its satellite town of Richmond. There is a provincial law on First Nations languages. The Canadian province of New Brunswick, with a large Acadian population (33% French-speaking) is officially bilingual. The Canadian province of Quebec, (7.9% English-speaking)[citation needed] Note: Quebec's largest city, Montreal, is a multilingual city with half the population having French as their mother tongue, and the other half having other languages (including English) as their mother tongue (see Language demographics of Quebec). A majority of Montrealers, whether they call themselves francophone, anglophone or allophone, know both French and English. The city's McGill University, an English-language institution, allows students to submit essays or tests in either English or French. Although there is a sizable English-speaking population in Quebec, French is the only official language of the provincial government. At the same time, many services are provided in English, such as health services, education, legislative activities and judiciary services. Many government services are available in English and French.[citation needed] In Kahnawake reserve, Mohawk is the official language. Manitoba has a particular French Language Services Policy and bilingual in capital city Winnipeg, as well as a special law on recognition of seven indigenous languages. Nova Scotia has a governmental agency for Scots Gaelic language and culture affairs. French is regionally spoken, with a special law on French-language services. In Newfoundland and Labrador, in the autonomous area of Nunatsiavut, English and Inuttut are co-official There is also a particular provincial French Language Services Policy In Port au Port Peninsula French language is used as well. Nunavut is a Canadian territory with a population that is 85% Inuit. According to Official Languages Act, its official languages are Inuit, English and French. Northwest Territories have Chipewyan, Cree, English, French, Gwich’in, Inuinnaqtun, Inuktitut, Inuvialuktun, North Slavey, South Slavey and Tłı̨chǫ Yatıì as the official languages. Ontario delivers services under the French Language Services Act. In Prince Edward Island there is a Francophone region. Saskatchewan has a particular French-language Services Policy. Yukon allows the use of Yukon languages in its legislative assembly, along with French and English. In the 2006 Canadian census, information and questions are available in sixty-two languages, including eighteen First Nations languages. The city of Toronto is one of the most multilingual cities in the world. It is the home to over a dozen daily media outlets of different languages, including the Italian daily Corriere Canadese and the Chinese daily Sing Tao. Greenland: Greenlandic is the official language. Danish and English are spoken and taught; and all Greenlanders are Danish-Greenlandic bilinguals. Mexico: The government recognizes 62 indigenous languages,[citation needed] including Nahuatl, spoken by more than 1.5 million people and Aguacatec spoken by 27 people, along with Spanish. Indigenous languages are recognised as national languages in areas where they are spoken. There is no official language at the federal level, although Spanish is the de facto state language. In Guerrero, state constitution provides for use of indigenous languages in education and translating of main provincial laws to these languages. In Yucatán, Yucatec Maya language is recognised in the state constitution. In Oaxaca state constitution, 15 indigenous communities are listed. Certain use of their languages in education and court proceedings is provided for. In Puebla state constitution, use of indigenous languages in courts and education is provided for In Campeche state constitution, use of indigenous languages in courts and teaching them in schools are provided for. In Quintana Roo state constitution, use of indigenous languages in courts and education is provided for; also, the laws are to be published in Maya language. In Chihuahua state constitution, use of indigenous languages in courts, education, health care and government-disseminated information is provided for. In Chiapas state constitution, use of indigenous languages in courts and education is provided for. In the United States, at the federal level, there is no official language, although there have been efforts to make English the official language. Use of several languages in electoral process under certain circumstances is provided for by federal law, including Spanish in the whole states of Florida, California and Texas. There are federal statutes promoting Native American languages: Native American Languages Act of 1990 and Esther Martinez Native American Languages Preservation Act. The US state of California has the Dymally-Alatorre Bilingual Services Act. requiring state and local agencies serving a "substantial number of non-English speaking people" to employ a "qualified bilingual staff" and to translate certain documents into clients' languages. The US state of New Mexico provides certain guarantees for the use of Spanish, alongside English, in its constitution and electoral laws. Its state laws also provide for using Spanish and Native American languages in education The US state of New York provides translation of vital documents and interpretation into six languages alongside English. The US state of South Dakota recognises the Sioux language as the official indigenous language of the state. The US state of Texas provides in its law for translating to Spanish certain information on agency websites. The US state of Louisiana has mandated the Louisiana French Language Services Program and the Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism to work on providing state government services in French, to the extent practicable It also expressly allows the use of French in legal process and publishing official documents. Spanish is also spoken. The Saint John River valley in the US state of Maine and some areas in Vermont are unofficially bilingual (de facto) in English and French. The US state of Hawaii is officially bilingual in English and Hawaiian. The US state of Alaska officially recognizes English and the following twenty Alaska Native languages: Inupiaq, Siberian Yupik, Central Alaskan Yup'ik, Alutiiq, Unanga, Dena'ina, Deg Xinag, Holikachuk, Koyukon, Upper Kuskokwim, Gwich'in, Tanana, Upper Tanana, Tanacross, Hän, Ahtna, Eyak, Tlingit, Haida, Tsimshian languages. Russian is spoken. Three US territories are also bilingual: American Samoa (Samoan and English), and Puerto Rico (Spanish and English). Guam Code provides for bilingual education (English and Chamorro). One US territory is trilingual: Northern Marianas Islands (English, Chamorro, and Carolinian). In US, states with a large historic (New Spain and First Mexican Empire) and recently arrived Spanish-speaking population such as California, Nevada, Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas and Florida will often provide government services at the municipal level in Spanish as well as English. For example, in Florida, Hialeah recognizes both English and Spanish while Miami recognizes English and Spanish as official government languages. Hopi Tribe constitution (Arizona) provides for specific requirements for Hopi language skills for officials German is spoken due to Amish, German, Austrian and Swiss people. In Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Dutch dialect is spoken. Argentina has several ethnic communities of European, Asian and indigenous origins (the Andean and northeast regions), who speak their own languages,[specify] but uses de facto Spanish as the official language of the country. In most of the country, there is a sizable but bilingual Italian-speaking population. Chaco Province recognises Qom, Moqoit y Wichi as official languages of the province along with Spanish Corrientes Province Guarani is recognised as the second official language Santiago del Estero Province gives official recognition to Quechua in its constitution Bolivia is officially multilingual, supporting Spanish and 36 native languages. Brazil, Portuguese (official) and upwards to 100 languages spoken mainly in the urban areas (European and Asian) and indigenous languages in the Amazon. The use of indigenous languages in primary education is enshrined in the constitution. Espírito Santo – German and East Pomeranian are recognized by constitution as part of the state's cultural heritage Rio de Janeiro – Yoruba, Bantu and Jeje (African Languages) are recognized by constitution as part of the state's cultural heritage Rio Grande do Sul – Talian (Italian dialect) and Riograndense Hünsrick (German dialect) are recognized by constitution as part of the state's cultural heritage Santa Catarina – Talian are recognized by constitution as part of the state's cultural heritage Chile uses de facto Spanish as official language, but there are not an act that declares officiality. The Indigenous Act ratified in 1992 permites the official usage of four indigenous languages: Aimara, Mapudungun, Quechua and Rapa Nui (Easter Island in Polynesia) inside the indigenous communities and areas with high native population density. In the southern portion, there is a sizable but bilingual German-speaking population. Colombia The official language is Spanish. Languages of ethnic groups are official in their territories. English is co-official in San Andres and Providencia. Ecuador defines Spanish as its official language, but Spanish, Quechua and Shuar – as official languages of intercultural relations in the Article 2 of the 2008 Constitution. Falkland Islands, English is the official & dominant language. Spanish is spoken by a minority of the population who comes from Chile and Argentina. Guyana, English (official), Guyanese Hindustani (now mostly used among elders only from Indo-Guyanese community), Chinese, indigenous languages, and a small Portuguese-speaking community. The Amerindian Act orders the National Toshaos Council to promote the recognition and use of Amerindian languages. Paraguay, More than 46% of its population is bilingual in Guaraní and Spanish (both official languages of the Republic), of whom 37% speak only Guaraní and 8% only Spanish but the latter increases with the use of Jopará. There is a large Mennonite German colony in the Gran Chaco region as well. Peru's official languages are Spanish and, in the zones where they are predominant, Quechua, Aymara, and other aboriginal languages. In addition to that, in Peru there is a large community of immigrants, of which few keep their languages. Within those, there are the Japanese and the Chinese (Cantonese dialect), for example and in smaller numbers, the Germans (central Andes), Italian, the Arabic speakers, and the Urdu speakers retain their native languages in Peru. The last two are products of the recent wave of immigrants from Palestine and Pakistan. Lately English has been used by American and British residents.[citation needed] In Suriname, Dutch, Sranan, and English are spoken by large segments of the population (as the national, de facto working language, and common educational language, respectively). In addition, Chinese, Javanese, and various Indian languages, such as Hindustani, are spoken as well. Uruguay has a large Italian-speaking minority also proficient in Spanish. Its border with Brazil has a mixed Portuguese-speaking presence.[citation needed] Venezuela has declared Spanish the official language, while there are some European and Arabic languages spoken in urban areas, Caribbean English dialects in the Caribbean and indigenous languages spoken in the Guayana department. The prominent additional European languages spoken are Italian and German. The use of native languages also has official status for native peoples. Kazakh and Russian both have official status—Kazakh as the "state" language and Russian as "officially used on equal grounds along with the Kazakh language". Kazakhstan is taking its huge step into multilingualism by accepting the trilingualism policy and making changes in law. Former president Nursultan Nazarbaev noted that "The multinationality and multilingualism are one of the values and the main feature of our state. "Dariga Nazarbayeva, then deputy prime minister and daughter of the then president, said in February 2016 that Kazakh children should learn Chinese in addition to Kazakh, Russian and English. “China is our friend, our trading partner and the biggest investor in the economy of our country", she said. "In the near future, we all need to know Chinese.” Kyrgyz is the state language and Russian "used in the capacity of an official language". Tajik as the state language and Russian, designated as language of interethnic communication in the constitution, are widely spoken.[specify] In Uzbekistan, Uzbek (official), Tajik, and Russian are all widely spoken.[specify] Use of Russian (alongside Uzbek) is foreseen for notarized documents and civic records In the autonomous Karakalpakstan, Karakalpak is an official one, alongside Uzbek. In Mainland China, Standard Mandarin (Putonghua) is the official language and is spoken in all regions. It is used for official and formal purposes, by the media, and in education as the language of instruction. However, on money notes, there are texts both in Mandarin (Han) and in Mongolian, Tibetan, Uyghur, and Zhuang. In every locality and region, local varieties of Chinese are spoken in daily life. These range from being quite similar to Putonghua, such as Tianjin dialect, to those that are mutually unintelligible with Putonghua such as Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Shanghai dialect (Wu) or Guangzhou dialect (Cantonese). In the autonomous regions, minority languages are used (such as Tibetan in Tibet or Mongolian in Inner Mongolia, Uyghur, Kazakh and others in Xinjiang). Japan: a special law provides for promotion of Ainu in Hokkaido Taiwan: A national language in Taiwan is legally defined as "a natural language used by an original people group of Taiwan and the Taiwan Sign Language". This includes Formosan languages, Hakka, Mandarin and Taiwanese Hokkien. In Hong Kong, English and Chinese are official languages. All road signs are written in both languages. English is the dominant language in the judiciary and in higher education. Hong Kong Cantonese is the first language of the majority of the population, and is the dominant language in many aspects of everyday life. While Cantonese is the widely spoken form of Chinese in Hong Kong, Standard Mandarin is also taught in schools. The degrees of proficiency in English and Mandarin vary from person to person. In Macau, both Chinese and Portuguese are official languages. While Cantonese is the dominant form of Chinese, Standard Mandarin (Putonghua) is also spoken. Chinese is taught in all schools, while Portuguese is mainly taught in government schools. In addition, English is also taught in many schools. Macanese Patois, a local Portuguese-based creole generally known as Patuá, is now spoken only by a few older Eurasian population. Russia holds a List of minor indigenous peoples of Russia. This list currently mentions 50 peoples (40 until an amendment in 2015), and the "Law on the guarantees of the rights of the minor indigenous peoples of Russia" guarantees among other Federal programmes for the protection and development of their languages and cultures (article 5). The article 10 of the same law guarantees to people belonging to these peoples the right to preserve and develop their native language, and the right to receive and broadcast information in their native languages and to create media. Several Republics of Russia make locally official the language of the main people(s) of those Republics: Buryatia – Russian and Buryat are co-official Altai Republic – Russian and Altai are co-official Tuva – Russian and Tuvan are co-official Khakassia – Russian and Khakas are co-official Sakha Republic – Russian and Sakha are co-official. The law "about the languages of the Sakha Republic" mentions in its article 6 that Evenki, Even, Yukagir, Dolgan, Chukchi languages are recognized as official in the places where those peoples live and are used as equal as the national languages. The Sakha Republic guarantees protection and care for the preservation and the free development of those languages. It is worth noting, however, that Chukchi has no official status in the neighbouring Chukotka. It is closely related to Koryak which is official in the North of Kamchatka (see below). Administrative-territorial units with special status (formerly Federal subjects of Russia, downgraded in 2007–2008): Ust-Orda Buryat Okrug (Irkutsk Oblast) and Agin-Buryat Okrug (Zabaykalsky Krai): Buryat is co-official with Russian. Koryak Okrug (Kamchatka Krai): Koryak is co-official with Russian. Afghanistan: Pashto and Dari (Afghan Persian) are the official and most widely spoken languages in Afghanistan, with the former serving as a national language and the latter spoken as a lingua franca. Other minor languages include Uzbek and Turkmen, Balochi and Pashayi, Nuristani (Askunu, Kamkata-viri, Vasi-vari, Tregami and Kalasha-ala), Pamiri (Shughni, Munji, Ishkashimi and Wakhi), Brahui, Hindko, Kyrgyz. Bangladesh: Standard Bengali is the official and most widely spoken language. However, there are many local languages (some of which are considered Bengali dialects) spoken in different regions of Bangladesh, as well as minority languages like Chakma and Urdu. Speakers of these languages are often bilingual in their local language and Standard Bangla. Additionally, the use of English is widespread in education and the judiciary in the country. India: There are 22 official languages in the states and territories of India (Including Hindi and English, the languages with official use by the Union Government). The largest, Hindi, is spoken by 26% of the population. English is also used, although mainly in some urban parts of the country. A large number of students with a high-school education would generally be trilingual – speaking their own native language, in addition to Hindi and English, with varying fluency—because of the nation's long-standing three language formula that encourages students to learn English and another Indian language as second- and third-languages. Nepal: The 2011 Nepal census reports 123 Nepalese languages spoken as a mother tongue. Most belong to the Indo-Aryan and Sino-Tibetan language families. These are considered to be national languages, and according to the Constitution of Nepal 2015 they are official in their own regions. Despite this, Nepali was selected as the sole working language for the Nepali government. Pakistan. The national language is English and Urdu; English was to be replaced by Urdu however this has not occurred despite many attempts in the past to do so. Pakistan is unique in that both English and Urdu are non-native languages and nearly all Pakistani's need to learn them as a second and/or a third language. There are many regional languages and dialects (the latter are often unintelligible from other dialects of the "same language"). Many high-school and college educated Pakistanis are trilingual, being able to speak English and Urdu as well as their own regional language with varying fluency. Sri Lanka. Sinhala and Tamil are official languages. English is referred to as the link language in the constitution. Brunei: Malay (official) and English Cambodia: Khmer is the official language, but French is spoken by a minority and sometimes used in government and education.[citation needed] Mandarin is spoken in business and commerce. East Timor – Tetum and Portuguese are the official languages; English and Indonesian "shall be working languages within the public administration side by side with official languages as long as it is deemed necessary" Indonesia is the largest bilingual country in the world, with approximately 200 million people speak more than one language. Indonesians speak about 746 different languages. Javanese has the most users in terms of native speakers (about 80 million). However, the sole official (or so-called "unity language") is Indonesian which has only 30 million L1 speakers (compared to Indonesia 260 million population). The role of Indonesian is important to glue together different ethnics and languages in Indonesia. Though Indonesian is considered the nation's only official language, regional governments have rights to conduct regional languages study at schools. Many people in Indonesia are bilingual at an early age. They speak a local native language with their families whereas the official Indonesian language is used to communicate with people from other regions and is taught in schools as a compulsory subject. In Laos, Lao is the official language, but French is understood and used by government. In Malaysia, nearly all people have a working knowledge of Malay and English.[citation needed] Malay is the official language of the country, along with English in the state of Sarawak. Malay and English are compulsory subjects taught in all public schools. Chinese (Mandarin) and Tamil are spoken by the Chinese and Indian communities respectively, and are the languages of instruction in Chinese and Tamil primary schools respectively. Among the Chinese community, apart from Mandarin, several Chinese languages especially Hakka, Hokkien, Cantonese and Teochew and among Indians, Tamil is the most spoken and dominant language. The indigenous peoples of Sabah and Sarawak speak their ancestral languages (Dayak, Iban etc.). However, it is not uncommon for the locals to be fluent in several of the above languages.[specify] The Constitution provides for use of Sabah and Sarawak languages in native courts or for any code of native law and custom. Philippines: The Philippine constitution. designates Filipino as the national language and, along with English, as official languages. Regional languages are designated as auxiliary official languages in the regions which shall serve as auxiliary media of instruction therein. Spanish and Arabic are designated to be promoted on a voluntary and optional basis. Some people in native Tagalog areas are bilingual, while in non-Tagalog areas it is common to be multilingual in Filipino, English, and in one or more of the regional languages, or as in other cases in languages such as Spanish, Minnan (Hokkien), and Arabic due to factors such as ancestry and religion. Eleven regional languages are recognised by the government as auxiliary official languages in their respective regions, while 90+ other languages and dialects are spoken by various groups. Singapore: English, Mandarin Chinese, Malay and Tamil are all official languages. Malay is the national language. English is the main language used in Singapore. As English links the different races and ethnic groups, a group with diverse races and ethnicities communicate using English. Most of the population can speak, read and write in English. In addition to English, many Singaporeans can speak their respective ethnic language like Mandarin Chinese fairly well, as it is a compulsory subject in school. In Chinese communities, the older generation usually speak their own language like Hakka and Hokkien besides Mandarin and/or English. Thailand: Thai is the main and sole official language in Thailand. There are different dialects such as Phitsanulok, Ayutthaya, Suphan Buri (traditional dialect), Thonburi, but Standard Thai is influenced by Thai Chinese in Bangkok, Isan which is influenced from Lao and widely used in the northeastern area,[specify] Southern Thai is spoken in the southern provinces, Northern Thai is spoken in the provinces that were formerly part of the independent kingdom of Lanna. Karen languages are spoken along the border with Burma, Khmer near Cambodia (and previously throughout central Thailand), and Malay in the south near Malaysia. The Thai hill tribes speak numerous small languages. Also, there is a big population of Chinese descent people in Thailand and the old generation often use Teochew as well as Hakka as their first language.[specify] The new generation tends to speak them as a second language or some may not know it at all. Vietnam: Vietnamese is the official language, and English is the most commonly used and studied second language, especially in education, international relations, and the media. In addition, French is spoken by a small minority of people and elders as it used to be the most common second language. The right to use own language, also in courts, is foreseen in the constitution. Bahrain: Arabic is the official language, and English is the most commonly used and studied second language, especially in education, international relations, and the media. In addition, Persian and Urdu are widely spoken.[citation needed] In Iran, Persian is the sole official language, but Azerbaijani (along with related varieties such as Qashqa'i and Kalaj) has upwards of 15 million speakers.[citation needed] Other minority languages include Kurdish, Turkmen, and Balochi. Assyrian is spoken by a Christian minority in the vicinity of Urmia. In the southwestern Iranian province of Khuzestan, most people speak Khuzestani Persian, Khuzestani Arabic, and Standard Persian, sometimes in addition to their own community languages such as Lur, Qashqa'i, Domari or Mandaic where applicable. In Iraq, Arabic is the official language of the state, Kurdish is the official language of the north where 4 million native speakers live. The use of Turkmen, Assyrian, and Armenian in education is provided for in the Constitution. Other languages also exist among Christian communities north of and around Baghdad, such as Aramaic. English is used as well. In Israel, Hebrew has the official status of the state's language and Arabic – a special status with protection of its pre-2018 functions (see Languages of Israel). Jewish immigrants to Israel (especially from Europe) have a different mother tongue, such as Arabic, Amharic, Yiddish, Ladino, Russian, Romanian, Polish, Ukrainian, English, or French and many Jewish immigrants from Latin America speak Spanish and Portuguese. The Arab population of Israel speaks Arabic. Functionally, almost all Arabs in Israel also speak Hebrew. English is widely spoken and understood as a second language by both Arabs and Jews. Officially, road signs must be in Arabic, Hebrew, and a romanized Hebrew transliteration. In Lebanon, Arabic is the official and national language; the Constitution provides for the conditions of using French to be provided by law. Many Lebanese are fluent in French and in English.[citation needed] Armenian is also a language mainly used in the Armenian community. In Qatar, Arabic is the official language, and English is common language. Syria: Arabic is the official language, English is taught as a second language in schools starting from first grade, and in middle school you get to choose between French and Russian as a third language. Rojava: the constitution of the de facto autonomous region designates Kurdish, Arabic and Syriac as official languages. United Arab Emirates: Arabic is the official language of the country, although English is an unofficial language it is widely accepted as the lingua franca as over 89% of the population is migrant. Almost everyone has a working knowledge of English. All road signs are written in both Arabic and English. English is dominant in higher education and is a required ability for most local jobs. English is a compulsory subject in all public schools and is the language of instruction for mathematics and science. Austria has one official language, German. However, it also has Croatian and Slovenian minorities, all of whose languages are protected under federal laws. Certain functions are also guaranteed for Romany, Hungarian, Czech and Slovak in Vienna and Burgenland, under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. In the Czech Republic, several municipalities of Trans-Olza area have official bilingualism (Czech and Polish). Bilingual signs are permitted if a minority constitutes at least a 10% of the population of the municipality. German is recognized as a minority language because of the previous visible German presence in Bohemia. Germany has German as its official national language. Low German is recognized as a regional language in at least five north German states. Lower Sorbian is an official minority language in Brandenburg, Upper Sorbian in Saxony, Sater Frisian in a part of Lower Saxony, and North Frisian varieties and Danish in Schleswig-Holstein. A language without its own territory, Romany (including the language of the Sinte people) is an official minority language as well. Germany is home to large numbers of people from other regions, and some of their languages, such as Turkish, Russian, and Polish, are widely used throughout the country. However, those languages are considered foreign and thus are given no official status. Hungary, the official language is Hungarian. The country recognizes Beás, Croatian, German, Romani, Romanian, Bosnian, Serbian, Slovak, Slovene languages. Use of those languages for certain functions is provided for by law, applying to localities where the share of a relevant minority exceeds 10% or, for wider functions, 20%. Poland – 20 bilingual communes in Poland (mostly Polish-German) speak forms of the German language. Belarusian, Czech, Hebrew, Yiddish, Lithuanian, German, Armenian, Russian, Slovak, and Ukrainian are recognised as national minorities languages while Karaim, Lemko, Romani, and Tatar as ethnic minorities languages. Slovakia has a Hungarian minority of 520,000 (9.7%). Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, German, Bosnian, Serbian, Hungarian, Polish, Roma, Russian, Ruthenian, and Ukrainian languages are recognized as regional or minority languages, with guarantees of their use in municipalities where Slovak citizens belonging to the national minorities form at least 20% of the population. Switzerland has four national languages; German, French, Italian, and Romansh. The cantons Valais, Fribourg and Bern are bilingual (French and German), while canton Graubünden is trilingual (German, Romansh, and Italian). Most Swiss nowadays learn English to communicate to Swiss speaking other native languages, as English is neutral among speakers of different national languages, making it a lingua franca, with no one national language dominating the other. Ex-Soviet republics and Warsaw Pact countries: Many people speak Russian fluently, especially in Slavic countries within the area of the former USSR (typically in Belarus and Ukraine), along with Moldova, which has a Slavic minority. However, few Polish, Slovak or Czech people speak Russian, despite huge expenditures in the past. Abkhazia. According to Georgian law, Georgian and Abkhazian are co-official; according to Abkhazian law – Abkhazian and Russian. The elder generation of Abkhazis spoke Georgian, Russian and Abkhazi. Belarus has two official languages: Belarusian and Russian. Estonia has one official language, Estonian, but there is also a sizeable Russian-speaking community (around 30% in 2000) who speak Russian. Russian and other minority languages can theoretically be used in communication with local government and state institutions within the borders of certain constituencies where most permanent residents belong to a respective national minority (Article 51 of the Constitution). Only citizens of Estonia are considered to belong to national minorities; thus, the provision is only applicable in three parishes and two towns. Many[specify] Estonians can speak Russian, but many[specify] Russians are not fluent in Estonian including those who are Estonian citizens, however fluency varies considerably between age groups. Latvia has one official language, Latvian. Liv language is recognized as an autochthonous (in the Livonian coast, it is allowed to form toponyms in Liv alongside Latvian); the others are defined as "foreign" in the Official Language Law, but there is also a sizeable minority with Russian as their native language – 37.3% of those answering the question on language used at home named Russian in the 2011 census. Lithuania has one official language, Lithuanian. The largest minorities in Lithuania are both Slavic-speaking: Russian and Polish. The latter are a majority in Šalčininkai district municipality. Republics of Russia (see also North Asia for other languages of Russia): Adygea – Russian and Adyghe are co-official Bashkortostan – Russian and Bashkir are co-official Dagestan – Russian and 13 languages are co-official. The Constitution does not state the list of the languages but instead mentions that the languages of the peoples of Dagestan are official. The commonly used list of 13 languages can be derived for example from the languages in which the regional public Radio and Television company broadcasts programmes: Since 2017, The Atlas of multilingualism of Dagestan has become available online. Ingushetia – Russian and Ingush are co-official Kabardino-Balkaria – Russian, Kabardian, Balkar are co-official Tatarstan – Russian and Tatar are co-official Kalmykia – Russian and Kalmyk are co-official Karachay-Cherkessia – Russian (also as a language of interethnic communication), Abaza, Cherkess, Karachay and Nogai are co-official Mari El – Russian and Mari are co-official Mordovia – Russian and Mordvin are co-official Komi Republic – Russian and Komi are co-official Karelia – Russian is official, but Karelian is spoken by the ethnic Karelian minority. North Ossetia–Alania – Russian and Ossetian are co-official Udmurtia – Russian and Udmurt are co-official Chechnya – Russian and Chechen are co-official Chuvashia – Russian and Chuvash are co-official Komi-Permyak Okrug: Komi-Permyak language is official (along with Russian) in this administrative-territorial unit with special status of Perm Krai. In Ukraine, Russian, Hungarian and Romanian were granted status of a regional language in certain areas in 2012–18 (Language policy in Ukraine). Carpathian Ruthenia, Ukraine, Slovaks living near Uzhhorod speak Ukrainian and Hungarian in addition to their mother tongue, Slovakian. In villages near Mukachevo Germans (Swabian dialect speakers) also speak Hungarian and Ukrainian. Denmark has one official language, Danish, but in South Jutland, use of German for certain functions is provided for. In Greenland, Greenlandic is the principal language, while Danish must be thoroughly taught, and all Greenlanders are Danish-Greenlandic bilinguals. Faroe Islands has two official languages: Faroese and Danish. The other Scandinavian languages, Norwegian and Swedish, are understood by most without much difficulty. English is taught in schools, often as a third language. Finland is constitutionally bilingual and has therefore two equally national languages, Finnish and Swedish, and the minority languages Sami (Northern Sami, Inari Sami and Skolt Sami), Romani and Finnish Sign Language are recognized by the constitution. The Swedish-speaking population of Finland comprises about 5.5% of the population, mostly in Svenskfinland. Municipalities are bilingual if the Swedish or Finnish minority is at least 6–8%. Åland is monolingually Swedish by law. Sami is an official language (besides Finnish) in the municipalities of northern Finland. In Norway six municipalities of Troms and Finnmark county, Sami is used officially along Norwegian Sweden has Swedish as its official language. Finnish, Meänkieli, Romani, Sami and Yiddish are recognized as minority languages. Meänkieli, a variant of Finnish, is spoken in Tornedalen and Haparanda in North Bothnia. Meänkieli, Finnish and Sami have a special status in the areas where speakers are significant minorities. Italy. The official language overall is Italian. However, the Italian law n. 482/1999 recognizes and protects twelve minority languages, like Sardinian, Friulian, Occitan, Greek, Albanian and other linguistic minorities. Bilingualism is also applied in some territories: In the province of South Tyrol German is co-official. In the Aosta Valley region French is co-official, as is Slovene in some municipalities of the provinces of Trieste and Gorizia. Ladin municipalities of South Tyrol are trilingual (Italian, Ladin, and German). In Veneto, there is a regional law on Venetian linguistic and cultural heritage. In 2016, an additional law has been adopted, providing for the use of Venetian in schools, public institutions and toponymical signs. In Calabria, there is a regional law on minority languages, with Greek, Albanian and Franco-Provençal specifically named. In Piedmont, there is a regional law on promoting linguistic heritage, with Occitan, German, French and Franco-Provençal minorities specifically named. In Sardinia, a 1997 law and a 2018 law establish detailed status for Sardinian, and give official recognition to Catalan in Alghero and to Gallurese, Tabarchino and Sassarese. Malta has two official languages, Maltese and English. Italian is also spoken by a large percentage of the population. Albania has one official language, Albanian. In some regions of southern Albania, Greek serves as co-official. Other languages such as Italian and Greek are widely spoken throughout the country, and are considered minority languages. Recognised minority languages include: Aromanian, Romanian, Serbo-Croatian, Macedonian, Bulgarian, French, Italian and Greek. The majority of Albanians[clarification needed] are multilingual, speaking more than 3 languages, which is due to the large number of Albanian immigrants in Europe and elsewhere, as well as political and socio-cultural relations with their neighbours. As a consequence, Albanians are considered one of the most linguistically diverse peoples in Europe. During Albania's Italian occupation and the subsequent communist period, Italian television and radio were a source of education and entertainment for many Albanians; as a result, 60–70% of Albania's population has a command of[clarification needed] Italian. Albania's Greek communities, as well as returning migrants from Greece and Greek national arrivals, continue to raise the status of Greek in the country. Albania is also part of the Francophonie, with 320,000 French speakers. Cyprus has two official languages: Greek and Turkish. Both languages were spoken throughout the island before 1974. After 1974, and the partition of the island, Turkish became the sole official language in the Turkish-Cypriot-controlled north whereas the internationally recognized Republic of Cyprus retains both languages as official. English is also widely spoken and understood throughout the island. Moldova – the Law concerning the rights of persons belonging to the national minorities and the legal status of the organizations thereof provides for the use of Romanian and Russian in tertiary education, communication with authorities and publishing regulatory acts.[clarification needed] It also provides for the use of Ukrainian, Gagauz, Bulgarian, Hebrew, Yiddish and other (unnamed) languages in education. Gagauzia – Romanian, Gagauz, Russian Transnistria – Moldovan, Russian, Ukrainian In Romania, the official language is Romanian, but significant minority languages are recognized at a local level, with commitments made in respect of use of Bulgarian, Czech, Croatian, German, Hungarian, Russian, Serbian, Slovak, Turkish and Ukrainian in areas where their share of speakers is at least 20%. The biggest ethnic minority is the Hungarian community of 1.4 million (6.6%). In Turkey, the Constitution of Turkey defines Turkish as the only official language of the country (art. 3) and explicitly prohibits educational institutions to teach any language other than Turkish as a mother tongue to Turkish citizens (art. 42). Only exception is Greek and Armenian languages, which can be taught in schools as part of non-Muslim minorities rights of Treaty of Lausanne. In 2013, the Ministry of Education introduced Kurdish, Abkhaz, Adyghe and Laz languages into the academic programme of the basic schools as optional classes from the fifth year on. In 2010, Kurdish municipalities in the southeast decided to begin printing water bills, marriage certificates and construction and road signs, as well as emergency, social and cultural notices, in Kurdish alongside Turkish. Friday sermons by imams began to be delivered in the language, and Esnaf provided Kurdish price tags. Before August 2002, the Turkish government placed severe restrictions on the use of Kurdish, prohibiting the language in education and broadcast media. In March 2006, Turkey allowed private television channels to broadcast in Kurdish. However, the Turkish government said that they must avoid showing children's cartoons, or educational programs that teach Kurdish, and could broadcast only for 45 minutes a day or four hours a week. However, most of these restrictions on private Kurdish television channels were relaxed in September 2009. In successor countries of the former SFR Yugoslavia, official languages of Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian and Montenegrin are mutually intelligible by all four groups (see Serbo-Croatian). Other smaller languages in the new republics of Slovenia (Slovene) and North Macedonia (Macedonian) are not. There are other languages that have co-official status in some parts of these countries (e.g. Italian in Istria, Hungarian in Vojvodina). Croatia – the Constitution of Croatia defines Croatian as the official language of the country while permitting regional or local co-official usage of minority languages of Croatia and Cyrillic or other alphabets. The Istria County is the only bilingual region with Italian language as its second official language. At the level of local self-government units municipalities and towns with second official languages are primarily influenced in their policy by the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities in the Republic of Croatia and other national and international legal norms. Kosovo has two official languages, Albanian and Serbian. Turkish, Bosnian, and Roma hold official status at a regional level. Serbia: There are seven officially used languages in the northern autonomous province of Vojvodina (Serbian, Croatian, Romanian, Ruthenian, Hungarian, Slovak and Czech), and four in central Serbia (Serbian, Bosnian, Albanian and Bulgarian). Vojvodina has a multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-lingual identity, with a number of mechanisms for the promotion of minority rights; there are more than 26 ethnic groups in the province. The province has six official languages. Some Serbs are recognised as fluent multilinguals; many of them can speak German, French and English, due to the huge number of Serbian immigrants in Europe, especially in Austria, Germany and France, whilst English is quite popular due to the large Serbian immigrant communities in Australia and Canada. North Macedonia – in 2019, Albanian was made co-official, while Macedonian remains the primary official language. Andorra has one official language, Catalan. Other languages (mainly Spanish, French and Portuguese) are also spoken without official recognition. Gibraltar is a British overseas territory whose sole official language is English. Given Gibraltar's size, most of the population is also fluent in Spanish due to its vicinity with Spain. Gibraltarians also use Llanito as a local vernacular. Portugal – although Portuguese is practically universal, Mirandese, a related Leonese language, is spoken in Miranda do Douro, northeastern Portugal and is officially recognized (see: Languages of Portugal), and there is some familiarity with the Spanish language in towns bordering Spain. Spain, where several autonomous communities have their own official language, additional to Spanish (also known as Castilian), official all over Spain (see: languages of Spain): Basque Country and Northern Navarre: Basque, a language isolate. Balearic Islands and Valencian Community: Catalan (officially called Valencian in Valencia). Catalonia: Catalan and Aranese (Occitan). Galicia: Galician, has a common origin with the Portuguese. There are a number of languages which have official recognition of some kind but which are not fully official: Aragonese and Catalan in certain areas of Aragon. Asturian and, in some areas, Galician in Asturias. Leonese and, to a smaller degree, Galician in Castile and León. Belgium has three official languages: Dutch (59%) in the north, French (40%) in the south and a small minority speaks German (1%). Its bilingual capital, Brussels is mainly French-speaking, with Dutch speakers as a minority. These languages have the status of 'official language' only in specified language areas as defined by the constitution. In Flanders, 59% and 53% of the Flemings know French and English respectively; in Wallonia, only 19% and 17% know Dutch or English. In each region, Belgium's third official language, German, is notably less known than Dutch, French or English. Wallonia recognises all of its vernacular dialect groups as regional languages, Flanders does not.[citation needed] France has a monolingual policy for the republic to conduct government business only in French. There are, however, levels of fluency in regional languages: Alsatian, Basque (the department of Pyrénées-Atlantiques), Breton (the regional government of Brittany has adopted some policies to promote the teaching of Breton), Catalan (the department of Pyrénées-Orientales has a particular charter for supporting Catalan), Corsican (Corsican teaching in the island's schools is provided for by law), Flemish, Franco-Provençal, Lorraine Franconian and Occitan (sometimes called Provençal). The country as whole is linguistically dominated by French. Ireland, the first official language of Ireland is Irish, with the second being English. English is the first language of the vast majority of the population. Luxembourg is a rare example of a truly trilingual society, in that it not only has three official languages – Luxembourgish, French and German – but has a trilingual education system. For the first four years of school, Luxembourgish is the medium of instruction, before giving way to German, which in turn gives way to French. (In addition, children learn English and sometimes another European language, usually Spanish or Italian.) Similarly in the country's parliament, debates are conducted in Luxembourgish, draft legislation is drafted in German, while the statute laws[clarification needed] are in French. Due to the large population of Portuguese descent, the Portuguese language is fairly prevalent in Luxembourg, though it remains limited to the relationships inside this community. Portuguese has no official status, but the administration sometimes makes certain informative documents available in Portuguese. The Netherlands has four official languages. Dutch is the primary language, and West Frisian is recognized as a minority language and spoken by between 300,000 and 700,000 people. West Frisian is mostly spoken in the province of Friesland, where it is the official first[citation needed] language. Low Saxon is recognized as a regional language in the northeast of the country, and Limburgish is an official regional language in Netherlands Limburg. In Amsterdam, certain services are provided in English; English is official in the Dutch municipalities of Saba and Sint Eustatius. The fourth official language is Papiamento, spoken on Bonaire. The only national language of the United Kingdom is English, however, there are several regional languages recognised to varying degrees in the UK or the Crown dependencies: England: Cornish is currently recognised under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. 557 people, mainly living in Cornwall, reported as speaking Cornish in 2011. Wales: 611,000 Welsh speakers (but no monoglots), including the majority of the population in parts of north and west Wales. English is widely used. English and Welsh have equal official status in law. On road signs and branding of devolved organisations, Welsh is usually placed first above English. Prior to 2016, local authorities could decide whether Welsh or English should be first on road signage, leading to different orders of the languages between English-speaking and Welsh-speaking authorities, since 2016, new signage must be Welsh-first, remaining English-first signage and road paintings would become Welsh-first when they would've otherwise been replaced. Northern Ireland: Ulster Scots, a variety of Scots, is spoken by some in Northern Ireland, but again English is far more commonly used and Ulster Scots is less actively used in media. Irish and Ulster Scots now both have official[specify] status in Northern Ireland as part of the 1998 Belfast Agreement; certain functions are granted to those two languages under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Scotland: 58,652 Gaelic speakers, mostly concentrated in the Highlands and the Hebrides, the traditional heartland of Gaelic culture. The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 provides for the status of the Gaelic language as an official language of Scotland commanding equal respect to the English language. Also Scots with approximately 2 to 3 million speakers – a Germanic language closely related to English. Jersey: along with English, the use of French for petitioning the parliament is provided for by its Standing Orders. Jèrriais is official as well. Isle of Man: the main language is English, but a small percentage of the population have some knowledge of Manx Gaelic, which is used officially to a limited extent, e.g. in bilingual street signs, some official documents and for ceremonial purposes. Guernsey: the main language is English. French is spoken as well. Australia – English is the de facto official language of Australia. Auslan is recognised by the Australian Government and is spoken by many Australian deaf people. Australian Aboriginal languages, of which there are approximately 290–363, have recognition – though only a few are popularly spoken by Australian Indigenous people, including: Wiradjuri, Pitjantjatjara, Kalaw Lagaw Ya, Ngaanyatjarra, Warlpiri and Australian Kriol. Some government departments and agencies provide translations of documents in multiple languages for non-English speakers. Fiji – Fijian, English and Fiji Hindi (All official) Tongan and Tuvaluan are also spoken. Kiribati – Gilbertese and English (official); Gilbertese is the majority language, English language is the prevailing language for constitutional text Marshall Islands – Marshallese and English (both official) Micronesia – English (official) but each state has its own regional language: Chuukese (Chuuk), Kosraean (Kosrae), Pohnpeian (Pohnpei), and Yapese (Yap). In addition other language such as Pingelapese, Ngatikese, Satawalese, Puluwatese, Mortlockese, Mokilese, Ulithian, Woleaian, Nukuoro, and Kapingamarangi are recognized. Nauru – Nauruan is the official language. English is also spoken along with it. New Caledonia, a special collectivity of France – French and Kanak languages (primarily Drehu, Nengone, Paicî, Ajië and Xârâcùù) New Zealand – a small percentage of the population has some reasonable degree of bilingualism in English and Māori, mostly among the Māori themselves; few are fully fluent in Māori.[specify] New Zealand Sign Language has also an official status. English is the main language, with over 96% of the population speaking it fluently. Maori has been recognized as official since 1987. Cook Islands – Cook Islands Maori and English. Niue – Niuean and English. Palau – Palauan traditional languages are the national languages. Palauan and English are the official languages. Papua New Guinea – Tok Pisin (official), English (official), Hiri Motu (official), Papua New Guinea Sign Language (official) and some 836 indigenous languages spoken are spoken Rapa Nui (Easter Island) – Rapa Nui along with Chilean Spanish are the 2 co-official languages of the island. Samoa – Samoan and English Tonga – Tongan and English (both official) Tuvalu – Tuvaluan and English (both official) Vanuatu – the national language is Bislama, a creole language or pidgin English and French, which is also an official language alongside English and French. There are also over 110 local vernacular languages distinct to this island archipelago. Constitution of the Republic of Cameroon Article 1 Central African Republic's Constitution of 2004 with Amendments through 2010 Article 18 Chad's Constitution of 1996 with Amendments through 2005 Article 9 THE CONSTITUTION OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, 2005 Archived 5 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine Article 1 Fundamental Law of Equatorial Guinea, as amended in 2012 (in French) (in Spanish) "World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Equatorial Guinea: Overview". UNHCR. 20 May 2008. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Dickovick, James Tyler (2012). Africa 2012. Stryker Post. p. 180. ISBN 978-1610488822. Retrieved 18 December 2012. 2002 Constitution of the Republic of the Congo Article 6(in French) Burundi's Constitution of 2005 Article 5 English is now official language of Burundi Archived 17 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine 2014 The Constitution of Kenya, 2010 Article 7 Bishumba, Nasra. "MPs approve law making Swahili official language". The New Times Rwanda. Retrieved 12 February 2017. The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda Article 5 Constitution of the Republic of Seychelles Article 4 Kiswahili tanzania.go.tz Constitution of the Republic of Uganda Article 6 Constitution of Djibouti Art. 1 The People of Eritrea Archived 3 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Embassy of the State of Eritrea to the Nordic Countries "Tigray Regional State – Ethiopia". ethiopia.gov.et. Archived from the original on 27 July 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2017. "Afar Regional State – Ethiopia". ethiopia.gov.et. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2017. "Oromia Regional State – Ethiopia". ethiopia.gov.et. "Somali Regional State – Ethiopia". ethiopia.gov.et. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2017. "Harari Regional State – Ethiopia". ethiopia.gov.et. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2017. Provisional Constitution of Somalia (2012) Article 5 سواق, Lameen Souag الأمين (6 January 2016). "Jabal al-Lughat: Tamazight official in Algeria". "Constitution of People's Democratic Republic of Algeria. Art. 3, Art. 3 (a)". Mauritania's Constitution of 1991 with Amendments through 2012 Article 6 Constitution of Morocco Article 5 Moroccan lawmakers vote to bolster French in education system Reuters, 2019 Constitution of Sudan Article 8 "Angola". Ethnologue. Botswana Constitution of the Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros Article 2 The Constitution of the Kingdom of Swaziland Act 2005 Art. 3 Constitution of Lesotho Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Art. 3 Constitution of Madagascar Article 4 "Malawi". Ethnologue. "Mozambique". Ethnologue. "Effective Literacy Programmes › National Literacy Programme in Namibia". unesco.org. 8 December 2009. Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Article 6 Central Statistics Office Archived 21 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine Central Statistics Office Article 6 Constitution of Zimbabwe Burkina Phrasebook Book Description Constitution of the Republic of Cabo Verde Article 9 (in Portuguese) (in French) Loi n° 2001-037 du 31 décembre 2001 fixant les modalités de promotion et de développement des langues nationales(in French) Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria Article 55 Constitution of the Republic of Senegal Archived 22 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Article 1 "What Language Do They Speak in Aruba? Dutch & Papiamento – Aruba.com". aruba.com. "wetten.nl – Wet- en regelgeving – Invoeringswet openbare lichamen Bonaire, Sint Eustatius en Saba – BWBR0028063". overheid.nl. Over Curaçao Archived 21 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in Dutch) Constitution of Haiti Art. 5 "Jamaican Language Unit, the University of West Indies at Mona". The World Factbook Nancy Morris (1995). Puerto Rico: Culture, Politics, and Identity. Praeger/Greenwood. p. 62. ISBN 0275952282. puerto rico official language 1993. + Crawford J. Puerto Rico and Official English 1997 Constitution of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico Article III Sefton, Dru (25 July 2011). "Puerto Rico's WIPR: adiós to PBS". Current. Retrieved 17 December 2023. The World Factbook "Spanish road signs quite correct". Trinidad and Tobago's Newsday. 10 October 2008. Spanish Implementation Secretariat Archived 18 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Ethnologue: Guatemala". Ethnologue. 2023. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Achi (acr), Akateko (knj), Awakateko (agu), Ch'orti' (caa), Chicomuceltec (cob), Chuj (cac), Itza' (itz), Ixil (ixl), Jakalteko (jac), K'iche' (quc), Kaqchikel (cak), Mam (mam), Maya/Mopán (mop), Poqomam (poc), Poqomchi' (poh), Q'anjob'al (kjb), Q'eqchi' (kek), Sakapulteko (quv), Sipakapense (qum), Tektiteko (ttc), Tz'utujil (tzj), Uspanteko (usp) Ley de idiomas nacionales Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Articulo 1–3(in Spanish) "Ethnologue: Nicaragua". Ethnologue. 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. The Political Constitution of the Republic of Nicaragua Article 11 Constitution of Panama Art. 7 Ley 88 de 22 noviembre de 2010(in Spanish) Alberta unveils first French policy "First Peoples' Heritage, Language and Culture Act". bclaws.ca. Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Sections 16–20 Archived 10 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Statistics Canada: Visual Census". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Government of Canada. 8 February 2012. "Language Policy". 2015–2016 eCalendar. Charter of the French Language In some areas, government services are provided in native languages such as Inuktitut.Archived 23 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Sections 7, 9, 73, 81, 87 Kahnawá:ke Language Law §3(in English) "French Language Services Policy" (PDF). "The Aboriginal Languages Recognition Act". gov.mb.ca. Gaelic Affairs Archived 14 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Gaelic Affairs "French-language Services Act – Loi sur les services en français". nslegislature.ca. Labrador Inuit Constitution Archived 25 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine Part 1.6 Languages French Language Services Policy Port-au-Port Peninsula Newfoundland and Labrador Heritage 1998–2017 Port au Port Peninsula, Francophone heritage in Newfoundland Francophone Heritage, Culture and Tourism Corridor History of Francophone Communities & Port-au-Port Peninsula, Newfoundland & Labrador Strengthening Rural Canada Inuit: Fact Sheet for Nunavut Statistics Canada 2016 Official Languages Act Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Art. 3 Official Languages Act Art. 4 "FRENCH LANGUAGE SERVICES ACT" (PDF). princeedwardisland.ca. French-language Services Policy Languages Act Art. 3–6 "Toronto's Languages". 9 November 2012. "Corriere Canadese". "首頁 – 多倫多 – 加拿大中文新聞網 – 加拿大星島日報 Canada Chinese News". singtao.ca. Ley general de derechos lingüísticos de los pueblos indígenas Archived 11 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Art. 4 (in Spanish) CONSTITUCIÓN POLÍTICA DEL ESTADO LIBRE Y SOBERANO DE GUERRERO Art. 11, 12, 61, 188(in Spanish) CONSTITUCIÓN POLÍTICA DEL ESTADO DE YUCATÁN Artículo 7 Bis.(in Spanish) Constitution of Oaxaca Archived 13 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Art. 12, 16, 126(in Spanish) Constitución Política del Estado Libre y Soberano de Puebla Art. 13(in Spanish) Constitution of Campeche Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine art. 7(in Spanish) Constitution of Quintana Roo Archived 7 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine art.13(in Spanish) see pages 20–22 Constitution of Chihuahua Archived 7 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine art. 6, 8–10, 143, 155(in Spanish) Constitution of Chiapas Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine art. 4, 7(in Spanish) Voting Rights Act Amendments of 2006, Determinations Under Section 203 Archived 23 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine by Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce Senate passes bill to protect, promote Native American languages Farmington Daily Times 10.12.2019 Dymally-Alatorre Bilingual Services Act Archived 28 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Summary of language access laws in California" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2016. "CONSTITUTION AS ADOPTED JANUARY 21, 1911, AND AS SUBSEQUENTLY AMENDED BY THE PEOPLE IN GENERAL AND SPECIAL ELECTIONS 1911 THROUGH 2013" (PDF). sos.state.nm.us. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2016. Deborah Baker Spanish not ‘enshrined’ as official N.M. language Albuquerque Journal 2013 Bilingual Multicultural Education Act; Technical Assistance Manual for implementing Bilingual Multicultural Education and Title III programs pp. IX-X; Ginger C. Stull Language, Borders and Education: Language Policy and The Making of New Mexico and Arizona Archived 16 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine Working Papers in Educational Linguistics Volume 27, Number 1 p. 24 (p. 6 – as numbered in the file) Language Access Archived 2 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine New York State Department of Labor; Governor Cuomo Announces New York State Agencies Now Provide Free Language Access Services Governor of New York South Dakota recognizes official indigenous language 22 March 2019 "GOVERNMENT CODE CHAPTER 2054. INFORMATION RESOURCES". statutes.capitol.texas.gov. Louisiana Revised Statutes. Title 25 Libraries, museums, and other scientific See RS 25:671 to RS 25:674 Louisiana Revised Statutes. Title 43 §204. Advertisements to be in English; duplication in French permitted Belluck, Pam (4 June 2006). "Long-Scorned in Maine, French Has Renaissance". The New York Times. French language University of Maine "Parlez-vous français? For Maine's Acadian youth, the answer is often 'non'". america.aljazeera.com. "In Maine, a little French goes a long way". Public Radio International. The Bilingual U.S. – French Vermont Boston Language Institute Burlington votes to add French to its signs CBC Article XV The Constitution of the state of Hawaii "Alaska OKs Bill Making Native Languages Official". NPR. 21 April 2014. "Samoa now an official language of instruction in American Samoa". Radio New Zealand. 2 October 2008. Revised Constitution of American Samoa Archived 26 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine Article I, section 3 Guam Code Annotated, Title 17. Education: CHAPTER 4 CURRICULUM AND TEXTS § 4101. English Language Required. CHAPTER 8 CHAMORRO LANGUAGE AND CULTURAL EDUCATION Article XXII Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Constitution Constitution and By-Laws of the Hopi Tribe art. 4 of the constitution and art. 1 of the By-Laws Ley Nro. 1848-W (Antes Ley 6604)(in Spanish) LEY 5.598(in Spanish) DISPOSICIONES COMPLEMENTARIAS // Constitución de la Provincia de Santiago del Estero(in Spanish) Bolivian Constitution Archived 21 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Article 5-I: "Son idiomas oficiales del Estado el castellano y todos los idiomas de las naciones y pueblos indígena originario campesinos, que son el aymara, araona, baure, bésiro, canichana, cavineño, cayubaba, chácobo, chimán, ese ejja, guaraní, guarasu'we, guarayu, itonama, leco, machajuyai-kallawaya, machineri, maropa, mojeño-trinitario, mojeño-ignaciano, moré, mosetén, movima, pacawara, puquina, quechua, sirionó, tacana, tapieté, toromona, uru-chipaya, weenhayek, yawanawa, yuki, yuracaré y zamuco." Constitution of the Federative Republic of Brazil Archived 15 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Art. 13, 210, 231 Constituição do estado do Espírito Santo Art. 182. "Pommern in Brasilien – LernCafe – Online-Journal zur allgemeinen Weiterbildung". lerncafe.de. "Lei 8085/18 | Lei nº 8085 de 28 de agosto de 2018. do Rio de janeiro, Governo do Estado do Rio de Janeiro". 19 April 2019. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "A partir de agora o idioma Iorubá é patrimônio imaterial do Rio | Hypeness – Inovação e criatividade para todos". 19 April 2019. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Idioma Bantu é Patrimônio Imaterial do Estado do Rio de Janeiro". 7 September 2022. Archived from the original on 7 September 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2023. https://gov-rj.jusbrasil.com.br/legislacao/826063527/lei-8758-18-marco-2020-rio-de-janeiro-rj "Lei Ordinária 9096 2020 de Rio de Janeiro RJ". "Idiomas jeje serão declarados Patrimônio Imaterial do Rio". Archived from the original on 7 September 2022. "Subsídios para o reconhecimento do Talian". Archived from the original on 13 March 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Sistema Legis". 30 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Texto da Norma". 30 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "LEI-014951". 30 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Indigenous Act – Ley Indígena". leychile.cl. Chilean National Congress Library. 5 October 1993. Retrieved 26 September 2015. Constitution of Colombia Article 10 LEY 47 DE 1993 (Febrero 19) por la cual se dictan normas especiales para la organización y el funcionamiento del Departamento Archipiélago de San Andrés, Providencia Y Santa Catalina Art. 42(in Spanish) "CONSTITUCIÓN DEL ECUADOR" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2009. Amerindian Act, 2006 Art. 41 "Paraguay – The World Factbook". 9 January 2021. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. Political Constitution of 1992 Art. 140(in Spanish) Project, Joshua. "Mennonite in Paraguay". joshuaproject.net. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Ethnologue: Paraguay". Ethnologue. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Constitution of Peru Article 48 Ley N° 29735, Ley que regula el uso, preservación, desarrollo, recuperación, fomento y difusión de las lenguas originarias del Perú Archived 4 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine(in Spanish) "Ethnologue: Suriname". Ethnologue. 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Art. 9 Constitution of Kazakhstan Article 7 Farchy, Jack (9 May 2016). "Kazakh language schools shift from English to Chinese". Financial Times. London. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic Article 10 Constitution o Tajikistan Art. 2 О внесении изменений и дополнений в закон «О государственном языке Республики Узбекистан» See Art. 12(in Russian) Новые правила заполнения форм ЗАГС (in Russian) Constitution of Karakalpakstan. Chapter 1 Archived 22 February 2015 at archive.today Art. 4(in Russian) Victor Mair The languages on Chinese banknotes//Language Log. Institute for Research in Cognitive Science at the University of Pennsylvania New Progress in Human Rights in the Tibet Autonomous Region Archived 5 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine State Council Information Office 1998 Language policy//Special Focus for 2005: China's Minorities and Government Implementation of the Regional Ethnic Autonomy Law. // Congressional-Executive Commission on China 2005 Annual Report V. Upholding Ethnic Equality and Unity White Paper on Development and Progress in Xinjiang 2009 Law for the Promotion of the Ainu Culture and for the Dissemination and Advocacy for the Traditions of the Ainu and the Ainu Culture Art.2 國家語言發展法. law.moj.gov.tw (in Chinese). Retrieved 22 May 2019. Chapter I Basic Law of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China Basic Law of the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People' s Republic of China Archived 5 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Article 9 Yiu, Enoch (20 September 2010). "Macau's Buildings Safe, but Culture Collapsing". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019. "О Едином перечне коренных малочисленных народов Российской Федерации (с изменениями на 25 августа 2015 года), Постановление Правительства РФ от 24 марта 2000 года №255". docs.cntd.ru. "О гарантиях прав коренных малочисленных народов Российской Федерации (с изменениями на 27 июня 2018 года), О гарантиях прав коренных малочисленных народов Российской Федерации (с изменениями на 27 июня 2018 года), Федеральный закон от 30 апреля 1999 года №82-ФЗ". docs.cntd.ru. Constitution of Buryatia Archived 24 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Art. 67(in Russian) Constitution of the Altai Republic Archived 1 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine Art. 13(in Russian) Constitution of Tuva Art. 5(in Russian) Constitution of Khakassia Art. 69(in Russian) Constitution of the Sakha Republic Art. 46(in Russian) The Constitution of Afghanistan Article 16 ". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 13 December 2007. https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/afghanistan/. Official Language Act Archived 22 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Sen, Sumant (17 September 2019). "Data: Just 26% of Indians speak Hindi as mother tongue". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 18 September 2019. Krishnan, Revathi (31 July 2020). "All about 3-language formula, the bone of contention between Centre & southern states". ThePrint. Retrieved 2 September 2022. Art. 251 Constitution of Pakistan CIA – The World Factbook Brunei Darussalam's Constitution Art. 82 Constitution of the Democratic Republic of East Timor Art. 13, 159 Peluncuran Peta Bahasa Indonesia Archived 23 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine (not in English) "Sarawak makes English official language along with BM". themalaymailonline.com. 26 September 2022. "Sarawak to recognise English as official language besides Bahasa Malaysia". BorneoPost Online – Borneo, Malaysia, Sarawak Daily News. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. "Sarawak adopts English as official language". thesundaily.my. What you should know about Chinese schools in Malaysia Malay Mail 2017 Constitution of Malaysia Art. 161 Constitution of the Republic of Philippines Article 14, Sections 6, 7 Constitution of Singapore Art. 153A Gupta, A.F. Fischer, K. (ed.). "Epistemic modalities and the discourse particles of Singapore" (DOC). Approaches to Discourse Particles. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 244–263. Constitution of Vietnam Article 5, 133 "Constitute". constituteproject.org. Full text of Basic Law: Israel as the Nation-State of the Jewish People Article 4 Constitution of Lebanon Article 11 "Portail d'actualités sur le Liban". iloubnan.info. Retrieved 15 February 2014. Constitution of the Rojava Cantons Article 9 "Adec reveals major changes to Abu Dhabi schools' curriculum | The National". thenational.ae. 25 March 2015. Retrieved 8 April 2016. State treaty for the re-establishment of an independent and democratic Austria Article 7 (see pages 229, 231) List of declarations made with respect to treaty No. 148 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ETS No. 148) → Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 - European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ETS No. 148), Council of Europe Treaty Office Act CLXXIX of 2011 on the Rights of Nationalities § 5, 6 Act on national and ethnic minorities and on regional language Archived 23 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine(in Polish) Swiss Constitution/Part 1, article 4, states: The national languages are German, French, Italian, and Romansh. English as a common language in Switzerland: a positive or a problem? from Swissinfo.ch The Constitution of Georgia Article 8 Constitution of the Republic of Abkhazia Article 6(in Russian) Constitution of Belarus Archived 26 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine Article 17 Ирина Каблукова Незнание государственного языка прав не лишает Postimees 23 August 2017(in Russian) "Statistical database". Pub.stat.ee. Retrieved 15 February 2014. Official Language Law Sections 3–5, 18 Select database "Population and Housing Census 2011", then "Final results of the Population and Housing Census 2011" Table TSG11-08 Constitution of Adygea Art. 5(in Russian) Constitution of Bashkortostan Art. 1(in Russian) "Национальное вещание". gtrkdagestan.ru. Dobrushina, Nina, Daria Staferova, and Alexander Belokon (eds.). 2017. Atlas of Multilingualism in Dagestan Online. Linguistic Convergence Laboratory, HSE. (Available online at https://multidagestan.com, accessed on 2019-09-24.) Constitution of Ingushetia Art. 14(in Russian) Constitution of Kabardino-Balkaria Art. 76(in Russian) Constitution of Tatarstan Art. 8(in Russian) Constitution of Kalmykia Article 17(in Russian) Constitution of Karachay-Cherkessia Article 11(in Russian) Constitution of Mari El Article 15(in Russian) Constitution of Mordovia Article 12(in Russian) Constitution of Komi Republic Article 67(in Russian) Constitution of North Ossetia–Alania Article 15(in Russian) Constitution of Udmurtia Archived 22 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Article 8(in Russian) Constitution of the Chechen Republic Archived 24 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Article 10(in Russian) Constitution of Chuvashia Article 8(in Russian) § 11, "Lov om Færøernes Hjemmestyre" Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Håller språket ihop Norden? – EN forskningsrapport om ungdomars föståelse av danska, svenska och norska". Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2013. "Section 17" (PDF). The Sámi Act See chapter 3 Norme in materia di tutela delle minoranze linguistiche storiche(in Italian) Statute of South Tyrol Articles 19, 99–102 etc.(in German) Statute of Aosta Valley Archived 23 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine Article 38(in French) Tutela, valorizzazione e promozione del patrimonio linguistico e culturale veneto(in Italian) Venetians call for recognition as a 'minority' The Local 2016 L.R. 30 ottobre 2003, n. 15 Norme per la tutela e la valorizzazione della lingua e del patrimonio culturale delle minoranze linguistiche e storiche della Calabria(in Italian) Legge regionale 7 aprile 2009, n. 11. “Valorizzazione e promozione della conoscenza del patrimonio linguistico e culturale del Piemonte”(in Italian) Disciplina della politica linguistica regionale & Lingua sarda, Consiglio approva legge. Dessena: ora massima tutela e trasmissione(in Italian) Sardegna, sì alla legge per la tutela della lingua: sarà insegnata nelle scuole La Repubblica 27 June 2018(in Italian) Constitution of Malta Article 5 Constitution of Cyprus Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine Article 3 Law concerning the rights of persons belonging to the national minorities and the legal status of the organizations thereof Art. 6, 8, 12 Oб особом правовом статусе Гагаузии (Гагауз Ери) Archived 24 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine ст. 3(in Russian) об основных положениях особого правового статуса населенных пунктов левобережья Днестра (Приднестровья) ст. 6(in Russian) "From Rep. of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "NTV Haber – Türkiye ve Dünya Gündemi Güncel Son Dakika Haberleri". ntv.com.tr. "On trial for speaking Kurdish". ANF-Firatnews. 11 May 2011. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2013. "Special Focus Cases: Leyla Zana, Prisoner of Conscience". Amnestyusa.org. Archived from the original on 10 May 2005. Retrieved 2 December 2011. "Kurdish performers banned, Appeal from International PEN". Freemuse.org. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 2 December 2011. Turkey to get Kurdish television Archived 13 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine "TRT HABER – Özel Kürtçe Kanala Yeşil Işık". Trt.net.tr. 28 November 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2011. Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo Article 5 Gojkovic N. System of minorities’ protection in Serbia. Konrad Adenauer Foundation. Macedonia's Albanian-Language Bill Becomes Law Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty 2019 El Estatuto de Autonomía Art. 6(in Spanish) Law on the Reintegration and Improvement of Fueros of Navarre Art. 9 Ley organica de reforma del estatuto de autonomia de las illes Balears Articulo 4. Ley Orgánica 5/1982, de 1 de julio, de Estatuto de Autonomía de la ComunidadValenciana Artículo sexto Act on linguistic policy O Estatuto de Autonomía de Galicia Art. 5 LEY 3/2013, de 9 de mayo, de uso, protección y promoción de las lenguas y modalidades lingüísticas propias de Aragón Art. 2(in Spanish) Ley 1/1998, de 23 de marzo, de uso y promoción del bable/asturiano Art. 1–2(in Spanish) Ley Orgánica 14/2007, Estatuto de Autonomía de Castilla y León Art. 5(in Spanish) Constitution of Belgium Article 4 Van Parijs, Philippe, Professor of economic and social ethics at the UCLouvain, Visiting Professor at Harvard University and the KULeuven. "Belgium's new linguistic challenges" (PDF). KVS Express (Supplement to Newspaper de Morgen) March–April 2007: Article from original source (pdf 4.9 MB) pages 34–36 republished by the Belgian Federal Government Service (ministry) of Economy – Directorate–general Statistics Belgium. Archived from the original (pdf 0.7 MB) on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 5 May 2007.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) – The linguistic situation in Belgium (and in particular various estimations of the population speaking French and Dutch in Brussels) is discussed in detail. "La politique linguistique de la Région – Développer les langues de Bretagne". Regional Government of Brittany Region. Retrieved 26 September 2015. Charte en faveur du Catalan Archived 22 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in French) The Corsican language in education in France. 2nd Edition Archived 22 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine Regional dossiers series / Mercator-Education ISSN 1570-1239 – р. 8 Constitution of Ireland Article 8 Loi du 24 février 1984 sur le régime des langues Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine(in French) "Amsterdam wordt 'Emsterdem'". telegraaf.nl. "Cornish gains official recognition". BBC News. 6 November 2002. Retrieved 11 November 2012. "Number of Welsh, Gaelic, Irish and Cornish speakers from the 2011 Census". Office of National statistics. 9 June 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2018. Map of percentage able to speak Welsh, 2001 Archived 24 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Assembly measure gives Welsh status 'equal to English'". BBC News. 7 October 2010. Economic, Social and Cultural Issues // Belfast Agreement "Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005". legislation.gov.uk. Standing Orders of the States of Jersey see Schedule 1 "Services Australia – Information your language". 4 April 2022. "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 14 December 2021. "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 14 December 2021. Constitution of Kiribati Article 127 "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 14 December 2021. Central Intelligence Agency. "The World Factbook". Micronesia, Federated States of. Retrieved 19 April 2016. Noumea Accord para. 1.3.3 Section 3 Māori Language Act 1987 Constitution of the Cook Islands Art. 35 Constitution of Niue Art. 23 Constitution of the Republic of Palau Archived 7 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine Article XIII "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 17 December 2021. Constitution of Samoa Art. 54 "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 3 January 2022. "The World Factbook". cia.gov. 20 December 2021. Constitution of the Republic of Vanuatu Article 3