Peristeri (Greek: Περιστέρι, meaning "pigeon/dove" in Greek) is a city and a suburban municipality in the western part of the Athens agglomeration, Greece. With 133,630 inhabitants (2021 census), it is the seventh-largest municipality and city of Greece by population. The ancient deme Leuconoe, is believed to have been located at Peristeri. Peristeri is located about 4 km (2 mi) northwest of the centre of Athens. It lies between the Egaleo Mountain in the northwest and the Cephissus river in the southeast. The municipality has an area of 10.50 square kilometres (4.05 sq mi). Its built-up area is continuous with that of central Athens and the neighbouring suburbs Aigaleo, Chaidari, Petroupoli, Ilion and Agioi Anargyroi. Motorway 1 (Athens-Thessaloniki) passes through the southeastern part of the municipality. Athinon Avenue (Greek National Road 8 Athens-Korinthos-Patras) passes through the southwestern part. Peristeri is served by three Athens metro stations on Line 2: Anthoupoli, Peristeri and Agios Antonios. The Kifissos Bus Terminal where long-distance buses from Peloponnese, Epirus, Macedonia, Ionian Islands and Thrace arrive, stands at the east border of Peristeri near Sepolia. The most important sport clubs based in Peristeri are Atromitos with presence in Super League Greece and Europa League qualification rounds and Peristeri BC, with long-time presence in A1 Ethniki basketball & in European competitions, such as the FIBA Korać Cup, Euroleague & FIBA Europe Cup. The Peristeri Arena (or Andreas Papandreou Arena) is an indoor basketball sporting arena. The seating capacity of the arena is 4,000 people. The arena is owned by the municipality of Peristeri. The arena is currently home to the Greek professional basketball team Peristeri Athens of the Greek A1 League. The hall was opened in the year 1989. The arena is named after the late Andreas Papandreou, who was the former prime minister of Greece. The arena is an older, smaller version of the Larissa Neapolis Arena and the Dimitris Tofalos Arena, which were based on Peristeri Arena, but built 6 years later and with a larger seating capacity. Cathedral Peristeri Arena Peristeri Stadium Town Hall Peristeri has one municipal outdoor cinema and four municipal theatres. Angela Dimitriou, singer Evangelos Koronios, professional basketball player and coach Giannis Poulopoulos, singer-songwriter Grigoris Bithikotsis (1922–2005), singer and songwriter Nikoleta Kyriakopoulou (born 1986), Pole vault athlete Vangelis Ploios, actor Vangelis Mantzaris, basketball player Leonidas Michailidis, brain surgeon Orfeas Tzortzopoulos, drummer of Suicidal Angels Argiris Pedoulakis, professional basketball player and coach Demostene Russo [el; ro] Konstantinos Argiros, singer Peristeri is twinned with: Iaşi, Romania Rousse, Bulgaria "Αποτελέσματα Μόνιμου Πληθυσμού κατά δημοτική κοινότητα" (in Greek). Hellenic Statistical Authority. 21 April 2023. "Population & housing census 2001 (incl. area and average elevation)" (PDF) (in Greek). National Statistical Service of Greece. "Νέος "ΣΙΝΕ ΠΕΡΑΝ" δημοτικός θερινός κινηματογράφος". peristeri.gr. "Δημοτικά Θέατρα & Κινηματογράφοι". peristeri.gr. "МЕЖДУНАРОДНО СЪТРУДНИЧЕСТВО НА ОБЩИНА РУСЕ - Побратимени градове". Община Русе [Municipality Ruse] (in Bulgarian). Archived from the original on 2013-08-05. Retrieved 2013-08-12. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Peristeri. (in Greek) Official website