Chongqing is a major city and municipality in Southwestern China. Chongqing is one of the four direct-administered municipalities under the Central People's Government, along with Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin. It is the only directly administrated municipality located deep inland. The municipality covers a large geographical area roughly the size of Austria, which includes several disjunct urban areas in addition to Chongqing proper. Due to its classification, the municipality of Chongqing is the largest city proper in the world by area, though it does not have the largest urban area. The municipality of Chongqing is the only Chinese municipality with a permanent population of over 30 million; however, this number includes its large rural population. In 2020, Chongqing passed Shanghai to become China's largest municipality by urban population; as of 2022[update], it has an urban population of 22.8 million. The municipality contains 26 districts, 8 counties, and 4 autonomous counties. The city served as the wartime capital for the Republic of China (ROC) during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945). On 14 March 1997, the current municipality was separated from the surrounding province of Sichuan, with the goal of furthering development in the central and western parts of the country. As one of China's National Central Cities, Chongqing serves as a center for finance in the Sichuan Basin and the upstream Yangtze, as well as for manufacturing and transportation. It is a connection in the Yangtze River Economic Belt and a base for the country's Belt and Road Initiative.Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport is the second-busiest airport in China, and is one of the top 50 busiest airports in the world, The city's monorail system is the world's longest and busiest, as well as having the greatest number of stations, with 70. Chongqing is ranked as a Beta (global second-tier) city; It is the headquarters of the Changan Automobile, one of the "Big Four" car manufacturers of China. As of 2023[update], the city hosts 12 foreign representations, the fifth-most in China behind Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Chengdu. It is one of the top 40 cities globally by scientific research output, as tracked by the Nature Index; the municipality is home to several notable universities, including Chongqing University, Southwest University, and Chongqing Normal University. Chongqing's location is historically associated with the State of Ba. Its capital was first called Jiangzhou (江州). Jiangzhou subsequently remained under Qin Shi Huang's rule during the Qin dynasty, the successor of the Qin State, as well as the rule of Han dynasty emperors. Jiangzhou was subsequently renamed during the Northern and Southern dynasties to Chu Prefecture (楚州), then again in 581 AD (Sui dynasty) to Yu Prefecture (渝州), and later in 1102 during Northern Song to Gong Prefecture (恭州). The name Yu however survives to this day as an abbreviation for Chongqing, as well as for the city's historic center, where the old town once stood; its name is Yuzhong (渝中, Central Yu). It received its current name in 1189, after Prince Zhao Dun of the Southern Song dynasty described his crowning as king and then Emperor Guangzong as a "double celebration" (simplified Chinese: 双重喜庆; traditional Chinese: 雙重喜慶; pinyin: shuāngchóng xǐqìng, or chóngqìng in short). To mark the occasion of his enthronement, Yu Prefecture was therefore converted to Chongqing Fu. In 1362 (during the Yuan dynasty), Ming Yuzhen, a peasant rebel leader, established the Daxia Kingdom (大夏) at Chongqing for a short time. In 1621 (during the Ming dynasty), another short-lived kingdom of Daliang (大梁) was established by She Chongming (奢崇明) with Chongqing as its capital. In 1644, after the fall of the Ming dynasty to a rebel army, Chongqing, together with the rest of Sichuan, was captured by Zhang Xianzhong, who was said to have massacred a large number of people in Sichuan and depopulated the province, in part by causing many people to flee to safety elsewhere. The Manchus later conquered the province, and during the Qing dynasty, immigration to Chongqing and Sichuan took place with the support of the Qing emperor. In 1890, the British Consulate General was opened in Chongqing. The following year, the city became the first inland commerce port open to foreigners, with the proviso that foreign ships should not be at liberty to trade there until Chinese-owned steamers had succeeded in ascending the river. This restriction was abolished by the Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895, which declared the city open on the same terms as other ports, although it was not until 1907 that a steamship made the journey without the help of manual haulers. From 1896 to 1904, the American, German, French, and Japanese consulates were opened in Chongqing. During and after the Second Sino-Japanese War, from Nov 1937 to May 1946, it was Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's provisional capital. After the General and remaining army had lived there for a time following their retreat in 1938 from the previous capital of Wuhan, it was formally declared the second capital city (陪都; péidū; p'ei2-tu1) on 6 September 1940. After Britain, the United States, and other Allies entered the war in Asia in December 1941, one of the Allies' deputy commanders of operations in South East Asia (South East Asia Command SEAC), Joseph Stilwell, was based in the city. This made it a city of world importance in the fight against Axis powers, together with London, Moscow and Washington, D.C. The city was also visited by Lord Louis Mountbatten, the Supreme Commander of SEAC which was itself headquartered in Ceylon, modern day Sri Lanka. Chiang Kai Shek as Supreme Commander in China worked closely with Stilwell. From 1938 to 1943, the city suffered from continuous massive bombing campaigns of the Imperial Japanese Navy and Army Air Forces; battles of which were fought entirely by the Chinese Air Force squadrons and anti-aircraft artillery units. Many lives were saved by the air-raid shelters which took advantage of the mountainous terrain. Chongqing was acclaimed to be the "City of Heroes" due to the indomitable spirits of its people as well as their contributions and sacrifices during the War of Resistance-World War II. Many factories and universities were relocated from eastern China and ultimately to Chongqing during years of setbacks in the war, transforming this city from inland port to a heavily industrialized city. In late November 1949, the Nationalist KMT government retreated from the city. Location maps of Chongqing, Fuling, Wanxian, Qianjiang prefectures in Sichuan before 1997 On 14 March 1997, the Eighth National People's Congress decided to merge the sub-provincial city with adjacent Fuling, Wanxian, and Qianjiang prefectures that it had governed on behalf of the province since September 1996, and grant it independence from Sichuan. The resulting single entity became Chongqing Municipality,: 74  containing 30,020,000 people in forty-three former counties (without intermediate political levels). The municipality became the spearhead of China's effort to develop its western regions and to coordinate the resettlement of residents from the reservoir areas of the Three Gorges Dam project. Its first official ceremony took place on 18 June 1997. On 8 February 2010, Chongqing became one of the four National Central/Core cities, the other three are Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin. The same year on June 18, the Liangjiang New Area was established in Chongqing, which was the third state-level new area at the time of its establishment. Chongqing is situated at the transitional area between the Tibetan Plateau and the plain on the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River in the sub-tropical climate zone often swept by moist monsoons. It often rains at night in late spring and early summer, and thus the city is famous for its "night rain in the Ba Mountains", as described by poems throughout Chinese history including the famous Written on a Rainy Night-A Letter to the North by Li Shangyin. The municipality reaches a maximum length of 470 km (290 mi) from east to west, and a maximum width of 450 km (280 mi) from north to south. It borders the following provinces: Hubei in the east, Hunan in the southeast, Guizhou in the south, Sichuan in the west and northwest, and Shaanxi to the north in its northeast corner. Chongqing covers a large area crisscrossed by rivers and mountains. The Daba Mountains stand in the north, the Wu Mountains in the east, the Wuling Mountains in the southeast, and the Dalou Mountains in the south. The whole area slopes down from north and south towards the Yangtze River valley, with sharp rises and falls. The area is featured by a large geological massif, of mountains and hills, with large sloping areas at different heights. Typical karst landscape is common in this area, and stone forests, numerous collections of peaks, limestone caves and valleys can be found in many places. The Longshuixia Gap (龙水峡地缝), with its natural arch-bridges, has made the region a popular tourist attraction. The Yangtze River runs through the whole area from west to east, covering a course of 665 km (413 mi), cutting through the Wu Mountains at three places and forming the well-known Three Gorges: the Qutang, the Wuxia and the Xiling gorges. Coming from northwest and running through "the Jialing Lesser Three Gorges" of Libi, Wentang and Guanyin, the Jialing River joins the Yangtze in Chongqing. Li Bai's Poem of Chongqing's Baidi Cheng Leaving at dawn the White Emperor crowned with cloud, I've sailed a thousand li through canyons in a day. With the monkeys' adieus the riverbanks are loud, My skiff has left ten thousand mountains far away. The central urban area of Chongqing, or Chongqing proper, is a city of unique features. Built on mountains and partially surrounded by the Yangtze and Jialing rivers, it is known as a "mountain city" and a "city on rivers". The night scene of the city is very illuminated, with millions of lights and their reflection on the rivers. With its special topographical features, Chongqing has the unique scenery of mountains, rivers, forests, springs, waterfalls, gorges, and caves. Li Bai, a famous poet of the Tang dynasty, was inspired by the natural scenery and wrote this epigram. Specifically, the central urban area is located on a huge folding area. Yuzhong District, Nan'an District, Shapingba District and Jiangbei District are located right on a big syncline. And the "Southern Mountain of Chongqing" (Tongluo Mountain), along with the Zhongliang Mountain are two anticlines next to the syncline of downtown. Zhongliang Mountains (中梁山) and Tongluo Mountains (铜锣山) roughly forms the eastern and western boundaries of Chongqing's urban area. The highest point in downtown is the top of Eling Hill, which is a smaller syncline hill that separates the Yangtze River and Jialing River. The elevation of Eling Hill is 379 m (1,243 ft). The lowest point is Chaotian Gate, where the two rivers merge with each other. The altitude there is 160 m (520 ft). The average height of the area is 259 m (850 ft). However, there are several high mountains outside central Chongqing, such as the Wugong Ling Mountain, with the altitude of 1,709.4 m (5,608 ft), in Jiangjin. Chongqing has a monsoonal humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa), bordering on a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cfa) and for most of the year experiences very high relative humidity, with all months above 75%. Known as one of the "Three Furnaces" of the Yangtze River, along with Wuhan and Nanjing, its summers are long and among the hottest and most humid in China, with highs of 34 °C (93 °F) in July and August in the urban area. Winters are short and somewhat mild, but damp and overcast. The city's location in the Sichuan Basin causes it to have one of the lowest annual sunshine totals nationally, at only 983 hours, lower than much of Northern Europe; the monthly percent possible sunshine in the city proper ranges from a mere 5% in January to 43% in August. Extremes since 1951 have ranged from −1.8 °C (29 °F) on 15 December 1975 (unofficial record of −2.5 °C (27 °F) was set on 8 February 1943) to 43.7 °C (111 °F) on 18 and 19 August 2022 (unofficial record of 44.0 °C (111 °F) was set on 8 and 9 August 1933). Chongqing, with over 100 days of fog per year, is known as the "Fog City" (雾都); this is because in the spring and fall, a thick layer of fog enshrouds it for 68 days per year. During the Second Sino-Japanese War, this special weather possibly played a role in protecting the city from being overrun by the Imperial Japanese Army. See or edit raw graph data. Jiangbeizui CBD from above, taken in 2018 Chaotianmen Bridge connects Jiangbei District with Nan'an District of Chongqing, taken in 2018 Jiefangbei (解放碑; 'People's Liberation Monument') is a World War II victory monument Raffles City Chongqing, sitting in the confluence of Yangtze and Jialing River Since 1997 Chongqing has been a direct-controlled municipality in the Chinese administrative structure, making it a provincial-level division with commensurate political importance. The municipality's leader is Secretary of the Municipal Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, which since 2007, has also held a seat on the Politburo of the Chinese Communist Party, the country's second highest governing council. Under the USSR-inspired nomenklatura system of appointments, individuals are appointed to the position by the central leadership of the CCP and bestowed to an official based on seniority and adherence to party orthodoxy, usually given to an individual with prior regional experience elsewhere in China and nearly never a native of Chongqing. Notable individuals who have held the municipal Party Secretary position include He Guoqiang, Wang Yang, Bo Xilai, Zhang Dejiang, and Sun Zhengcai, the latter three were Politburo members during their term as party chief. The party chief heads the municipal party standing committee, the de facto top governing council of the municipality. The standing committee is typically composed of 13 individuals which includes the party chiefs of important subdivisions and other leading figures in the local party and government organization, as well as one military representative. The municipal People's Government serves as the day-to-day administrative authority, and is headed by the mayor, who is assisted by numerous vice mayors and mayoral assistants. Each vice mayor is given jurisdiction over specific municipal departments. The mayor is the second-highest-ranking official in the municipality. The mayor usually represents the city when foreign guests visit. The municipality also has a People's Congress, theoretically elected by lower level People's Congresses. The People's Congress nominally appoints the mayor and approves the nominations of other government officials. The People's Congress, like those of other provincial jurisdictions, is generally seen as a symbolic body. It convenes in full once a year to approve party-sponsored resolutions and local regulations and duly confirm party-approved appointments. On occasion the People's Congress can be venues of discussion on municipal issues, although this is dependent on the actions of individual delegates. The municipal People's Congress is headed by a former municipal official, usually in their late fifties or sixties, with a lengthy prior political career in Chongqing. The municipal Political Consultative Conference (zhengxie) meets at around the same time as the People's Congress. Its role is to advise on political issues. The zhengxie is headed by a leader who is typically a former municipal or regional official with a lengthy career in the party and government bureaucracy. Chongqing was the wartime capital of China during the Second Sino-Japanese War (i.e., World War II), and from 1937 to 1945, the seat of administration for the Republic of China's government before its departure to Nanjing and then Taiwan. After the eventual defeat at the Battle of Wuhan General Chiang-Kai Shek and the army were forced to use it as base of resistance from 1938 onwards. It also contains a military museum named after the Chinese Korean War hero Qiu Shaoyun. Chongqing used to be the headquarters of the 13th Group Army of the People's Liberation Army, one of the two group armies that formerly comprised the Chengdu Military Region, which in 2016 was re-organized into the Western Theater Command.[citation needed] Chongqing is the largest of the four direct-controlled municipalities of the People's Republic of China. The municipality is divided into 38 subdivisions (3 were abolished in 1997, and Wansheng and Shuangqiao districts were abolished in October 2011), consisting of 26 districts, 8 counties, and 4 autonomous counties. The boundaries of Chongqing municipality reach much farther into the city's hinterland than the boundaries of the other three provincial level municipalities (Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin), and much of its administrative area, which spans over 80,000 km2 (30,900 sq mi), is rural. At the end of year 2018, the total population is 31.02 million. As of 2022, Chongqing is the largest Chinese city by urban population, with a population of 22.80 million. Including other township related subdivisions. Chongqing core districts are consist of nine districts: Yuzhong, Dadukou, Jiangbei, Shapingba, Jiulongpo, Nan'an, Beibei, Yubei, & Banan. Wansheng District & Qijiang County currently known as Qijiang District after census. Kaizhou County is currently known as Kaizhou District after census. Shuangqiao District & Dazu County currently known as Dazu District after census. Rongchang County is currently known as Rongchang District after census. Tongliang County is currently known as Tongliang District after census. Tongnan County is currently known as Tongnan District after census. Bishan County is currently known as Bishan District after census. Liangping County is currently known as Liangping District after census. Wulong County is currently known as Wulong District after census. a Indicates with which district the division was associated below prior to the merging of Chongqing, Fuling, Wanxian (now Wanzhou) and Qianjiang in 1997. The main urban area of Chongqing city (重庆主城区) spans approximately 5,473 km2 (2,113 sq mi), and includes the following nine districts: Yuzhong District (渝中区, literally "Central Chongqing District"), the central and most densely populated district, where government and international business offices and the city's best shopping are located in the district's Jiefangbei CBD area. Yuzhong is located on the peninsula surrounded by Eling Hill, Yangtze River and Jialing River. Jiangbei District (江北区, literally "North of the River District"), located to the north of Jialing River. Shapingba District (沙坪坝区), roughly located between Jialing River and Zhongliang Mountain. Jiulongpo District (九龙坡区), roughly located between Yangtze River and Zhongliang Mountain. Nan'an District (南岸区, literally "Southern Bank District"), located on the south side of Yangtze River. Dadukou District (大渡口区) Banan District (巴南区, literally "Southern of Ba District"). Previously called Ba County, and changed to the current name in 1994. Yubei District (渝北区, or "Northern Chongqing District"). Previously called Jiangbei County, and changed into the current name in 1994. Beibei District (北碚区), a satellite district northwest of Chongqing. According to the 2020 national census, Chongqing has a population of 32,054,159, accounting for around 2.27% of the national total. As of 2010[update], the metropolitan area encompassing the central urban area was estimated by the OECD to have, a population of 17 million. The Census also lists the male percentage as 50.55% and the female percentage as 49.55%. In terms of age distribution, of the total population, 15.91% were age 0–14, 62.22% were 15–64, and 21.87% were 65 and over. Of the population's highest education level achieved, 15.41% were college, 15.96% were high school, 30.58% were middle school, and 29.89% were elementary school. As of 2021[update], 70.4% of Chongqing's population is estimated to be urban, and 29.6%. The predominant religions in Chongqing are Chinese folk religions, Taoist traditions and Chinese Buddhism. According to surveys conducted in 2007 and 2009, 26.63% of the population believes and is involved in cults of ancestors, while 1.05% of the population identifies as Christian. The reports did not give figures for other types of religion; 72.32% of the population may be either irreligious or involved in worship of nature deities, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, or folk religious sects. In 2010, there were 9,056 Muslims in Chongqing. There has been a massive government push to transform Chongqing into the region's economic, trade, and financial center and use the municipality as a platform to open up the country's western interior to further development. Chongqing is facing rapid urbanization. For instance, statistics suggest that new construction added approximately 137,000 m2 (1,470,000 sq ft) daily of usable floor space to satisfy demands for residential, commercial and factory space. Thus, Chongqing was separated from Sichuan province and made into a municipality in its own right on 14 March 1997 in order to accelerate its development and subsequently China's relatively poorer western areas (see China Western Development strategy). By the 2000s the city had become an important industrial area in western China. As of 2022[update], Chongqing's nominal GDP was US$433 billion (CN¥ 2.91 trilion), about 2.41% of the country's GDP and ranked 16th among province-level administrative units; the municipality's primary, secondary and tertiary industries were worth CN¥201.21 billion (US$29.92 billion), CN¥1.169 trillion (US$173.86 billion) and CN¥1.542 trillion (US$229.3 billion) respectively. Its nominal GDP per capita was US$13,479 (CN¥90,663) and ranked 10th in the country. Chongqing has been identified by the Economist Intelligence Unit in the November 2010 Access China White Paper as a member of the CHAMPS (Chongqing, Hefei, Anshan, Maanshan, Pingdingshan and Shenyang), an economic profile of the top 20 emerging cities in China. Traditionally, due to its geographic inaccessibility, Chongqing and Sichuan have both been important military bases in weapons research and development. Even though Chongqing's industries are diversified, unlike eastern China, its export sector is small due to its relatively disadvantageous inland location. Instead, factories producing local-oriented consumer goods such as processed food, cars, chemicals, textiles, machinery, sports equipment and electronics are common. Chongqing is China's third largest motor vehicle production center and the largest for motorcycles. In 2007, it had an annual output capacity of 1 million cars and 8.6 million motorcycles. Leading makers of cars and motorbikes includes China's fourth biggest automaker; Changan Automotive Corp and Lifan Hongda Enterprise, as well as Ford Motor Company, with the US car giant having 3 plants in Chongqing. The municipality is also one of China's nine largest iron and steel producers in China as well as one of its three major aluminum producers. Important manufacturers include Chongqing Iron and Steel Company (重庆钢铁股份有限公司) and Southwest Aluminum (西南鋁業), which is Asia's largest aluminum plant. Agriculture remains significant. Rice and fruits, especially oranges, are the area's main produce. Natural resources are also abundant with large deposits of coal, natural gas, and more than 40 kinds of minerals such as strontium and manganese. Coal reserves total approximately 4,800,000,000 metric tons (4.7×109 long tons; 5.3×109 short tons). Chuandong Natural Gas Field is China's largest inland gas field with deposits of around 270 billion m3 – more than 1/5 of China's total. Has China's largest reserve of strontium (China has the world's 2nd biggest strontium deposit). Manganese is mined in the Xiushan area. Although the mining sector has been denounced as heavily polluting and unsafe. Chongqing is also planned to be the site of a 10 million ton capacity refinery operated by CNPC (parent company of PetroChina) to process imported crude oil from the Sino-Burma pipelines. The pipeline itself, though not yet finished, will eventually run from Sittwe (in Myanmar's western coast) through Kunming in Yunnan before reaching Chongqing and it will provide China with fuels sourced from Myanmar, the Middle East and Africa. Recently, there has been a drive to move up the value chain by shifting towards high technology and knowledge intensive industries resulting in new development zones such as the Chongqing New North Zone (CNNZ). Chongqing's local government is hoping through the promotion of favorable economic policies for the electronics and information technology sectors, that it can create a 400 billion RMB high technology manufacturing hub which will surpass its car industry and account for 25% of its exports. The city has also invested heavily in infrastructure to attract investment. The network of roads and railways connecting Chongqing to the rest of China has been expanded and upgraded reducing logistical costs. Furthermore, the nearby Three Gorges Dam which is the world's largest, supplies Chongqing with power and allows oceangoing ships to reach Chongqing's Yangtze River port. These infrastructure improvements have led to the arrivals of numerous foreign direct investors (FDI) in industries ranging from car to finance and retailing; such as Ford, Mazda, HSBC, Standard Chartered Bank, Citibank, Deutsche Bank, ANZ Bank, Scotiabank, Wal-Mart, Metro AG and Carrefour, among other multinational corporations. The city includes a number of economic and technological development zones: Chongqing Chemical Industrial Park Chongqing Economic & Technological Development Zone Chongqing Hi-Tech Industry Development Zone Chongqing New North Zone (CNNZ) Chongqing Export Processing Zone Jianqiao Industrial Park (located in Dadukou District) Liangjiang New Area Liangjiang Cloud Computing Center (the largest of its kind in China) Chongqing itself is part of the West Triangle Economic Zone, along with Chengdu and Xi'an. As of 2022[update], Chongqing hosts 70 institutions of higher education (excluding adult colleges), making it the fourth city with the most higher education institutions nationwide and the first city in Western China, which comprises Chongqing, six provinces (Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan, Shaanxi, Gansu, and Qinghai), and three autonomous regions (Tibet, Ningxia, and Xinjiang), with a combination of more than 290 million population. Chongqing is one of the top 40 cities in the world by scientific research outputs as tracked by the Nature Index. Chongqing University (重庆大学) Southwest University (西南大学) Chongqing University of Science and Technology (重庆科技学院) Southwest University of Political Science and Law (西南政法大学) Army Medical University (第三军医大学) Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications (重庆邮电大学) Chongqing University of Technology (重庆理工大学) Chongqing Jiaotong University (重庆交通大学) Chongqing Medical University (重庆医科大学) Chongqing Normal University (重庆师范大学) Chongqing Technology and Business University (重庆工商大学) Chongqing Three Gorges University (重庆三峡学院) Chongqing Telecommunication Institute (重庆通讯学院) Sichuan Fine Arts Institute (四川美术学院) Sichuan International Studies University (四川外国语大学) University of Logistics (后勤工程学院) Chongqing University of Arts and Science (重庆文理学院) Yangtze Normal University (长江师范学院) Chongqing University of Education (重庆第二师范学院) Chongqing Changshou Middle School (重庆市长寿中学校) Fuling Experimental High School [zh] (涪陵实验中学) Chongqing No.1 Middle School [zh] (重庆一中) Chongqing Nankai Secondary School (重庆南开中学) Chongqing No.8 Secondary School [zh] (重庆八中) Bashu Secondary School (巴蜀中学) Chongqing Railway High School (重庆铁路中学) Chongqing Yucai Secondary School [zh] (育才中学) Chongqing Foreign Language School [zh] (The High School Affiliated to Sichuan International Studies University 重庆一外) Verakin High School of Chongqing [zh] (The 2nd Chongqing Foreign Language School, 重庆二外) Chongqing Qiujing High School [zh] (求精中学) High School Affiliated to Southwest University [zh] (西南大学附中) Chongqing NO.18 Secondary School (重庆十八中) Yew Chung International School of Chongqing (重庆耀中国际学校) KL International School of Chongqing Bashu (重庆市诺林巴蜀外籍人员子女学校) Since its elevation to national-level municipality in 1997, the city has dramatically expanded its transportation infrastructure. With the construction of railways and expressways to the east and southeast, Chongqing is a major transportation hub in southwestern China. As of October 2014[update], the municipality had 31 bridges across the Yangtze River including over a dozen in the city's urban core. Aside from the city's first two Yangtze River bridges, which were built, respectively, in 1960 and 1977, all of the other bridges were completed since 1995. Public transport in Chongqing consists of metro, intercity railway, a ubiquitous bus system and the world's largest monorail network. According to the Chongqing Municipal Government's ambitious plan in May 2007, Chongqing is investing 150 billion RMB over 13 years to finish a system that combines underground metro lines with heavy monorail. As of 2017[update], four metro lines, the 14 km (8.7 mi) long CRT Line 1, a conventional subway, and the 19 km (12 mi) long heavy monorail CRT Line 2 (through Phase II), Line 3, a heavy monorail connects the airport and the southern part of downtown. Line 6, runs between Beibei, a district in the city's far north to downtown. Line 5 opened in late 2017. By 2020 CRT will consist of 6 lines and 1 loop line resulting in 363.5 km (225.9 mi) of road and railway to the existing transportation infrastructure and 93 new metro stations will be added to the 111 stations that are already in place. By 2050, Chongqing will have as many as 18 lines that are planned to be in operation.[full citation needed] Chongqing is the only Chinese city that has kept public aerial tramways. Historically there were three aerial tramways in Chongqing: the Yangtze River Tramway, the Jialing River Tramway and the South Mountain Tramway. Currently, only Yangtze River Tramway is still in operation, it is also considered a Class 4A Tourist Attraction. The 1,160-meter (3,810 ft)-long tramway connects the southern and northern banks of Yangtze River; its daily passenger volume is about 10,000. Major railway stations in Chongqing: Chongqing railway station in Yuzhong, accessible via Metro Lines 1 & 3 (Lianglukou Metro station), is the city's oldest railway station and located near the Jiefangbei CBD in the city center. The station handles mostly long-distance trains. There are plans for a major renovation and overhaul of this station, thus many services have been transferred to Chongqing North railway station. Chongqing North railway station is a station handling many long-distance services and high-speed rail services to Chengdu, Beijing and other cities. It was completed in 2006 and is connected to Metro Line. Chongqing West railway station is in Shapingba, a station handling many long-distance services and high-speed rail services to many cities. It was completed in 2018. Shapingba railway station is in Shapingba, near Shapingba CBD, accessible via Shapingba metro station on Lines 1, 9 and the Loop line. It handles many local and regional train services. It was completed in 2018. Another railway station, Chongqing East, is currently under construction and is expected to be completed in 2025. Chongqing is a major freight destination for rail with continued development with improved handling facilities. Due to subsidies and incentives, the relocation and construction of many factories in Chongqing has seen a huge increase in rail traffic. Chongqing is a major rail hub regionally. Chengdu–Chongqing railway (to Chengdu, Sichuan Province) Sichuan–Guizhou railway (to Guiyang, Guizhou Province) Xiangyang–Chongqing railway (to Hubei Province) Chongqing–Huaihua railway (to Hunan Province) Suining–Chongqing railway (to Sichuan Province) Chongqing–Lichuan railway (to Hubei Province) Lanzhou–Chongqing railway railway (to Gansu Province) Chongqing is one of the most important inland ports in China. There are numerous luxury cruise ships that terminate at Chongqing, cruising downstream along the Yangtze River to Yichang, Wuhan, Nanjing or even Shanghai.[citation needed] In the recent past, this provided virtually the only transportation option along the river. However, improved rail, expressways and air travel have seen this ferry traffic reduced or cancelled altogether. Most of the river ferry traffic consists of leisure cruises for tourists rather than local needs. Improved access by larger cargo vessels has been made due to the construction of the Three Gorges Dam. This allows bulk transport of goods along the Yangtze River. Coal, raw minerals and containerized goods provide the majority of traffic plying this section of the river. Several port handling facilities exist throughout the city, including many impromptu river bank sites. Traditionally, the road network in Chongqing has been narrow, winding and limited to smaller vehicles because of the natural terrain, large rivers and the huge population demands on the area, especially in the Yuzhong District. In other places, such as Jiangbei, large areas of homes and buildings have recently been cleared to improve the road network and create better urban planning; thus, several ring roads have also been constructed. This has seen many tunnels and large bridges needing to be built across the city. The construction of many expressways have connected Chongqing to its neighbors. The natural mountainous terrain that Chongqing is built on makes many road projects difficult to construct, including for example some of the world's highest road bridges. Unlike many other Chinese cities, it is rare for motorbikes, electric scooters or bicycles to be seen on Chongqing's Roads. This is due to the extremely hilly and mountainous nature of Chongqing's roads and streets. However, despite this, Chongqing is a manufacturing center for these types of vehicles. Chongqing-Chengdu Expressway Chongqing-Chengdu 2nd Expressway (under construction) Chongqing-Wanzhou-Yichang Highway (Wanzhou-Yichang section under construction) Chongqing-Guiyang Highway Chongqing-Changsha Expressway (Xiushan-Changsha section under construction) Chongqing-Dazhou-Xi'a Highway (Dazhou-Xi'an section under construction) Chongqing-Suining Expressway Chongqing-Nanchong Expressway China National Highway 210 China National Highway 212 With so many bridges crossing the Yangtze and Jialing rivers in the urban area, Chongqing is sometimes known as the 'Bridge Capital of China'. The first important bridge in urban Chongqing was the Niujiaotuo Jialing River Bridge, built in 1958. The first bridge over the Yangtze river was the Shibanpo Yangtze River Bridge (or Chongqing Yangtze River Bridge) built in 1977. As of 2014[update], within the area of the 9 districts, there were 20 bridges on the Yangtze river and 28 bridges on the Jialing river. The bridges in Chongqing exhibit a variety of shapes and structures, making Chongqing a showcase for bridge design. The major airport of Chongqing is Chongqing Jiangbei International Airport (IATA: CKG, ICAO: ZUCK). It is located in Yubei District. The airport offers a growing network of direct flights to China, South East Asia, the Middle East, North America, and Europe. It is located 21 km (13 mi) north of the city center of Chongqing and serves as an important aviation hub for south-western China. Jiangbei airport is a hub for China Southern Airlines, Chongqing Airlines, Sichuan Airlines, China Express Airlines, Shandong Airlines and Hainan Airlines's new China West Air. Chongqing also is a focus city of Air China, therefore it is very well connected with Star Alliance and Skyteam's international network. The airport currently has three parallel runways in operation. It serves domestic routes to most other Chinese cities, as well as international routes to Auckland, New York City, London, Los Angeles, Moscow, Doha, Dubai, Seoul, Bangkok, Phuket, Osaka, Singapore, Chiang Mai, Phnom Penh, Siem Reap, Malé, Bali, Tokyo, Kuala Lumpur, Batam, Rome and Helsinki. As of 2021[update], Jiangbei Airport was the 4th busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic in mainland China. Currently, Jiangbei airport has three terminals. Chongqing Airport has metro access (CRT Line 3 and Line 10) to its central city, and two runways in normal use. There are four other airports in Chongqing Municipality: Qianjiang Wulingshan Airport, Wanzhou Wuqiao Airport, Chongqing Xiannüshan Airport, and Chongqing Wushan Airport. They are all class 4C airports and serve passenger flights to domestic destinations including Beijing, Shanghai and Kunming. The language native to Chongqing is Southwestern Mandarin. More precisely, the great majority of the municipality, save for Xiushan, speak Sichuanese, including the primary Chengdu-Chongqing dialect and Minjiang dialect spoken in Jiangjin and Qijiang. There are also a few speakers of Xiang and Hakka in the municipality, due to the great immigration wave to the Sichuan region (湖广填四川) during the Ming and Qing dynasties. In addition, in parts of southeastern Chongqing, the Miao and Tujia languages are also used by some Miao and Tujia people. As the provisional Capital of China for almost ten years (1937 to 1945), the city was also known as one of the three headquarters of the Allies during World War II, as well as being a strategic center of many other wars throughout China's history. Chongqing has many historic war-time buildings or sites, some of which have since been destroyed. These sites include the People's Liberation Monument, located in the center of Chongqing city. It used to be the highest building in the area, but is now surrounded and dwarfed by numerous shopping centers. Originally named the Monument for the Victory over Axis Armies, it is the only building in China for that purpose. Today, the monument serves as a symbol for the city. The General Joseph W. Stilwell Museum, dedicated to General "Vinegar Joe" Stilwell, a World War II general. the air force cemetery in the Nanshan area, in memory of those air force personnel killed during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), and the Red Rock Village Museum, a diplomatic site for the Communist Party in Chongqing led by Zhou Enlai during World War II, and Guiyuan, Cassia Garden, where Mao Zedong signed the "Double 10 (10 October) Peace Agreement" with the Kuomintang in 1945. The Baiheliang Underwater Museum, China's first underwater museum, The Memorial of Great Tunnel Massacre, a former air-raid shelter where a major massacre occurred during World War II. The Great Hall of the People in Chongqing is based on the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. This is one of the largest public assembly buildings in China which, though built in modern times, emulates traditional architectural styles. It is adjacent to the densely populated and hilly central district, with narrow streets and pedestrian only walkways, The large domed Three Gorges Museum presents the history, culture, and environment of the Three Gorges area and Chongqing. Chongqing Art Museum is known for striking architecture. Chongqing Science and Technology Museum has an IMAX theater. Luohan Si, a Ming dynasty temple, Huangguan Escalator, the second longest escalator in Asia. Former sites for embassies of major countries during the 1940s. As the capital at that time, Chongqing had many residential and other buildings for these officials. Wuxi County, noted as a major tourism area of Chongqing, The Dazu Rock Carvings, in Dazu county, are a series of Chinese religious sculptures and carvings, dating back as far as the 7th century A.D., depicting and influenced by Buddhist, Confucian and Taoist beliefs. Listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, the Dazu Rock Carvings are made up of 75 protected sites containing some 50,000 statues, with over 100,000 Chinese characters forming inscriptions and epigraphs., The Three Natural Bridges and Furong Cave in Wulong Karst National Geology Park, Wulong County are listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site as part of the South China Karst, Ciqikou is a 1000-year-old town in the Shapingba District of Chongqing. It is also known as "Little Chongqing". The town, located next to the lower reaches of the Jialing River, was at one time an important source of china-ware and used to be a busy commercial dock during the Ming and Qing dynasties, Fishing Town or Fishing City is one of the three great ancient battlefields of China. It is noted for its resistance to the Mongol armies during the Southern Song dynasty (1127–1279) and the location where the Mongol leader Möngke Khan died in 1259, Xueyu Cave in Fengdu County is the only example of a pure-white, jade-like karst cave in China, Fengdu Ghost City in Fengdu County is the Gate of the Hell in traditional Chinese literature and culture. Snowy Jade Cave, see Xueyu Cave (above). Baidi Cheng, a peninsula in Yangtze River, known due to a famous poem by Li Bai. The Chongqing Zoo, a zoo that exhibits many rare species including the giant panda, the extremely rare South China tiger, and the African elephant. Chongqing Amusement Park. Chongqing Grand Theater, a performing arts center. Foreigners' Street was an amusement park, including the Porcelain Palace, the world's largest toilet. Also the location of the abortive Love Land development in 2009. The Black Mountain Valley (Heishangu). Hongya Cave (aka Hongya Dong), a pier stilt house fortress that served as one of the 17 city gates of Ancient Chongqing is a popular tourist attraction for its architecture. Chongqing food is part of Sichuan cuisine. Chongqing is known for its spicy food. Its food is normally considered numbing because of the use of Sichuan pepper, also known as Sichuan peppercorn, containing hydroxy alpha sanshool. Chongqing's city center has many restaurants and food stalls where meals often cost less than RMB10. Local specialties here include dumplings and pickled vegetables and, different from many other Chinese cuisines, Chongqing dishes are suitable for the solo diner as they are often served in small individual sized portions. Among the delicacies and local specialties are these dishes: Chongqing hot pot– Chongqing's local culinary specialty which was originally from Northern China. Tables in hot pot restaurants usually have a central pot, where food ordered by the customers is boiled in a spicy broth, items such as beef, pork, tripe, kidney slices, pork aorta and goose intestine are often consumed. Chongqing Xiao Mian – a common lamian noodle dish tossed with chili oil and rich mixtures of spices and ingredients Jiangtuan fish – since Chongqing is located along Jialing River, visitors have a good opportunity to sample varieties of aquatic products. Among them, is a fish local to the region, Jiangtuan fish: Hypophthalmichthys nobilis although more commonly known as bighead carp. The fish is often served steamed or baked. Wanzhou district is famous for baking Jiangtuan fish. Suan La Fen (Sour and Spicy Sweet-Potato Noodles) – Thick, transparent noodles of rubbery texture in a spicy vinegar soup. Lazi Ji (Spicy Chicken) – A stir-fried dish consists of marinated then deep-fried pieces of chicken, dried Sichuan chili peppers, Sichuan peppercorns, garlic, and ginger, originated near Geleshan in Chongqing. Quanshui Ji (Spring Water Chicken) – Quanshui Ji is cooked with the natural spring water in the Southern Mountain of Chongqing. Pork leg cooked with rock sugar – A common household dish of Chongqing, the tender, reddish finished dish, has been described as having strong and sweet aftertaste. Qianzhang (skimmed soy bean cream) – Qianzhang is the cream skimmed from soybean milk. In order to create this, several steps must be followed very carefully. First, soybeans are soaked in water, ground, strained, boiled, restrained several times and spread over gauze until delicate, snow-white cream is formed. The paste can also be hardened, cut into slivers and seasoned with sesame oil, garlic and chili oil. Another variation is to bake the cream and fry it with bacon, which is described as soft and sweet. The Chongqing People's Broadcast Station is Chongqing's largest radio station. The only municipal-level TV network is Chongqing TV, claimed to be the 4th largest television station in China. Chongqing TV broadcasts many local-oriented channels, and can be viewed on many TV sets throughout China. Chongqing Soaring Dragons became the 20th team playing in Chinese Basketball Association in 2013. They play at Datianwan Arena, in the same sporting complex as Datianwan Stadium. The team moved to Beijing in 2015 and is currently known as Beijing Royal Fighters. Professional soccer teams in Chongqing include: Chongqing Liangjiang Athletic, folded Chongqing F.C., folded Chongqing Liangjiang Athletic was a professional Chinese soccer club that played in the Chinese Super League. They were owned by the Chongqing-based Lifan Group, which manufactures motorcycles, cars and spare parts. Originally called Qianwei (Vanguard) Wuhan, the club formed in 1995 to take part in the recently developed, fully professional Chinese Soccer League. They would quickly rise to top tier of the system and experience their greatest achievement in winning the 2000 Chinese FA Cup, and coming in fourth within the league. However, since then they have struggled to replicate the same success, and have twice been relegated from the top tier. Chongqing FC was a soccer club located in the city that competed in China League One, the country's second-tier soccer division, before being relegated to the China League Two, and dissolved due to a resultant lack of funds. Sport venues in Chongqing include: The Chongqing Olympic Sports Center is a multipurpose stadium. It is currently used mostly for soccer matches, as it has a grass surface, and can hold 58,680. It was built in 2002 and was one of main venues for the 2004 AFC Asian Cup. Yanghe Stadium is a multiuse stadium that is currently used mostly for soccer matches. The stadium holds 32,000 people, and is the home of Chongqing Lifan in the Chinese Super League. The stadium was purchased by the Lifan Group in 2001 for RMB80 million and immediately replaced Datianwan Stadium as the home of Chongqing Lifan. Datianwan Stadium is a multipurpose stadium that is currently used mostly for soccer matches. The stadium has a capacity 32,000 people, and up until 2001 was the home of Chongqing Lifan. At the end of 2020, a collaboration between a Danish architecture firm and a Chinese tech company Terminus was announced, taking the form of an AI-controlled campus. The project is named Cloud Valley and aims to use sensors and WiFi-controlled devices to collect data on the city's residents and atmosphere, including weather and eating and sleeping habits. The AI will adapt devices to work in a way that fits the gathered information and improves residents' lives. Ba Manzi: a legendary hero of Ba kingdom in Zhou dynasty Ba Qing, the Widow: the earliest known female merchant in Chinese history who provided huge financial aid to Qin Shi Huang to construct the Great Wall Gan Ning: a general serving under warlord Sun Quan in the last years of Han dynasty Yan Yan: a loyal general during Three Kingdoms period Lanxi Daolong: a famous Buddhism monk and philosopher in Song dynasty who went to Japan and established the Kenchō-ji Qin Liangyu: a popular heroine in Ming dynasty who fought against Manchus Nie Rongzhen: marshal of the People's Liberation Army of China Liu Bocheng: an early leader of Chinese communist party during Anti-Japanese War Lu Zuofu: a notable patriotic industrialist and businessman who was a member of Chinese United League and a leader of Railway Protection Movement, established the Beibei District, Chongqing Natural History Museum, Jianshan High School, the Northern Hot Spring Park of Chongqing and Beibei Library, and served as the chief official of Food Bureau during Republic of China period. Liu Yongqing: wife of the former president and Party general secretary Hu Jintao Zhonghua Pang: a well-known calligrapher and geologist born in Sichuan but raised and lived in Chongqing Liu Xiaoqing: an actress Xia Peisu: computer scientist Chen Kun: actor and singer Huang Qian: chess player Tian Liang: Olympic diving gold medalist Li Yundi: pianist Karry Wang: member of the pop band TFBoys and actor Roy Wang: singer-songwriter and member of TFBoys, also an actor and TV host Huang Junjie : actor Jiang Qinqin: actress Li Hua: artist who studied in Europe Xiao Zhan: actor, singer, and member of the boy group X Nine Pan Wenhua: born in Renshou County, Sichuan Province, was a famous military general regarded as a born military prodigy Zhou Zhennan: leader of C-pop group R1SE Shi Tingmao: Olympic diving gold medalist Chen Zihan : actress Shuguang Zhang : biochemist Xia Li: professional wrestler signed with WWE Feng Timo : singer, pop-star and internet personality Meng Fei : television host Li Ying (footballer, born 1993): first Chinese soccer player to come out as Lesbian Domee Shi: Chinese-Canadian animator, director and screenwriter Lei Tingjie: chess grandmaster Wang Ziqi : brothel madam described as the 'Godmother' of prostitution, executed aged 35 in 2011 after being convicted of organizing and leading a criminal organization Chongqing has sister city relationships with many cities of the world including: Toulouse, France (1982) Seattle, United States (1983) Detroit, United States (1986) Toronto, Canada (1986) Hiroshima, Japan (1986) Leicester, United Kingdom (1993) Voronezh, Russia (1993) Zaporizhzhia, Ukraine (2002) Mpumalanga, South Africa (2002) Sliven, Bulgaria (2002) Düsseldorf, Germany (2004) Brisbane, Australia (2005) Shiraz, Iran (2005) Aswan, Egypt (2005) Busan, South Korea (2007) Sør-Trøndelag, Norway (2007) Chiang Mai Province, Thailand (2008) Córdoba, Argentina (2010) Budapest, Hungary (2010) Bangkok, Thailand (2005) Antwerp, Belgium (2011) Salvador, Bahia, Brazil (2011) Chennai, India (2015) Maribor, Slovenia (2017) Telde, Spain (2018) China portal List of cities in China by population and built-up area List of twin towns and sister cities in China Major national historical and cultural sites in Chongqing /ˌtʃɒŋˈtʃɪŋ/ CHONG-CHING or /ˈtʃɒŋtʃɪŋ/ chong-CHING; simplified Chinese: 重庆; traditional Chinese: 重慶; pinyin: Chóngqìng; Sichuanese pronunciation: [tsʰoŋ˨˩tɕʰin˨˩˦], Standard Mandarin pronunciation: [ʈʂʰʊ̌ŋ.tɕʰîŋ] ; alternately romanized as Chungking, /ˈtʃʊŋˈkɪŋ/ Total urban population in the municipality. The data was collected by the Chinese General Social Survey (CGSS) of 2009 and by the Chinese Spiritual Life Survey (CSLS) of 2007, reported and assembled by Xiuhua Wang (2015) in order to confront the proportion of people identifying with two similar social structures: ① Christian churches, and ② folk traditional Chinese religion of the lineage (i. e. people practicing ancestral worship are often classified into lineage "churches" and ancestral shrines). Data for other religions with a significant presence in China (Buddhism, Taoism, folk religious sects, etc.) was not reported by Wang. This may include: Buddhists; Confucians; Folk religionists; Taoists; Members of folk religious sects; Small minorities of Muslims; And people not bounded to, nor practicing any, institutional or diffuse religion. A survey in 2005 by China's State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) found 13 firms in the manganese triangle had breached targets on the release of hexavalent chromium and ammonia-nitrogen – in the worst case, by a factor of 180. The cleanup ordered by SEPA resulted in firms closing and the expenditure of 280 million yuan. "Doing Business in China – Survey". Ministry of Commerce of the People's Republic of China. Archived from the original on 5 August 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. 2015年重庆常住人口3016.55万人 继续保持增长态势 (in Chinese (China)). Chongqing News. 28 January 2016. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016. Retrieved 13 February 2016. "China: Chóngqìng". City Population. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "China: Chóngqìng (Districts and Counties) - Population Statistics, Charts and Map". City Population. "National Data". National Bureau of Statistics of China. 1 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Sub-national HDI - Subnational HDI". Global Data Labg. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "City Flower". En.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "City Tree". En.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing". The Free Dictionary. Retrieved 24 January 2023. "Chongqing". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins. Retrieved 8 April 2019. "Chongqing". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 27 June 2021. "Chongqing". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. "China's Direct-Controlled Municipalities". Geography.about.com. 14 March 1997. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Ruth, Alexander (29 January 2012). "Which is the world's biggest city?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2018. "National Data :Population". National Bureau of Statistics of China. Retrieved 30 January 2024. 关于提请审议设立重庆直辖市的议案的说明_中国人大网 [Explanation on the proposal to consider the establishment of a municipality directly under the Central Government of China]. www.npc.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 17 May 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2018. World Bank (2019). "Chongqing 2035: Spatial and Economic Transformation for a Global City". World Bank Open Knowledge Repository. Washington, DC. doi:10.1596/31386. "2020 Airport Traffic Report" (PDF). Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. July 2021. p. 30. Retrieved 26 September 2021. 2019 Annual Airport Traffic Report (PDF). United States: Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. 2020. 世界最长单轨线路 (in Chinese (China)). NetEase News. 12 October 2013. Archived from the original on 8 July 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2014. 日本单轨协会副会长石川正和一行来渝考察重庆单轨发展情况. Chongqing Rail Transit (in Chinese (China)). 18 November 2016. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. Retrieved 2 December 2016. "The World According to GaWC 2020". Loughborough University. 21 August 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 4 October 2020. "One minute to understand Changan". Changan Auto. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "Foreign consulates in Chongqing". www.embassypages.com. Retrieved 25 February 2024. "Leading 200 science cities | Nature Index 2023 Science Cities | Supplements | Nature Index". www.nature.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nature Index 2018 Science Cities". Nature Index. 1 November 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2020. "US News Best Global Universities Rankings in Chongqing". U.S. News & World Report. 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2021. Kim Hunter Gordon; Jesse Watson (2011). Chongqing & The Three Gorges. Kim Hunter Gordon. pp. 38–40. ISBN 978-7-5022-5215-1. "Chongqing's History with the State of Ba". Chongqing Municipal Government. 6 December 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2012. "Ming Yuzhen Information". Neohumanism.com. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 2 July 2012. Nicola di Cosmo; Don J. Wyatt (3 July 2003). Political Frontiers, Ethnic Boundaries, and Human Geographies in Chinese History. ISBN 9780203987957. Retrieved 2 July 2012. "The last Qing (Manchu) Dynasty 1644 - 1912 of China". Archived from the original on 7 November 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2015. "UK Consulate Page". Cq.xinhuanet.com. 30 December 2004. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013.  One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Ch'ungk'ing". Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 324. "French Consulate Page". Cq.xinhuanet.com. 30 December 2004. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Japanese Consulate Page". Chongqing.cn.emb-japan.go.jp. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "US Consulate Page". Us-passport-service-guide.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "German Consulate Page". 2011.cqlib.cn. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Danielson, Eric N. (2005). "Revisiting Chongqing: China's Second World War Temporary National Capital". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Hong Kong Branch. 45: 175. JSTOR 23889883. "Chongqing - The Famous City in the Second World War: Photo Annals of Vanishing Sceneries(Book)". "Stilwell in China: The Worst Command in the War". Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Chiang Kai-shek & Stilwell, Joseph "揭秘重庆空战：抗战期间出动飞机2159次 - 中国军网". www.chinamil.com.cn. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 15 November 2020. Gustavsson, Hakans. "Håkans Aviation page – Sino-Japanese Air War 1939". Biplane Fighter Aces - CHINA. Retrieved 15 November 2020. "WWII Era History of Chongqing". .needham.k12.ma.us. 23 October 1944. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Šebok, Filip Šebok (2023). "China's Political System". In Kironska, Kristina; Turscanyi, Richard Q. (eds.). Contemporary China: a New Superpower?. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-03-239508-1. "Chongqing becomes 5th National Central city". English.peopledaily.com.cn. 10 February 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Establishment of the Liangjiang New Area". Gochina.scmp.com. 25 November 2013. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Tang poetry: Night rain in the mountain in Bashan". Archived from the original on 16 August 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Bashan Poems "Location of Chongqing". En.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing 2005 - The Year in Review". Archived from the original on 24 October 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2015. Chongqing's bordering provinces Chongqing Topography. "Mountains in Sichuan and Chongqing". Fodors.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "The Three Gorges Corp". Ctg.com.cn. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Yangtze River". Chinese National Tourism Office, US Chinese Embassy. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2014. Murphy, Ryan (28 December 2010). "Trip to Chongqing". Elevendegreesnorth.blogspot.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Poems of Li Bai". Poemhunter.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Scithesis-Previous outstanding master's and doctoral thesis, search and download". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Chongqing Mountains Data 中国气象局 国家气象信息中心 (in Simplified Chinese). Guangzhou Popular Science News Net (广州科普资讯网). 12 September 2007. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2014. "57516: Chongqing (China)". ogimet.com (in Spanish). OGIMET. 19 August 2022. Retrieved 20 August 2022. "Extreme Temperatures Around the World". Archived from the original on 26 August 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2013. "Chongqing Municipality". IES Global. Archived from the original on 11 October 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2011. "Chongqing – City of Hills, Fog and Spicy Food". China.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011. Lin, Yutang (1944). The Vigil of a Nation. The John Day Company.[page needed] "Index" 中国气象数据网 - WeatherBk Data. China Meteorological Administration. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2018. CMA台站气候标准值(1991-2020) (in Chinese). China Meteorological Administration. Retrieved 11 April 2023. 中国地面国际交换站气候标准值数据集 （1971–2000年） (in Simplified Chinese). China Meteorological Administration. May 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2011. "Monthly weather forecast and climate - Chongqing, China". Weather Atlas. Retrieved 12 June 2020. CMA台站气候标准值(1991-2020) (in Chinese). China Meteorological Administration. Retrieved 14 April 2023. 中国地面气候标准值月值(1981-2010) (in Simplified Chinese). China Meteorological Data Service Center. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Page, Jeremy (15 March 2012). "Chongqing Party Chief Position". Online.wsj.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Kuo, Ping-chia. "Chongqing History: The Modern Period". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 31 July 2016. "Chongqing, once a wartime capitol". En.cq.gov.cn. 14 March 1997. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Qiu Shaoyun Memorial Hall". Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2016. 重庆调整部分行政区划：4区(县)并为2区. News.163.com. 17 March 2010. Archived from the original on 31 October 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2013. 国家统计局统计用区划代码 (in Simplified Chinese). National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2015. 《保定经济统计年鉴2011》 [China Statistical Yearbook 2011]. National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2011. 中国2010年人口普查分乡、镇、街道资料 (1st ed.). Beijing: China Statistics Print. 2012. ISBN 978-7-5037-6660-2. 国务院人口普查办公室; 国家统计局人口和社会科技统计司, eds. (2012). 中国2010年人口普查分县资料. Beijing: China Statistics Print. ISBN 978-7-5037-6659-6. 《中国民政统计年鉴2012》 [China Statistical Yearbook 2012]. National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2012. "Position of Five Function Districts in Chongqing". Chongqing Municipal Government. 22 September 2013. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2015. 五大功能区域: 都市功能核心区 [Five Functional Districts: Urban-function Core District]. CQNEWS Corporation. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. 统计年鉴2014 [Statistical Yearbook 2014] (in Simplified Chinese). Statistics Bureau of Chongqing. 9 February 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2015. 2014年重庆市国民经济和社会发展统计公报 [Chongqing Economic and Social Development Statistical Bulletin 2014] (in Simplified Chinese). Chongqing Bureau of Statistics. 16 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 May 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2015. "Annual Total Population by Provinces". National Bureau of Statistics China. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2018. CNBC.com, Justina Crabtree; special to (20 September 2016). "A tale of megacities: China's largest metropolises". CNBC. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. slide 8{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) OECD Urban Policy Reviews: China 2015, OECD READ edition. OECD. 18 April 2015. p. 37. doi:10.1787/9789264230040-en. ISBN 9789264230033. ISSN 2306-9341. Archived from the original on 27 March 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017 – via OECD iLibrary. "OECD Urban Policy Reviews: China 2015". OECD. 18 April 2015. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Wang, Xiuhua (2015). Explaining Christianity in China: Why a Foreign Religion has Taken Root in Unfertile Ground (PDF) (Master's thesis). p. 15. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 September 2015. "Muslim in China". Top China Travel. Retrieved 4 August 2021. "Innovative City in West China Chongqing" (PDF). Jon Sigurdson and Krystyna Palonka of Stockholm School of Economics, EIJS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2009. Tapscott, Don; Williams, Anthony D. (2006). Wikinomics: How Mass Collaboration Changes Everything. Penguin. p. 218. ISBN 9781591843672. "Chinese vice premier urges Chongqing to become economic engine for western regions". Embassy of the People's Republic of China in Australia. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2009. "China urges reform, development of Chongqing municipality". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 31 January 2009. "Market Profiles on Chinese Cities and Provinces (hktdc.com)". Tdctrade.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2006. Retrieved 14 March 2011. "The Rise of The 'Champs' – New Report Maps Business Opportunity in China's Fastest Growing Cities". Sourcewire.com. 9 November 2010. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 14 March 2011. "Chongqing Municipality(重慶市)". The Australia-China Chamber of Commerce and Industry of New South Wales. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2009. "Critical Eye on Chongqing – Pillar of the West". China Business Review. Archived from the original on 6 April 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2009. MacKie, Nick (4 May 2005). "China's west seeks to impress investors". BBC News. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006. Retrieved 28 April 2010. "China-Myanmar pipeline projects on track". Atimes.com. 24 April 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Main Industry in CNNZ". Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. "China Business News: HP Foxcom Setup Laptop Plants in Chongqing". The China Perspective. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011. "Chongqing Investment Zone Profiles". Allroadsleadtochina.com. 30 May 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2011. "China's Three Gorges Dam". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2009. Dee-Ann Durbin (28 August 2012). "Ford building sixth plant in China". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2017. Seetharaman, Deepa (27 August 2012). "Mazda in Chongqing". Reuters.com. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "HSBC opens bank in Chongqing". Hsbc.com.cn. 28 December 2009. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Standard Chartered open a bank in Chongqing" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Citibank opens branch in Chongqing". Citigroup.com. 31 March 2011. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Branch opening in Chongqing: Deutsche Bank – a strong partner in China". 28 April 2011. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 3 September 2012. "ANZ Bank opens a branch in Chongqing". Anz.com. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "PPeople's Republic of China". Scotiabank. Archived from the original on 26 August 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2016. Yue, Terril (25 October 2011). "Wal-Mart reopens Chongqing locations". Reuters.com. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Multinational Grocery Stores in Chongqing". Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Tan, Kenneth (12 November 2007). "Chongqing Carrefour Stampede". Shanghaiist.com. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Industrial Park". Chinaknowledge.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "CETD". Hktdc.com. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "CHTIDT". En.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "CNNZ". English.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Contact. "CEPZ". Rightsite.asia. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Jianqiao Industrial Park Profile". Hktdc.com. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2013. "Chongqing Liangjiang New Area". Archived from the original on 16 October 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2012. "New cloud computing center". En.cq.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Top 10 Chinese cities with most higher education institutions". www.chinadaily.com.cn. 4 August 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "Home - Yew Chung International School of Chongqing". Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 11 February 2009. Website in English "KL International School of Chongqing Bashu | A Responsive School for a Changing World". Archived from the original on 8 November 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2015. Website in English "New Scenery of Chongqing Metropolis". Green Travel. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. "Line 2 & 1". English.cqnews.net. 15 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 August 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Planning of Chongqing Line 6". Cn.siemens.com. 30 December 2010. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing City Transport". English.cqnews.net. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Chongqing Daily (23 March 2008) "Chongqing Ports Details". Service-industries-research.hktdc.com. 19 July 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Black, Simon (12 July 2011). "Chongqing: World's Largest Construction Project". Articles.businessinsider.com. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Rough Guide to Chongqing Travel". Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. "CJIA Stats". Theairdb.com. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. 2018年民航机场生产统计公报 (in Chinese). Civil Aviation Administration of China. 5 March 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Chongqing Airport Profile". Archived from the original on 30 July 2013. 翟时雨 (Ruo Shiyu) (2003). "中篇第四节：四川话的分区 (The divisions of the Sichuan dialect)". 《汉语方言学》 [The Study of Chinese Languages] (in Simplified Chinese). Southwest China Normal University Press (西南师范大学出版社). ISBN 978-7-5621-2942-4. 苗族：特色苗语 [The Miao People: Characteristics of the Miao language]. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 31 July 2010. "People's Liberation Monument". Chongqingwomen.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "General Joseph Stilwell Museum". Travelchinaguide.com. 17 May 1944. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Red Rock Village Museum". Beijingfeeling.com. 15 September 2013. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing: The First Underwater Museum in China has Been Built and Opened". Chinahush. 21 May 2009. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Great Hall of the People". Placesonline.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Luohan Si". Fodors.com. 28 May 2013. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. www.chinaeducenter.com. "Embassies List". Chinaeducenter.com. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Wuxi County". English.51766.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Dazu Rock Carvings". China.org.cn. 12 September 2003. Archived from the original on 26 May 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "China: Three Natural Bridges National Geopark". Naturalarches.org. Archived from the original on 9 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Furong Cave". Gxnu.edu.cn. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Ciqkou". Blog.seattlechinesegarden.org. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Fishing Town". Chongqingwomen.com. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Xueyu Cave [Chongqing]". Luopan ChinaHotelSearch. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. "Chongqing Zoo Profile and Pictures". Travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Black Mountain Valley". Travelchinaguide.com. Retrieved 26 November 2017. SinoHotelGuide.com. "Chongqing Dining Overlook" (in Dutch). Sinohotelguide.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2010. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing Hot Pot & Dining Guide". Travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Bighead Carp, or Jiangtuan Fish". Nas.er.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Jiangtuan Fish". Chinatravelcompass.com. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Yang, Shihan; Tan, Martini,Kailong (24 June 2021). "Wanzhou Grilled Fish, Sees an Annual Output Value of Tens of Billions". iChongqing. Retrieved 4 December 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Holliday, Taylor (20 July 2019). "Sour and Spicy Sweet-Potato Noodles (Suan La Fen) and a Spicy Girl Graduates". The Mala Market. Retrieved 8 May 2020. Dunlop, Fuchsia (17 January 2014). "Recipe: Firecracker poussin with chillies". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2019. Knyazeva, Katya (26 January 2010). "The search for the best la zi ji in Shanghai". CNN. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2012. "Chongqing Dining, Dining in Chongqing, Chongqing cuisine, Chongqing Food, Chongqing restaurants". Chinatourguide.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Qianzhang". Chinatourguide.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chinese radio stations". Chinaculture.org. 24 September 2003. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Bandurski, David (1 June 2011). "Chongqing's TV revolution". Cmp.hku.hk. Archived from the original on 2 June 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Beijing Events | the Beijinger". Archived from the original on 14 August 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2015. Beijing Ducks vs. Chongqing "Lifan Group buys Chongqing soccer team". China.org.cn. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "2000 Chinese FA Cup". Rsssf.com. 8 March 2007. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Chongqing Lifan F.C". Soccerway.com. 9 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "重庆Fc宣布解散球员自寻下家 传解散因资金匮乏-搜狐体育". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2015. Chongqing FC folds "重庆市奥林匹克体育中心 重庆奥体中心". Archived from the original on 6 June 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2012. Official Site "Yanghe Stadium profile". Footballgroundmap.com. 13 September 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Datianwan Stadium profile". Worldstadiums.com. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. Bacchi, Umberto (3 December 2020). "'I know your favourite drink': Chinese smart city to put AI in charge". Reuters. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "China executes 'Godmother' of prostitution". The Telegraph. 9 December 2011. 各国驻华领馆领区一览表 (in Simplified Chinese). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. 8 May 2007. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 18 March 2011. 荷兰意大利有望年内在渝设领事馆. Hexun (in Simplified Chinese). 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. "Consulate General of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay in Chongqing". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Tarleton, Gael D. "Chongqing, China - Office of Intergovernmental Relations". www.seattle.gov. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Brisbane's Sister City - Chongqing". Brisbane City Council. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. General Danielson, Eric N. (2005). "Chongqing". The Three Gorges and the Upper Yangzi. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish/Times Editions. pp. 325–362. ISBN 978-981-232-599-0. Huang, Jiren (1999). 老重庆：巴山夜语 [Old Chongqing: Ba Mountains Night Rains]. 老城市 [The Old Cities] (in Chinese). Nanjing: Jiangsu Fine Arts Publishing House. Kapp, Robert A. (1974). "Chungking as a Center of Warlord Power, 1926–1937". In Mark Elvin; G. William Skinner (eds.). The Chinese City Between Two Worlds. Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp. 143–170. ISBN 9780804708531. Kapp, Robert A. (1973). Szechwan and the Chinese Republic: Provincial Militarism and Central Power, 1911–1938. New Haven: Yale University Press. Liao, Qingyu (2005). Chongqing Ge Le Shan Pei Du Yizhi [The Construction of War-time Capital on the Gele Mountain, Chongqing]. Chengdu: Sichuan University Press. Long, Juncai (2005). Sui Yue Ya Feng de Jiyi: Chongqing Kang Zhan Yizhi (Covered Memory of Flowing Years: Site[s] of [the] Anti-Japanese War in Chongqing). Chongqing: Southwest University Press. McIsaac, Lee (2000). "The City as Nation: Creating a Wartime Capital in Chongqing". In Esherick, Joseph W. (ed.). Remaking the Chinese City, 1900–1950. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. Xu Dongsheng; Liu Yuchuan (1998). Chongqing Jiu Ying [Old Photos of Chongqing]. Beijing: People's Fine Arts Publishing House. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Chongqing. Look up Chongqing, Chungking, or Ch'ung-ch'ing in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Chongqing (category) Chongqing Municipal Government website