Nancy Patricia Pelosi (/pəˈloʊsi/ pə-LOH-see; née D'Alesandro; born March 26, 1940) is an American politician who served as the 52nd speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 2007 to 2011 and again from 2019 to 2023. A member of the Democratic Party, she was the first woman elected as U.S. House Speaker and the first woman to lead a major political party in either chamber of Congress, leading the House Democrats from 2003 to 2023. A member of the House since 1987, Pelosi currently represents California's 11th congressional district, which includes most of San Francisco. She is the dean of California's congressional delegation. Pelosi was born and raised in Baltimore, and is the daughter of mayor and congressman Thomas D'Alesandro Jr. She graduated from Trinity College, Washington in 1962 and married businessman Paul Pelosi the next year; the two had met while both were students. They moved to New York City before settling down in San Francisco with their children. Focused on raising her family, Pelosi stepped into politics as a volunteer for the Democratic Party in the 1960s. After years of party work, she was first elected to Congress in a 1987 special election and is now in her 19th term; she is the dean of California's congressional delegation. Pelosi steadily rose through the ranks of the House Democratic Caucus to be elected House minority whip in 2001 and elevated to House minority leader a year later, becoming the first woman to hold each of those positions in either chamber of Congress. In the 2006 midterm elections, Pelosi led the Democrats to a majority in the House for the first time in 12 years and was subsequently elected Speaker, becoming the first woman to hold the office. Until Kamala Harris became vice president in 2021, Pelosi was the highest-ranking woman in the presidential line of succession in U.S. history, as the speaker of the House is second in the line of succession. During her first speakership, Pelosi was a major opponent of the Iraq War as well as the Bush administration's attempts to partially privatize Social Security. She participated in the passage of the Obama administration's landmark bills, including the Affordable Care Act, the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and the 2010 Tax Relief Act. Pelosi lost the speakership after the Republican Party retook the majority in the 2010 midterm elections, but she retained her role as leader of the House Democrats and became House minority leader for a second time. In the 2018 midterm elections, Democrats regained majority control of the House, and Pelosi was again elected Speaker, becoming the first former speaker to reclaim the gavel since Sam Rayburn in 1955. During her second speakership, the House twice impeached President Donald Trump, first in December 2019 and again in January 2021; the Senate acquitted Trump both times. She participated in the passage of the Biden administration's landmark bills, including the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, the CHIPS and Science Act, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, and the Respect for Marriage Act. In the 2022 midterm elections, Republicans narrowly regained control of the House for the new Congress, ending her tenure as speaker. She subsequently retired as House Democratic leader. On November 29, 2022, the Steering and Policy Committee of the House Democratic Caucus named Pelosi "Speaker Emerita". Expert assessments of Pelosi's two tenures as speaker have generally considered her to have had a very strong grasp on power in the Democratic majorities and to have been highly effective at the job. Nancy Pelosi was born in Baltimore, Maryland, to an Italian-American family. She was the only daughter and the youngest of six children of Annunciata M. "Nancy" D'Alesandro (née Lombardi) and Thomas D'Alesandro Jr. Her mother was born in Fornelli, Isernia, Molise, in Southern Italy, and immigrated to the U.S. in 1912; her father traced his Italian ancestry to Genoa, Venice and Abruzzo. When Pelosi was born, her father was a Democratic congressman from Maryland. He became Baltimore mayor seven years later. Pelosi's mother was also active in politics, organizing Democratic women and teaching her daughter political skills. Pelosi's brother, Thomas D'Alesandro III, also a Democrat, was elected Baltimore City Council president and later served as mayor from 1967 to 1971. Pelosi helped her father at his campaign events, and she attended President John F. Kennedy's inaugural address in January 1961. In 1958, Pelosi graduated from the Institute of Notre Dame, an all-girls Catholic high school in Baltimore. In 1962, she graduated from Trinity College (now Trinity Washington University) in Washington, D.C., with a Bachelor of Arts in political science. Pelosi interned for Senator Daniel Brewster (D-Maryland) in the 1960s alongside future House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer. After moving to San Francisco, Pelosi became friends with 5th district congressman Phillip Burton and began working her way up in Democratic politics. In 1976, she was elected as a Democratic National Committee member from California, a position she would hold until 1996. She was elected as party chair for Northern California in 1977, and four years later was selected to head the California Democratic Party, which she led until 1983. Subsequently, Pelosi served as the San Francisco Democratic National Convention Host Committee chairwoman in 1984, and then as Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee finance chair from 1985 to 1986. Phillip Burton died in 1983 and his wife, Sala Burton, won a special election to fill the remainder of her husband's congressional term. She was then reelected to two more terms in her own right. Burton became ill with cancer in late 1986 and decided not to run for reelection in 1988. She wanted Pelosi to succeed her, guaranteeing Pelosi the support of the Burtons' contacts. Burton died on February 1, 1987, one month after being sworn in for a second full term. Pelosi won the special election to succeed her, defeating Democratic San Francisco supervisor Harry Britt on April 7, 1987, and Republican Harriet Ross in a June 2 runoff. Pelosi took office a week later. In the primary, Britt, a gay man, had courted San Francisco's sizable homosexual population by arguing that he would be a better than Pelosi at addressing the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Pelosi has continued to represent approximately the same area of San Francisco for her entire congressional career, despite the boundaries shifting marginally in decennial post-reapportionment redistrictings. This area has been represented in the House by Democrats uninterruptedly since 1949, and is strongly Democratic-leaning (as of 2006, 13% of registered voters in the boundaries of Pelosi's district were Republican). It has not seen a serious Republican congressional contender since the early 1960s. Pelosi has been reelected to the House 18 times without any substantive opposition. Unlike in her 1987 campaign, Pelosi has not participated in candidates' debates in her reelection campaigns. In her first seven reelection campaigns (from 1988 through 2004), she won an average of 80% of the vote. At the time that Pelosi entered office, there were only 23 women in the House. When Pelosi entered office, the AIDS epidemic was at a dire point. San Francisco was greatly affected; its large population of gay men was the epidemic's initial epicenter. Beginning in her first term, Pelosi became a prominent congressional advocate on behalf of those impacted by HIV/AIDS. Shortly after she took office, she hired a gay man as her congressional office's director of AIDS policy. In her first floor speech, Pelosi promised that she would be an advocate in the fight against what she called "the crisis of AIDS." With great stigma around the subject, some in her party privately chastised her for publicly associating herself with it. Pelosi co-authored the Ryan White CARE Act, which allocated funding dedicated to providing treatment and services for this impacted by HIV/AIDS. President George H. W. Bush signed the bill into law in December 1990. In March 1988, Pelosi voted for the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987 (as well as to override President Ronald Reagan's veto). In 2001, Pelosi was elected the House minority whip, second-in-command to Minority Leader Dick Gephardt. She was the first woman in U.S. history to hold that post. Pelosi defeated John Lewis and Steny Hoyer for the position. A strong fundraiser, she used campaign contributions to help persuade other members of Congress to support her candidacy. In 2002, Pelosi opposed the Iraq Resolution authorizing President George W. Bush to use military force against Iraq, which passed the House on a 296–133 vote. She said, "unilateral use of force without first exhausting every diplomatic remedy and other remedies and making a case to the American people will be harmful to our war on terrorism." In November 2002, after Gephardt resigned as House minority leader to seek the Democratic nomination in the 2004 presidential election, Pelosi was elected to replace him, becoming the first woman to lead a major party in either chamber of Congress. In the campaign to succeed Gephardt as the House Democratic Caucus's leader, Pelosi was challenged by Harold Ford Jr. and Marcy Kaptur. Kaptur withdrew her candidacy for the position before the November 15, 2003, caucus vote, and Pelosi defeated Ford 117–29 in the closed-door vote of caucus members. Critics of Pelosi characterized her as too liberal to be a successful House leader. As minority leader, Pelosi sharply criticized the handling of the Iraq War by President Bush and his administration, in 2004 saying Bush had demonstrated areas of "incompetence". In a relative surprise, the Democratic Party lost three seats in the 2004 House elections, which coincided with Bush's reelection as president. Focused on retaking the House majority in 2006, in her second term as minority leader Pelosi worked to criticize the Bush administration more effectively and to contrast the Democratic Party with it. As part of this, Pelosi voiced even harsher criticism of Bush's handling of the Iraq War. In November 2005, prominent congressional Democrat John Murtha proposed that the U.S. begin a withdrawal of troops from Iraq at the "earliest predictable date". Pelosi initially declined to commit to supporting Murtha's proposal. Speaker Dennis Hastert soon brought to the floor a vote on a non-binding resolution calling for an immediate withdrawal of troops, seeking to trap Democrats into taking a more radical stance. Pelosi led Democrats in voting against the resolution, which failed in a 403–3 floor vote. Roughly two weeks later, Pelosi held a press conference in which she endorsed Murtha's proposal. Some critics believed that Pelosi's support for a troop withdrawal would prevent the Democrats from winning a House majority in the 2006 elections. During her time as minority leader, Pelosi was not well known to much of the American public. Before the 2006 elections, Republicans made a concerted effort to taint public perception of her, running advertisements assailing her. Advertisements demonizing Pelosi became a routine part of Republican advertising in subsequent elections. For instance, during the 2022 election cycle, Republicans ran more than $50 million in ads that negatively characterized or invoked Pelosi, and in the 2010 cycle, they spent more than $65 million on such ads. In the 2006 elections, the Democrats took control of the House, picking up 30 seats, the party's largest House seat gain since the 1974 elections held in the wake of the Watergate scandal. The party's House majority meant that as the party's incumbent House leader, Pelosi was widely expected to become speaker in the next Congress. On November 16, 2006, the Democratic caucus unanimously nominated her for speaker. Pelosi supported her longtime friend John Murtha for House majority leader, the second-ranking post in the House. His competitor was House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer, who had been Pelosi's second-in-command since 2003. Hoyer was elected House majority leader over Murtha by a margin of 149–86. On January 4, 2007, Pelosi defeated Republican John Boehner of Ohio, 233 votes to 202, in the election for speaker of the House. Rahm Emanuel, the incoming chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, nominated Pelosi, and her longtime friend John Dingell swore her in, as the dean of the House of Representatives traditionally does. Pelosi was the first woman, the first Californian, and the first Italian-American to hold the speakership. She was also the second speaker from a state west of the Rocky Mountains. The first was Washington's Tom Foley, the last Democrat to hold the post before Pelosi. During her speech, she discussed the historical importance of being the first woman to hold the position of Speaker: This is a historic moment—for the Congress, and for the women of this country. It is a moment for which we have waited more than 200 years. Never losing faith, we waited through the many years of struggle to achieve our rights. But women weren't just waiting; women were working. Never losing faith, we worked to redeem the promise of America, that all men and women are created equal. For our daughters and granddaughters, today, we have broken the marble ceiling. For our daughters and our granddaughters, the sky is the limit, anything is possible for them. She also said Iraq was the major issue facing the 110th Congress while incorporating some Democratic Party beliefs: The election of 2006 was a call to change—not merely to change the control of Congress, but for a new direction for our country. Nowhere were the American people more clear about the need for a new direction than in Iraq. The American people rejected an open-ended obligation to a war without end. As speaker, Pelosi remained the leader of the House Democrats, as the speaker is considered the leader of the majority caucus. But by tradition, she did not normally participate in debate and almost never voted on the floor, though she had the right to do so as a member of the House. She was also not a member of any House committees, also in keeping with tradition. Pelosi was reelected speaker in 2009. During and after her first tenure as speaker, Pelosi was widely characterized as a polarizing political figure. Republican candidates often associated their Democratic opponents with her. Pelosi became the focus of heavy disdain by "mainstream" Republicans and Tea Party Republicans alike, as well as from the left. As they had in 2006, Republicans continued to run advertisements that demonized Pelosi. Before the 2010 House elections, the Republican National Committee prominently used a "Fire Pelosi" slogan in its efforts to recapture the House majority. This slogan was rolled out hours after the House passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Republicans spent $65 million ahead of the 2010 elections on anti-Pelosi advertisements. Pelosi has continued to be a fixture of Republican attack. Ads demonizing her have been credited with fostering intense right-wing ire toward her, and have been seen as one of the top factors in her unpopularity with the public. Shortly after being reelected in 2004, President Bush claimed a mandate for an ambitious second-term agenda and proposed reforming Social Security by allowing workers to redirect a portion of their Social Security withholding into stock and bond investments. Pelosi strongly opposed the plan, saying there was no crisis, and as minority leader she imposed intense party discipline on her caucus, leading them to near-unanimous opposition to the proposal, which was defeated. In the wake of Bush's 2004 reelection, several leading House Democrats believed they should pursue impeachment proceedings against him, asserting that he had misled Congress about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and violated Americans' civil liberties by authorizing warrantless wiretaps. In May 2006, with an eye on the upcoming midterm elections—which offered the possibility of Democrats taking back control of the House for the first time since 1994—Pelosi told colleagues that, while the Democrats would conduct vigorous oversight of Bush administration policy, an impeachment investigation was "off the table". A week earlier, she had told The Washington Post that although Democrats would not set out to impeach Bush, "you never know where" investigations might lead. After becoming speaker in 2007, Pelosi held firm against impeachment, notwithstanding strong support for it among her constituents. In the 2008 election, she withstood a challenge for her seat by antiwar activist Cindy Sheehan, who ran as an independent primarily because of Pelosi's refusal to pursue impeachment. Before the midterm elections, Pelosi announced that if Democrats gained a House majority, they would push through most of their agenda during the first 100 hours of the 110th Congress. The "first hundred hours" was a play on President Franklin D. Roosevelt's promise for quick action to combat the Great Depression during his "first hundred days" in office. Newt Gingrich, who became speaker of the House in 1995, had a similar 100-day agenda to implement his Contract with America. On January 5, 2007, reacting to suggestions from Bush's confidants that he would increase troop levels in Iraq (which he announced in a speech a few days later), Pelosi and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid condemned the plan. They sent Bush a letter reading: [T]here is no purely military solution in Iraq. There is only a political solution. Adding more combat troops will only endanger more Americans and stretch our military to the breaking point for no strategic gain. ... Rather than deploy additional forces to Iraq, we believe the way forward is to begin the phased redeployment of our forces in the next four to six months while shifting the principal mission of our forces there from combat to training, logistics, force protection, and counter-terror. Pelosi was named Permanent Chair of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado. Pelosi has been credited for spearheading Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act, when it seemed doomed to defeat. After Republican Scott Brown won Democrat Ted Kennedy's former Senate seat in the January 2010 Massachusetts special election, costing Democrats their 60-seat filibuster-proof majority, Obama agreed with his then chief of staff Rahm Emanuel's idea to do smaller initiatives that could pass easily. But Pelosi dismissed Obama's compunction, mocking his scaled-back ideas as "kiddie care". After convincing him that this was their only shot at health care reform because of the large Democratic majorities in Congress, she rallied her caucus as she began an "unbelievable marathon" of a two-month session to craft the bill, which passed the House 219–212. In Obama's remarks before signing the bill into law, he called Pelosi "one of the best speakers the House of Representatives has ever had." By early 2010, analysts were assessing Pelosi as possibly the most powerful woman in U.S. history and among the most powerful speakers of the previous 100 years. Later in 2010, Gail Russell Chaddock of the Christian Science Monitor opined that Pelosi was the "most powerful House speaker since Sam Rayburn a half century ago", adding that she had also been "one of the most partisan". Pelosi's first speakership was favorably assessed by scholars. In late 2010, Norman Ornstein, a congressional scholar at the conservative-leaning American Enterprise Institute, opined that despite polarized public opinion of Pelosi, "she's going to rank quite high in the pantheon of modern speakers", declaring that the only speaker of the previous 100 years that he would rank higher than Pelosi was Sam Rayburn. Catholic University of America political scientist Matthew Green opined that 111th Congress had "been remarkable in its productivity—in both the number of bills enacted and their scope—and Pelosi shares much of the credit." In November 2010, Brian Naylor of NPR opined that: During Nancy Pelosi's four years as speaker of the House, Congress approved the health care overhaul—widely considered the most significant piece of domestic legislation since Medicare—along with an $800 billion measure to stimulate the economy and a multi-billion-dollar rescue of the banks. It is a legislative legacy that rivals the accomplishments of any speaker in modern times. In November 2010, after Democrats lost their House majority, Politico writer John Bresnahan called Pelosi's record as speaker "mixed". He opined that Pelosi had been a powerful speaker, describing her as wielding "an iron fist in a Gucci glove" and having held "enormous power within the House Democratic Caucus", but noting that she had a "horrible approval rating with the rest of America". Bresnahan wrote that Pelosi's leadership and the legislative agenda she advanced had significantly contributed to the party's loss of its House majority, citing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act as an example of legislation that hurt the Democrats electorally in 2010. Bresnahan also believed that, ahead of the 2010 elections, Pelosi had "disastrously" misread public opinion, and that Pelosi had been a poor orator. Thomas Mann of the Brookings Institution later opined that Pelosi had been the "strongest and most effective speaker of modern times" during her first speakership. In 2018, Robert Draper wrote for The New York Times Magazine: During Nancy Pelosi’s four years as speaker, there was no confusion as to who was in control. Pelosi used the tools at her disposal—committee assignments, campaign donations—to establish a balance among her party’s coalitions while also reminding everyone that her job was not simply to officiate and appease...But as Newt Gingrich learned the hard way two decades ago, an autocratic speaker is a short-lived one. Pelosi’s reign was successful because she understood the will of her caucus rather than bending it to hers. Draper also wrote that "for all her mastery of Washington’s inside game, Pelosi has never been a deft public-facing politician," and called her a poor orator. Though Pelosi was reelected by a comfortable margin in the 2010 elections, the Democrats lost 63 seats and control of the House of Representatives to the Republicans. After this setback, Pelosi sought to continue leading the House Democratic Caucus as minority leader, the office she held before becoming speaker. Intraparty opposition failed to pass a motion to delay the leadership vote, though she faced a challenge from Representative Heath Shuler. Shuler lost to Pelosi, 150–43, in the caucus vote on November 17, 2010. On the opening day of the 112th Congress, Pelosi was elected minority leader. In November 2011, 60 Minutes alleged that Pelosi and several other members of Congress had used information they gleaned from closed sessions to make money on the stock market. The program cited her purchases of Visa Inc. stock while a bill that would limit credit card fees was in the House. Pelosi denied the allegations and called the report "a right-wing smear". When the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge Act (or STOCK Act) was introduced the next year, she voted for it and lauded its passing. Of representatives Louise Slaughter and Tim Walz, who drafted the bill, Pelosi said they "shined a light on a gaping hole in our ethics laws and helped close it once and for all". On November 14, 2012, Pelosi announced that she intended to remain Democratic leader. In August 2016, Pelosi said that her personal contact information had been posted online following a cyberattack against top Democratic campaign committees and she had received "obscene and sick calls, voice mails and text messages". She warned members of Congress to avoid letting children or family members answer phone calls or read text messages. At times, centrists, progressive candidates and incumbent Democrats all expressed opposition to Pelosi's continued tenure as the party's House leader. Prompted by colleagues after the 2016 presidential election, Tim Ryan of Ohio initiated a bid to replace Pelosi as House minority leader on November 17, 2016. After Pelosi agreed to give more leadership opportunities to junior members, she defeated Ryan by a vote of 134–63 on November 30. In 2017, after Democrats lost four consecutive special elections in the House of Representatives, Pelosi's leadership was again called into question. In June 2017, Representative Kathleen Rice of New York and a small group of other House Democrats, including Congressional Black Caucus chairman Cedric Richmond, held a closed-door meeting to discuss potential new Democratic leadership. Other House Democrats, including Ryan, Seth Moulton, and Filemon Vela, publicly called for new House leadership. In an interview, Rice said, "If you were talking about a company that was posting losing numbers, if you were talking about any sports team that was losing time and time again, changes would be made, right? The CEO out. The coach would be out and there would be a new strategy put in place." In a press conference, Pelosi defended her leadership, saying, "I respect any opinion that my members have but my decision about how long I stay is not up to them." When asked specifically why she should stay on as House minority leader after numerous Democratic seats were lost, she responded, "Well, I'm a master legislator. I am a strategic, politically astute leader. My leadership is recognized by many around the country, and that is why I'm able to attract the support that I do." In November 2017, after Pelosi called for John Conyers's resignation over allegations of harassment, she convened the first in a series of planned meetings on strategies to address reforming workplace policies in the wake of national attention to sexual harassment. She said Congress had "a moral duty to the brave women and men coming forward to seize this moment and demonstrate real, effective leadership to foster a climate of respect and dignity in the workplace". In February 2018, Pelosi sent a letter to Speaker Paul Ryan about the proposed public release of a memo prepared by Republican staff at the direction of House Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes. The memo attacked the Federal Bureau of Investigation for its investigation of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections. Pelosi said the FBI and the Department of Justice had warned Nunes and Ryan that the memo was inaccurate and that its release could threaten national security by disclosing federal surveillance methods. She added that Republicans were engaged in a "cover-up campaign" to protect Trump: "House Republicans' pattern of obstruction and cover-up to hide the truth about the Trump-Russia scandal represents a threat to our intelligence and our national security. The GOP has led a partisan effort to distort intelligence and discredit the U.S. law enforcement and intelligence communities." She charged Nunes with "deliberately dishonest actions" and called for his immediate removal from his position. In February 2018, Pelosi broke the record for longest House speech using the "magic minute" custom when she spent more than eight hours recounting stories from DREAMers—people brought to the United States as minors by undocumented immigrants—to object to a budget deal that would raise spending caps without addressing the future of DACA recipients, who were at risk of deportation by the Trump administration. In May 2018, after the White House invited two Republicans and no Democrats to a Department of Justice briefing on an FBI informant who had made contact with the Trump campaign, Pelosi and Schumer sent a letter to Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein and FBI director Wray calling for "a bipartisan Gang of Eight briefing that involves congressional leadership from both chambers". In August 2018, Pelosi called for Duncan D. Hunter's resignation after his indictment on charges of misusing at least $250,000 in campaign funds, saying the charges were "evidence of the rampant culture of corruption among Republicans in Washington today". In April 2018, Peter Beinart wrote in The Atlantic that Pelosi had been "the most effective congressional leader of modern times—and, not coincidentally, the most vilified." In the 2018 elections, the Democrats recaptured a House majority, gaining 41 seats. This was the party's largest gain in the House since the 1974 post-Watergate elections. On November 28, House Democrats nominated Pelosi to once again serve as speaker. She was reelected to the speakership at the start of the 116th Congress on January 3, 2019. Pelosi "clinched the speakership after weeks of whittling down opposition from some fellow Democrats seeking a new generation of leadership. The deal to win over holdouts put an expiration date on her tenure: she promised not to stay more than four years in the job". 220 House Democrats voted for Pelosi as Speaker and 15 for someone else or no one. On February 4, 2020, at the conclusion of Trump's State of the Union address, Pelosi tore up her official copy of it. Her stated reason for doing so was "because it was a courteous thing to do considering the alternatives. It was a such a dirty speech". Trump and other Republicans criticized her for this. In December 2021, Pelosi announced her candidacy for reelection to the House in 2022. In 2018, and again in 2020, she had agreed not to stay on as speaker beyond January 2023, but otherwise avoided questions about her future. In 2022, Pelosi was reelected, but the Democratic Party lost the House majority. Ten days later, she announced that she would not seek a Democratic leadership post in the next Congress. At the start of the 116th Congress, Pelosi opposed Trump's attempts to use the 2018–2019 federal government shutdown (which she called a "hostage-taking" of civil servants) as leverage to build a substantial wall on the U.S.-Mexico border. She declined to allow Trump to give the State of the Union Address in the House chamber while the shutdown was ongoing. After several polls showed Trump's popularity sharply falling due to the shutdown, on January 25, 2019, Trump signed a stopgap bill to reopen the government without any concessions regarding a border wall for three weeks to allow negotiations on an appropriations bill. But he reiterated his demand for border wall funding and said he would shut the government down again or declare a national emergency and use military funding to build the wall if Congress did not appropriate the funds by February 15. On February 15, Trump declared a national emergency in order to bypass Congress, after being unsatisfied with a bipartisan bill that had passed the House and Senate the day before. On September 29, 2019, Pelosi announced the launch of an impeachment inquiry against Trump. On December 5, 2019, after the inquiry had taken place, Pelosi authorized the Judiciary Committee to begin drafting articles of impeachment. After hearings were held, two articles of impeachment were announced on December 10. The House of Representatives approved both articles on December 18, thereby formally impeaching Trump. The day after the January 6 United States Capitol attack, Pelosi demanded that Trump either resign or be removed from office through the clauses of section four the Twenty-Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution, threatening impeachment if this did not happen. On January 10, she issued a 24-hour ultimatum to Vice President Mike Pence, that if he did not invoke the 25th amendment, she would proceed with legislation to impeach Trump. On January 13, the House voted to impeach Trump a second time. Pelosi aided with the passage of the CARES Act. She attracted controversy when footage emerged in early September 2020 of her visiting a hair salon in San Francisco. This was contrary to regulations enforced at that time preventing service indoors. Criticized for hypocrisy by Trump and the owners of the salon, Pelosi described the situation as "clearly a setup". Her stylist and other Democrats defended her. Pelosi played a key role in the 2021 passage of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. The New York Times credited the legislation's passage to Pelosi's decision to adopt a Congressional Black Caucus proposal to pair together the final vote on the bill with a good-faith vote on the rules governing debate on a subsequent social safety net bill. The Times noted that Pelosi did not make herself the public face of this, instead having Congressional Black Caucus Chairwoman Joyce Beatty persuade House Democratic Caucus members to accept the proposal. The New York Times wrote, "in effect, the speaker had harnessed one faction of her unruly Democrats to win over two others." Chris Cillizza of CNN wrote: Consider the challenge Pelosi faced with this infrastructure bill—starting with the fact that she had only a three-seat majority, meaning that even a handful of renegade Democrats could scuttle the entire thing. Then add in the total lack of trust not only between House liberals and Senate moderates but also the decided lack of trust between House liberals and House moderates. And sprinkle in the fact that the entire bill had been at an impasse for months as both sides of the party wrangled for leverage on the broader $1.75 trillion social safety net legislation. During the 117th Congress, the CHIPS and Science Act, Inflation Reduction Act, and Honoring our PACT Act of 2022 (PACT Act) were passed. As with her first tenure, experts gave Pelosi's second tenure as speaker high marks, with many opining that during her two tenures as speaker she had been among the most effective people to hold the position. In June 2019, Brent Budowsky opined in The Hill that Pelosi had been "the most important, consequential and effective Speaker since Tip O’Neill" as well as "one of the greatest Speakers who ever served." In January 2020, on the eve of Trump's first impeachment trial before the U.S. Senate, Washington Post political writer Paul Kane called Pelosi the most powerful House speaker in at least 25 years, noting that some historians were comparing her influence to that of former speaker Sam Rayburn. In 2021, former Republican speaker John Boehner opined that Pelosi had been the most powerful House speaker in U.S. history. In November 2022, Chris Cillizza wrote that Pelosi was "the most effective speaker ever." Johnathan Bernstein opined for The Washington Post and Bloomberg News that Pelosi was "the greatest speaker in history." Jackie Calmes of the Los Angeles Times also opined that Pelosi had been the greatest speaker in history. Sarah Ferris of Politico called Pelosi "a legislative giant regarded as one of the most powerful speakers in modern U.S. history." Historian Lindsay M. Chervinsky wrote for NBC News that Pelosi was "one of the most effective speakers in history" and had been so while facing "the double standards that apply to powerful women." John Haduk wrote for the Brookings Institution: Whether you agree with her politics or not, it is undeniable that [Pelosi] has been a remarkably effective House leader. That success has come as both House Minority Leader and as Speaker of the House. As Speaker, she has worked with a majority as large as 81 seats in November and December 2009 (258-177) and one as small as 6 seats from April to May 2021 (218-212). A number of progressive and liberal-leaning outlets published strong assessments of Pelosi's tenure. Harold Meyerson opined that Pelosi had been the greatest speaker in U.S. history in an article in The American Prospect. Amanda Marcotte of Salon.com opined that Pelosi was the greatest speaker of all time, calling her "both the most effective and most progressive House speaker of all time." Marcotte added that Pelosi had been effective "both in terms of managing an unruly caucus and being able to push her party in more progressive directions." On November 29, 2022, the Steering and Policy Committee of the House Democratic Caucus honorarily named Pelosi "speaker emerita" in the upcoming 118th U.S. Congress. Her second speakership, and her participation in the House Democratic Party leadership, concluded on January 3, 2023, at the end of the 117th Congress. In the House, Pelosi served on the Appropriations and Intelligence Committees and was the ranking member on the latter until her election as minority leader. She is a member of the House Baltic Caucus. Early in her political career, Pelosi established herself as a prominent fundraiser in the party. She was one of the party's most prolific fundraisers, transferring significant funds to committees for other candidates. During the 2000 and 2002 election cycles, compared to other members of Congress, she contributed the most money to other congressional campaigns. In 2006, Pelosi was the Democratic Party's third-largest fundraiser, behind former first couple Bill and Hillary Clinton. From 2003 to 2014, Pelosi raised more than $400 million in campaign funds. Pelosi was a founding member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, but left in 2003 after being elected House minority leader. In 2001, she voted in favor of the USA Patriot Act, but voted against reauthorization of certain provisions in 2005. She voted against a Constitutional amendment banning flag-burning. Pelosi voted against the Secure Fence Act of 2006. In June 2018, Pelosi visited a federal facility used to detain migrant children separated from their parents and subsequently called for the resignation of Department of Homeland Security Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen. In July, Pelosi characterized the compromise immigration bill by the Republicans as a "deal with the devil" and said she had not had conversations with House Speaker Ryan about a legislative solution to the separation of families at the southern border. In April 2021, after southern border crossings peaked, House Republicans criticized Pelosi for saying that immigration under the Biden administration was "on a good path". U.S. Customs and Border Protection reported that nearly 19,000 unaccompanied minors arrived in March. Pelosi has long supported LGBT rights. In 1996, she voted against the Defense of Marriage Act, and in 2004 and 2006, she voted against the proposed Federal Marriage Amendment, which would amend the United States Constitution to define marriage federally as being between one man and one woman, thereby overriding states' individual rights to legalize same-sex marriage. When the Supreme Court of California overturned the state's ban on marriage between same-sex couples in 2008, Pelosi released a statement welcoming the "historic decision". She also indirectly voiced her opposition to California Proposition 8, a successful 2008 state ballot initiative which defined marriage in California as a union between one man and one woman. In 2012, Pelosi said her position on LGBT rights such as same-sex marriage grows from and reflects her Catholic faith; it also places her at odds with Catholic doctrine, which defines marriage as a union between one man and one woman. She said: "My religion compels me—and I love it for it—to be against discrimination of any kind in our country, and I consider [the ban on gay marriage] a form of discrimination. I think it's unconstitutional on top of that." Pelosi supports the Equality Act, a bill that would expand the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 to ban discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. In 2019, she spoke in Congress in favor of the bill and called for ending discrimination against LGBT people. Pelosi also opposed Trump's transgender military ban. Pelosi supports reform in marijuana laws, although NORML's deputy director Paul Armentano said she and other members of Congress had not done anything to change the laws. She also supports use of medical marijuana. Pelosi supports the Bush/Obama NSA surveillance program PRISM. As Speaker of the House, Pelosi quietly moved the statue of Robert E. Lee from the National Statuary Hall of the U.S. Capitol to the Capitol crypt. In Lee's place, she had a statue of Rosa Parks erected. In August 2017, Pelosi said she supported the removal of Confederate monuments and memorials from the Capitol Building. In 2002, while Pelosi was the ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee, she was briefed on the ongoing use of "enhanced interrogation techniques", including waterboarding, authorized for a captured terrorist, Abu Zubaydah. After the briefing, Pelosi said she "was assured by lawyers with the CIA and the Department of Justice that the methods were legal". Two unnamed former Bush administration officials say the briefing was detailed and graphic, and at the time she did not raise substantial objections. One unnamed U.S. official present during the early briefings said, "In fairness, the environment was different then because we were closer to September 11 and people were still in a panic. But there was no objecting, no hand-wringing. The attitude was, 'We don't care what you do to those guys as long as you get the information you need to protect the American people.'" These techniques later became controversial, and in 2007 Pelosi's office said she had protested their use at the time, and she concurred with objections raised by Democratic colleague Jane Harman in a letter to the CIA in early 2003. Subsequently, several leading Democratic lawmakers in the House signed a letter on June 26, 2009, alleging CIA Director Leon Panetta had asserted that the CIA misled Congress for a "number of years" spanning back to 2001, casting clouds on the controversy. The letter, lawmakers and the CIA all providing no details, and the circumstances surrounding the allegations, make it hard to assess the claims and counterclaims of both sides. Officials in Congress say her ability to challenge the practices may have been hampered by strict rules of secrecy that prohibited her from taking notes or consulting legal experts or members of her own staffs. In an April 2009 press conference, Pelosi said: "In that or any other briefing ... we were not, and I repeat, were not told that waterboarding or any of these other enhanced interrogation techniques were used. What they did tell us is that they had some legislative counsel—the Office of Legislative Counsel opinions that they could be used, but not that they would. And they further [...] the point was that if and when they would be used, they would brief Congress at that time." Pelosi voted against the 1995 Balanced Budget Proposed Constitutional Amendment, which passed the House by a 300–132 vote, but fell two votes short of the 2/3 supermajority required in the Senate (with 65 senators voting in favor). As Speaker of the House, she spearheaded the Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007 as part of the 100-Hour Plan. The act raises the minimum wage in the United States and the territories of the Northern Marianas Islands and American Samoa. American Samoa was initially absent from the act, but it was included as part of HR 2206. One Republican congressman who voted against the initial bill accused Pelosi of unethically benefiting Del Monte Foods (headquartered in her district) by excluding the territory, where Del Monte's StarKist Tuna brand is a major employer. Pelosi co-sponsored legislation that omitted American Samoa from a raise in the minimum wage as early as 1999, before Del Monte's acquisition of StarKist Tuna in 2002. Pelosi opposed the welfare reform President Bush proposed as well as reforms proposed and passed under President Clinton. She also opposed the tax reform signed by Trump in December 2017, calling it "probably one of the worst bills in the history of the United States of America ... It robs from the future [and] it rewards the rich ... and corporations at the expense of tens of millions of working middle-class families in our country." She said "this is Armageddon" and argued that the tax bill increased the debt in a way that would adversely impact social insurance spending. In January 2018, shortly after the tax bill passed, a reporter asked Pelosi to respond to statements by companies crediting the tax cuts with allowing them to raise wages and give bonuses. She said that, given the benefits corporations received from the tax bill, the benefits workers got were "crumbs". Most companies that awarded bonuses gave out payments of hundreds of dollars, while some gave bonuses significantly over $1,000. In November 2018, Pelosi said she had spoken with Trump about infrastructure development. Though he "really didn't come through with it in his first two years in office" while it was a topic during his campaign, the subject had not been a partisan matter in Congress. She mentioned potential bipartisan legislative initiatives that would "create good paying jobs and will also generate other economic growth in their regions". On May 1, 2019, Pelosi and Schumer met with Trump about infrastructure funding. In late May, a meeting to discuss an impending $2 trillion infrastructure plan was cut short when Trump abruptly left after only a few minutes. In August 2018, after Trump signed an emergency declaration for federal aid in combating the Carr Fire in Northern California, Pelosi called the move "an important first step" but requested that Trump accede to California Governor Jerry Brown's request for further aid to other hard-hit areas in California. She called on the Trump administration to take "real, urgent action to combat the threat of the climate crisis, which is making the wildfire season longer, more expensive and more destructive". In 1999, Pelosi voted against displaying the Ten Commandments in public buildings, including schools. She voted for the No Child Left Behind Act, which instituted testing to track students' progress and authorized an increase in overall education spending. In 2019, Pelosi said climate change was "the existential threat of our time" and called for action to curb it. She has supported the development of new technologies to reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil and remediate the adverse environmental effects of burning fossil fuels. Pelosi has widely supported conservation programs and energy research appropriations. She has also voted to remove an amendment that would allow for oil and gas exploration in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Pelosi has blocked efforts to revive offshore oil drilling in protected areas, reasoning that offshore drilling could lead to an increase in dependence on fossil fuels. Pelosi was instrumental in passing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010. She was a key figure in convincing Obama to continue pushing for health-care reform after the election of Massachusetts Senator Scott Brown in a January special election—a defeat seen as potentially fatal to Democratic reform efforts. After delivering 219 votes in the House for Obama's health-care package, Pelosi was both praised and heckled as she made her way to Capitol Hill. Pelosi has voted to increase Medicare and Medicaid benefits. She does not endorse Senator Bernie Sanders's bill for single-payer healthcare. On March 10, 2017, Pelosi said Democrats would continue battling Republican efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act, but would also be willing to form a compromise measure if Republicans reached out for support. She indicated her support for the Republican plan to expand Health Savings Accounts and said the question of Republicans' accepting an expansion of Medicaid was important. In September, Pelosi sent a letter to Democrats praising Senator John McCain for announcing his opposition to the latest Republican effort to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act and called on lawmakers and advocacy groups alike to pressure Republicans in the health-care discussion. She said Democrats would be unified in putting "a stake in the heart of this monstrous bill". In July 2018, during a speech at Independence First, Pelosi said Democrats' goal "has always been to expand coverage and to do so in a way that improves benefits ... and we have to address the affordability issue that is so undermined by the Republicans." In November 2018, after Democrats gained a majority in the House in the midterm elections, she said, "I'm staying as Speaker to protect the Affordable Care Act. That's my main issue, because I think that's, again, about the health and financial health of the America's families, and if Hillary had won, I could go home." She added that Republicans had misrepresented their earlier position of opposition to covering people with preexisting conditions during the election cycle and called on them to join Democrats in "removing all doubt that the preexisting medical condition is the law—the benefit—is the law of the land". Pelosi voted against the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2003 and earlier attempts at similar bans, and voted against the criminalization of certain situations where a minor is transported across state lines for an abortion (HR 748, passed). She has voted in favor of lifting the ban on privately funded abortions at overseas U.S. military facilities (HA 209, rejected); in favor of an amendment that would repeal a provision forbidding servicewomen and dependents from getting an abortion in overseas military hospitals (HA 722, rejected); and in favor of stripping the prohibition of funding for organizations working overseas that use their own funds to provide abortion services, or engage in advocacy related to abortion services (HA 997, rejected). She also voted in favor of the 1998 Abortion Funding Amendment, which would have allowed the use of district funds to promote abortion-related activities, but would have prohibited the use of federal funds. In 2008, she was rebuked by Archbishop Donald Wuerl of Washington, D.C., for being "incorrect" in comments she made to Tom Brokaw on Meet the Press concerning Church teaching on the subjects of abortion of when a human life begins. The archbishop's statement quoted Pelosi as saying the church has not been able to define when life begins. During the interview she said, "over the history of the church, this [what constitutes the moment of conception] is an issue of controversy." In February 2009, Pelosi met with her bishop, Archbishop George Hugh Niederauer of San Francisco, and with Pope Benedict XVI regarding the controversy. Pelosi opposed the 2022 overturning of Roe v. Wade, calling it "cruel", "outrageous" and "heart-wrenching". In a January 25, 2009, interview with George Stephanopoulos for ABC News, Pelosi said that one of the reasons she supported family planning services was that they would "reduce costs to states and to the federal government." Pelosi stands in favor of increased background checks for potential gun owners, as well as the banning of assault weapons. In February 2013, she called for the "Boldest possible move" on gun control, similar to a stance made just weeks earlier by former Representative, mass shooting victim, and fellow gun control advocate Gabby Giffords. In 2012, she was given a 0% rating by Gun Owners of America and a 7% rating from the National Rifle Association of America for her stances on gun control. In February 2018, following the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, Pelosi said Republicans' "cowering" to the gun lobby was "an assault on our whole country" and that the victims were "paying the price for our inaction". She requested House Speaker Ryan and Republicans take action via consideration of legislation expanding background checks or authorizing researchers to use federal dollars to examine public health as it relates to gun violence. Pelosi also advocated for the creation of a special committee on gun violence and said Republicans had previously created committees to investigate Planned Parenthood and the 2012 Benghazi attack. In November 2018, after the Thousand Oaks shooting, Pelosi released a statement saying Americans "deserve real action to end the daily epidemic of gun violence that is stealing the lives of our children on campuses, in places of worship and on our streets" and pledged that gun control would be a priority for House Democrats in the 116th United States Congress. With regard to Representative Charles Rangel's (D-NY) plan to introduce legislation that would reinstate the draft, Pelosi said she did not support it. In March 2009, conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch had obtained emails sent by Pelosi's staff requesting the United States Air Force (USAF) to provide specific aircraft—a Boeing 757—for Pelosi to use for taxpayer-funded travel. Pelosi responded that the policy was initiated by President Bush due to post-9/11 security concerns (Pelosi was third in line for presidential succession), and was initially provided for the previous Speaker Dennis Hastert. The Sergeant at Arms requested—for security reasons—that the plane provided be capable of non-stop flight, requiring a larger aircraft. The Pentagon said "no one has rendered judgment" that Pelosi's use of aircraft "is excessive". During Trump administration, Pelosi voted in line with the president's stated position 17.6% of the time. During a news conference on June 9, 2017, after a reporter asked her about tweets by President Donald Trump lambasting former FBI director James Comey following Comey's testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee, Pelosi said no one at the White House seemed courageous enough to tell Trump his tweets were beneath the dignity of the presidency and that she was worried about his fitness for office. In November, when asked about Democrats beginning the impeachment process against Trump in the event they won a majority of seats in the 2018 elections, Pelosi said it would not be one of their legislative priorities but that the option could be considered if credible evidence appeared during the ongoing investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 election. In January 2018, Pelosi referred to Trump's 2018 State of the Union Address as a performance without serious policy ideas the parties could collaborate on. She questioned Trump's refusal to implement Russian sanctions after more than 500 members of Congress voted to approve them. In February, after Trump blocked the release of a Democratic memo by the Intelligence Committee, Pelosi said the act was "a stunningly brazen attempt to cover up the truth about the Trump-Russia scandal from the American people" and "part of a dangerous and desperate pattern of cover-up on the part of the president who has shown he had something to hide." In March, Pelosi said she was "more concerned about the president's policies which undermine the financial security of America's working families" than the Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal. Pelosi did note the scandal as having highlighted a double standard of Republicans on issues of family values and expectations of presidential behavior, saying the party would be very involved if the event was happening to a Democrat. In April, following Scooter Libby being pardoned by Trump, Pelosi released a statement saying the pardon "sends a troubling signal to the president's allies that obstructing justice will be rewarded and that the idea of those who lie under oath being granted a pardon "poses a threat to the integrity of the special counsel investigation, and to our democracy". On August 15, after Trump revoked the security clearance of former CIA director John Brennan, Pelosi said the move was "a stunning abuse of power [and] a pathetic attempt to silence critics", and an attempt by Trump to distract attention from other issues of his administration. Pelosi and Charles E. Schumer met with Trump and Pence in December 2018 to discuss changes to be made when the new Democratic representatives takes office in 2019. In January 2019 she supported President Trump in his decision to back the leader of the opposition Juan Guaidó during Venezuelan protests and constitutional crisis. The Democrats gained control of the House of Representatives in the November 2018 elections, and Pelosi took office as Speaker. Multiple House committees launched investigations into various actions by Trump and some of his cabinet members and requested or subpoenaed documents and information from the White House and the administration. In April 2019, Trump vowed to defy "all" subpoenas from the House and to refuse to allow current or former administration officials to testify before House committees. Pelosi initially resisted efforts by some fellow House Democrats to pursue Trump's impeachment, but in September 2019, following revelations of the Trump–Ukraine scandal, announced the beginning of a formal House impeachment inquiry, saying "The actions taken to date by the president have seriously violated the Constitution" and that Trump "must be held accountable—no one is above the law." Privately, Pelosi expressed concern that focusing on impeachment would imperil the Democrats' House majority; she preferred to focus on other legislation. In May 2019, the White House intervened to halt former White House Counsel Don McGahn from complying with a subpoena issued by the House Judiciary Committee, instructing the committee to redirect its records requests to the White House. Pelosi, who had previously urged "Democrats to focus on fact-finding rather than the prospect of any impeachment", described Trump's interference regarding McGahn's records as an obstruction of justice, saying that "Trump is goading us to impeach him." Later that month, as the Trump administration continued to ignore subpoenas, refuse to release documents, and encourage or order current and former officials not to testify in Congress, Pelosi declared: "we believe that the president of the United States is engaged in a cover-up." Later that day, after learning of Pelosi's comments, Trump walked away from a scheduled White House meeting with Pelosi and Schumer, in which a $2 trillion infrastructure plan was supposed to be discussed. Trump told Pelosi and Schumer he could not work with them until they stopped investigating him. Later in the day, Pelosi accused Trump of "obstructing justice" and again said he "is engaged in a cover-up". On June 5, 2019, during a meeting with senior Democrats about whether the House should launch impeachment proceeding against Trump, Pelosi said, "I don't want to see him impeached, I want to see him in prison." According to multiple sources, rather than impeachment, she wanted to see Trump lose to a Democrat in the 2020 election, following which he could be prosecuted. Eventually, under pressure from an alliance of left-wing Representatives led by Chair of the House Judiciary Committee Jerry Nadler, Pelosi backed an impeachment inquiry. The House impeachment inquiry focused on efforts by Trump and Trump administration officials to pressure the government of Ukraine to smear former Vice President Joe Biden, a political rival of Trump's, while withholding $400 million in U.S. military aid, and a White House visit, from Ukraine; the inquiry also examined Trump's request in a July 2019 phone call to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky to "do us a favor" and investigate Biden. On December 18, 2019, the House voted nearly along party lines to impeach Trump for abuse of power (230–197) and obstruction of Congress (229–198), making him the third president in U.S. history to be impeached. Pelosi said, when opening debate on the articles of impeachment, "If we do not act now, we would be derelict in our duty. It is tragic that the president's reckless actions make impeachment necessary. He gave us no choice." Pelosi initially did not transmit the articles of impeachment to the Republican-controlled Senate for trial, seeking to negotiate an agreement with Senate Majority Mitch McConnell for the Senate to hear witness testimony and other additional evidence as part of a bid for a "full and fair" trial. McConnell rejected these efforts, and the House transmitted the articles to the Senate on January 15, 2020, with Pelosi naming seven Democratic Representatives, led by Representative Adam Schiff, as the House managers to argue the impeachment case against Trump in the Senate. As expected, the Senate ultimately acquitted Trump in a nearly-party line vote in which every Democrat voted for conviction and all but one Republican, Senator Mitt Romney, voting for acquittal. Ahead of the Senate vote Pelosi said that, irrespective of the outcome, the president "has been impeached forever", that the impeachment process had successfully "pulled back a veil of behavior totally unacceptable to our founders, and that the public will see this with a clearer eye, an unblurred eye." Following the Senate vote, Pelosi criticized Trump and Senate Republicans, saying their actions had "normalized lawlessness and rejected the system of checks and balances". Following the Senate vote, Trump claimed vindication and criticized Democrats, the FBI, and Pelosi. In a speech at the National Prayer Breakfast, Trump referred to Pelosi as "a horrible person", and questioned her religious faith; Pelosi said these remarks were "particularly without class". Before Trump's February 4, 2020 State of the Union Address, the day before the Senate impeachment vote, Trump and Pelosi exchanged mutual snubs. Trump refused to shake Pelosi's outstretched hand, and Pelosi tore up her copy of Trump's speech. Her stated reason for doing so was "because it was a courteous thing to do considering the alternatives. It was a such a dirty speech." Pelosi also said Trump's speech "had no contact with reality whatsoever" and suggested the president appeared "a little sedated" during the address. Pelosi's action was criticized by Trump and others. Days after the Senate impeachment vote, Trump fired two officials who had testified against him during the impeachment inquiry: U.S. Ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland and Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Vindman, a National Security Council official. Pelosi called the firing of Vindman a "shameful" and "clear and brazen act of retaliation that showcases the President's fear of the truth", saying that "History will remember Lieutenant Colonel Vindman as an American hero." On October 8, 2020, Pelosi announced that legislation was being introduced in the House of Representatives to advance the creation of a commission to allow the use of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution to intervene and remove Trump from executive duties. As of October 2022, Pelosi had voted in line with Joe Biden's stated position 100% of the time. After the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, Pelosi sought to take a harsher position toward China than President George H.W. Bush.: 210  With the support of Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, she took a lead role for the Democrats in criticizing Bush's China policy.: 210  Pelosi's view was that Congress should oppose the annual presidential waiver for China under the Jackson-Vanik Amendment, an amendment to the Trade Act of 1974 that required the president to inform Congress if he intended to waive the Act to have a most favored nation trading relationship with a non-market economy.: 211  Pelosi said that if China's economy suffered, Chinese people would be unhappy with their government and this would serve to advance democracy in China.: 223  As part of a Congressional delegation, Pelosi unfurled a banner in the square in 1991, provoking a confrontation with Chinese police. She advocated for Chinese political prisoners and dissidents to be able to come to the U.S. In 1999, ahead of Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji's visit to the U.S. for talks over World Trade Organization admission for China, Pelosi called on President Clinton and Vice President Gore to ask Zhu to recognize the 1989 protests as a pro-democracy effort. In 2008, after a meeting with the Dalai Lama and officials in the Tibetan government-in-exile, Pelosi criticized the People's Republic of China for its handling of the unrest in Tibet; addressing a crowd of thousands of Tibetans in Dharamsala, India, Pelosi called on "freedom-loving people" worldwide to denounce China for its human rights abuses in Tibet. The same year, Pelosi commended the European Parliament for its "bold decision" to award the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to Chinese dissident and human rights activist Hu Jia, and called upon the Chinese government "to immediately and unconditionally release Hu Jia from prison and to respect the fundamental freedoms of all the people in China." In 2010, Pelosi backed a bill naming China a currency manipulator, which would appease exporters. Pelosi criticized the imprisonment of Hong Kong democracy activists in August 2017 for their roles in a protest at the Civic Square in front of the Central Government Complex in Hong Kong. She called the ruling an injustice that should "shock the conscience of the world". Before the Trump administration took concrete measures against China in late March 2018, Pelosi and other Democratic leaders pressed Trump to focus more on China and impose real punishments, such as fulfilling his own campaign commitments to name China a currency manipulator and stop China from pressuring U.S. tech companies into giving up intellectual property rights. Pelosi urged Trump to take a strong stand against unfair market barriers in China. In September 2019, Pelosi met with Hong Kong pro-democracy activist Joshua Wong on Capitol Hill; Chinese media responded by accusing Pelosi of "backing and encouraging radical activists". On the eve of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, Pelosi advised American athletes competing: "I would say to our athletes, 'You're there to compete. Do not risk incurring the anger of the Chinese government, because they are ruthless'". On August 2, 2022, Pelosi became the highest-ranking U.S. government official to visit Taiwan in 25 years. President Joe Biden discouraged but did not prevent Pelosi from traveling to Taiwan, and the White House later affirmed her right to visit. Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and 25 Senate Republicans backed Pelosi's decision to visit, issuing a joint statement that also supported the trip. Her trip triggered a new round of hostilities in the already tense relationship between the U.S. and China. During and after her visit, China undertook a series of retaliatory measures against Taiwan and the United States. Pelosi said her visit was a sign of the U.S. Congress's commitment to Taiwan. During her visit, she met with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-Wen and called Taiwan one of the "freest societies in the world". Pelosi publicly scolded Colombian president Álvaro Uribe during Uribe's May 2007 state visit to America. Pelosi met with Uribe and later released a statement that she and other members of Congress had "expressed growing concerns about the serious allegations" of links between paramilitary groups and Colombian government officials. Pelosi also came out against the Colombian free-trade agreement. In 2008, Pelosi said: "For years, I have opposed the embargo on Cuba. I don't think it's been successful, and I think we have to remove the travel bans and have more exchanges—people to people exchanges with Cuba." In 2015, Pelosi supported President Obama's Cuban Thaw, a rapprochement between the U.S. and Castro's regime in Cuba, and visited Havana for meetings with high-level officials. Pelosi opposed U.S. intervention in the 1991 Gulf War. In an interview on February 15, 2007, Pelosi said that Bush consistently said he supports a diplomatic resolution to differences with Iran "and I take him at his word". At the same time, she said, "I do believe that Congress should assert itself, though, and make it very clear that there is no previous authority for the president, any president, to go into Iran". On January 12, 2007, Congressman Walter B. Jones of North Carolina introduced a resolution requiring that—absent a national emergency created by an attack, or a demonstrably imminent attack, by Iran upon the United States or its armed forces—the president must consult with Congress and receive specific authorization prior to initiating any use of military force against Iran. This resolution was removed from a military spending bill for the war in Iraq by Pelosi on March 13, 2007. In July 2015, Pelosi said she was convinced Obama would have enough votes to secure the Iran nuclear deal, crediting the president with having made a "very strong and forceful presentation of his case supporting the nuclear agreement with Iran" and called the deal "a diplomatic masterpiece". In 2016, Pelosi argued against two bills that if enacted would block Iran's access to the dollar and impose sanctions for its ballistic missile program: "Regardless of whether you supported the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), we all agree that Iran must not possess a nuclear weapon. At this time, the JCPOA is the best way to achieve this critical goal." In May 2018, after Trump announced his intention to withdraw from the Iran nuclear deal, Pelosi said the decision was an abdication of American leadership and "particularly senseless, disturbing & dangerous". In 2002, Pelosi opposed the Iraq Resolution authorizing President George W. Bush to use military force against Iraq, which passed the House on a 296–133 vote. Pelosi said that "unilateral use of force without first exhausting every diplomatic remedy and other remedies and making a case to the American people will be harmful to our war on terrorism." In explaining her opposition to the resolution, Pelosi said CIA Director George Tenet had told Congress the likelihood of Saddam Hussein's launching an attack on the U.S. using weapons of mass destruction was low, saying: "This is about the Constitution It is about this Congress asserting its right to declare war when we are fully aware what the challenges are to us. It is about respecting the United Nations and a multilateral approach, which is safer for our troops." Although Pelosi voted against the Iraq War, anti-war activists in San Francisco protested against her voting to continue funding the war. UC Berkeley political scientist Bruce Cain said Pelosi had to balance the demands of her anti-war constituency against the moderate views of Democrats in tight races around the country in her role as minority leader. Pelosi has never faced a serious challenger to her left in her district. Pelosi has reaffirmed that "America and Israel share an unbreakable bond: in peace and war; and in prosperity and in hardship". She has emphasized that "a strong relationship between the United States and Israel has long been supported by both Democrats and Republicans. America's commitment to the safety and security of the State of Israel is unwavering ... [h]owever, the war in Iraq has made both America and Israel less safe." Pelosi's voting record shows consistent support for Israel. Pelosi voted in favor of the Jerusalem Embassy Act of 1995, which urged the federal government to relocate the American embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. Before the 2006 elections in the Palestinian Authority, she voted for a Congressional initiative that disapproved of participation in the elections by Hamas and other organizations the legislation defined as terrorist. She agrees with the current U.S. stance in support of land-for-peace. She has applauded Israeli "hopeful signs" of offering land while criticizing Palestinian "threats" of not demonstrating peace in turn. Pelosi has said, "If the Palestinians agree to coordinate with Israel on the evacuation, establish the rule of law, and demonstrate a capacity to govern, the world may be convinced that finally there is a real partner for peace". During the 2006 Lebanon War, Pelosi voted in favor of Resolution 921: "... seizure of Israeli soldiers by Hezbollah terrorists was an unprovoked attack and Israel has the right, and indeed the obligation, to respond." She argues that organizations and political bodies in the Mideast like Hamas and Hezbollah "have a greater interest in maintaining a state of hostility with Israel than in improving the lives of the people they claim to represent". Pelosi asserts that civilians on both sides of the border "have been put at risk by the aggression of Hamas and Hezbollah" in part for their use of "civilians as shields by concealing weapons in civilian areas". In September 2008, Pelosi hosted a reception in Washington with Israeli Speaker of the Knesset Dalia Itzik, along with 20 members of Congress, where they toasted the "strong friendship" between Israel and the United States. During the ceremony, Pelosi held up replica dog tags of the three Israeli soldiers captured by Hezbollah and Hamas in 2006 and said she keeps them as a "symbol of the sacrifices made, sacrifices far too great by the people of the state of Israel". Pelosi supported Israel in the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict. In March 2018 Pelosi said, "There is no greater political accomplishment in the 20th Century than the establishment of the State of Israel." Pelosi condemned Rep. Ilhan Omar of Minnesota for posting controversial tweets related to Jews and Israel. In March 2019, she said, "Israel and America are connected now and forever. We will never allow anyone to make Israel a wedge issue." In January 2017, Pelosi voted against a House resolution that would condemn the UN Security Council Resolution 2334. This UN Security Council Resolution called Israeli settlement building in the occupied Palestinian territories in the West Bank a "flagrant violation" of international law and a major obstacle to peace. She condemned the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions (BDS) movement targeting Israel. Pelosi has voiced heavy criticism over Israel's plan to annex parts of the West Bank and the Jordan Valley. She said Israeli annexation would undermine U.S. national security interests. Pelosi said that Democrats are taking "a great pride" in Barack Obama’s Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that Israel signed with the Obama administration in 2016, for a guarantee of $38 billion in defense assistance over a decade. On January 28, 2024, Pelosi suggested that some pro-Palestinian protesters calling for a ceasefire in the Israel–Hamas war could be connected to Russia and called on the FBI to investigate the possible connection. Nancy Pelosi is one of the few members of Congress to have traveled to North Korea. She has expressed concern about the danger of nuclear proliferation from the North Korean regime, and the ongoing problems of hunger and oppression imposed by that country's leadership. In August 2017, following Trump's warning that North Korea "will be met with fire and fury like the world has never seen" in the event of further threats to the United States, Pelosi said the comments were "recklessly belligerent and demonstrate a grave lack of appreciation for the severity of the North Korean nuclear situation. His saber-rattling and provocative, impulsive rhetoric erode our credibility." In November 2017, after the Pentagon sent a letter to lawmakers stating a ground invasion was the only way to destroy all North Korea's nuclear weapons without concern for having missed any, Pelosi said she was concerned about Pyongyang's selling nuclear technology to third parties and called for the United States to "exhaust every other remedy". In June 2018, after Trump praised North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, Pelosi said in a statement, "In his haste to reach an agreement, President Trump elevated North Korea to the level of the United States while preserving the regime's status quo." In December 2017, Pelosi wrote a letter to Speaker Paul Ryan advocating for the continued House investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election on the grounds that Americans deserved "a comprehensive and fair investigation into Russia's attack" and "America's democracy and national security" being at stake. Pelosi cited the need for Congress to "fully investigate Russia's assault on our election systems to prevent future foreign attacks". In February 2018, after the release of a Republican report alleging surveillance abuses by the Justice Department, Pelosi accused Trump of siding with Russian president Vladimir Putin at the expense of preserving intelligence sources and methods. In July, Pelosi asserted that Trump was afraid to mention the 12 indictments against people connected to the intelligence community in Russia during his meeting with Putin and questioned what intelligence the Russians had on Trump to cause his behavior. She said Putin would not be welcomed by Congress even if he visited Washington as a result of his actions: "Putin's ongoing attacks on our elections and on Western democracies and his illegal actions in Crimea and the rest of Ukraine deserve the fierce, unanimous condemnation of the international community, not a VIP ticket to our nation's capital." She called for House Speaker Ryan to "make clear that there is not — and never will be — an invitation for a thug like Putin to address the United States Congress." On multiple occasions, Pelosi said of Trump, "With him, all roads lead to Putin," including with regard to the Trump-Ukraine scandal, a lack of action against the alleged Russian bounty program, and Trump's incitement of the January 6 United States Capitol attack. Pelosi supports the Syria Accountability Act and Iran Freedom and Support Act. In a speech at the AIPAC 2005 annual conference, Pelosi said that "for too long, leaders from both parties haven't done enough" to put pressure on Russia and China who are providing Iran with technological information on nuclear issues and missiles. "If evidence of participation by other nations in Iran's nuclear program is discovered, I will insist that the Administration use, rather than ignore, the evidence in determining how the U.S. deals with that nation or nations on other issues." In April 2007, Pelosi visited Syria, where she met Foreign Minister Walid Muallem, Vice President Farouk al-Sharaa and President Bashar Al-Assad, despite President Bush efforts to isolate Syria, because of militants crossing from Syria into Iraq, and supporting Hezbollah and Hamas. During her visit, she conveyed Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert message for peace, and toured in Al-Hamidiyah Souq, and the Umayyad Mosque. Pelosi supported the NATO-led military intervention in Libya in 2011. She also favored arming Syria's rebel fighters. In January 2019, Pelosi criticized President Trump's planned withdrawal of U.S. troops from Syria and Afghanistan. She called Trump's announcement a "Christmas gift to Vladimir Putin". In an October 2019 letter to Democratic caucus members, Pelosi wrote that both parties were condemning President Trump's deserting the US's "Kurdish allies in a foolish attempt to appease an authoritarian strongman" Recep Tayyip Erdoğan of Turkey and opined that the decision "poses a dire threat to regional security and stability, and sends a dangerous message to Iran and Russia, as well as our allies, that the United States is no longer a trusted partner". Later that month, she visited Jordan to discuss the Syrian situation with King Abdullah II. Afterwards, she went to Afghanistan, where she met President Ashraf Ghani and chief executive officer Abdullah Abdullah, and she was also briefed by U.S. diplomats on reconciliation efforts with the Taliban. In mid-October 2007, after the House Foreign Affairs Committee passed a resolution to label the 1915 killing of Armenians by Ottoman Turks as genocide, Pelosi pledged to bring the measure to a vote. The draft resolution prompted warnings from President Bush and fierce criticism from Turkey, with Turkey's Prime Minister saying that approval of the resolution would endanger U.S.–Turkey relations. After House support eroded, the measure's sponsors dropped their call for a vote, and in late October Pelosi agreed to set the matter aside. The resolution was passed during Pelosi's second term as Speaker. The House voted 405 to 11 in October 2019 to confirm the resolution. On April 30, 2022, Pelosi met with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Kyiv, to pledge U.S. support for Ukraine during the Russian invasion. Pelosi's only close race so far has been in the special election to succeed U.S. Representative Sala Burton after her death in February 1987. Pelosi defeated San Francisco Supervisor Harry Britt in the Democratic primary with 36 percent of the vote to his 32 percent, then Republican Harriet Ross by more than 2-to-1. Since then, Pelosi has enjoyed overwhelming support in her political career, collecting 76 and 77 percent of the vote in California's 5th congressional district 1988 and 1990. In 1992, after the redistricting from the 1990 census, Pelosi ran in California's 8th congressional district, which now covered the San Francisco area. She has continued to post landslide victories since, dropping beneath 80 percent of the vote only three times in general elections. After redistricting from the 2010 census, Pelosi ran in California's 12th congressional district, which she represented for the next decade. Due to the 2020 United States redistricting cycle from the 2020 census, Pelosi now represents California's 11th congressional district, which covers San Francisco. Nancy D'Alesandro met Paul Francis Pelosi while she was attending college. They married in Baltimore at the Cathedral of Mary Our Queen on September 7, 1963. They moved to New York after they wed, then moved to San Francisco in 1969, where Paul's brother Ronald Pelosi was a member of the City and County of San Francisco's Board of Supervisors. Nancy and Paul Pelosi have five children, including Christine and Alexandra, and nine grandchildren. Alexandra, a journalist, covered the Republican presidential campaigns in 2000 and made a film about the experience, Journeys with George. In 2007, Christine published a book, Campaign Boot Camp: Basic Training for Future Leaders. Pelosi resides in the Pacific Heights neighborhood of San Francisco. Her 2016 financial disclosure report lists among her assets a combined home and vineyard in St. Helena, California, two commercial buildings in San Francisco, and a townhouse in Loomis, California. In January 2021, her San Francisco home was vandalized with graffiti, messages of "[c]ancel rent" were left on her garage, along with fake blood and a severed pig's head. In 2009, OpenSecrets estimated that Pelosi's net worth was approximately $58 million, making her the 13th-wealthiest member of Congress. In 2014, OpenSecrets reported Pelosi's net worth had almost doubled, to approximately $101 million, making her the 8th-wealthiest. Business Insider reported that Pelosi's net worth was $26.4 million in 2012 and made her the 13th-richest member of Congress. In 2014, Roll Call estimated that Pelosi's net worth was $29.35 million, making her the 15th-wealthiest member. Roll Call said Pelosi's earnings are connected to her husband's heavy investments in stocks that include Apple, Disney, Comcast and Facebook. Roll Call reported that the couple have $13.46 million in liabilities including mortgages on seven properties. According to Roll Call, Pelosi and her husband hold properties "worth at least $14.65 million, including a St. Helena vineyard in Napa Valley worth at least $5 million and commercial real estate in San Francisco". As of 2021, Pelosi's net worth was valued at $120 million, making her the 6th richest person in Congress. According to journalist Glenn Greenwald, the Pelosis have traded $33 million worth of tech stocks over the past two years, including Apple, Amazon, Microsoft, Facebook, and Google stocks. In May and June 2021, Pelosi's husband purchased stocks in tech companies such as Alphabet, Amazon, and Apple, netting a gain of $5.3 million. This occurred even while Speaker Pelosi was working on anti-trust legislation to better regulate the tech industry. The CEO of Apple, Tim Cook, had called Pelosi to lobby her in opposition to the new regulations. Pelosi opposes increasing regulations on stock trades by members of congress, stating that "we're a free market economy" and congresspeople "should be able to participate in that". This comment drew strong criticism, including from Democrats who favor banning stock trades by members of Congress. Pelosi is a board member of the National Organization of Italian American Women. She served for 13 years as a board member of the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF). In 2007, she received the NIAF Special Achievement Award for Public Advocacy and remains involved in the foundation. Pelosi considers herself a devout Catholic, but she has had numerous disagreements with members of the church hierarchy over gay rights, abortion, contraception, and in vitro fertilization. She has said that her biggest disappointment was the church's lobbying against the Affordable Care Act because of contraception coverage. Pelosi and Catholic bishops have also disagreed about abortion rights. Although she thought it was "lovely" that she had five children in a little over six years, she argued that "It's a woman's right to make her own choices with her family, her God, her doctor." On May 20, 2022, Salvatore Cordileone, archbishop of San Francisco, announced that Pelosi would be barred from receiving Holy Communion because of her support of pro-choice abortion policies. Cordileone had communicated his concerns on April 7, 2022, writing, "should you not publicly repudiate your advocacy for abortion 'rights' or else refrain from referring to your Catholic faith in public and receiving Holy Communion, I would have no choice but to make a declaration, in keeping with Canon 915, that you are not to be admitted to Holy Communion." On June 29, 2022, Pelosi received Communion at a Papal Mass presided over by Pope Francis in Rome at St. Peter's Basilica. In October 2022, while Pelosi was in Washington, D.C., an intruder entered her San Francisco home demanding to know her whereabouts, and attacked her husband, Paul Pelosi, with a hammer. Police arrested a suspect, 42-year-old David DePape, at the scene, who has been charged federally with attempting to kidnap Nancy Pelosi and assaulting a relative of a federal official, as well as six state charges. Electoral history of Nancy Pelosi Know Your Power List of female speakers of legislatures in the United States Women in the United States House of Representatives Eilperin, Juliet (October 11, 2001). "Democrats Pick Pelosi as House Whip". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved June 19, 2023. "CNN.com - Democrats pick Pelosi as House leader - Nov. 15, 2002". edition.cnn.com. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Branigin, William (January 4, 2007). "Pelosi Sworn in as First Woman Speaker of the House". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Cassie, Ron (January 4, 2019). "The Gavel Goes Back to Nancy D'Alesandro Pelosi of Little Italy". Baltimore Magazine. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved May 30, 2019. Ball, Molly (September 6, 2018). "Nancy Pelosi Doesn't Care What You Think of Her". Time. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2019. Stated on Finding Your Roots, January 12, 2021 Campbell, Colin (October 21, 2019). "The D'Alesandros: a Baltimore political powerhouse that gave us two mayors and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi". The Baltimore Sun. Retrieved October 22, 2019. Puzzanghera, Jim (November 14, 2002). "Pelosi's aim for center may steer pundits wrong". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on September 3, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2010. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (January 2, 2019). "Nancy Pelosi, Icon of Female Power, Will Reclaim Role as Speaker and Seal a Place in History". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019. Clymer, Adam (October 11, 2001). "A new vote counter—nancy patricia pelosi". The New York Times. Weisman, Jonathan; Romano, Lois (November 16, 2006). "Pelosi Splits Democrats With Push For Murtha". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2006. Marcovitz, Hal (2009). Nancy Pelosi: politician. Chelsea House Publishers. pp. 29–30. ISBN 9781438120423. McGreal, Chris (March 26, 2010). "Nancy Pelosi: is this the most powerful woman in US history?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2010. "Nancy Pelosi Fast Facts". CNN. March 21, 2019. Archived from the original on December 15, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2019. "Is this the new face of the Democratic Party?". The Nation. Archived from the original on June 6, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Democrat Elected in San Francisco". The New York Times. Associated Press. June 3, 1987. Archived from the original on February 9, 2010. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "It began in Baltimore: The life and times of Nancy Pelosi". San Francisco Chronicle. January 2, 2007. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Martin, Jonathan (September 7, 2023). "Inside Nancy Pelosi's Fight For San Francisco". POLITICO. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Epstein, Edward (October 20, 2006). "Campaign 2006: Eighth Congressional District / three challengers fight for Pelosi seat". San Francisco Chronicle. p. B-1. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2006. Quinn, Melissa; Killion, Nikole; Yilek, Caitlin (November 17, 2022). "Nancy Pelosi stepping aside as House Democratic leader, clearing the way for "new generation"". CBS News. Retrieved October 25, 2023. Calmes, Jackie (December 23, 2022). "Column: Nancy Pelosi's indelible mark". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Najjar, Ruqaiyah (November 17, 2022). "How Two Pandemics Define Pelosi's 35-Year Political Career". NowThis News. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "40 Years of AIDS in SF". University of California San Francisco. 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "Regional Dispute Delays AIDS Bill Until Final Day of the Session". library.cqpress.com. CQ Almanac Online Edition. 2006. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "To Pass S 557, Civil Rights Restoration Act, A Bill... – House Vote #506 – Mar 2, 1988". GovTrack.us. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2020. "To Pass, Over President Reagan's Veto, S 557, Civil Rights ... – House Vote #527 – Mar 22, 1988". GovTrack.us. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2020. Molotsky, Irvin (March 23, 1988). "House and Senate Vote to Override Reagan On Rrights". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 8, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2020. Eilperin, Juliet (October 11, 2001). "Democrats Pick Pelosi as House Whip; Top Rank Ever for Woman in Congress". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 15, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Draper, Robert (November 19, 2018). "Nancy Pelosi's Last Battle". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "Final vote results for roll call 455". Office of the Clerk. October 10, 2002. Archived from the original on January 15, 2004. Retrieved November 12, 2006. Mitchell, Alison; Hulse, Carl (October 10, 2002). "House Passes Iraq Resolution With 296 to 133 Vote". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2019. Pelosi, Nancy (October 10, 2002). "Pelosi: Unilateral Use of Force Will Be Harmful to the War on Terrorism" (Press release). House of Representatives. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. Hulse, Carl (November 15, 2002). "Pelosi Easily Wins Election for House Democratic Leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved August 31, 2022. Loughlin, Seth (November 15, 2002). "Democrats pick Pelosi as House leader". CNN. Romano, Lois (October 21, 2006). "The woman who would be speaker". NBC News. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Yglesias, Matthew (August 1, 2007). "The Underappreciated Pelosi". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Pelosi questions Bush's competence". CNN. May 31, 2004. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Billings, Erin P. (June 24, 2005). "Pelosi Sees '06 House Gains". Roll Call. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Sandalow, Marc (November 10, 2006). "Pelosi's determination makes her Democratic hero of '06". New Bedford Standard-Times. The San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Heated House Rejects GOP Iraq Plan - CBS News". CBS News. November 19, 2005. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Heated House Rejects GOP Iraq Plan - CBS News". CBS News. The Associated Press. November 19, 2005. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Pelosi joins troop withdrawal movement". The Worcester Telegram & Gazette. The Associated Press. December 1, 2005. "Pelosi to Make History as First Woman Speaker of the House". ABC News. November 8, 2006. Retrieved October 28, 2023. McCaskill, Nolan (November 2, 2022). "Leading up to attack, GOP and its allies spent $50 million on anti-Pelosi ads". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Polman, Dick (July 18, 2018). "Can the GOP Demonize Pelosi One More Time?". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Benenson, Bob (January 4, 2007). "Pelosi Officially Elected Speaker of the U.S. House". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved January 5, 2019. ABC News (November 8, 2006). "Pelosi to Make History as First Woman Speaker of the House". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2019. Eilperin, Juliet (November 8, 2006). "Nancy Pelosi Set to Be First Female Speaker". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2019. Hulse, Carl (November 17, 2006). "Pelosi Rebuffed Over Her Choice for Majority Leader". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2019. Hooper, Molly (November 16, 2006). "Hoyer Wins House Majority Leader Race, Giving Pelosi First Setback". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 19, 2006. Retrieved November 8, 2006. Ferraro, Thomas; Cowan, Richard (November 16, 2006). "CORRECTED—Democrats defy Pelosi, elect Hoyer House leader". Toronto Star. Reuters. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Walsh, Deirdre (January 4, 2007). "Pelosi becomes first woman House speaker". CNN. Archived from the original on January 6, 2007. Retrieved January 4, 2007. NowThis News (March 29, 2020). "Remember When: Nancy Pelosi Became First Woman Speaker of The House | NowThis". YouTube. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "Nancy Pelosi becomes first female Speaker of the House". History. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "Oath of Office | US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. Archived from the original on November 9, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2019. "Pelosi Sworn in as First Woman Speaker of the House". The Washington Post. January 4, 2007. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 22, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2019. Bush, George W. (January 23, 2007). "President Bush Delivers State of the Union Address". The White House. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved August 26, 2007. "Text of Nancy Pelosi's speech". January 4, 2007. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "GOP turns to familiar foil amid Trump woes: Pelosi". Politico. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved August 10, 2018. "Exclusive: Nancy Pelosi targeted in more than a third of GOP House commercials". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2018. Chaddock, Gail Russell (September 15, 2010). "Michael Steele's 'Fire Pelosi' bus tour: 48 states or bust". Christian Science Monitor. Donegan, Moira (November 18, 2022). "Nancy Pelosi, a hate figure to right and left, is a political virtuoso who defined her era". The Guardian. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Hulse, Carl (November 6, 2010). "Despite Losses, Nancy Pelosi Will Run for House Post". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Sainato, Michael (June 22, 2017). "Democrats Realize 2010 'Fire Nancy Pelosi' Campaign Has Been Working". Observer. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Condon, Stephanie (March 22, 2010). ""Fire Nancy Pelosi" Becomes GOP Slogan After Health Care Vote - CBS News". CBS News. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Codon, Stephanie (March 22, 2010). ""Fire Nancy Pelosi" Becomes GOP Slogan After Health Care Vote - CBS News". CBS News. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Parker, Ashley; Allam, Hannah; Sotomayor, Marianna (October 30, 2022). "Attack on Nancy Pelosi's husband follows years of GOP demonizing her". Washington Post. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Karni, Annie; Edmondson, Catie; Hulse, Carl (October 30, 2022). "Pelosi, Vilified by Republicans for Years, Is a Top Target of Threats". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Sandalow, Marc (November 5, 2004). "Bush claims mandate, sets 2nd-term goals". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Don't Mess With Pelosi". Time. August 27, 2006. Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved February 3, 2010. Babington, Charles (May 12, 2006). "Democrats Won't Try To Impeach President". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Sheehan considers challenge to Pelosi", by Angela K. Brown, Associated Press, July 8, 2007. Espo, David (October 6, 2006). "Pelosi Says She Would Drain GOP 'Swamp'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2013. ... As in the first 100 hours the House meets after Democrats—in her fondest wish—win control in the November 7 midterm elections and Pelosi takes the gavel as the first Madam Speaker in history. Pelosi, Nancy (November 7, 2006). "One Hundred Hours". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2013. Pelosi, Nancy; Reid, Harry (January 5, 2007). "Congressional Leaders Call on President to Reject Flawed Iraq Troop Surge". Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Democrats Announce 2008 Convention Chairs". February 20, 2008. Archived from the original on February 20, 2008. Retrieved February 3, 2010. Gautreaux, Ryan J. (Summer 2016). "Framing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act:A Content Analysis of Democratic and Republican Twitter Feeds". Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Bzdek, Vince (March 28, 2010). "Why it took a woman to fix health care". The Washington Post. Seabrook, Andrea (March 29, 2010). "Health Care Overhaul Boosts Pelosi's Clout". NPR. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2018. Sheryl Gay Strolberg, Jeff Zenley and Carl Hulse (March 20, 2010). "Health Vote Caps a Journey Back From the Brink". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2017. Brown, Carrie Budoff; Thrush, Glenn (March 20, 2010). "Nancy Pelosi steeled White House for health push". Politico. Draper, Robert (November 19, 2018). "Nancy Pelosi's Last Battle". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Pelosi [had to manage] intransigent House Republicans, reluctant Blue Dogs, liberals demanding nothing less than a single-payer system, skittish White House advisers and Senate Democrats willing to waste months in quixotic pursuit of bipartisan cover. … [She had to persuade progressives] that the "public option" hybrid of single-payer and privately managed health care plans was now dead on arrival in the Senate. Then she persuaded Representative Bart Stupak of Michigan, an anti-abortion Democrat, to drop his demand that the health care bill prohibit federal funds being used on abortion. When a host of other backstage deals with Blue Dogs — like reckoning with disparities among states in Medicare reimbursements — failed, Pelosi managed the fallout. Obamacare passed in the House by three votes. "I'd remind people: We would not have health care today were it not for Nancy Pelosi," [Former Wisconsin Congressman David] Obey said. "There were all kinds of people, both in our caucus and in the White House, who were willing to settle for one-tenth of a loaf. And she said, 'To hell with that. We were sent here to do more.' " McGreal, Chris (March 26, 2010). "Nancy Pelosi: is this the most powerful woman in US history?". The Guardian. Retrieved October 28, 2023. University, Catholic (November 4, 2010). "Experts Rank Pelosi Among Greatest House Speakers". The Catholic University of America. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Naylor, Brian. "Legislative Legacy Works To Pelosi's Detriment". NPR. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Bresnahan, John (November 3, 2010). "The rise and fall of Nancy Pelosi". Politico. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Beinart, Peter (March 16, 2018). "The Nancy Pelosi Problem". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Bowman, Quinn (November 17, 2010). "Pelosi Staves off Leadership Challenge, Elected Minority Leader, Boehner to Be House Speaker". The Rundown. PBS NewsHour. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2011. Boyle, John (November 18, 2010). "Heath Shuler challenge to Nancy Pelosi falls short". Asheville Citizen-Times. Retrieved November 23, 2010. "News & Observer: Shuler falls short, way short". News Observer. January 5, 2011. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved August 8, 2012. msnbc.com and NBC News (with contributions by NBC News' Luke Russert and Frank Thorp) (November 14, 2011). "Pelosi fires back at report on 'insider trading'". MSN Canada—News. MSN. Archived from the original on December 23, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2013. "Pelosi fires back at '60 Minutes' report on 'soft corruption'". CNN. November 14, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2013. Lochhead, Carolyn (November 15, 2011). "Pelosi aide calls '60 Minutes' report a 'smear'". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved October 9, 2013. "Pelosi Statement on Senate Passage of STOCK Act". Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi. February 2, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2013. "Pelosi Statement on Senate Passage of the STOCK Act". Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi. March 22, 2012. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013. Henneberger, Melinda (November 14, 2012). "The millions of reasons Nancy Pelosi decided to stay". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2013. "Pelosi bombarded with 'obscene and sick' calls, texts after cyber attack". USA Today. August 13, 2018. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "List of Democrats opposing Pelosi". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2018. "Rep. Tim Ryan announces challenge to Pelosi". CNN. November 17, 2016. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2016. "Pelosi promises more influence for junior Democrats". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. November 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Kane, Paul; O'Keefe, Ed (November 30, 2016). "Nancy Pelosi chosen again as House Democratic leader – but tally suggests deep division". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Walsh, Deirdre (June 23, 2017). "Democrats meet privately to mull ousting Pelosi". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2017. Scott, Eugene (June 22, 2017). "Dem rep on Pelosi: 'It's time for people to know when to go'". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2017. "Pelosi: 'So you want me to sing my praises?'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved June 24, 2017. "Pelosi convenes sexual harassment reform meeting". Politico. November 30, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Schumer, Pelosi ask Ryan to demote Nunes over memo". Politico. February 1, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Lillis, Mike (February 1, 2018). "Pelosi calls on Ryan to oust Nunes over 'bogus' memo". The Hill. Archived from the original on September 10, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2018. Daniella Diaz; Deirdre Walsh. "Pelosi marathon speech on DACA sets record". CNN. Retrieved February 8, 2018. "Nancy Pelosi told DREAMer stories for more than eight hours on the House floor". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved February 8, 2018. Sheryl Gay Stolberg (February 7, 2018). "Pelosi Held House Floor in Advocacy of 'Dreamers' for More Than Eight Hours". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2018. Sink, Justin (May 22, 2018). "White House bars Dems from Nunes meeting on probe". Detroit News. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2018. Lima, Cristiano (May 23, 2018). "Schumer, Pelosi: Include us in FBI informant briefing". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2018. "Pelosi calls for Hunter to resign". The Hill. August 21, 2018. Hayes, Christal (November 21, 2018). "Democrats won House midterms by largest margin since Watergate scandal, report says". USA Today. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Brufke, Juliegrace (May 23, 2020). "House Republicans voice optimism on winning back the House following special election victories". The Hill. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Johnson, Ted (November 28, 2018). "Democrats Nominate Nancy Pelosi as Next Speaker, but 32 Members Vote No". Variety. Archived from the original on December 21, 2019. Retrieved November 28, 2018. Bloomberg (January 3, 2019). "Democrats Elect Nancy Pelosi Speaker of the House". Fortune. Retrieved January 28, 2019. Samuels, Brett (February 4, 2020). "Pelosi rips up Trump speech at conclusion of State of the Union". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2020. Mansoor, Sanya (February 4, 2020). "Nancy Pelosi Ripped Up a Copy of Trump's State of the Union Address". Time. Retrieved February 4, 2020. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (February 5, 2020). "As White House Calls Pelosi's Speech-Ripping a 'Tantrum', She Feels 'Liberated'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2020. "Pelosi shreds Trump's speech. Right there on the podium". The Oklahoman. Associated Press. February 5, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2020. Dovere, Edward-Isaac (December 12, 2021). "Pelosi will stay around to lead House Democrats through the next election -- and perhaps beyond". CNN. Retrieved December 13, 2021. Haberkorn, Jennifer (September 1, 2022). "What the end of the Pelosi era could cost California". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 4, 2022. Breuninger, Kevin (November 16, 2022). "Republicans take control of the House, NBC News projects". CNBC. Retrieved November 16, 2022. "Nancy Pelosi stands down as leader of US House Democrats". BBC News. November 17, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Rogers, Alex; Grayer, Annie; Raju, Manu (November 17, 2022). "Nancy Pelosi announces she won't run for leadership post, marking the end of an era". CNN. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (January 20, 2019). "Republicans Push Trump Immigration Plan, Seeking to Corner Democrats on Shutdown". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 13, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Nancy Pelosi [@SpeakerPelosi] (January 23, 2019). "This afternoon, I sent @realDonaldTrump a letter informing him that the House will not consider a concurrent resolution authorizing the President's State of the Union address in the House Chamber until government has opened" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Collins, Kaitlan; Liptak, Kevin; Acosta, Jim; Phillip, Abby (January 24, 2019). "Trump says he won't give State of the Union during shutdown after being disinvited by Pelosi". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Cillizza, Chris (January 25, 2019). "Donald Trump caved. And now the government is going to re-open". CNN. Archived from the original on November 23, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Baker, Peter; Cochrane, Emily; Haberman, Maggie (February 14, 2019). "As Congress Passes Spending Bill, Trump Plans National Emergency to Build Border Wall". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2020. "Pelosi announces impeachment inquiry". BBC News. September 24, 2019. Rowland, Geoffrey (December 6, 2019). "The Hill's Morning Report – Pelosi makes it official: Trump will be impeached". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2019. Gregorian, Dareh (November 26, 2019). "House Judiciary Committee announces first impeachment hearing, invites Trump to attend". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 27, 2019. Retrieved November 27, 2019. Desiderio, Andrew; Cheney, Kyle; Caygle, Heather (December 10, 2019). "Democrats unveil 2 articles of impeachment against Trump". Politico. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved December 10, 2019. Fritze, John (December 18, 2019). "House impeaches Donald Trump in historic vote, reshuffling U.S. politics on eve of 2020". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Pecorin, Allison; Khan, Mariam (January 7, 2021). "Pelosi, Schumer call for Trump's immediate removal, threaten impeachment". ABC News. Retrieved January 14, 2021. "Nancy Pelosi's ultimatum: 25th Amendment or second Trump impeachment". MarketWatch. Associated Press. January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Singh (now), Maanvi; Greve, Joan E.; Belam (earlier), Martin; Strauss, Daniel; Beckett, Lois; Smith, David; Benwell, Max (January 14, 2021). "Donald Trump becomes the first US president to be impeached for a second time – as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Caygle, Heather; Ferris, Sarah (April 23, 2020). "House passes $484 billion relief package after weeks of partisan battles". Politico. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Nancy Pelosi seen without mask inside San Francisco hair salon". BBC News. September 2, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Mehta, Seema (September 3, 2020). "Nancy Pelosi says her visit to a hair salon was a 'setup.' Stylist backs her up". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Cillizza, Chris (November 8, 2021). "Nancy Pelosi is the most effective speaker ever | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Chervinsky, Lindsay M. (November 17, 2022). "Opinion | Nancy Pelosi steps down from her leadership role with a strong legacy". NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Budowsky, Brent (June 5, 2019). "Budowsky: Pelosi, a historically great Speaker". The Hill. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Kane, Paul (January 11, 2020). "Showdown over Trump impeachment trial underscores power of Pelosi and McConnell". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Green, Lloyd (April 24, 2021). "Madam Speaker review: how Nancy Pelosi bested Bush and Trump". The Guardian. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Analysis | Nancy Pelosi Is the Greatest Speaker in History". Washington Post. November 18, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Calmes, Jackie (November 18, 2022). "Column: Nancy Pelosi, the GOAT". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Ferris, Sarah (November 17, 2022). "Pelosi, first woman speaker, to depart Dem leadership in seismic shift". POLITICO. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Haduk, John (November 18, 2022). "The GOP should see Nancy Pelosi as a role model, not a villain". Brookings Institution. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Meyerson, Harold (November 17, 2022). "The Greatest-Ever Speaker of the House". The American Prospect. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Marcotte, Amanda (November 23, 2022). "Nancy Pelosi's historic run as speaker comes with a lesson: Quit while you're ahead". Salon. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Diaz, Daniella (December 2, 2022). "House Democrats pick Hakeem Jeffries to succeed Nancy Pelosi, the first Black lawmaker to lead a party in Congress". CNN. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Schnell, Mychael (December 1, 2022). "House panel votes to designate Pelosi 'Speaker Emerita'". The Hill. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Hulse, Carl (January 3, 2023). "The Pelosi Era Comes to a Close". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Stone, Andrea (November 9, 2006). "Pelosi to lead Congress". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2010. "Members". House Baltic Caucus. Archived from the original on February 21, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2018. Mehta, Seema (February 2, 2022). "California Reps. McCarthy, Pelosi, Porter and Schiff among nation's biggest fundraisers". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 25, 2023. Palmer, Anna; Bresnahan, John (September 9, 2014). "Pelosi the money juggernaut". Politico. Retrieved October 25, 2023. Suellentrop, Chris (November 13, 2002). "Nancy Pelosi: The leader the House Democrats deserve". Slate. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2013. Marans, Daniel (November 27, 2018). "The Progressive Caucus Has A Chance To Be More Influential Than Ever". HuffPost. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2019. "Pelosi: Reauthorization of Patriot Act a Massive Invasion of Privacy" (Press release). Office of Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi. December 14, 2005. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007. Retrieved July 31, 2007. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call 296: H J RES 10". House.gov. June 22, 2005. Archived from the original on October 26, 2010. Retrieved July 24, 2018. "Key Votes by Nancy Pelosi". The Washington Post. May 30, 2016. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Pelosi visits detention facility, says DHS secretary should resign". The Hill. June 18, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: GOP immigration bill is 'a compromise with the devil'". The Hill. July 21, 2018. Czachor, Emily (April 8, 2021). "Nancy Pelosi sparks backlash for saying border on a 'good path' as U.S. sees most unaccompanied minors ever". Newsweek. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Final Vote Results for Roll Call". Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Nancy Pelosi on Civil Rights". Retrieved February 3, 2010. Simon, Mark; Marinucci, Carla (February 2, 2004). "Top state Dems criticize S.F. mayor / TIGHTROPE: Politicians try not to anger voters—50% of Californians oppose same-sex unions". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "12 times Nancy Pelosi was there for LGBT community". Washington Blade. January 10, 2019. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2019. "Pelosi Statement on California State Supreme Court Ruling on Gay Marriage". House.gov. May 15, 2008. Archived from the original on August 2, 2008. Retrieved June 14, 2010. "Nancy Pelosi: My Catholic faith 'compels me' to support gay marriage". The Washington Post: On Faith. May 11, 2012. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. "House Debate on the Equality Act". C-SPAN. May 17, 2019. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2021. "Speaker Pelosi, we've been "in touch" about marijuana will you do something now". The NormlStash Blog. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Pelosi talks medical marijuana". February 1, 2009. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2010. Lee, Timothy (June 20, 2014). "The House just overwhelmingly voted to rein in the NSA". Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Steinhauer, Jennifer (June 25, 2015). "Search for Confederate Symbols Finds Them Aplenty in Washington". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved August 17, 2017. Scott, Eugene (August 17, 2017). "There are Confederate statues on Capitol Hill. Cory Booker has a bill that removes them". CNN. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "Torture battle escalating, Pelosi vs. Boehner". San Francisco Chronicle. April 23, 2009. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2020. "Hill Briefed on Waterboarding in 2002". The Washington Post. December 9, 2007. Kane, Paul (May 8, 2009). "Pelosi briefed in 2002 on interrogation tactics". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Pelosi: I Was Told Interrogation Methods Were Lawful". Fox News. May 8, 2009. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi insisted Friday that she was briefed only once about the "enhanced" interrogation techniques being used on terrorism suspects and that she was assured by lawyers with the CIA and the Department of Justice that the methods were legal. Warrick, Joby; Eggen, Dan (December 9, 2007). "Hill Briefed on Waterboarding in 2002". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2007. Warrick, Joby; Eggen, Dan (December 9, 2007). "Hill Briefed on Waterboarding in 2002". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 7, 2018. Retrieved October 6, 2013. In fairness, the environment was different then because we were closer to Sept. 11 and people were still in a panic," said one U.S. official present during the early briefings. "But there was no objecting, no hand-wringing. The attitude was, 'We don't care what you do to those guys as long as you get the information you need to protect the American people.' Mazzetti, Mark (December 10, 2007). "C.I.A. Official in Inquiry Called a 'Hero'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Open Letter from the Congress of the United States" (PDF). June 26, 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2009. Gorman, Siobhan (July 8, 2009). "Democrats Say Panetta Admits CIA Misled Them". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved July 8, 2009. Thrush, Glenn (April 23, 2009). "Pelosi briefed on waterboarding in '02". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2009. Thrush, Glenn (April 23, 2009). "Pelosi: I didn't know about use of waterboarding". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2009. "Balanced Budget Proposed Constitutional Amendment". Key Vote. Project Vote Smart. 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. "Shadegg Finds House Wage Hike A Bit Fishy". BizJournals.com. January 8, 2007. Retrieved January 14, 2007. "Fair Minimum Wage Act of 1999". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on September 2, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2007. "Left-Handed Compliment". Opinion Journal. Archived from the original on May 26, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2010. Lejeune, Tristan (December 4, 2017). "Pelosi denounces GOP tax reform as 'armageddon'". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 1, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2018. "To sell tax cuts during State of the Union, GOP group attacks Pelosi". The Washington Post. January 29, 2018. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2018. O'Keefe, Ed (March 1, 2018). "Nearly half of Americans agree with Nancy Pelosi's 'crumbs' comment, according to a poll by a pro-Trump group". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2018. "Pelosi's 'Crumbs' Comment in Context". FactCheck.org. February 2, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Sherman, Amy (January 30, 2018). "Donald Trump says tax bill led to bonuses for three million workers". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Rodrigo, Chris Mills (November 7, 2018). "Pelosi touts bipartisan potential of infrastructure". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2018. Nguyen, Tina (May 1, 2019). "HAIL SATAN: IT LOOKS LIKE INFRASTRUCTURE WEEK IS COMING EARLY THIS YEAR". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2019. Holland, Steve; Mason, Jeff; Cowan, Richard (May 22, 2019). "Trump torpedoes meeting with Democrats, blasts Pelosi's 'cover-up' accusation". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2019. Lillis, Mike (August 7, 2018). "Pelosi urges Trump to expand disaster relief for California wildfires". The Hill. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2018. "The Votes for Gun Control". The New York Times. June 19, 1999. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "H.R. 1 (107th): No Child Left Behind Act of 2001—House Vote #497—Dec 13, 2001". GovTrack.us. Archived from the original on August 15, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2019. "No Child Left Behind—The New Rules | Testing Our Schools". Frontline. PBS. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2019. "Education". Key Vote. Project Vote Smart. 2006. Archived from the original on December 4, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. Adragna, Anthony; Colman, Zack. "'The existential threat of our time': Pelosi elevates climate change on Day One". Politico. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2019. "Energy Issues". Key Vote. Project Vote Smart. 2006. Archived from the original on December 4, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. "Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Drilling Amendment". Key Vote. Project Vote Smart. 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. ""Pelosi: Drilling in Arctic Refuge Is Not the Way to Energy Independence", Congresswoman Nancy Polosi, pelosi.house.gov, May 25, 2006. Retrieved May 15, 2019". May 25, 2006. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2019. "Pelosi blocks offshore drilling vote GOP wants", San Francisco Chronicle, August 1, 2008, archived from the original on April 23, 2019, retrieved January 19, 2019 Molly Ball (May 2020). "How Nancy Pelosi saved the Affordable Care Act". Time Magazine. "Nancy Pelosi Heckled—Sarah Palin Promises November Vote". National Ledger. March 22, 2010. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved March 24, 2010. "Health Issues". Key Vote. Project Vote Smart. 2006. Archived from the original on December 4, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2006. Mascaro, Lisa. "Pelosi declines to endorse Sen. Bernie Sanders' single-payer healthcare bill". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2018. Min Kim, Seung. "Pelosi not endorsing Sanders' single-payer bill". Politico. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved September 12, 2017. "Pelosi says Democrats willing to deal on health-care fixes if GOP reaches out". USA Today. March 10, 2017. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Democrats will 'put a stake in the heart' of ObamaCare repeal after McCain opposition". The Hill. September 22, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Barrett, Rick (July 21, 2018). "Nancy Pelosi pushes for national health care plan during Milwaukee visit". jsonline.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Burke, Michael (November 11, 2018). "Pelosi says she'll be Speaker 'to protect the Affordable Care Act'". The Hill. "Representative Pelosi on Abortion Issues". January 3, 2008. Archived from the original on January 3, 2008. Retrieved February 3, 2010. "Archbishop: Pelosi comments on abortion are false". The Hill. August 25, 2008. Archived from the original on April 1, 2009. Retrieved May 24, 2019. Pelosi, Nancy (June 24, 2022). "Pelosi Statement on Supreme Court Overturning Roe v. Wade". Speaker Nancy Pelosi. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "'This Week' Transcript: Nancy Pelosi". ABC News. January 25, 2009. Archived from the original on October 15, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2020. Memoli, Michael A. (February 7, 2013). "Pelosi calls for 'boldest possible' gun legislation". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved February 12, 2013. "Nancy Pelosi". Project Vote Smart. Vote Smart. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2013. "Pelosi: Gun victims 'paying the price for our inaction'". The Hill. February 15, 2018. Archived from the original on April 24, 2019. Retrieved November 22, 2018. Bowden, John. "Pelosi: Americans 'deserve real action' on gun control after California shooting". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 21, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2018. "Pelosi says no to draft legislation". CNN Politics. November 21, 2006. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2006. Farooq, Sajid (March 12, 2009). "Nancy Pelosi Doesn't Fly Coach". WRC-TV. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2013. Miklaszewski, Jim (March 11, 2009). "Pentagon mum on Pelosi flights". MSNBC. Archived from the original on March 15, 2009. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Bycoffe, Aaron (January 30, 2017). "Tracking Congress In The Age Of Trump". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Kelley, Erin. "Nancy Pelosi: Trump 'needs sleep' and she's 'worried' about his fitness". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 22, 2020. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Impeaching Trump 'not someplace that I think we should go'". Politico. November 5, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Trump's 'performance' devoid of 'serious policy ideas'". The Hill. January 31, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Trump 'has something to hide'". The Hill. February 9, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Focus on Trump's agenda, not Stormy Daniels". The Hill. March 8, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Delk, Josh (April 13, 2018). "Pelosi: Libby pardon shows that 'obstructing justice will be rewarded' by Trump". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: Trump revoking Brennan's clearance a 'pathetic attempt to silence critics'". The Hill. August 15, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "'This has spiraled downward': Democrats introduce Trump to divided government". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 9, 2020. Retrieved December 12, 2018. Lynch, Suzanne. "Venezuelan crisis deepens as Trump backs opposition". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. Fandos, Nicholas (March 4, 2019). "With Sweeping Document Request, Democrats Launch Broad Trump Corruption Inquiry". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Savage, Charles (April 24, 2019). "Trump vows stonewall of 'all' House subpoenas, setting up fight over powers". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Rachael Bade & Mike DeBonis (December 5, 2019). "'The president gave us no choice': Pelosi resisted Trump's impeachment, now she's the public face". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Jennifer Haberkorn (December 18, 2019). "Pelosi once resisted impeachment; now it shapes her legacy". The Washington Post. Fandos, Nicholas (September 4, 2019). "Nancy Pelosi Announces Formal Impeachment Inquiry of Trump". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2019. Bade, Rachael (October 17, 2022). "The Legacy Nancy Pelosi Never Wanted". Politico. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Desiderio, Andrew; Cheney, Kyle (May 7, 2019). "Don McGahn won't comply with House Democrats' subpoena". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Kellman, Laurie (April 22, 2019). "Democrats subpoena former White House Counsel Don McGahn, but downplay Trump impeachment talk". Chicago Tribune. The Associated Press. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Fandos, Nicholas; Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S. (May 7, 2019). "Justice Dept. Threatens House Democrats Over Contempt in Barr Battle". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2022. ""'Every Day He's Obstructing Justice.' Pelosi Issues Impeachment Warning as White House Escalates Fight", by Shannon Pettypiece and Bloomberg via Fortune, May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019". Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2019. "Trump hits back at Democratic 'cover-up' claims". BBC News. May 22, 2019. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Baker, Peter; Rogers, Katie; Cochrane, Emily (May 22, 2019). "Trump, Angered by 'Phony' Inquiries, Blows Up Meeting With Pelosi and Schumer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 23, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Caygle, Heather (June 6, 2019). "Pelosi tells Dems she wants to see Trump 'in prison'". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Fandos, Nicholas; Shear, Michael D. (December 18, 2019). "Trump Impeached for Abuse of Power and Obstruction of Congress". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 18, 2019. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Heather Caygle & John Bresnahan (February 10, 2020). "Pelosi ends standoff with Senate Republicans over impeachment articles". Politico. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Jane C. Timm & Rebecca Shabad (January 15, 2020). "House sends impeachment articles to Senate, Pelosi names trial managers". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2020. "Trump Acquitted of Two Impeachment Charges in Near Party-Line Vote". The New York Times. February 5, 2020. Archived from the original on February 5, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Sheryl Gay Stolberg (February 3, 2020). "Pelosi Says Democrats Have 'Pulled Back a Veil' on Trump's 'Unacceptable' Behavior". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Coleman, Justine (February 5, 2020). "Pelosi rips McConnell as 'rogue leader' after Trump acquittal". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. "Pelosi Statement on Senate Impeachment Vote" (Press release). Office of the Speaker of the House. February 5, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Peter Baker (February 6, 2020). "Trump Hails Acquittal and Lashes Out at His 'Evil' and 'Corrupt' Opponents". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 6, 2020. Sheryl Gay Stolberg (February 4, 2020). "Trump and Pelosi Exchange Snubs at the State of the Union Address". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Sarah E. Croco & Jacob Silverman (February 5, 2020). "Trump didn't shake hands. Pelosi ripped up his speech. Do Americans care about civility?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Mansoor, Sanya (February 4, 2020). "Nancy Pelosi Ripped Up a Copy of Trump's State of the Union Address". Time. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2020. Segers, Grace (February 6, 2020). "Pelosi says Trump's State of the Union 'had no contact with reality whatsoever'". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Stolberg, Sheryl; Sullivan, Eileen (February 5, 2020). "As White House Calls Pelosi's Speech-Ripping a 'Tantrum', She Feels 'Liberated'". The New York Times. Retrieved February 5, 2020. "Pelosi shreds Trump's speech. Right there on the podium". The Oklahoman. Associated Press. February 5, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2020. "Nancy Pelosi: Trump impeachment witness Vindman's 'shameful' firing a 'brazen act of retaliation'". USA Today. February 8, 2020. Archived from the original on February 10, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Mascaro, Lisa, In 25th Amendment bid, Pelosi mulls Trump's fitness to serve Archived January 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press, October 9, 2020 Bycoffe, Anna Wiederkehr and Aaron (October 22, 2021). "Does Your Member Of Congress Vote With Or Against Biden?". Retrieved October 31, 2021. Lampton, David M. (2024). Living U.S.-China Relations: From Cold War to Cold War. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-5381-8725-8. Pelosi has landed in Taiwan. Here's why that's a big deal Greene, David L. (April 8, 1999). "Pelosi still fighting for human rights progress in China; Congresswoman delivers biting message to Clinton as he readies to meet Zhu". The Baltimore Sun. Retrieved July 14, 2021. "Pelosi calls on nations to protest China's hold on Tibet". CNN. March 20, 2008. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Pelosi, Nancy (October 24, 2008). "Pelosi Statement on Chinese Human Rights Activist Hu Jia Receiving Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought" (Press release). United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original on October 30, 2008. Retrieved January 19, 2019. "Pelosi backs China currency bill". United Press International. September 22, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Cheung, Karen (August 18, 2017). "US Democratic leader says Occupy activists' sentencing should 'shock the conscience of the world'". Hong Kong Free Press. Retrieved December 20, 2018. "Pelosi Letter to President Trump: Raise Human Rights in China During President Xi's U.S. Visit". Nancy Pelosi. April 6, 2017. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Pelosi, Nancy (August 14, 2017). "Pelosi Statement on China Trade Investigation Memo". Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Pelosi: You Can Almost Hear Leadership Of Chinese Government Laughing At Trump". Real Clear Politics. November 9, 2017. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. "Democrats target Trump on trade". The Washington Post. September 2, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2018. "China accuses Pelosi of "interference" as battle rages to control narrative on Hong Kong". CBS News. September 20, 2019. Archived from the original on October 15, 2019. Retrieved November 8, 2019. "2022 Olympics: Nancy Pelosi urges athletes against protesting to avoid 'anger of the Chinese government'". sports.yahoo.com. February 4, 2022. "US Plane Believed To Be Carrying Nancy Pelosi Lands In Taiwan - Live Updates". NDTV.com. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Nancy Pelosi's Expected Taiwan Visit Raises U.S.-China Tensions: Live Updates". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Pelosi-Taiwan Live Updates: House Speaker Arrives in Taiwan in Defiance of China". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Mason, Jeff; Martina, Michael (August 1, 2022). "White House: U.S. will not be intimidated by China; Pelosi has right to visit Taiwan". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 4, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Nancy Pelosi's plan to visit Taiwan prompts outrage from China". Financial Times. Archived from the original on August 4, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Pelosi: China cannot isolate Taiwan by preventing visits". AP News. "Senate Republicans Use Biden's Reasoning in Rare Defense of Nancy Pelosi". MSN. August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2022. "McConnell and 25 Senate Republicans issue rare statement of support for Pelosi as she visits Taiwan in defiance of China's threats". news.yahoo.com. August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2022. "House Speaker Nancy Pelosi says the U.S. will not abandon Taiwan as China protests". NPR. August 3, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Teh, Cheryl. "Nancy Pelosi calls Taiwan one of the 'freest societies in the world' during visit to the island". Business Insider. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Ukman, Jason (May 5, 2007). "Colombian President Defends His Government". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2007. "Pelosi, Hoyer, Rangel, and Levin Statement on Trade". Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Neill, Morgan (April 28, 2008). "Raul Castro pushes change for Cubans". CNN. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved June 25, 2017. Miroff, Nick (February 10, 2015). "In Havana, Pelosi delegation promotes Obama's Cuba thaw". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 15, 2018. Retrieved June 25, 2017. Pelosi, Nancy; Bloom, Saul (1994). Hidden Casualties: Environmental, Health and Political Consequences of the Persian Gulf War. North Atlantic Books. ISBN 978-1-55643-163-0. "House Passes Resolution Opposing Bush's Plan to Send More Troops to Iraq". Fox News. February 16, 2007. Archived from the original on October 8, 2009. Retrieved June 14, 2010. H.J.Res.14: Concerning the use of military force by the United States against Iran "Jones Introduces Resolution Requiring Congressional Approval Prior to Use of Military Force Against Iran" (Press release). January 12, 2007. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Davis, Susan (July 30, 2015). "Pelosi says Iran deal 'a diplomatic masterpiece'". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 13, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2018. "House votes to toughen Iran sanctions". The Hill. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2018. "Dems hammer Trump over withdrawal from Iran deal". May 8, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2018. McCormick, E. (January 15, 2006). "SAN FRANCISCO / Anti-war activists take Pelosi to task / Minority leader negotiates with lawmakers to her right". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved August 5, 2013. Mai-Duc, Christine (April 26, 2017). "Nancy Pelosi just got a challenger and he's a 'pretty hard-core' Bernie Sanders supporter". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2019. "Pelosi Delivers Speech to American Israel Public Affairs Committee". democraticleader.house.gov. 2005. Archived from the original on February 2, 2006. Retrieved January 4, 2007. "Trump's actions on Jerusalem come with Democratic support". San Francisco Chronicle. December 7, 2017. "Pelosi Floor Statement on House Resolution Reaffirming Support for Israel". News West 9. July 19, 2006. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2013. "Two speakers toast to U.S.–Israel friendship". JTA. September 18, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2013. "Pelosi and Trump Are Both pro-Israel, but the Leading Democrat Is Not pro-Netanyahu". Haaretz. Israel. November 28, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "U.S. House Democrats depart for Israel trip". The Jerusalem Post. March 25, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2018. "Ilhan Omar Condemned by Pelosi, Democratic Leaders for Using 'Anti-Semitic Tropes'". The Daily Beast. February 11, 2019. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2020. "Ilhan Omar Takes Swipe at Nancy Pelosi for Condemning BDS at AIPAC". Haaretz. March 27, 2019. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2019. "House votes to rebuke UN on Israeli settlement resolution". The Hill. January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2019. "AAI Thanks 80 Representatives For Standing Against Illegal Israeli Settlements". Arab American Institute. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2019. "Omar hits back at Pelosi over BDS remarks". The Hill. March 26, 2019. "Israeli annexation will 'undermine US national security interests' – Pelosi". The Jerusalem Post. June 6, 2020. "Pelosi Wants F.B.I. to Investigate Pro-Palestinian Protesters". The New York Times. January 28, 2024. "Democrats Won't Back Farm Bill, Leader Pelosi Says". C-SPAN. Archived from the original on October 25, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2021. "Transcript of Pelosi Press Conference Today—Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi". speaker.gov. July 13, 2017. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Top Democrats Knock Trump for 'Fire and Fury' Threat Against North Korea". The Weekly Standard. August 9, 2017. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2018. "Pelosi: Must 'exhaust' diplomatic options on North Korea". CNN. November 5, 2017. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2018. "Dems rip Trump concessions, 'embarrassing' rhetoric with Kim". The Hill. June 12, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2018. Manchester, Julia. "Pelosi demands GOP continue Russia probe". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2018. "Pelosi: Nunes memo is a 'bouquet' for Putin". The Hill. February 2, 2018. "Pelosi: 'The Russians have something on the president'". The Hill. July 16, 2018. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "Pelosi: 'Thug' Putin not welcome in Congress". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2018. "'All roads lead to Putin': Impeachment ties Ukraine, Russia". Associated Press. December 6, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Dugyala, Rishika. "Pelosi on Trump: 'With him, all roads lead to Putin'". Politico. Retrieved March 12, 2021. "Did Hillary Clinton Suggest Trump Spoke to Putin During Capitol Riot?". Snopes.com. January 19, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2021. "Nancy Pelosi: Israel, don't fear Dems in Congress". Ynetnews. 2006. Retrieved January 4, 2007. "Pelosi shrugs off Bush's criticism, meets Assad". NBC News. April 4, 2007. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Seth Sherwood (June 24, 2007). "The Road Back to Damascus". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. "As One Syria Trip Draws Fire, Others Draw Silence". The New York Times. April 7, 2007. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Nancy Pelosi Stands by Obama on Libya". San Francisco Chronicle. March 23, 2011. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "Who to Blame If Arming the Syrian Rebels Goes Wrong". The Atlantic. September 18, 2014. Archived from the original on May 12, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Keating, Joshua (December 21, 2018). "Are Democrats Hypocrites for Criticizing Trump's Troop Withdrawals?". Slate. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2019. Brufke, Juliegrace (October 8, 2019). "Pelosi accuses Trump of deserting Kurds in 'foolish attempt to appease an authoritarian strongman'". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 19, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019. "Pelosi in Jordan for 'vital discussions' amid Syria crisis". Arab News. October 20, 2019. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "U.S. House speaker Pelosi makes unannounced visit to Afghanistan". Reuters. October 21, 2019. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "US House Speaker: Armenian Genocide Measure Will Go Forward". Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved October 11, 2007. "Turkey's PM says U.S. relations in danger". Reuters. October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved October 12, 2007. Walsh, Diedre (October 25, 2007). "Vote on Armenian 'genocide' resolution put off". CNN. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2007. Edmondson, Catie; Gladstone, Rick (October 29, 2019). "House Passes Resolution Recognizing Armenian Genocide". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2019. "Pelosi, Congressional Delegation Statement on Visit to Kyiv, Ukraine". speaker.gov. May 1, 2022. Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Ward, Alexander; Desiderio, Andrew; Ferris, Sarah (May 1, 2022). "Pelosi concludes secret visit to Ukraine". Politico. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Lindsey, Robert (April 9, 1987). "House race in west goes to runoff". The New York Times. Accessed via LexisNexis. "Nancy Pelosi Wins House Seat". The Washington Post. June 3, 1987. Accessed via LexisNexis. "California 11th Congressional District Primary Election Results". The New York Times. June 21, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "Pelosi: Remarks at Georgetown University School of Foreign Commencement". House.gov. May 18, 2002. Archived from the original on August 4, 2008. Retrieved June 14, 2010. McManus, Margaret (February 4, 1995). "Baltimore-bred lawmaker lives, breathes politics". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on December 3, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2011. "Board of Supervisors: Past Supervisors". City and County of San Francisco. Archived from the original on November 14, 2008. Retrieved November 19, 2008. @ABCPolitics (January 11, 2019). "Speaker Nancy Pelosi: "I'm the mother of five, grandmother of nine. I know a temper tantrum when I see one."" (Tweet). Retrieved January 19, 2019 – via Twitter. Whiting, Sam (February 3, 2008). "Christine Pelosi's boot camp trains future politicians to avoid the campaign minefield". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved October 24, 2008. Evon, Dan (February 16, 2018). "Is This a Wall Around Nancy Pelosi's Home?". Snopes. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018. Retrieved June 24, 2018. McKinley, Jesse (March 13, 2007). "Home in San Francisco, Pelosi Gets the Crawford Treatment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "Financial Disclosure Report, Hon. Nancy Pelosi" (PDF). Office of the Clerk, United States House of Representatives. May 15, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Nielsen, Katie (January 1, 2021). "Nancy Pelosi's San Francisco Home Vandalized With Graffiti, Severed Pig's Head". KPIX-TV. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Rawnsley, Adam (January 1, 2021). "Vandals Trash Pelosi's Garage With Pig Head, Stimulus Demand". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2021. "Net Worth, 2009". OpenSecrets. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2017. "Net Worth, 2014". OpenSecrets. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Hickey, Walter (August 23, 2012). "The 15 Richest Members Of Congress". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2017. "Wealth of Congress Index". Roll Call. 2014. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2017. "How Rich Is Nancy Pelosi?". finance.yahoo.com. July 22, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. "Nancy Pelosi's husband makes $5.3 million on timely bets". Fortune. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Schnell, Mychael (June 23, 2021). "Tim Cook called Pelosi to say tech antitrust bills were rushed". The Hill. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Dan Mangan (December 15, 2021). "House Speaker Nancy Pelosi opposes banning Congress members from owning individual stocks: 'We're a free market economy'". NBC News. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Christina Marcos (December 21, 2021). "Pelosi faces pushback over stock trade defense". The Hill. Retrieved January 11, 2022. "Board Members". National Organization of Italian American Women. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2013. Distinguished Board Member Shaw, Adam (May 20, 2022). "San Francisco archbishop bars Pelosi from receiving Holy Communion due to abortion support". Fox News. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Cordileone, Salvatore (May 19, 2022). "Full Text: Archbishop Cordileone's Letter to Nancy Pelosi Banning Her From Holy Communion". Retrieved May 20, 2022. Winfield, Nicole (June 29, 2022). "Pelosi receives Communion in Vatican amid abortion debate". AP News. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Brito, Christopher (June 29, 2022). "Nancy Pelosi takes Communion in Vatican despite her support of abortion rights". CBS News. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Thrush, Glenn; Browning, Kellen; Vander Ploeg, Luke (October 31, 2022). "Intruder Wanted to Break Speaker Pelosi's Kneecaps, Federal Complaint Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 1, 2022. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Bzdek, Vincent (2008). Woman of the house: the rise of Nancy Pelosi (1st ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9780230610873. Dabbous, Yasmine; Ladley, Amy (June 2010). "A spine of steel and a heart of gold: newspaper coverage of the first female Speaker of the House". Journal of Gender Studies. 19 (2): 181–194. doi:10.1080/09589231003695971. S2CID 145462188. McElroy, Lisa Tucker (2007). Nancy Pelosi: first woman Speaker of the House. Lerner. ISBN 9781580136280. Pelosi, Nancy; Hearth, Amy Hill (2008). Know your power: a message to America's daughters (1st ed.). Doubleday. ISBN 9780385525862. Peters, Ronald M. Jr.; Rosenthal, Cindy Simon (April 16, 2010). Speaker Nancy Pelosi and the new American politics. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199750764. Povich, Elaine S. (2008). Nancy Pelosi: a biography. Greenwood Press. ISBN 9780313345708. Rafter, Dan (2015). Female Force: Nancy Pelosi. StormFront Entertainment. ISBN 9781311355287. Sandalow, Marc (2008). Madam speaker: Nancy Pelosi's life, times, and rise to power. Modern Times. ISBN 9781594868078. Shichtman, Sandra H. (2007). Political profiles: Nancy Pelosi. Morgan Reynolds Pub. ISBN 9781599350493. Schweizer, Rochelle (2010). She's the boss: the disturbing truth about Nancy Pelosi. Penguin. ISBN 9781101443514. Ball, Molly (2020). Pelosi. New York: Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-1-250-25286-9. OCLC 1119760070. Page, Susan (2021). Madam Speaker : Nancy Pelosi and the lessons of power. New York: Twelve. ISBN 978-1-5387-5069-8. OCLC 1245231617. Nancy Pelosi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi official U.S. House website Nancy Pelosi for Congress campaign website Appearances on C-SPAN Nancy Pelosi at Curlie Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress Profile at Vote Smart Nancy Pelosi Archived June 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Video produced by Makers: Women Who Make America "Trinity Graduates Win Re-election: House Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi '62 Poised to Become Speaker, Kansas Governor Kathleen Sebelius '70 Wins Second Term", Trinity Washington University, November 8, 2006 "Rolling With Pelosi", Newsweek, October 23, 2006 "Pelosi mines 'California gold' for Dems nationwide: Personal skills, wide network of wealthy donors help party's House leader gather millions", San Francisco Chronicle, April 3, 2006 "Pelosi rides high", The Economist, February 22, 2007 "This Is What a Speaker Looks Like", Winter 2007 cover story, Ms. "Opinion | How Nancy Pelosi's unlikely rise turned her into the most powerful woman in U.S. history: A troublemaker with a gavel", by Karen Tumulty, The Washington Post, March 25, 2020