Jeremy Shu-How Lin (born August 23, 1988) is a Taiwanese-American professional basketball player for the New Taipei Kings of the P. League+ (PLG). He unexpectedly led a winning turnaround with the New York Knicks of the National Basketball Association (NBA) during the 2011–12 season, sparking a cultural phenomenon known as "Linsanity". Lin was the first American of Chinese or Taiwanese descent to play in the NBA, and is one of the few Asian Americans to have played in the league. He is the first Asian American player to win an NBA championship, having done so with the Toronto Raptors in 2019. Lin grew up in the San Francisco Bay Area and earned Northern California Basketball Player of the Year honors as a senior in high school. After receiving no athletic scholarship offers, he attended Harvard University, where he was a three-time all-conference player in the Ivy League. Undrafted out of college, Lin signed with his hometown Golden State Warriors in 2010. He seldom played in his rookie season and received assignments to the NBA Development League (D-League). In 2011, Lin was waived by both the Warriors and the Houston Rockets before joining the New York Knicks early in 2011–12. At first, Lin played sparingly for the Knicks, and he again spent time in the D-League. In February 2012, however, he was promoted to the starting lineup and led the team on a seven-game winning streak. Lin's stellar play during the season helped the Knicks make the 2012 playoffs; it also catapulted him to international fame. Lin appeared on the covers of Sports Illustrated and Time and was named to the Time 100 as one of the most influential people in the world. In July 2012, Lin won the ESPY Award for Breakthrough Athlete of the Year. Following his Knicks tenure, Lin played for the Houston Rockets, Los Angeles Lakers, Charlotte Hornets, Brooklyn Nets, Atlanta Hawks, and Toronto Raptors. While he experienced some success in Houston and Charlotte, he battled injuries in the ensuing seasons. In August 2019, he left the NBA and signed with the Beijing Ducks, where he became an All-Star in the Chinese Basketball Association (CBA). Attempting to return to the NBA, Lin played with the Warriors' development team in 2021. He returned to the CBA and played with the Ducks and later the Guangzhou Loong Lions. He left the Loong Lions midseason in 2022–23 and joined PLG's Steelers in 2023. Lin was born in Torrance, California, on August 23, 1988. He was raised in a Christian family in the Bay Area city of Palo Alto, California. His parents, Gie-ming Lin and Shirley Lin (née Xinxin Wu), emigrated from Taiwan to the United States in the mid-1970s, first settling in Virginia before moving to Indiana, where they both attended universities to study engineering and computer science. They are dual nationals of Taiwan and the U.S. Lin's paternal family are Hoklo people from Beidou, Changhua, Taiwan, while his maternal grandmother emigrated to Taiwan in the late 1940s from Pinghu, Zhejiang in mainland China. Lin's parents are both 5 feet 6 inches (1.68 m) tall. His maternal grandmother's family was tall, and her father was over 6 feet 0 inches (1.83 m). Lin has an older brother, Josh, and a younger brother, Joseph. Gie-Ming taught his sons to play basketball at the local YMCA. Shirley helped form a National Junior Basketball program in Palo Alto where Lin played. She worked with coaches to ensure his playing did not affect his academic performance. She was criticized by her friends for letting Lin play so much basketball, but let him play the game he enjoyed. During his senior year in 2005–06, Lin captained Palo Alto High School to a 32–1 record and upset the nationally ranked Mater Dei, 51–47, for the California Interscholastic Federation Division II state title. He was named first-team All-State and Northern California Division II Player of the Year, and ended his senior year averaging 15.1 points, 7.1 assists, 6.2 rebounds, and 5.0 steals. Lin sent his résumé and a DVD of highlights of his high school basketball career to all of the Ivy League schools; the University of California, Berkeley; and his dream schools, Stanford University and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). The Pac-10 (now Pac-12) schools wanted him to walk on rather than be actively recruited or offered an athletic scholarship. Harvard and Brown were the only teams that guaranteed him a spot on their teams, but Ivy League schools do not offer sports scholarships. University of San Francisco men's basketball coach and retired NBA player Rex Walters said NCAA limits on coaches' recruiting visits had reduced Lin's chances: "Most colleges start recruiting a guy in the first five minutes they see him because he runs really fast, jumps really high, does the quick, easy thing to evaluate". Harvard assistant coach Bill Holden was initially unimpressed with Lin's on-court abilities and told Lin's high school basketball coach, Peter Diepenbrock, that Lin was a "Division III player". Later Holden saw Lin playing in a much more competitive game, driving to the basket at every opportunity with the "instincts of a killer", and he became Harvard's top recruit. Its coaches feared that Stanford—across the street from his high school—would offer Lin a scholarship, but it did not, and Lin chose to attend Harvard. Golden State Warriors owner and Stanford booster Joe Lacob said Stanford's failure to recruit Lin "was really stupid. The kid was right across the street. [If] you can't recognize that, you've got a problem". Kerry Keating, a UCLA assistant who had offered Lin the opportunity to walk on, said in hindsight that Lin would probably have become a starting point guard for UCLA. A Harvard coach remembered Lin in his freshman season as "the [physically] weakest guy on the team", but in his sophomore season (2007–08), Lin averaged 12.6 points and was named to the All-Ivy League Second Team. By his junior year during the 2008–09 season, he was the only NCAA Division I men's basketball player ranked in the top ten in his conference for scoring (17.8), rebounding (5.5), assists (4.3), steals (2.4), blocked shots (0.6), field goal percentage (0.502), free throw percentage (0.744), and three-point shot percentage (0.400), and was a consensus selection for the All-Ivy League First Team. He had 27 points, 6 rebounds, and 8 assists in an 82–70 win over the 17th-ranked Boston College Eagles, three days after the Eagles defeated No. 1 North Carolina. In his senior year (2009–10), Lin averaged 16.4 points, 4.4 rebounds, 4.5 assists, 2.4 steals, and 1.1 blocks, and was again a unanimous selection for the All-Ivy League First Team. He was one of 30 midseason candidates for the John R. Wooden Award and one of 11 finalists for the Bob Cousy Award. He was also invited to the Portsmouth Invitational Tournament. Fran Fraschilla of ESPN named Lin one of the 12 most versatile players in college basketball. Lin gained national attention for his performance against the 12th-ranked Connecticut Huskies, when he scored a career-high 30 points and grabbed 9 rebounds on the road. After the game, Hall of Fame Connecticut coach Jim Calhoun said of Lin: "I've seen a lot of teams come through here, and he could play for any of them. He's got great, great composure on the court. He knows how to play." For the season, Harvard set numerous program records including wins (21), non-conference wins (11), home wins (11) and road/neutral wins (10). Lin finished his career as the first player in the history of the Ivy League to record at least 1,450 points (1,483), 450 rebounds (487), 400 assists (406) and 200 steals (225). He graduated from Harvard in 2010 with a degree in economics and a 3.1 grade-point average. To his disappointment, no team chose Lin in the 2010 NBA draft. Scouts saw what The New York Times later described as "a smart passer with a flawed jump shot and a thin frame, who might not have the strength and athleticism to defend, create his own shot or finish at the rim in the NBA." Lin joined the Dallas Mavericks for mini-camp as well as their NBA Summer League team in Las Vegas. Donnie Nelson of the Mavericks was the only general manager who offered him an invitation to play in the Summer League. "Donnie took care of me," said Lin. "He has a different type of vision than most people do." In five Summer League games, while playing both guard positions, Lin averaged 9.8 points, 3.2 rebounds, and 1.8 assists in 18.6 minutes per game and shot a team-leading 54.5% from the floor. Following the Summer League, he received offers from the Mavericks, Los Angeles Lakers, Golden State Warriors, and an unnamed Eastern Conference team. On July 21, 2010, Lin signed a two-year deal with his hometown Warriors. Lin's deal was partially guaranteed for the 2010–11 NBA season, and the Warriors held a team option for the second season. Lin also signed a three-year guaranteed contract with Nike. The Warriors held a press conference for Lin after his signing, with national media in attendance. "It was surprising to see that ... for an undrafted rookie," said then-Warriors coach Keith Smart. The San Jose Mercury News wrote that Lin "had something of a cult following" after his signing. The San Francisco Bay Area, with its large Asian-American population, celebrated his arrival. He became the first American of Chinese or Taiwanese descent to play in the NBA. Lin was appreciative of the support he received from fans, especially from the Asian-American community, but he preferred to concentrate on his play. Lin received little playing time during the season because two dominant ball-handling guards, Stephen Curry and Monta Ellis, starred for the Warriors. Lin started the regular season on the Warriors' inactive list, but made his NBA debut the next game during the Warriors' Asian Heritage Night. He received a standing ovation when he entered the game in the final minutes. In the next game against the Los Angeles Lakers, Lin scored his first NBA basket, had three assists, and recorded four steals. He played 11 of his 16 minutes in the third quarter and committed five fouls but played a role in a 12–1 run by the Warriors in a 107–83 loss to the defending NBA champions. At Toronto on November 8, the Raptors held Asian Heritage Night to coincide with Lin's visit with the Warriors. Over 20 members of Toronto's Chinese media covered the game. Three times during the season, Lin was assigned to the Warriors' D-League affiliate, the Reno Bighorns. Each time, he was later recalled by the Warriors. He competed in the NBA D-League Showcase and was named to the All-NBA D-League Showcase First Team on January 14, 2011. In 20 games, he averaged 18 points, 5.8 rebounds and 4.4 assists with Reno. The Warriors saw Lin as a potential backup for Curry. Lacob said the team received more than one trade offer for Lin while he was in the D-League, adding: "He's a minimum, inexpensive asset. You need to look at him as a developing asset. Is he going to be a superstar? No." He finished his rookie NBA season averaging 2.6 points on 38.9 percent shooting in 29 games. Lin recovered from a patellar ligament injury to his knee during the 2011 NBA lockout. In September 2011, Lin played a few games for the Chinese Basketball Association (CBA) club Dongguan Leopards at the ABA Club Championship in Guangzhou, China, where he was named the MVP of the tournament. Lin worked to improve his jump shot during the offseason by abandoning the shooting form he had used since the eighth grade. He also increased his strength, doubling the weight he could squat (from 110 pounds (50 kg) to 231 pounds (105 kg)) and almost tripling the number of pull-ups that he could do (from 12 to 30). He increased his body weight from 200 pounds (91 kg) to 212 (96)—including 15 pounds (6.8 kg) of muscle—added 3.5 inches (8.9 cm) to his standing vertical jump and 6 inches (15 cm) to his running vertical jump, and improved his lateral quickness by 32 percent. Due to the lockout, he never got a chance to work out for new Warriors coach Mark Jackson. On the first day of training camp on December 9, 2011, the Warriors waived Lin to free up salary cap space to make an offer to restricted free agent center DeAndre Jordan; Lin was due to make almost $800,000 that would have become fully guaranteed on February 10, 2012. Lin was claimed off of waivers by the Houston Rockets on December 12, 2011 and played seven minutes in two pre-season games in Houston. Houston already had point guards Kyle Lowry, Goran Dragić and Jonny Flynn, and all three had guaranteed contracts. The Rockets waived Lin on December 24, before the start of the season, to clear payroll to sign center Samuel Dalembert. The New York Knicks waived point guard Chauncey Billups for cap space to sign center Tyson Chandler. On December 27, after an injury to guard Iman Shumpert, the team claimed Lin off of waivers to be a backup behind Toney Douglas and Mike Bibby. Recently signed guard Baron Davis had also been injured, and was weeks away from being able to play. Because of the lockout, coaches had little opportunity to see Lin's play, and placed him fourth on the point guard depth chart. Lin stated that he was "competing for a backup spot", adding that people saw him "as the 12th to 15th guy on the roster"; he continued to arrive first at practice and leave last, intensely studied game film, and worked with coaches to improve his footwork and judgment. Lin made his season debut with the Knicks on the road against the Warriors, where he was cheered in his return to Oracle Arena. In January, Lin was assigned to the Erie BayHawks of the D-League, and on January 20, he scored a triple-double with 28 points, 11 rebounds, and 12 assists in the BayHawks' 122–113 victory over the Maine Red Claws. Three days later, Lin was recalled by the Knicks, but was so fearful of being cut again that he asked a chaplain at a pregame prayer service to pray for him. On January 28, Davis postponed his Knicks debut due to an elbow infection and back pain. Contemplating signing another player, the Knicks were considering releasing Lin. However, after New York squandered a fourth quarter lead in a February 3 loss to the Boston Celtics, coach Mike D'Antoni—in desperation, according to experts—decided to give Lin a chance to play. "He got lucky because we were playing so bad", said the coach; three point guards had failed to run D'Antoni's offense, and fans demanded the team fire him. Lin had played only 55 minutes through the Knicks' first 23 games, and the team had lost 11 of its last 13 games; however, he unexpectedly led a Knicks resurgence. On February 4, against the New Jersey Nets and All-Star guard Deron Williams, Lin had 25 points, five rebounds, and seven assists—all career highs—in a 99–92 Knicks victory. Teammate Carmelo Anthony suggested to D'Antoni at halftime that Lin should play more in the second half. After the game, D'Antoni said Lin had a point-guard mentality and "a rhyme and a reason for what he is doing out there". In the subsequent game against the Utah Jazz, Lin made his first career start, playing without stars Anthony (who left the game due to injury) and Amar'e Stoudemire (whose older brother had died). Upon Lin's promotion to the starting lineup, the Knicks went on a seven-game winning streak. Lin had 28 points and eight assists in the Knicks' 99–88 win. Stoudemire and Anthony missed the next three and seven games, respectively. D'Antoni stated after the Jazz game that he intended to ride Lin—still not in the media guide—"like freakin' Secretariat". Players playing that well don't usually come out of nowhere. It seems like they come out of nowhere, but if you can go back and take a look, his skill level was probably there from the beginning. It probably just went unnoticed. —Kobe Bryant, after Lin scored 38 points on February 10, 2012. In a 107–93 win over the Washington Wizards, Lin played against John Wall and had 23 points and 10 assists, his first double-double. On February 10, Lin scored a new career-high 38 points and had seven assists, leading the Knicks in their 92–85 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers. He outscored the Lakers' Kobe Bryant, who had 34 points. The New York Times wondered if Lin was "the Knicks' grandest stroke of fortune" since drafting Patrick Ewing in the 1985 NBA draft. On February 11, Lin scored 20 points and had eight assists in a narrow 100–98 victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves, making a go-ahead free throw with 4.9 seconds left in the game. Lin was named the Eastern Conference Player of the Week after averaging 27.3 points, 8.3 assists and 2.0 steals in four starts; the Knicks went undefeated during those four games. On February 14, with less than a second remaining in the game, Lin made a game-winning three-pointer in the Knicks' 90–87 win over Toronto. The basket was so amazing to the Lakers watching on television that veteran player Metta World Peace ran past reporters shouting "Linsanity! Linsanity!" and waving his hands above his head. Lin became the first NBA player to score at least 20 points and have seven assists in each of his first five starts. Lin scored a total of 89, 109, and 136 points in his first three, four, and five career starts, respectively; all three totals are the most by any player since the merger between the American Basketball Association (ABA) and the NBA in 1976–77. In the following game against the Sacramento Kings, Lin recorded 13 assists and led the Knicks back to a .500 record with a 100–85 win. The team's seven-game winning streak ended in an 89–85 loss to the New Orleans Hornets; Lin scored 26 points, but had nine turnovers. His 45 turnovers in his first seven career starts were the most since individual turnovers began being tracked in 1977–78. On February 19, in a 104–97 win against the Mavericks, Lin scored 28 points and tallied career highs with 14 assists and five steals. USA Today wrote: "No matter what Dallas threw at Lin – double-teams, traps, blitzes, tall defenders ... smaller defenders ... stocky, thin – Lin found a way ... to a victory against the defending NBA champions". He did not do as well against the Miami Heat, shooting one for 11 from the field and committing eight turnovers. LeBron James, Dwyane Wade, Chris Bosh, and the rest of the eventual NBA champions focused their entire defense on Lin, an experience he described as "flattering—and terrifying ... I felt like they were all like hawks circling me and staring". The craze surrounding Lin's sudden ascendancy became known as "Linsanity". In his 12 starts before the All-Star break, Lin averaged 22.5 points and 8.7 assists per game, and New York had a 9–3 record. He played in the Rising Stars Challenge during NBA All-Star Weekend. He was omitted from the original Rising Stars roster, but was added after his sudden ascent to stardom. Some media outlets—including USA Today, Los Angeles Times, and CBSSports.com—stated that he deserved to play in the All-Star Game. In March, the Knicks replaced D'Antoni with coach Mike Woodson, who ran fewer pick-and rolls and more isolation plays. Lin had excelled at running pick-and-rolls under D'Antoni. After a March 24 game against the Detroit Pistons, Lin complained about a sore knee, and an MRI later revealed a small meniscus tear in the left knee. Lin opted to have knee surgery and missed the remainder of the regular season. He averaged 18.5 points and 7.6 assists during his 26 games as an everyday player; during that period, the team went 16–10. The Knicks finished the season with a 36–30 record and earned the seventh seed in the Eastern Conference playoffs. Without the injured Lin, they were defeated by the eventual NBA champion Miami Heat in the first round of the playoffs in five games. Lin finished sixth in voting for the NBA Most Improved Player Award. Lin became a restricted free agent at the end of the season. The New York Times called Lin "[the Knicks'] most popular player in a decade" and asserted that he had saved the team's season. However, his success over only 26 games left teams uncertain about his overall standing among the league's point guards; some still believed Lin was a bench player. In July 2016, former Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni recalled that some players on the Knicks resented Lin during the Linsanity period, an account corroborated by Lin's former Knicks teammate Amar'e Stoudemire. During the 2012 offseason, the Knicks encouraged Lin to seek other offers, but he and the press expected that the team would re-sign him given its need for a young guard, his good play, and worldwide popularity; ESPN reported that the Knicks would match any other offer "up to $1 billion". The Rockets offered a $28.8 million contract over four years with the fourth year of that deal being at the team's option, which put the true commitment at $19.5 million. Woodson said the Knicks would match Houston's offer and that Lin would be his starting point guard. The Rockets then offered a revised three-year, $25 million deal, which Anthony called "ridiculous". The Knicks did not match the deal, and Lin deduced the team's decision when they signed Raymond Felton instead. The first two years of Houston's offer paid $5 million and $5.225 million, respectively, followed by $14.8 million in the third year. The higher salary in the final year, known as a "poison pill", was intended to discourage New York from matching the offer. Their failure to match the offer surprised observers, given the team's history of high payrolls; Lin would have been the fourth-highest-paid Knick. The Rockets made Lin the center of both their preseason "A New Age" publicity campaign as well as their initial ads on Comcast SportsNet Houston. Coming off his "Linsanity" performance in New York, Houston coach Kevin McHale said the expectations of Lin were undue. McHale said the public believed Lin would "average 28 [points] and 11 [assists]", but he had never played a whole 82-game season before. Shortly before their regular-season opener in October, the Rockets acquired James Harden, who supplanted Lin as the face of the team. Harden was a ball-dominant, pick-and-roll player like Lin, and McHale chose to have the offense run through the more-proven Harden. Lin struggled at the beginning of the season and began losing playing time to backup Toney Douglas. With Harden sitting out due to injury on December 10, Lin scored 38 points in a 134–126 overtime loss to the San Antonio Spurs. The performance was reminiscent of his play during Linsanity. Numbers through the season suggested that Harden and Lin were more productive individually with the other on the bench. "I'll be my harshest critic but I'll go ahead and say it: I'm doing terrible," Lin said before facing the Knicks in his first game back in New York. On December 17, Houston defeated the Knicks 109–96, handing the Knicks their first home loss in 11 games. Lin had 22 points and nine assists. He was cheered in pregame introductions, but was booed after the game began. Lin did not play in the 2013 All-Star Game, held in Houston, after finishing third behind Bryant and Chris Paul in the voting for guards of the Western Conference. He was selected instead to compete in the Skills Challenge during All-Star Weekend. His scoring, shooting percentage, and 3-point percentage improved after the All-Star break, and in February 2013, The New York Times reported that he was "fitting in well" with the Rockets. Lin finished the season with averages of 13.4 points and 6.1 assists per game. Houston qualified for the playoffs, but lost in the first round in six games to the No. 1 seed Oklahoma City Thunder. Lin suffered a bruised chest in Game 2, which limited him in Game 3 and sidelined him for the two games after. He returned for the final game, coming off the bench for three points in 13 minutes. In 2013–14, Lin was replaced in the Rockets' starting lineup by Patrick Beverley. Lin became the second unit's primary ball handler and scoring option as the team's sixth man. In November, Lin established the highest two-game scoring total of his career, 65 points, including season-highs of 34 points and 11 assists along with a Rockets record-tying nine three-pointers in a start in place of an injured Harden. Lin followed this with a 21-point performance in a win at New York. On November 27, Lin sprained his right knee against the Atlanta Hawks; he missed six games with the injury. He missed four additional games in December due to back spasms. On February 1, 2014, Lin recorded 15 points, 11 rebounds and 10 assists—his first career triple-double—in 29 minutes off the bench in a 106–92 home victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers. However, he went into a shooting slump after the All-Star break, and again experienced problems with his back. Lin finished the season with 33 starts and averages of 12.5 points and 4.1 assists per game along with career highs in field goal percentage (44.6%), three-point percentage (35.8%), and free throw percentage (82.3%). In the playoffs, Lin averaged 11.3 points off the bench as Houston lost in six games to the Portland Trail Blazers. He scored 21 points in a Game Five win that extended the Rockets' season. During the offseason, the Rockets pursued Lin's former Knicks teammate Carmelo Anthony in free agency and showed images outside of its arena of Anthony in a Houston jersey bearing Lin's No. 7. On July 13, 2014, Lin was traded, along with a first-round draft pick and a second-round draft pick, to the Los Angeles Lakers in exchange for the rights to Serhiy Lishchuk. The Rockets made the move to clear cap space in their attempt to sign free agent Chris Bosh. Lin shot a career-high 36.9 percent on his three-pointers during the season, but his role was undefined with the Lakers, who were just 21–61 in his only season with the team. Lin moved into the starting lineup late in the preseason after an injury to Ronnie Price, and he started the first 20 games of the season. However, he struggled in coach Byron Scott's offense, which was based on the methodical player and ball movement of the Princeton offense. Lin was most comfortable dominating the ball while attacking off the pick-and-roll as he did in New York and Houston. After the team's poor 5–15 start, Scott attempted to improve the Lakers' poor defense by moving Lin to the bench in favor of the journeyman Price. Lin was disappointed in the demotion, calling it "one of the toughest situations I've been in". On January 23, 2015, Scott promoted rookie Jordan Clarkson to start over Price and chose not to play a healthy Lin in a blowout loss to San Antonio. Lin had previously played in each game of the season, averaging 10.5 points and 4.5 assists in 43 games. It was the first time he was healthy and did not play since February 2, 2012, two days before he logged then-career highs against New Jersey at the dawn of Linsanity. After Lin scored a season-high 29 on March 22 in a win over Philadelphia, Scott returned him to the starting lineup. On March 24, Lin and teammate Clarkson, who is part Filipino, became the first Asian Americans to start together in the backcourt in NBA history. Lin missed the last five games of the season due to an upper respiratory infection. On July 9, 2015, Lin signed a two-year, $4.3 million contract with the Charlotte Hornets, who used their bi-annual exception in the deal. He had been open to re-joining New York, but they were not interested, having drafted guard Jerian Grant to pair with veteran José Calderón at point guard. Lin was projected to back up Hornets point guard Kemba Walker, and coach Steve Clifford envisioned that the two pick-and-roll players would sometimes play together. Lin made his debut for the Hornets in the team's season opener against the Miami Heat on October 28, scoring 17 points off the bench in a 104–94 loss. On December 17, he scored a season-high 35 points in a 109–99 overtime win over the Toronto Raptors. On March 21, 2016, he scored 15 of his 29 points in the fourth quarter, including the go-ahead jumper with 48 seconds remaining, to help Charlotte rally from a 30–7 deficit in the second quarter for a 91–88 comeback victory over San Antonio. Lin's only season with the Hornets came to an end after they were defeated in seven games by the Heat in the first round of the playoffs. He finished seventh in voting for the NBA Sixth Man of the Year Award. After declining his $2.2 million player option for the 2016–17 season, Lin became an unrestricted free agent on July 1, 2016. On July 7, 2016, Lin signed a three-year, $36 million contract with the Brooklyn Nets. The Nets were led by head coach Kenny Atkinson, who was an assistant with the Knicks during Linsanity. Lin made his debut for the Nets in their season opener on October 26, 2016, in an away game against the Boston Celtics. In 27 minutes as a starter, he scored 18 points in a 122–117 loss. Two days later, he recorded a near triple-double with 21 points, nine rebounds, and nine assists in a 103–94 home-opener win over the Indiana Pacers. On December 12, 2016, he returned to action for Brooklyn for the first time since November 2, when he had suffered a strained left hamstring. He played 20 minutes off the bench and scored 10 points in a 122–118 loss to the Houston Rockets. On February 24, 2017, Lin was back in the starting lineup for the Nets after missing 26 games with his hamstring strain. He played just under 15 minutes and scored seven points with five assists in a 129–109 loss to the Denver Nuggets. On April 6, 2017, he scored a season-high 32 points in a 115–107 loss to the Orlando Magic. He ended the injury-plagued season with a total of only 36 games played, averaging 14.5 points and 5.1 assists per game. On October 18, 2017, during the Nets' season opener against the Indiana Pacers, Lin was injured when he landed awkwardly following a layup. He suffered a ruptured patellar tendon in his right knee and missed the remainder of the season. On July 13, 2018, Lin was traded to the Atlanta Hawks, along with draft picks, in exchange for the draft rights to Isaia Cordinier and a future second-round pick. The Hawks acquired him to be a mentor for rookie point guard Trae Young, who was the No. 5 overall pick in the draft. On February 11, 2019, the Hawks waived Lin after finalizing a buyout. After clearing waivers, Lin signed with the Toronto Raptors on February 13, 2019, joining a playoff contender. The Raptors were expecting backup point guard Fred VanVleet to be out with an injury for three weeks and had recently traded guard Delon Wright. Lin struggled with the Raptors, averaging 7 points and 2.2 assists. During the playoffs, he was limited to playing in garbage time as the Raptors relied on Kyle Lowry and VanVleet. In June, Lin acknowledged that his 2017 patellar tendon injury continued to limit his athleticism and affect his ability to drive to the basket. Toronto advanced to the NBA Finals, winning the series in six games over Lin's former team, Golden State. In the first NBA Finals held outside of the United States, Lin became the first Asian American to win an NBA title. He played a total of 27 minutes in the playoffs, becoming the first East Asian American as well as the first Harvard graduate to play in an NBA Finals. Lin became a free agent on July 1. Later that month, in a motivational speech on Taiwanese Christian media outlet GOOD TV, he lamented the fact that he remained unsigned. Lin likened his situation to hitting "rock bottom", adding that he felt as if the NBA had "kind of given up" on him. Teams were uncertain about whether Lin remained mobile enough to play the point guard position. On August 27, 2019, Lin signed with the Beijing Ducks of the CBA for a reported $3 million per year. He also had offers to play in Russia, Israel, and the EuroLeague. The Ducks scheduled for Lin to sit out the month of January in an arrangement agreed upon before the season with their other overseas players, Ekpe Udoh and Justin Hamilton. In his regular season debut on November 3, Lin led the Ducks to a 103–81 win over the Tianjin Gold Lions with 25 points, nine assists, and six rebounds. He was named a starter for the North in the CBA All-Star Game after receiving the most votes on his squad and the second most overall behind the South's Yi Jianlian. Lin scored a game-high 41 points in the contest, which the South won 167–166. On February 1, 2020, the CBA postponed the season due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the season did not resume until late June. Lin ended the season with averages of 22.3 points, 5.7 rebounds, and 5.6 assists, and he was a finalist for the CBA Defensive Player of the Year award. Beijing was eliminated in the semifinals of the playoffs to the Guangdong Southern Tigers, who went on to repeat as league champions. During the offseason, Lin sought a return to the NBA. His original team, Golden State, wanted to add him to their G League (formerly D-League) affiliate, the Santa Cruz Warriors. Golden State planned to sign and release him on December 19, 2020, to secure his G League rights for Santa Cruz, but they were unable to obtain a clearance letter from the Ducks, partly because FIBA's offices were closed on the weekends. However, the NBA later passed a new rule, allowing NBA teams to designate one five-year NBA veteran to fill a spot on their G League team. This allowed Golden State to secure Lin without more complicated and costlier roster moves. On January 9, 2021, Santa Cruz announced that Lin had been added to their team for the 2020–21 season through the new NBA veteran exception rule, which some G League observers dubbed the "Jeremy Lin rule". He played in nine games, averaging 19.8 points and 6.4 assists per game while shooting 50.5 percent from the field and 42.6 percent on 3-pointers. On June 11, 2021, Lin announced that he was returning to the Beijing Ducks in the CBA. After returning to China from San Francisco, he was hospitalized in Shanghai in September after he contracted COVID-19. He lost 20 pounds (9.1 kg) while he was in isolation. He struggled when he returned to play, saying he felt "very tired—like I couldn't breathe". Lin signed with the Guangzhou Loong Lions for the 2022–23 season. On December 2, 2022, amid protests in China over its COVID-19 controls, the CBA announced that it had fined him 10,000 yuan ($1,400) for "inappropriate remarks about quarantine hotel-related facilities". On December 29, he announced that he had left the team for the season. He played in seven games for Guangzhou, averaging 11.6 minutes, 6.9 points, 2.3 rebounds, and 2.1 assists per game. On January 26, 2023, Lin signed with the Kaohsiung 17LIVE Steelers of the P. League+, where his brother, Joseph, was playing with the New Taipei Kings. On April 23, 2023, Lin became the first player in Taiwan's PLG history to record a 50-point triple-double. His final stat line included 50 points, 11 assists, and 10 rebounds. On September 19, 2023, Lin signed with the New Taipei Kings of the P. League+, joining his brother Joseph on the team. In addition to being a U.S. citizen, Lin was by descent through his parents a national of Taiwan; he qualified for a Taiwan passport, though he did not initially obtain one. In June 2011, the Chinese Taipei Basketball Association (CTBA) president Ting Shou-chung considered Lin would be included in the Chinese Taipei (Taiwan) national team's preliminary squad of 24 players for the 2011 FIBA Asia Championship, the preliminary roster of 24 players would be finalized in mid-July. In July 2011, CTBA president Ting Shou-chung said Lin was rehabilitating due to a knee injury and the Golden State Warriors medical team advised Lin not to participate in competitions. Lin was named to the USA Basketball Men's Select Team to scrimmage against the 2012 U.S. Olympic team candidates, but he did not participate due to his restricted free agent status with the Knicks. In August 2020, he obtained a Taiwan passport. Apart from being a capable passer, Lin established himself as a strong, fast-paced offensive player who attacks the basket and excels at the pick-and-roll. He improved his outside shooting during his career and became a threat from three-point range. He has been considered difficult to defend because of his ability to draw fouls. An admitted risk taker, Lin has been criticized for his tendency to commit turnovers and his perceived lack of effectiveness on defense. Following his star turn for the Knicks in 2012, Lin battled inconsistency and injuries. During his basketball career, Lin has encountered racial slurs relating to his Asian ancestry. In the sixth grade, he faced racist comments when he started playing more competitive basketball and journeying outside of the Bay Area. While playing for Harvard, he regularly heard bigoted jeers such as "Wonton soup", "Sweet and sour pork", "Open your eyes!", "Go back to China", "Orchestra is on the other side of campus", or pseudo-Chinese gibberish. According to Harvard teammate Oliver McNally, a fellow Ivy League player once called Lin the ethnic slur "chink". On February 10, 2012, in the middle of a Knicks-Lakers game in which Lin scored 38 points, Fox Sports columnist Jason Whitlock posted the following on Twitter regarding Lin's sexual prowess: "Some lucky lady in NYC is gonna feel a couple inches of pain tonight". Hyphen wrote that Whitlock had "reinforced the insipid and insidious 'small Asian penis' stereotype". The Asian American Journalists Association demanded an apology. "I debased a feel-good sports moment. For that, I'm truly sorry," apologized Whitlock. Also in February 2012, boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr. wrote on his Twitter page, "Jeremy Lin is a good player but all the hype is because he's Asian. Black players do what he does every night and don't get the same praise." In response to Mayweather, NBC New York noted that "no one of any skin color in the history of basketball has done in their first four starts what Lin pulled off for the Knicks last week." On February 17, 2012, ESPN used a racial slur in relation to Lin. After Lin had nine turnovers in a loss to the Hornets, ESPN posted a headline that read, "Chink in the Armor". The headline was removed 35 minutes later, and ESPN apologized. The ESPN editor who wrote the headline said it had no racial meaning, but was fired. Lin later reached out to the editor and met with him for lunch, and Lin told him he did not think the headline was meant to be racially charged. Knicks radio announcer Spero Dedes also used the phrase on 1050 ESPN New York. On November 14, 2013, ESPN SportsCenter anchor Jorge Andres apologized on-air after commenting that Lin "was cooking with some hot peanut oil" after Lin's 21-point performance helped Houston to a win over the Knicks. I know a lot of people say I'm 'deceptively athletic' and 'deceptively quick', and I'm not sure what's deceptive. But it could be the fact that I'm Asian-American. But I think that's fine. It's something that I embrace, and it gives me a chip on my shoulder. But I'm very proud to be Asian-American and I love it. —Jeremy Lin, during 2012 All-Star Weekend interview There has been speculation that Lin's career has been adversely affected by stereotypes about the athletic prowess of Asian-Americans. In 2009, Sean Gregory of Time wrote the following in regard to Lin not having received Division I basketball scholarship offers: "[Lin] was scrawny, but don't doubt that a little racial profiling, intentional or otherwise, contributed to his underrecruitment." In 2008, Lin said: "I'm not saying top-5 state automatically gets you offers, but I do think [my ethnicity] did affect the way coaches recruited me. I think if I were a different race, I would've been treated differently." During Lin's college career, fewer than 0.5% of men's Division 1 basketball players were Asian-American. Peter Diepenbrock, Lin's high school basketball coach, stated in 2012 that he did not think Lin's race affected his recruiting until later seeing 10 Division I coaches express interest in a black student who Diepenbrock assessed as "a nice junior college player". Based on comments that his talents were "deceptive", Lin stated in a 2013 60 Minutes interview that he had a "gut feeling" that his ethnicity contributed to his being undrafted. NBA commissioner David Stern also believed Lin was not drafted due to discrimination. "I don't know whether he was discriminated against because he was at Harvard. Or because he was Asian," said Stern in 2013. Some fans and commentators wrote off his Warriors signing as a publicity stunt. Larry Riley, the team's general manager, denied catering to the Bay Area's large Asian population. He understood that some people would see it that way. "We evaluated him throughout summer league," Riley said. "All that had to happen was for him to confirm what we already believed." While the team created a campaign around him, Riley said it would not have been advisable if Lin was not a basketball player first. Former player and coach Rex Walters, a fellow Asian American, added, "People who don't think stereotypes exist are crazy. If [Lin's] white, he's either a good shooter or heady. If he's Asian, he's good at math. We're not taking him." Lin's experience in the NBA draft was used as an example in the nonfiction psychology book The Undoing Project by Michael Lewis, which details how stereotypes can overwhelmingly influence a person's decision making, even in the face of contradictory evidence. In the book, Houston Rockets general manager Daryl Morey stated that Lin did very well in pre-draft testing. "He lit up our [statistical] model," said Morey. "Our model said take him with, like, the 15th pick in the draft." A year after the Rockets failed to draft Lin, they began to measure the speed of a player's first two steps; Lin had the quickest first move of any player measured, and he was able to change direction far more quickly than most NBA players. "He's incredibly athletic," said Morey. "But the reality is that every fucking person, including me, thought he was unathletic. And I can't think of any reason for it other than he was Asian." The first time Lin went to a Pro-Am game in Kezar Pavilion in San Francisco, a security guard told him: "Sorry, sir, there's no volleyball here tonight. It's basketball." Early in his stint with the Knicks, a security guard at Madison Square Garden stopped Lin from entering the players' entrance, mistaking him as a trainer. After signing with the Hornets, the five-year NBA veteran had to convince security at Charlotte's Time Warner Cable Arena that he was a player. In a 2015 interview with Pablo S. Torre in ESPN The Magazine, Lin expressed the belief that perceptions of Asians had affected his reputation as a player who was turnover-prone or unable to use both hands, despite statistics that suggested he had improved in both areas. He also noted his reputation as a poor defender who lacked speed, while D'Antoni stated that Lin "was one of the quickest athletes we've ever worked out". Lin also opined that his performance with the Knicks may have gained excessive publicity due to his ethnicity. "People just aren't used to seeing Asians do certain things, so it creates a very polarizing effect," Lin stated. In 2015, Lin said, "I feel like Asians in general don't get the respect that we may deserve whether it comes to sports, basketball, or whatever it might be". Reflecting on the subject of race after he returned to the New York City area in 2016 to play for the Brooklyn Nets, Lin stated, "In some ways, Linsanity wouldn't have been Linsanity if I was a different skin color, most likely, it wouldn't have been as big of a deal, and that went to my advantage, too, but if you look prior to that, a lot of the obstacles to even get to that point where I could get to a position of getting on the floor, those were definitely obstacles that were very much stereotypes that I had to fight along the way. So I've always understood that there's good and there's bad and you have to take them together and just be thankful for it all." J. A. Adande of ESPN.com wrote that heightened ethnic sensitivity toward Asian Americans was "another way [Lin's] impact resonates far beyond Madison Square Garden". The AAJA released a set of guidelines to the media in response to what it termed as "factual inaccuracies about Lin's background as well as an alarming number of references that rely on stereotypes about Asians or Asian Americans". Lin has a popular YouTube account, and has made videos with YouTube personalities Nigahiga and KevJumba. Lin and former Knicks teammate Landry Fields appeared on the channel revealing their "secret handshake". In 2014, Lin became a content partner with Whistle Sports Network, adding his YouTube channel with roughly 400,000 subscribers in exchange for an undisclosed equity stake. He was the first athlete from one of the four major sports leagues in the United States to produce content for the digital sports platform. In a video interview conducted by Elie Seckbach, he asked Lin how it felt to be representing so many people. Lin responded by stating, "It's humbling, a privilege, and an honor. I'm really proud of being Chinese, I'm really proud of my parents being from Taiwan. I just thank God for the opportunity." In July 2011, the overseas Chinese Vivid Magazine named Lin one of its top eight influential Chinese-Americans. In April 2012, Lin was named to the Time 100 as one of the most influential people in the world. On June 18, 2012, NBA TV announced that Lin was the first-ever winner of the "Social Breakout Player of the Year" Award. He was also the winner of "The EPIC Award". In July 2012, Lin won the ESPY Award for Breakthrough Athlete of the Year. The New York Times wrote: "Jeremy Lin has given Asian-Americans a popular sports figure to relate to". Bleacher Report called Lin an "American icon", explained: "To the rest of the world, Jeremy Lin may be that Asian basketball player from Harvard who was really famous for two weeks or an average NBA point guard who has bounced around from team to team. But for Asian-Americans, Jeremy Lin is our Brad Pitt, our second-most famous person in the world". In 2014, Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax figure of his likeness at its San Francisco branch. In 2016, Lin starred in an episode of the Comedy Central series Viralocity, playing a heightened version of himself. On May 26, 2021, Jeremy Lin addressed the graduating class of Harvard College as their Class Day speaker. After he became a starter for the Knicks, the Associated Press called Lin "the most surprising story in the NBA". Bloomberg News wrote that Lin "has already become the most famous [Asian American NBA player]". Knicks fans developed nicknames for him along with a new lexicon inspired by his name, Lin. Most popular was the word Linsanity, the excitement over the unheralded Lin. Time.com ran an article titled, "It's Official: Linsanity Is for Real". Other puns included "Words with Lin", "Linderella", "Lincredible", and "Super Lintendo". Hall of Fame player Magic Johnson said, "The excitement [Lin] has caused in [Madison Square] Garden, man, I hadn't seen that in a long time". The Associated Press compared Linsanity to Tebowing. Lin appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated with the headline "Against All Odds", which the Times called "the greatest tribute". He also made the cover of Time in Asia; Forbes wrote, "Congratulations Jeremy. You have now made the cover of Time the same number of times as Michael Jordan. Linsanity reigns on". Lin's story was also on the front-page of many Taipei newspapers. "I haven't done a computation, but it's fair to say that no player has created the interest and the frenzy in this short period of time, in any sport, that I'm aware of like Jeremy Lin has," said NBA commissioner David Stern. The Knicks' success due to Lin's play reportedly contributed to the end of a dispute that had for 48 days prevented Time Warner Cable customers from watching Knicks games and other MSG Network programs. The market capitalization of the Madison Square Garden Company, the team's owner, rose by $250 million in February and $600 million by July 2012. The Knicks quickly began selling replicas of Lin's No. 17 jerseys and T-shirts, and the sales and traffic for its online store increased more than 3,000%. Lin's jersey became the best-selling online in the league in the week of February 4, 2012, and the Knicks the best-selling team; the team began selling Lin merchandise on February 10, and one souvenir stand at Madison Square Garden sold out before the game started. His merchandise dominated the displays at Knicks stores, while those for the team's high-priced stars—Anthony, Stoudemire, and Chandler—were moved to the sale racks. He had the best selling jersey in the NBA in February and March. For the one-year period ending April 2012, Lin had the second highest selling jersey in the league behind Derrick Rose. Both Nike and Adidas introduced Lin-related athletic apparel, and expected that his fame would help sales in China. His popularity was attributed with growing the NBA's popularity there since Yao Ming's retirement in the offseason; the audience for NBA games on television and online in China rose 39 percent over the previous season. Within three weeks of his first game as a starter, at least seven e-books were being published on Lin, and the Global Language Monitor declared that Linsanity had met its criteria to be considered an English-language word. He appeared on a second consecutive Sports Illustrated cover, the first New York-based team athlete and the third NBA player in the magazine's history to do so. New York City restaurants introduced new food and bar items in honor of Lin, and sales of Yanjing Beer rose. The city has about 450,000 residents of Chinese or Taiwanese descent—larger than the entire populations of NBA cities like Miami, Atlanta or Cleveland—and viewing parties to watch Lin play flourished in Manhattan's Chinatown. An airline advertised "Linsanely low prices", bids for his rookie card exceeded $21,000 on eBay, and the press circulated rumors—denied by Lin—that he was dating Kim Kardashian. Foreign Policy speculated on his potential impact on Sino-American relations, and Jack and Suzy Welch wrote that Lin's rise was a lesson to business leaders to not let bureaucracy stifle unproven talent. Despite Lin's sudden fame, Sacramento Kings coach Keith Smart stated, "I knew [Lin] before he was Linmania. He's still the same humble guy. The guy has not changed a bit, which is real special for a young man." Lin trademarked the word Linsanity in 2012 to preempt strangers from profiting from his likeness. Two others had attempted to trademark the term in the first week of February, but the United States Patent and Trademark Office ultimately registered the term to Lin. A documentary film about Lin, titled Linsanity, premiered on January 20, 2013, at the Sundance Film Festival. It was shown at numerous film festivals before making its way into art houses. Ben & Jerry's created a frozen yogurt in honor of Lin named "Taste the Lin-Sanity". It contained lychee honey swirls and fortune cookie pieces. The company later replaced the fortune cookies with waffle cookies and apologized to anyone offended by their Lin-Sanity flavor. In May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, the Knicks re-broadcast a week of Linsanity games on the MSG Network. Lin stated: "When I first got the call from my agent like, 'Hey, [the Knicks] want to do this,' I was floored. Because with COVID, right now, New York is going through one of the toughest times that it has seen in decades. It is a very, very tragic time. And the Knicks were like, 'Hey, we need to do something to uplift everybody.'" Lin has turned down most of the sponsorship deals he has been offered. He stated that he declined tens of millions of dollars of endorsement opportunities during the peak of Linsanity. "I do think my purpose is to play basketball, play well, and play for the glory of God," he said. Lin called business outside of basketball "definitely secondary to my primary job". He has endorsed the following brands during his career: Volvo Nike (2010–2014) Steiner Sports Adidas (2014–2019) Xtep (2019–2022) In November 2020, in partnership with Xtep, Lin released a signature shoe called Xtep JLin One, which was available in Asia. Lin has collaborated with fellow Asian-American rapper MC Jin on the single "The First Opponent". The music video was released on YouTube on May 28, 2019. In October 2016, Lin donated $1 million to Harvard University to support undergraduate financial aid and renovations to Lavietes Pavilion. In February 2020, Lin donated ¥1 million (about $144,370) to help those affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. He also spoke out against the racism related to the outbreak, stating: "I've lived in China this past season and now being back on US soil, I'm saddened by the racist comments regarding the virus in China. There are real people suffering and real heroes working around the clock in service to others — please don't let your fear or ignorance rob you of seeing that. This world needs more compassion and empathy." In April 2020, Lin donated $500,000 to the nonprofits Direct Relief and Feeding America to help those affected by the COVID-19 pandemic; he also wrote an article for The Players' Tribune in which he pledged to match donations up to an additional $500,000 and encouraged unity, writing: "Again, at a time like this that requires everyone uniting to survive, COVID-19 shouldn't be about East vs. West, politics, race or anything other than helping as many people as we can survive." In an NBA Together Virtual Roundtable held in May 2020, Lin further spoke out against anti-Asian racism, stating: "All it would take is 10 seconds to put yourself in the position of someone who is dealing with racism or somebody who is legitimately contemplating whether to go to the grocery store to get food for themselves or to not because they're afraid of being attacked. ... Sometimes the best thing you can do is to not post the hateful comment, or don't be a troll, or take a second to think about what you're saying or doing or if you know someone acting ignorant call them out. All these things are small steps in the right direction." Mostly private about his personal life, Lin announced on social media in January 2023 that he and his wife got married about two years before. She is Filipino. His older brother, Joshua, studied dentistry at New York University. Lin is an evangelical Protestant, and was a leader in Harvard's Asian American Christian Fellowship during his time there. He credited his NBA success to playing without pressure. "I've surrendered that to God. I'm not in a battle with what everybody else thinks anymore," said Lin. He hopes to become a pastor who can head up non-profit organizations, either home or abroad, and has talked of working in inner-city communities to help with underprivileged children. Lin said that he understands Mandarin, though he could use some help speaking it; he can also read and write a little. He took a few Mandarin classes while attending Harvard to try to improve. After joining the Knicks in 2012, Lin slept on a couch in his brother's one-bedroom apartment on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, New York City. He relocated to a luxury condo in White Plains, New York, after his Knicks contract became guaranteed. Lin is a fan of the video game Dota 2, having played the first game in the series, Defense of the Ancients, since his sophomore year of high school. He appeared in Free to Play, the 2014 documentary centered around the game, in which he described Dota 2 as a "way of life" that helped him better connect with his family and friends. In 2016, Lin formed his own professional Dota 2 team, known as J.Storm. Bryant led all NBA players with 1,591,437 votes, while Paul had 929,155, ahead of Lin with 883,809. The first players of Asian descent to win an NBA championship were Chinese Mengke Bateer with San Antonio in 2003 and Sun Yue with the Lakers in 2009. The first Asian American was his former Lakers teammate Jordan Clarkson, a Filipino American, who played a year earlier in 2018 with Cleveland. Liao Lu-wei, Jake Chung (August 20, 2020). "NBA star Lin gains ROC citizenship". Taipei Times. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Matthew Strong (August 19, 2020). "Basketball star Jeremy Lin has obtained Taiwan passport". Taiwan News. Retrieved June 6, 2021. "Prospect Profile: Jeremy Lin". NBA.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2016. McMenamin, Dave (July 24, 2014). "Jeremy Lin welcomed by Lakers". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Jeremy Lin Introductory Press Conference. NBA. July 24, 2014. Event occurs at 3:00. Retrieved July 25, 2014. It's good to be back in the state of California. I was born in Torrance, not too far away from here. "Jeremy Lin NBA Stats". Basketball-Reference.com. Retrieved March 21, 2016. Kluck, Ted (April 1, 2012). Jeremy Lin: Faith, Joy, and Basketball. Baker Books. ISBN 978-1-4412-6122-9. Retrieved December 2, 2021. Howard-Cooper, Scott (October 23, 2010). "Lin faces the rookie grind as an entire community watches on". NBA. Archived from the original on October 31, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2010. 'I think that's tricky, because on one hand you want to be able to focus and play your game and to have the distractions left on the side. But at the same time, to be able to have that type of support is unbelievable.' Jeremy Lin Postgame: Knicks 107 Wiz 93. NBA. February 9, 2012. Event occurs at 2:16. Retrieved February 11, 2012. I was raised in NorCal, but I was actually born in L.A. Borden, Sam (February 26, 2012). "Tight-Knit Family Shares Lin's Achievement". The New York Times. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Torre, Pablo S. (February 1, 2010). "Harvard School of Basketball". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved November 12, 2010. What's most surprising? The possibility that he might become the first Asian-American draft pick in NBA history? The bigoted jeers he regularly hears at games (everything from "wonton soup" to "Open your eyes!")?[permanent dead link] Caplan, Jeff (July 17, 2010). "Lin's prospects grow with Mavs squad". ESPN. Retrieved October 21, 2010. All three grew up playing all the time. Lin's older brother, Josh, stoked the competitive juices in Jeremy and younger brother, Joseph, who will be a freshman member of the basketball team at Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pa., this fall. Bradsher, Keith (February 16, 2012). "Jeremy Lin's Grandmother Watches, Along With Taiwan". The New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2012. "Jeremy Lin profile" (in Chinese). Radio Taiwan International. July 28, 2010. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2014. "林書豪來廈門「走穴」 「很拼」放下行李就訓練". isay.tw. June 25, 2015. 林書豪彰化老家嗑肉圓 返鄉做公益. Apple Daily (in Chinese). Hong Kong. August 6, 2011. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved August 24, 2014. 林爸爸還帶林書豪祭祖，雖然篤信基督教不能拿香，但仍口頭向書豪的祖父、曾祖父報告近況，林爸爸說：「林氏宗親在彰化北斗，我算是第8代，林書豪已是第9代了！ "Jeremy Lin's maternal lineage". Jiaxing Daily (in Chinese). July 26, 2010. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Bradsher, Keith (February 15, 2012). "In China, Lin Is a Star and a Symbol". The New York Times. p. B12. Hochman, Benjamin (November 28, 2010). "Hochman: Lin isn't your typical NBA rookie". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved November 29, 2010. The 6-foot-3 Lin is the son of two 5–6 Taiwanese immigrants and, though the Warriors can't confirm it, it's assumed he's the first Asian-American in the NBA since Wat Misaka played for the New York Knicks in 1947. O'Neil, Dana (December 10, 2009). "Immigrant dream plays out through son: Harvard's do-it-all star learned the game from his father and a host of NBA legends". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved November 12, 2010. Borden, Sam; Bradsher, Keith (February 26, 2012). "Tight-Knit Family Shares Lin's Achievement". The New York Times. p. SP1. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. "Jeremy Lin Harvard Basketball Guard". GoCrimson.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2010. Captained team to the CIF Division II State title by scoring 17 points in a upset of nationally ranked Mater Dei in the finals, 51–47 Stephens, Mitch (April 2, 2006). "Boys Player of the Year: Jeremy Lin/A knack for the big play". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 28, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2010. Palo Alto won 32 of them this season (losing only one), including a 51–47 upset of nationally ranked Mater Dei for the CIF State Division II title at Arco Arena two weeks ago. Hynes, Calder (January 5, 2011). "Hornets.com 1-on-1: Golden State's Jeremy Lin". Hornets.com. Archived from the original on February 26, 2011. Stanford and UCLA were my dream schools, but that didn't work out (athletically). Prince, Rosa (February 10, 2012). "Jeremy Lin's amazing journey from sofa surfing to NBA stardom with New York Knicks – in the space of a week". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2012. "Part 2: Q&A with Lin". San Francisco Chronicle. July 22, 2010. Archived from the original on November 22, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2010. The Pac-10 schools wanted me to walk-on. The Ivy League schools, Harvard and Brown, were the two ones that really wanted me to go there and play for them. I was deciding mainly between those two conferences.... I didn't really want to walk on. I wanted to go somewhere the team wanted me. Not somewhere I'd have to go and potentially not have a spot on the team. Culpepper, Chuck (September 15, 2010). "An All-Around Talent, Obscured by His Pedigree". The New York Times. p. B13. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved November 12, 2010. Rex Walters, the University of San Francisco coach since 2008 and the most recent Asian-American to play in the N.B.A., said N.C.A.A. recruiting rules that limit coaches' visits to watch players impeded Lin's discovery Armstrong, Kevin (February 11, 2012). "Jeremy Lin: The true Hollywood story of the Knick sensation who's taken over New York in less than a week". New York Daily News. Viera, Mark (February 13, 2012). "Colleges Passed on Lin Before the N.B.A. Did". The New York Times. p. D1. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Kawakami, Tim (August 17, 2010). "Lacob interview, Part 3: On Jeremy Lin, Ellison, Larry Riley, bold moves and poker". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on October 24, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2010. I'm a big Stanford fan, but that was really stupid. The kid was right across the street. You can't recognize that, you've got a problem. Kroner, Steve (January 3, 2010). "Playing hard and smart goes a long way for Lin". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 24, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2010. 'It's not like I didn't know he wasn't good four or five years ago,' Keating said. 'I watched him win a championship.... In hindsight now, given UCLA's current state, he'd probably be starting for UCLA at point guard.' Beck, Howard (February 25, 2012). "The evolution of a point guard". The New York Times. p. D1. Archived from the original on March 4, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2012. Fraschilla, Fran (October 7, 2009). "ESPN Names Lin One Of Country's Most Versatile Players". GoCrimson.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on September 11, 2011. Retrieved November 12, 2010. His crowning moment last season was a 27-point, eight-assist, six-rebound performance in an 82–70 win over Boston College, three days after the Eagles had knocked off No. 1 North Carolina. "Lin Named John R. Wooden Award Midseason Top 30 Candidate". GoCrimson.com. January 4, 2010. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved November 8, 2010. "Jeremy Lin among 11 finalists for the Bob Cousy Award". Palo Alto Online. February 9, 2010. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved November 8, 2010. "Lin Selected For Portsmouth Invitational". GoCrimson.com. February 22, 2010. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "Lin Dazzles With 30 Points But No. 13 UConn Hangs On, 79–73". GoCrimson.com. December 6, 2009. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "Basketball's Jeremy Lin Featured on Comcast SportsNet". GoCrimson.com. March 16, 2010. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2010. The Palo Alto, Calif. native lived up to the billing with an impressive season that saw Harvard set numerous program records including wins (21), non-conference wins (11), home wins (11) and road/neutral wins (10) Ding, Kevin (September 3, 2010). "Lin is the NBA's Asian-American inspiration". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on September 14, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. He posted a 3.1 grade-point average while there and has his degree in economics, thank you very much. "After Backing a Dark Horse, Lin's Agent Is Riding High". The New York Times. March 10, 2012. p. D5. Retrieved March 10, 2012. Sefko, Eddie (June 25, 2010). "Mavericks to bring in Lin". mavsblog.dallasnews.com. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "WARRIORS: Warriors Sign Free Agent Guard Jeremy Lin". NBA. July 21, 2010. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. McMenamin, Dave (July 19, 2010). "Harvard guard Lin piques L.A.'s interest". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved November 24, 2010. Lin averaged 9.8 points, 3.2 rebounds, 1.8 assists and 1.2 steals while shooting 54.5 percent from the floor and 66.7 percent on three-pointers in five games while playing for the Dallas Mavericks summer league team in Las Vegas. Kessler, Martin (July 20, 2010). "Jeremy Lin To Sign With Warriors, Reports Say". The Harvard Crimson. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. The Warriors—although not one of three original teams to offer Lin a contract—expressed interest in Lin before the 2010 NBA draft, inviting Lin to a workout at their facilities. Thompson II, Marcus (July 21, 2010). "Golden State Warriors sign ex-Palo Alto High star Jeremy Lin". The Oakland Tribune. Retrieved October 9, 2010. Guard Jeremy Lin, a Bay Area native who played at Harvard, signed a two-year deal with the Warriors on Wednesday afternoon. Shell, Dan (October 12, 2010). "Shell: The Recruiting Failure with Jeremy Lin". Comcast SportsNet Bay Area. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2010. As evidenced by Lin's three-year guaranteed contract with Nike, and a jersey projected to be an NBA top-10 seller, we're witnessing a pretty rare phenomenon for an undrafted free agent from the Ivy League. Clemmons, Anna Katherine (March 16, 2011). "Jeremy Lin: NBA's Cinderella story". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Thompson II, Marcus (December 28, 2011). "Injured Curry misses practice". San Jose Mercury News. p. C2. Archived from the original on December 29, 2011. Beck, Howard (December 29, 2011). "Newest Knick Out to Prove He's Not Just a Novelty". The New York Times. p. B10. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Roth, David (February 7, 2012). "The NBA's Unlikeliest New Hero". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. "Warriors' Lin hopes to break new ground in NBA". NBA. July 28, 2010. Archived from the original on December 31, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2010. Beck, Howard (February 10, 2012). "Lin's Success Surprising to Everyone". The New York Times. p. B10. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Simmons, Rusty (October 28, 2010). "Warriors: Yao Ming, Jeremy Lin ride bench". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved October 28, 2010. Most of the media, and maybe even most of the fans, at Oracle Arena on Wednesday night were there to see Houston center Yao Ming and Warriors guard Jeremy Lin sit the benches on their respective team's inactive lists. "Monta Ellis, Dorell Wright lead Warriors; Stephen Curry reinjures ankle". ESPN. Associated Press. October 29, 2010. Retrieved November 1, 2010. It was Asian Heritage Night at Oracle Arena and the crowd of 17,408 rose in a standing ovation when reserve Jeremy Lin checked into the game with 2:32 remaining in the fourth quarter. Lepper, Geoff (October 30, 2010). "Clippers-Warriors notebook". NBA. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2010. He was credited with a steal after tying up Cook and watching the Warriors win the ensuing jump ball. Chu, Bryan (November 1, 2010). "Warriors-Lakers notebook". NBA. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2010. The Palo Alto native played only three minutes all season, but played logged 16 minutes, including 11 minutes in the third quarter. "Pau Gasol, Kobe Bryant come up big as Lakers crush Warriors". ESPN. Associated Press. October 31, 2010. Retrieved November 1, 2010. Lin committed five fouls in his first 11 minutes, but also played a role in Golden State's 12–1 run in the third. "Stephen Curry scores season-high 34 points; Monta Ellis taken for X-rays". ESPN. Associated Press. November 8, 2010. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2010. More than 20 members of Toronto's Chinese media covered the game on Asian Heritage Night, timed to coincide with the visit of Golden State rookie guard Jeremy Lin. Thompson II, Marcus (November 8, 2010). "Golden State Warriors update: Stephen Curry eager to lose his ankle brace sooner than later". The Oakland Tribune. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2010. Rookie guard Jeremy Lin saw 15 minutes of action, most of them in the first half. Warriors Assign Jeremy Lin To Reno Bighorns Archived February 14, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. nba.com. Retrieved December 28, 2010. 2010–11 transactions Archived November 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. nba.com. Retrieved January 9, 2011. "Warriors reassign Lin to Bighorns". Reno Gazette-Journal. March 17, 2011. Retrieved March 18, 2011. Golden State reassigned Jeremy Lin to the Reno Bighorns, the team announced Thursday. 2010–11 transactions Archived November 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. nba.com. Retrieved January 4, 2011. "Warriors recall Jeremy Lin from D-League". Csnbayarea.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012. "Warriors recall Jeremy Lin from Reno". CSN California. March 27, 2011. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2011. Steinmetz, Matt (January 20, 2011). "Q&A with Warriors owner Joe Lacob". Comcast SportsNet Bay Area. Archived from the original on January 26, 2011. "Lin waived by Warriors but picked up by Rockets". PaloAltoOnline.com. December 12, 2011. Archived from the original on June 14, 2012. Brown, Daniel (February 23, 2012). "Bay Area trainers helped make Knicks guard Jeremy Lin better, stronger, faster". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on April 27, 2014. October 1, 2011, 亚俱杯东莞遭逆转憾失冠军 林书豪全面表现获MVP (Dongguan Leopard's unfortunate loss of the championship, Jeremy Lin wins MVP), Sina Sports Ostler, Scott (February 26, 2012). "Lin shows Warriors' insanity". San Francisco Chronicle. p. B2. Archived from the original on February 28, 2012. Spears, Mark J. (February 13, 2012). "Jeremy Lin: Knicks' star is Warriors' loss". sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Thompson II, Marcus (December 9, 2011). "Golden State Warriors waive guard Jeremy Lin". Contra Costa Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Stein, Mark (December 27, 2011). "Knicks claim guard Jeremy Lin". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 29, 2011. Thompson II, Marcus (December 9, 2011). "Golden State Warriors notebook: Team pursuing Los Angeles Clippers center DeAndre Jordan". The San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. "Rockets sign rookie forward Morris". NBA. Associated Press. December 12, 2011. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Thompson II, Marcus (February 13, 2012). "Jeremy Lin says faith in God triggered 'Lin-sanity'". The San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Jenkins, Bruce (February 12, 2012). "Jeremy Lin flies in face of conventional wisdom". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved February 14, 2012. Feigen, Jonathan (December 25, 2011). "Rockets release Lin to make room on roster for Dalembert". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Mahoney, Brian (February 11, 2012). "Linsanity: Knicks benchwarmer becomes a star". yahoo. Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Brennan, Sean (December 27, 2011). "Harvard grad Jeremy Lin claimed off waivers by NY Knicks; Asian-American guard offers backcourt insurance". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Beck, Howard (December 29, 2011). "Knicks' Strengths Vanish, and So Do Hopes of Winning". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Beck, Howard (January 17, 2012). "Knicks Send Two Bench Warmers to D-League". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved January 19, 2012. "Lin Picks Up Triple-Double As Erie Drops Maine 122–113". NBA. January 20, 2012. Archived from the original on January 23, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2012. "Knicks Recall Jordan & Lin". NBA. Archived from the original on January 31, 2012. Retrieved January 23, 2012. Beck, Howard (February 25, 2012). "Lin's New Challenge: Media Onslaught at All-Star Weekend". The New York Times. Retrieved February 26, 2012. Beck, Howard (February 11, 2012). "Knicks Can Keep Their Breakout Star". The New York Times. p. SP3. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Berman, Marc (February 12, 2012). "Phenom nearly found himself out of NBA". New York Post. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "Jeremy Lin: How long will stardom last for the surprising New York Knicks' phenom? Poll". cleveland.com. February 13, 2012. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Torre, Pablo S. (February 20, 2012). "From Couch To Clutch". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Schneider, Christian (February 20, 2012). "Jeremy Lin and the Element of Surprise". National Review Online. Archived from the original on February 23, 2012. Back, Howard (February 5, 2012). "Lin Sparks Knicks, to Crowd's Delight and D'Antoni's Relief". The New York Times. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Thompson II, Marcus (February 13, 2012). "Exclusive: Jeremy Lin says 'Lin-sanity' was triggered by a leap of faith". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. "Deron Williams pours in 38 as Nets thwart Jeremy Lin, Knicks in Carmelo Anthony's return". ESPN. Associated Press. February 20, 2012. Archived from the original on February 21, 2012. Felt, Hunter (August 1, 2019). "Jeremy Lin could never match his remarkable start but he is no NBA failure". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. "Knicks 99, Jazz 88: Depleted Knicks Still Get Best of Jazz". The Wall Street Journal. February 6, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Jeremy Lin hits game-winning 3 as Knicks top Raptors". ESPN. February 14, 2012. Retrieved February 15, 2012. "Jeremy Lin leads Knicks with Stoudemire gone". CBS News. Associated Press. February 7, 2012. Torre, Pablo S. (March 27, 2015). "Isolation Play". ESPN The Magazine. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Hunt, Christopher (February 11, 2012). "Lin makes Lakers believe the hype". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. "Jeremy Lin dazzles again as Knicks rip Wiz for 3rd straight win". ESPN. February 11, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. "Lin scores 38 to lead Knicks over Lakers 92–85". SI.com. Associated Press. February 10, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Pedulla, Tom (February 9, 2012). "Even Kobe impressed by 'Lin-sational' Knicks". Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Araton, Harvey (February 12, 2012). "Lin Keeps His Cool; Around Him, Heads Spin". The New York Times. p. SP3. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Borzi, Pat (February 11, 2012). "Lin LIfts Knicks past Timberwolves". The New York Times. "Knicks' Lin, Thunder's Westbrook named Players of the Week" (Press release). National Basketball Association. February 13, 2012. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. McMenamin, Dave (February 15, 2012). "When Lakers have fun, it shows". ESPN. Retrieved February 19, 2012. Bresnahan, Mike (February 14, 2012). "Lakers and Kobe Bryant keep hitting low points, even in victory". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 19, 2012. Brown, Daniel (February 16, 2012). "Jeremy Lin: Fernando Valenzuela understands Lin-Sanity first hand". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on April 27, 2014. Smith, Sekou (February 13, 2012). "Linsanity ... Five and Counting!". NBA. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Zwerling, Jared (February 11, 2012). "Five Lin-sane stats from Lakers game". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. "Lin-vestigating History". ESPN. February 15, 2012. Retrieved February 15, 2012. "Jeremy Lin dishes out 13 assists in Knicks' rout of Kings". ESPN. February 15, 2012. Retrieved February 15, 2012. "Hornets slow down Jeremy Lin, snap Knicks' winning streak". Associated Press. February 17, 2012. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Zillgitt, Jeff (February 19, 2012). "Lin keeps improving as Knicks beat the Mavericks". USA Today. Retrieved February 23, 2012. Leitch, Will (November 2012). "Rocket Man". GQ. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2012. Smallwood, John (February 28, 2012). "Setting the stage for NBA second half". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Beck, Howard (February 24, 2012). "Lin, a Rising Star, Needs a Break". The New York Times. Levine, Paul (February 17, 2012). "Jeremy Lin to play in Rising Stars Challenge at All-Star Weekend". Boston Herald. Deutsche Presse-Agentur. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Brennan, Christine (February 15, 2012). "NBA, Stern missing All-Star opportunity with Lin". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Schilken, Chuck (February 16, 2012). "Should the Knicks' Jeremy Lin play in the All-Star game?". Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Doyel, Gregg (February 17, 2012). "When it comes to All-Star Game, forget rules and let Lin play". CBSSports.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Begley, Ian (March 16, 2012). "Jeremy Lin still Knicks starter". ESPNNewYork.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012. Beck, Howard (April 1, 2012). "Lin Out for Rest of Regular Season With Knee Injury". The New York Times. Retrieved March 31, 2012. "Jeremy Lin has torn meniscus". ESPN Internet Ventures. March 31, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2012. Beck, Howard (July 7, 2012). "Knicks Know Lin's Price, but Value? Not Exactly". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. "'Linsanity' revisited – A look at Jeremy Lin's brief time as a basketball phenomenon". Nationalpost. February 11, 2019. "2012 NBA Playoffs Preview: Miami Heat vs. New York Knicks". CBSSports.com. April 27, 2012. Bonett, Bobby (June 21, 2012). "Jeremy Lin wins 'The Epic Award'". Newsday. Joseph, Chris (June 22, 2012). "Miami Heat Are 2012 NBA Finals Champions". Miami New Times. Beck, Howard (May 9, 2012). "Knicks' Season Ends in a Game 5 Rout by the Heat". The New York Times. "Magic's Ryan Anderson wins 2011–12 Kia NBA Most Improved Player Award". NBA Communications. May 4, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2020. Beck, Howard (July 16, 2012). "Growing Doubts on Lin's Return to the Knicks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Stefan Bondy (July 13, 2016). "Knicks players had 'real' resentment for Jeremy Lin during Linsanity, says Mike D'Antoni". Daily News. Retrieved October 17, 2021. The current Rockets coach also acknowledged what Amar'e Stoudemire previously stated: there was resentment from players, including Anthony, for Jeremy Lin. Bondy, Stefan (March 1, 2016). "Amar'e Stoudemire throws shade at Carmelo Anthony prior to Knicks game vs. Heat". New York Daily News. Retrieved September 28, 2016. Taylor, Nate (July 14, 2012). "Lin Signs Offer Sheet With Rockets, Putting Knicks on the Clock". The New York Times. Beck, Howard (July 17, 2012). "For Fans of Knicks, Conflict Over Lin". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Saslow, Eli (November 20, 2014). "Carmelo Anthony Means Business". ESPN The Magazine. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. "Knicks won't keep Jeremy Lin". ESPN. July 17, 2012. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Manfred, Tony (July 2, 2012). "A Quick Explanation Of The 'Poison Pill' Contract That Could Stop The Knicks From Signing Jeremy Lin". businessinsider.com. Archived from the original on July 4, 2012. Barron, David (July 11, 2014). "Jeremy Lin: From face of Rockets to trade to Lakers in two years". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Longman, Jere (April 22, 2013). "From Phenom to Everyday N.B.A. Player". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Barron, David (May 4, 2013). "Rockets' oft-criticized Lin promises improvement". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on May 6, 2013. "Jeremy Lin: Was open to return to Knicks, but team not interested". ESPN.com. October 17, 2015. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Devine, Dan (December 12, 2012). "Jeremy Lin on his play with Rockets before return to MSG to face Knicks: 'I'm doing terrible'". Yahoo. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Jones, Tao (November 15, 2013). "Linsanity Redux: How Much Does New York Miss Jeremy Lin?". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Joseph, Adi (December 11, 2012). "Linsanity: Jeremy Lin finally breaks out for Houston Rockets". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Freeman, Eric (December 11, 2012). "Jeremy Lin recaptures Linsanity in loss to Spurs". Yahoo. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Taylor, Nate (December 18, 2012). "In Return, Lin Plays as if He Never Left". New York Times. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Barron, David (January 17, 2013). "Familiar faces dominate All-Star starters". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 6, 2013. Deveney, Sean (February 16, 2013). "Jeremy Lin learned a lot in 12 months, but this Rocket still hasn't launched". SportingNews.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2013. Mason, Beckley (February 23, 2013). "Lin Does a Lot by Not Doing Too Much". The New York Times. "Jeremy Lin back for Game 6". ESPN. May 3, 2013. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Araton, Harvey (November 13, 2013). "Lin Is Better Off (and Better)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Devine, Dan (November 14, 2013). "Surging Jeremy Lin hopes to 'be a subplot' as Rockets visit MSG to take on Knicks". Yahoo. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Lynam, Dei (November 13, 2013). "Sixers' hands full with super-sub Jeremy Lin". csnphilly.com. Archived from the original on November 17, 2013. "Rockets withstand Carmelo Anthony's 45 points to down Knicks". ESPN. Associated Press. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 17, 2013. Friedman, Jason. "Year In Review: Jeremy Lin". Rockets.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. "Jeremy Lin (knee) out 2 weeks". ESPN. November 29, 2013. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. "LaMarcus Aldridge scores 31, gets 25 rebounds as Blazers top Rockets". ESPN. Associated Press. December 12, 2013. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. "Rockets report: Lin back in fold, aims to improve". Houston Chronicle. December 23, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013. "Jeremy Lin's 1st career triple-double propels Rockets". ESPN. Associated Press. February 1, 2014. Dial Creech, Jenny (March 2, 2014). "Jeremy Lin mired in shooting slump". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Riccobono, Anthony. "Jeremy Lin Injury News: Has Rockets Point Guard Played Hurt In Recent Games?". International Business Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Feigen, Jonathan (March 4, 2014). "Dwight Howard and Jeremy Lin miss practice due to back issues". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Pincus, Eric (August 21, 2014). "San Francisco's Madame Tussauds to unveil Jeremy Lin figure". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Deveney, Sean (July 3, 2014). "'Disrespected' Jeremy Lin turns other cheek over Melo jersey flap". SportingNews.com. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Pincus, Eric (July 24, 2014). "Jeremy Lin knows there's a lot of work ahead for Lakers and himself". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 10, 2014. "Lakers Acquire Jeremy Lin and Draft Choices in Trade with Rockets". NBA. July 13, 2014. Retrieved July 13, 2014. Lowe, Zach (July 15, 2014). "Free Agency Winners and Losers". grantland.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Devine, Dan (August 27, 2019). "In China, Jeremy Lin Will Get to Control the Game, Again". The Ringer. Retrieved August 28, 2019. Pandian, Anath (November 8, 2015). "Jeremy Lin enjoying consistent role in his new home with Charlotte Hornets". CBSSports.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2015. Helin, Kurt (December 7, 2014). "Jeremy Lin, Carlos Boozer benched by Lakers; Ronnie Price, Ed Davis start". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Ramirez, Joey (December 7, 2014). "Price, Davis to Start Against Pelicans". NBA. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Pincus, Eric (December 9, 2014). "Lakers' Byron Scott trades offense for better defense in starting lineup". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 12, 2014. Beacham, Greg (January 25, 2015). "Lin disappointed by benching, but not giving up on Lakers". NBA. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 29, 2015. Bresnahan, Mike (December 9, 2014). "Lakers Coach Byron Scott fires back at Carlos Boozer". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 12, 2014. Medina, Mark (December 10, 2014). "Lakers' Kobe Bryant could have more point guard duties". LA Daily News. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. Bresnahan, Mike (January 23, 2015). "Lakers sit Jeremy Lin, go with younger starters in 99–85 loss to Spurs". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Holmes, Baxter (January 23, 2015). "Spurs 99, Lakers 85: No Kobe, inspiration". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Wise, Brandon (January 23, 2015). "Lakers guard Jeremy Lin benched during Friday's loss to Spurs". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on January 25, 2015. Barnes, Evan (March 23, 2015). "Lakers' Jeremy Lin, Ryan Kelly to return to starting lineup". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Medina, Mark (March 25, 2015). "Lakers' Jeremy Lin, Jordan Clarkson thrive as backcourt duo in loss to Thunder". insidesocal.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Imperial, Nel (March 29, 2015). "Jeremy Lin Shut Down with Upper Respiratory Infection; Lakers Fall Anew to Nets". yibada.com. "Hornets Sign Free Agent Guard Jeremy Lin". NBA. July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2015. ESPN news services (July 8, 2015). "Jeremy Lin gets Hornets' bi-annual exception of 2 years, $4.3M". espn.go.com. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Bonnell, Rick (August 29, 2015). "Coach Steve Clifford looking forward to more shooting, passing from new-look Hornets". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Fowler, Scott (July 9, 2015). "Jeremy Lin makes Hornets better, but hype beyond that is 'Linsanity'". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. "Bosh returns, Heat top Hornets 104–94 in season opener". NBA.com. October 28, 2015. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2015. "Lin scores 35 points, Hornets beat Raptors 109–99 in OT". NBA.com. December 17, 2015. Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2015. "Lin, Hornets erase 23-point deficit, beat Spurs 91–88". NBA.com. March 21, 2016. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2016. "Sources: Lin declines player option with Hornets". espn.com.au. June 23, 2016. "Brooklyn Nets Sign Jeremy Lin". NBA.com. July 7, 2016. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. "Sources: Jeremy Lin agrees to 3-year deal with Nets". ESPN.com. July 1, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2016. "Thomas scores 25, Celtics fight off Nets 122–117". ESPN.com. October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2016. "Lin leads Nets past Pacers, 103–94 in home opener". ESPN.com. October 28, 2016. Retrieved October 29, 2016. "Harden leads Rockets past Nets for 7th straight win". ESPN.com. December 12, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. "Harris scores 25 points in Nuggets' 129–109 win over Nets". ESPN.com. February 24, 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2017. "Elfrid Payton has 22 points, Magic beat Nets 115–107". ESPN.com. April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2017. "Jeremy Lin career statistics". basketball-reference.com. April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Brooklyn Nets' Jeremy Lin suffers ruptured patella tendon; expected to miss season". NBA.com. Retrieved October 19, 2017. "Brooklyn Nets Complete Trade With Atlanta Hawks". NBA.com. July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2018. Cunningham, Michael (July 16, 2018). "Hawks add 'high-character' Jeremy Lin, continue to seek trades for Dennis Schroder". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved February 13, 2019. Kirschner, Chris (January 31, 2019). "If Hawks deal Lin, he accomplished exactly what the team wanted — to mentor Young". The Athletic. "Atlanta Hawks Request Waivers On Jeremy Lin". Atlanta Hawks. February 11, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Wojnarowski, Adrian (February 11, 2019). "Jeremy Lin finalizing buyout with Hawks, to sign with Raptors". ESPN.com. Retrieved February 11, 2019. "Raptors Sign Jeremy Lin" (Press release). Toronto Raptors. February 13, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Lewenberg, Josh (February 11, 2019). "Lin could have immediate impact in VanVleet's absence". TSN.ca. Retrieved February 14, 2019. "Former Raptors guard Jeremy Lin to play in China, signs with Beijing Ducks". The Toronto Star. August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019. "Linsanity a distant memory, but Jeremy Lin plays on – The Boston Globe". BostonGlobe.com. "Golden State Warriors to face former players Patrick McCaw, Jeremy Lin in NBA Finals against Toronto Raptors". ABC7News.com. May 28, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2019. Rhoden, William C. (March 28, 2019). "Raptors veterans are in NBA Finals — here's what it took to get there". The Undefeated. Retrieved May 29, 2019. White, Jonathan (June 19, 2019). "Jeremy Lin not the first Asian player to win the NBA – inside the bizarre tale of Sun Yue's 2009 championship with Kobe Bryant's LA Lakers". South China Morining Post. Retrieved July 3, 2019. Brockell, Gillian (June 15, 2019). "He broke pro basketball's color barrier. Now Jeremy Lin joins him in the history books". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 16, 2019. Wong, Alex (June 18, 2019). "Jeremy Lin, 'Reppin' Asians With Everything I Have,' Is Bigger Than an N.B.A. Title". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Blennerhassett, Patrick (June 6, 2019). "Jeremy Lin becomes first East Asian-American to play in NBA Finals". South China Morning Post. Retrieved June 10, 2019. Wang, Kevin (August 27, 2019). "Lin inks pact to play in China with Beijing Ducks". ESPN.com. Retrieved August 27, 2019. Stein, Marc (July 23, 2019). "The Surprises Won't Stop". The New York Times. Retrieved August 27, 2019. 林虹. "NBA star Jeremy Lin signs for Beijing Ducks in CBA – Chinadaily.com.cn". www.chinadaily.com.cn. Retrieved November 12, 2019. "Jeremy Lin 'offered US$3 million' to join Beijing Ducks". South China Morning Post. August 19, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2019. White, Jonathan (October 20, 2019). "Jeremy Lin chose CBA's Beijing Ducks in July even though Euro League offered best chance of NBA return". South China Morning Post. Retrieved November 17, 2019. White, Jonathan (December 29, 2019). "Beijing Ducks swap out Jeremy Lin for Justin Hamilton for January's CBA matches". South China Morning Post. Retrieved February 21, 2020. "Beijing Ducks swap out Jeremy Lin for Hamilton". China Daily. Xinhua. December 30, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2020. Rapp, Timothy. "Jeremy Lin Drops 25 Points in Debut as Beijing Ducks Beat Tianjin Gold Lions". Bleacher Report. Retrieved November 12, 2019. White, Jonathan (January 12, 2020). "Jeremy Lin pays tribute to Godfrey Gao ahead of All-Star game, reveals NBA championship ring". South China Morning Post. Retrieved February 21, 2020. White, Jonathan (January 13, 2020). "CBA All-Star Jeremy Lin scores 41 points but misses out on MVP award in loss to South". South China Morning Post. Retrieved February 21, 2020. "Jeremy Lin Upset By 'Racist Comments' About Coronavirus As Chinese League Postpones Season Due To Outbreak". Inquisitr. February 28, 2020. "Basketball restarts in China after coronavirus shutdown". NBA.com. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Jeremy Lin could feature for Taiwan at Olympics after securing passport". South China Morning Post. August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. "Zhou, Yi to vie for CBA regular-season MVP award". Xinhua. July 28, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. White, Jonathan (August 10, 2020). "CBA: Jeremy Lin visits hospital for injuries; says Beijing Ducks loss 'heartbreaking and really hurts'". South China Morning Post. Retrieved August 20, 2020. White, Jonathan (December 6, 2020). "Jeremy Lin on NBA future: 'You'll know when I know,' Linsanity star tells fans". South China Morning Post. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Amico, Sam (September 16, 2020). "Veteran guard Lin leaving Beijing in hopes of NBA return". SI.com. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Stein, Marc (December 30, 2020). "From Kobe to LeBron: Tragedy and Triumph in the N.B.A." The New York Times. Retrieved January 10, 2021. "SANTA CRUZ WARRIORS ADDS NBA VETERAN JEREMY LIN" (Press release). Santa Cruz Warriors. January 9, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Espinoza, Alex (March 10, 2021). "Focus turns to Lin's NBA future after Sea Dubs eliminated". NBCsports.com. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Kasabian, Paul (June 11, 2021). "Jeremy Lin Announces He's Rejoining Beijing Ducks After NBA G League Stint". bleacherreport.com. Retrieved June 12, 2021. McNicol, Andrew (January 19, 2022). "Jeremy Lin in tears after finally finding Beijing Ducks form, as he reveals Covid-19 breathing issues and off-court struggles". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Lin was hospitalised in Shanghai last September after contracting Covid-19 on his return to China from San Francisco in the summer, where he impressed in the NBA G-League for the Santa Cruz Warriors but failed in his pursuit to return to the NBA. Eaton, Matt (December 21, 2021). "Jeremy Lin 'loses 20 pounds' after long Covid-19 bout as he returns to Beijing Ducks against CBA league leaders Flying Leopards". South China Morning Post. Retrieved May 23, 2022. After testing positive, I lost about 20 pounds. That is what affected me the most. Eaton, Matt (September 6, 2022). "Jeremy Lin to 'write a new chapter' with Guangzhou Loong Lions". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. McDonald, Joe (December 2, 2022). "China fines former NBA star Lin over quarantine comments". Associated Press. Retrieved December 29, 2022. Madjar, Kayleigh (December 30, 2022). "Steelers silent after Jeremy Lin announces CBA exit". Taipei Times. CNA. Retrieved December 30, 2022. 黃巧雯 (December 29, 2022). "林書豪離開CBA 先返美與家人討論下一步" (in Chinese). Central News Agency. Retrieved December 29, 2022. "Jeremy Lin's Little Brother, Joseph, Signs Semi-Pro Deal". NBC News. August 27, 2015. "Jeremy Lin signs with P. LEAGUE+'s Kaohsiung 17LIVE Steelers". Focus Taiwan. January 26, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2023. "Linsanity Lives On: Bay Area Icon Posts 50-Point Triple-Double in Taiwan". sfstandard.com. April 26, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. 黎建忠 (September 19, 2023). "林書豪加盟PLG新北國王簽1+1年合約 高喊目標總冠軍" (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Central News Agency. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Liu, Nancy (February 16, 2012). "Jeremy Lin has automatic Taiwanese citizenship: MOFA". Central News Agency. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. "申請中華民國國籍 外交部：看林書豪本人意願" (in Chinese). NOWnews. February 17, 2012. Archived from the original on February 20, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012. "Taipei to include Jeremy Lin in prelim roster for Wuhan". FIBA Asia. June 27, 2011. Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. "亞錦賽中華隊24人 林書豪將列入". 中央通訊社. June 27, 2011. Archived from the original on June 30, 2011. Retrieved October 17, 2021 – via 聯合新聞網. 楊湘鈞 (June 28, 2011). "阿豪征男籃亞錦賽？「有一半機會」". 聯合報. 陳雍仁 (June 28, 2011). "林書豪披中華隊戰袍 八字已有一撇". 蘋果日報. 臺灣. Retrieved October 17, 2021. 顏若瑾 (June 28, 2011). "林書豪若出征 決不代表中國". 自由時報. Retrieved October 17, 2021. "TPE – Knee injury likely to keep Jeremy Lin out of Taipei NT". FIBA Asia. July 16, 2011. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2011. 黃及人 (July 16, 2011). "林書豪膝傷 無緣亞錦賽". 中國時報. Retrieved October 17, 2021. 葉士弘 (July 15, 2011). "意願不敵膝傷 林書豪無緣亞錦賽". 自由時報. Retrieved October 17, 2021. "Jeremy Lin off U.S. select team because of free agency". USA Today. Associated Press. July 2, 2012. Archived from the original on July 3, 2012. Stein, Marc (May 14, 2012). "Coach K eyes end to Team USA stint". ESPN. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Pina, Michael. "Finding the Ideal System and Role for Houston Rockets' Jeremy Lin". Bleacher Report. Retrieved February 9, 2014. Mihaly, Martin. "Houston Rockets' Jeremy Lin showing his value". Rant Sports. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 9, 2014. Wilmes, John. "Why Jeremy Lin Is More Important to Houston Rockets Than Most Think". Bleacher Report. Retrieved February 9, 2014. "First Asian-American NBA champion Jeremy Lin struggles to find takers in USA, joins Chinese team Beijing Shougang Ducks". Firstpost. September 3, 2019. Blennerhassett, Patrick (March 19, 2021). "Jeremy Lin details racism he experienced in childhood as he opens up about mental health struggles during 'Linsanity' period". South China Morning Post. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Gregory, Sean (December 31, 2009). "Harvard's Hoops Star Is Asian. Why's That a Problem?". Time. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved November 8, 2010. 'I've heard it at most of the Ivies if not all of them,' he says. Lin is reluctant to mention the specific nature of such insults, but according to Harvard teammate Oliver McNally, another Ivy League player called him a C word that rhymes with ink during a game last season. Chu, Bryan (December 16, 2008). "Asian Americans remain rare in men's college basketball". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 22, 2010. Retrieved November 8, 2010. 'I hear everything: "Go back to China. Orchestra is on the other side of campus. Open up your eyes,"' Lin said. 'They're yelling at me before, during and after. I'm an easy target because I'm Asian. Sometimes it makes me uncomfortable, but it's part of the game.' "Sunday's NBA notebook: Rajon Rondo's triple-double carries Celtics over Bulls". The Detroit News. Associated Press. February 12, 2012. Archived from the original on February 13, 2012. Kim, Sylvie (February 13, 2012). "Spike, Jeremy, and Stopping "Asian Profi'Lin"". Hyphen. Archived from the original on February 17, 2012. Schilken, Chuck (February 13, 2012). "Fox Sports' Jason Whitlock apologizes for Jeremy Lin tweet". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Dwyer, Kelly (February 13, 2012). "Jason Whitlock apologizes for his unfunny Jeremy Lin comment on Twitter". Yahoo. Archived from the original on February 13, 2012. Weir, Tom (February 13, 2012). "Floyd Mayweather Jr. plays the race card on Jeremy Lin". USA Today. Alper, Josh (February 14, 2012). "Jeremy Lin Isn't Totally Without Precedent". NBC New York. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. "ESPN apologizes for offensive headline on mobile sites for Jeremy Lin story". The Washington Post. Associated Press. February 18, 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. "Linsanity, A Botched Headline And An ESPN Editor's Journey To The Priesthood". www.wbur.org. January 10, 2020. Boren, Cindy (February 19, 2012). "ESPN fires employee for offensive Jeremy Lin headline; "SNL" weighs in". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 20, 2012. Collins, Scott (February 19, 2012). "Jeremy Lin and ESPN: Network rushes to quell furor over 'chink' comments". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 19, 2012. Spar, Jerry (February 20, 2012). "Mashup: Lin accepts ESPN apology for slur". Entercom Boston. Archived from the original on February 22, 2012. "ESPN anchor apologizes for making racially insensitive comment about Jeremy Lin". New York Daily News. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Aschburner, Steve (February 24, 2012). "Lin Gets His All-Star Weekend Close-Up". NBA. Archived from the original on February 26, 2012. Bolch, Ben (February 13, 2012). "Jeremy Lin's high school coach says race hindered opportunities". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 14, 2012. Barron, David (April 5, 2013). "Lin tells "60 Minutes" his ethnicity played a role in him going undrafted". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on April 8, 2013. Castillo, Jorge (July 28, 2010). "Harvard graduate Jeremy Lin blazes unique trail to Golden State Warriors". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 21, 2010. 'If he didn't have the skill set to go with it, that's not something you want to get into,' Riley said. Reilly, Rick (February 14, 2012). "How do you like me now?". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Lewis, Michael (2016). The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds. p. 19. Lewis, p. 20. Lewis, Michael (December 6, 2016). "Basketball's Nerd King". Slate. "Author Michael Lewis on "the best two characters I've ever had as a writer"". cbsnews.com. December 6, 2016. Knapp, Gwen (July 22, 2010). "Bay Area appeal makes Lin good bet". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved August 28, 2010. He pointed out that even people who don't mean any harm assume that Lin, whose parents came to the United States from Taiwan, doesn't have game. Yng, Jeff (May 10, 2012). "Jeremy Lin's Pop Culture Slam Dunk". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Yang, Jeff (March 18, 2013). "Yes, 'Linsanity' Is Still a Thing". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Pandian, Anath (September 12, 2015). "Jeremy Lin had to persuade Hornets security he plays for team". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. First Person: Jeremy Lin (Full Interview). First Person. Palo Alto Online. December 15, 2011. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Botte, Peter (September 26, 2016). "Lin: If I wasn't Asian, Linsanity wouldn't have been a big deal – NY Daily News". Daily News. Retrieved September 28, 2016. Adande, J.A. (February 22, 2012). "Jeremy Lin, race and lessons learned". ESPN. Archived from the original on February 23, 2012. Stableford, Dylan (February 23, 2012). "Asian American Journalists Association releases guidelines on Jeremy Lin media coverage". Yahoo. Archived from the original on February 25, 2012. "AAJA Media Advisory on Jeremy Lin News Coverage". channelapa.com. February 23, 2012. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Roberts, Daniel (September 26, 2014). "Can YouTube revive Linsanity?". Fortune. Retrieved May 14, 2016. "Jeremy Lin and Landry Fields secret handshake finally revealed (video)". NBC Sports. March 17, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012. "Jeremy Lin passed up big Linsanity payday". Los Angeles Times. Bloomberg News. September 26, 2014. Archived from the original on September 27, 2014. NBA Star: Manny Beats Mosley. ESNEWS. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved March 8, 2011. "New Sabah Times". New Sabah Times. July 17, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011. "The 100 Most Influential People in the World – Jeremy Lin". Time. April 18, 2012. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012. "Jeremy Lin Wins "Social Breakout Player of the Year" Award". Turner Sports. June 18, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012. "2011–12 Social Media Award Winners". NBA. July 12, 2012. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved July 18, 2012. Lin Wins ESPN's "ESPY Award for Breakthrough Athlete of the Year", espn.go.com, July 2012; accessed August 24, 2014. Luo, Michael (February 11, 2012). "Lin's Appeal: Faith, Pride and Points". The New York Times. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Lee, Joon (February 14, 2017). "Jeremy Lin Remains an American Icon, Even Five Years After Linsanity". Bleacher Report. Retrieved May 18, 2021. "Jeremy Lin stars in Comedy Central 'Viralocity' skit". www.newsday.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019. "Jeremy Lin Surprises His Fans". Youtube. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Christina, Pazzanese (May 26, 2021). "There is more to Jeremy Lin than 'Linsanity'". The Harvard Gazette. Retrieved February 20, 2022. "It's Lin-Mania in the NBA as Jeremy jams Kobe". Canada: Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Associated Press. February 11, 2012. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Hsu, Hua (February 10, 2012). "Love Jeremy Lin Without Asian, Harvard, NBA Stereotypes: Hua Hsu". The San Francisco Chronicle. Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Flegenheimer, Matt (February 12, 2012). "A Player's Rise, Charted on Twitter". The New York Times. p. MB4. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. "Lin-sanity Accepted into English Lexicon ... Lin-ough already!?". The Global Language Monitor. February 24, 2012. Archived from the original on March 2, 2012. Chen, Guo-Ming (2012). "Linsanity and the shaking of interethnic boundary". Asian Ethnicity. 13 (4): 469–471. doi:10.1080/14631369.2012.710070. S2CID 144056382. Other newly coined words, including English such as 'Lincredible', 'Linpossible', 'Linderella', 'Super Lintendo', and 'Legend in New York', and Chinese such as 'haoshen' (Lin as god), 'haoge' (Lin as brother), and 'haoxiaozi' (Lin as buddy) Gregory, Sean (February 11, 2012). "It's Official: Linsanity Is for Real". Time. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Beck, Howard (February 15, 2012). "At the Buzzer, It's All Lin". The New York Times. p. B10. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Badenhausen, Kurt (February 17, 2012). "Time Magazine Picks Jeremy Lin For Cover After Five Games". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012. Bradsher, Keith (February 15, 2012). "In China, an Instant Star and an Emerging Symbol". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. "David Stern fascinated by Jeremy Lin". ESPN. Associated Press. February 24, 2012. Archived from the original on February 24, 2012. Beck, Howard; Sandomir, Richard (February 18, 2012). "Time Warner and MSG Network End Their Cable Dispute". The New York Times. p. D5. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Silver, Nate (July 16, 2012). "Keeping Lin Should Make Financial Sense for the Knicks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. McCarthy, Michael (February 14, 2012). "Lin carrying Knicks and creating a $14 million brand". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Zwerling, Jared (April 26, 2012). "Jeremy Lin No. 2 on NBA jersey sales list". ESPNNewYork.com. ESPN Internet Ventures. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. "Derrick Rose, Jeremy Lin top sellers". ESPN. April 26, 2012. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Levinson, Mason; Novy-Williams, Eben (February 13, 2012). "Jeremy Lin Drives Sales of Knicks' Merchandise as MSG Shares Reach Record". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on April 12, 2012. Brettman, Allan (February 22, 2012). "Jeremy Lin craze is welcome news at Nike, Adidas". The Oregonian. Retrieved February 23, 2012. "'Linsanity' a boon for NBA in China". ESPN. Associated Press. February 17, 2012. Archived from the original on February 19, 2012. Terdiman, Daniel (February 22, 2012). "'Linsanity' already hitting e-bookstores near you". CNet. Retrieved February 22, 2012. "'Lin-sanity' becomes part of the English language". ABS-CBN. February 23, 2012. "Knicks' Jeremy Lin makes 2nd straight SI cover". Sports Illustrated. February 22, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Dwyer, Kelly (February 22, 2012). "Jeremy Lin scores his second straight Sports Illustrated cover, joining some lofty company". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on February 22, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. Kayal, Michele (February 17, 2012). "Jeremy Lin fever reaches into restaurants and bars". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 19, 2014. Manker, Rob (February 21, 2012). "Airline hopes to score with 'Linsanely low fares'". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 22, 2012. Cherner, Reid (February 23, 2012). "Jeremy Lin rookie card now past $20,000 in bidding". USA Today. Retrieved February 23, 2012. McCarthy, Michael (February 20, 2012). "Jeremy Lin: I'm not dating divorced Kim Kardashian". USA Today. Retrieved February 22, 2012. Inboden, Will (February 22, 2012). "Jeremy Lin and U.S.-China relations". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on August 16, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. Welch, Jack; Welch, Suzy (February 24, 2012). "Jeremy Lin: Lessons from the Lin-sanity". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Mahoney, Brian (February 16, 2012). "Lin has 13 assists, Knicks run win streak to 7". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved February 16, 2012. Dwyer, Kelly (May 30, 2012). "Jeremy Lin awarded the trademark to the word 'Linsanity,' but his next deal in New York will be complicated". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. "Linsanity Comes to CAAMFest Opening Night". Asian Week. January 31, 2013. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Freedman, Samuel G. (November 16, 2013). "Off the Court, a Film's Lens on Asian-American Faith". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Rocheleau, Matt (February 24, 2012). "Ben & Jerry's launches 'Lin-Sanity' flavor, takes out fortune cookie ingredient". Boston Globe. Retrieved February 24, 2012. 'There seemed to be a bit of an initial backlash about it, but we obviously weren't looking to offend anybody and the majority of the feedback about it has been positive,' he said. "Ben & Jerry's sorry for fortune cookies". ESPN. February 26, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2012. 'We offer a heartfelt apology if anyone was offended by our handmade Lin-Sanity flavor', Ben & Jerry's said in a statement. "Jeremy Lin 'floored' by Knicks' week of Linsanity TV". ESPN. May 1, 2020. Shirouzu, Norihiko (March 20, 2012). "Volvo, Jeremy Lin to Unveil Marketing Deal Today". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 6, 2012. Abbott, Henry (July 18, 2012). "Jeremy Lin confronts critics". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Soshnick, Scott (January 6, 2014). "Jeremy Lin Signs Adidas Endorsement Accord After Nike Deal Ends". Bloomberg. Retrieved July 13, 2014. Moon, Louise (August 9, 2019). "Xtep expands its sportswear portfolio into basketball shoes and apparel, signing on star Jeremy Lin as brand spokesman". South China Morning Post. Retrieved January 22, 2021. "特步签约林书豪 共创篮球新事业" (Press release). 特步. August 9, 2019. Archived from the original on August 26, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2020. 白, 杨 (August 9, 2019). "签下林书豪 特步进军篮球". 北京商报. Retrieved January 22, 2021. McCarriston, Shanna (November 6, 2020). "LOOK: Jeremy Lin drops first signature shoe in Asia, 'JLIN ONE'". CBS Sports. Retrieved April 21, 2021. "Raptor to Rapper: Jeremy Lin Jumps In the Booth with MC Jin". Radii China. May 30, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019. "Gift from Jeremy Lin '10 funds financial aid and Lavietes Pavilion renovation". harvard.edu. October 26, 2016. "David Beckham, Sun Yang and Jeremy Lin among stars supporting Wuhan virus fight". South China Morning Post. February 10, 2020. "Jeremy Lin pledges up to $1 million to fight coronavirus". ClutchPoints. April 13, 2020. Lin, Jeremy (April 13, 2020). "The Darkness Has Not Overcome It". The Players' Tribune. "Jeremy Lin Addresses Anti-Asian Racism in U.S. amid Coronavirus Pandemic, Encourages Unity". People. May 13, 2020. "Jeremy Lin reveals he got married 'over a couple years ago'". NBC News. January 19, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2023. 陳筱琳; 陳怡誠 (November 29, 2023). "林書豪賽後透露 老婆是菲律賓人" (in Chinese). 中時新聞網. Retrieved November 29, 2023. 他回應：「菲律賓歌手AJ Rafael是我好朋友，我穿的是他的衣服品牌。我也覺得應該可以宣傳一下我老婆是菲律賓人，（之後到馬尼拉比賽）當然對我來說是非常有意義的一件事。」 Chao Yen-hsiang (November 30, 2023). "Jeremy Lin shares connection with Philippines following EASL win". Focus Taiwan. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Asked about his shirt, Lin said it was a product of a brand founded by his good friend AJ Rafael, a Filipino-American singer-songwriter."Also, I think I can share this with you today, my wife is a Filipino, so for me this is very meaningful." Back, Howard (February 8, 2012). "From Ivy Halls to the Garden, Surprise Star Jolts the N.B.A." The New York Times. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Jeremy Lin: Taking Harvard Basketball to New Levels Archived March 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, InterVarsity.org, Published March 12, 2010; accessed February 15, 2012. Michael Luo, Lin's Appeal: Faith, Pride, and Points, The New York Times, February 12, 2012, accessed February 15, 2012. Hughes, Frank (July 26, 2010). "Former Harvard standout Lin ready to prove himself with Warriors". SI.com. Retrieved October 23, 2010. You do not hear too many NBA players talk like this, seeds of self-doubt occasionally sprouting. You also rarely hear this sentence: 'I compare myself to [Suns backup point guard] Goran Dragic.' "Jeremy Lin Interview". NBADraft.net. June 16, 2010. Retrieved October 23, 2010. I would be a pastor. It is something I think about doing when my playing days are over. Lin, Jeremy (February 4, 2010). "Tell Me More". National Public Radio (Interview). Interviewed by Michel Martin. Retrieved October 25, 2010. I mean, I get Asian jokes and, you know, when other fans try to heckle us, I don't really hear from other players very much. "Jeremy Lin Interview". NBADraft.net. June 16, 2010. Retrieved March 8, 2011. Howard Beck (February 8, 2012). "From Ivy Halls to the Garden, Surprise Star Jolts the N.B.A." The New York Times. Retrieved February 16, 2012. Bailey Johnson (February 15, 2012). "Jeremy Lin moves from couch to condo". CBS News. Retrieved February 16, 2012. Breslau, Rod (April 4, 2014). "NBA's Jeremy Lin: "Dota 2 is more than just a game"". onGamers. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved April 4, 2014. Van Allen, Eric (September 18, 2016). "Jeremy Lin endorses new Dota 2 team VGJ". ESPN. Retrieved October 5, 2016. Lin, Jeremy (October 31, 2018). "Esports vs. pro sports: Jeremy Lin is betting on both". Quartz (publication). Retrieved October 31, 2018. "China V Chart". Billboard. ""The First Opponent" charting". Billboard. Dalrymple, Timothy (2012). Jeremy Lin: The Reason for the Linsanity. Center Street. ISBN 978-1455523948. Yorkey, Mike (2012). Linspired: The Remarkable Rise of Jeremy Lin. Zondervan. ISBN 978-0-310-32068-5. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jeremy Lin. Official website Career statistics and player information from NBA.com  and Basketball-Reference.com  Lin's Dota 2 organization Archived January 1, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Portal:  Sports