Estonia, officially the Republic of Estonia, is a country by the Baltic Sea in Northern Europe. It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland across from Finland, to the west by the sea across from Sweden, to the south by Latvia, and to the east by Lake Peipsi and Russia. The territory of Estonia consists of the mainland, the larger islands of Saaremaa and Hiiumaa, and over 2,300 other islands and islets on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea, covering a total area of 45,335 square kilometres (17,504 sq mi). The capital city Tallinn and Tartu are the two largest urban areas of the country. The Estonian language is the indigenous and the official language of Estonia; it is the first language of the majority of its population, the world's second-most spoken Finnic language as well as the third-most spoken Uralic language. The land of what is now modern Estonia has been inhabited by humans since at least 9,000 BCE. The medieval indigenous population of Estonia was one of the last pagan civilisations in Europe to adopt Christianity following the Papal-sanctioned Livonian Crusade in the 13th century. After centuries of successive rule by the Teutonic Order, Denmark, Sweden, and the Russian Empire, a distinct Estonian national identity began to emerge in the mid-19th century. This culminated in the 24 February 1918 Estonian Declaration of Independence from the then-warring Russian and German empires. Democratic throughout most of the interwar period, Estonia declared neutrality at the outbreak of World War II, however the country was repeatedly contested, invaded, and occupied; first by the Soviet Union in 1940, then by Nazi Germany in 1941, and was ultimately reoccupied in 1944 by, and annexed into, the USSR as an administrative subunit (Estonian SSR). Throughout the 1944–1991 Soviet occupation, Estonia's de jure state continuity was preserved by diplomatic representatives and the government-in-exile. Following the bloodless Estonian "Singing Revolution" of 1988–1990, the nation's de facto independence from the Soviet Union was restored on 20 August 1991. Estonia is a developed country, with a high-income advanced economy, ranking 31st (out of 191) in the Human Development Index. The sovereign state of Estonia is a democratic unitary parliamentary republic, administratively subdivided into 15 maakond (counties). With a population of just around 1.4 million, it is one of the least populous members of the European Union, the Eurozone, the OECD, the Schengen Area, and NATO. Estonia has consistently ranked highly in international rankings for quality of life, education, press freedom, digitalisation of public services and the prevalence of technology companies. The name Estonia (Estonian: Eesti [ˈeːsʲti] ) has been connected to Aesti, a people first mentioned by Ancient Roman historian Tacitus around 98 CE. Some modern historians believe he was referring to Balts, while others have proposed that the name then applied to the whole eastern Baltic Sea region. Scandinavian sagas and Viking runestones referring to Eistland are the earliest known sources that definitely use the name in its modern geographic meaning. From Old Norse the toponym spread to other Germanic vernaculars and reached literary Latin by the end of 12th century. Esthonia was a common alternative spelling in English until the beginning of 20th century. In 1922, in a response to Estonian diplomats, the Royal Geographical Society agreed that the correct spelling was Estonia. Formal adoption at the government level took place only in 1926, with the United Kingdom and United States then adopting the spelling Estonia. Human settlement in Estonia became possible 13,000–11,000 years ago, when the ice from the last glacial era melted. The oldest known settlement in Estonia is the Pulli settlement, on the banks of Pärnu river in southwest Estonia. According to radiocarbon dating, it was settled around 11,000 years ago. The earliest human habitation during the Mesolithic period is connected to the Kunda culture. At that time the country was covered with forests, and people lived in semi-nomadic communities near bodies of water. Subsistence activities consisted of hunting, gathering and fishing. Around 4900 BCE, ceramics appear of the neolithic period, known as Narva culture. Starting from around 3200 BC the Corded Ware culture appeared; this included new activities like primitive agriculture and animal husbandry. The Bronze Age started around 1800 BCE, and saw the establishment of the first hill fort settlements. A transition from hunter-fisher subsistence to single-farm-based settlement started around 1000 BC, and was complete by the beginning of the Iron Age around 500 BC. The large amount of bronze objects indicate the existence of active communication with Scandinavian and Germanic tribes. The middle Iron Age produced threats appearing from different directions. Several Scandinavian sagas referred to major confrontations with Estonians, notably when in the early 7th century "Estonian Vikings" defeated and killed Ingvar Harra, the King of Swedes.[additional citation(s) needed] Similar threats appeared to the east, where East Slavic principalities were expanding westward. Around 1030 the troops of Kievan Rus led by Yaroslav the Wise defeated Estonians and established a fort in modern-day Tartu. This foothold may have lasted until ca 1061 when an Estonian tribe, the Sosols, destroyed it. Around the 11th century, the Scandinavian Viking era around the Baltic Sea was succeeded by the Baltic Viking era, with seaborne raids by Curonians and by Estonians from the island of Saaremaa, known as Oeselians. In 1187 Estonians (Oeselians), Curonians or/and Karelians sacked Sigtuna, which was a major city of Sweden at the time. Estonia could be divided into two main cultural areas. The coastal areas of north and west Estonia had close overseas contacts with Scandinavia and Finland, while inland south Estonia had more contacts with Balts and Pskov. The landscape of Ancient Estonia featured numerous hillforts. Prehistoric or medieval harbour sites have been found on the coast of Saaremaa. Estonia also has a number of graves from the Viking Age, both individual and collective, with weapons and jewellery including types found commonly throughout Northern Europe and Scandinavia. In the early centuries AD, political and administrative subdivisions began to emerge in Estonia. Two larger subdivisions appeared: the parish (Estonian: kihelkond) and the county (Estonian: maakond), which consisted of multiple parishes. A parish was led by elders and centered on a hill fort; in some rare cases a parish had multiple forts. By the 13th century, Estonia comprised eight major counties: Harjumaa, Järvamaa, Läänemaa, Revala, Saaremaa, Sakala, Ugandi, and Virumaa; and six minor, single-parish counties: Alempois, Jogentagana, Mõhu, Nurmekund, Soopoolitse, and Vaiga. Counties were independent entities and engaged only in a loose cooperation against foreign threats. Little is known of medieval Estonians' spiritual and religious practices before Christianization. The Chronicle of Henry of Livonia mentions Tharapita as the superior deity of the then inhabitants of Saaremaa (Oeselians). There is some historical evidence about sacred groves, especially groves of oak trees, having served as places of "pagan" worship. In 1199, Pope Innocent III declared a crusade to "defend the Christians of Livonia". Fighting reached Estonia in 1206, when Danish King Valdemar II unsuccessfully invaded Saaremaa. The German Livonian Brothers of the Sword, who had previously subjugated Livonians, Latgalians, and Selonians, started campaigning against the Estonians in 1208, and over next few years both sides made numerous raids and counter-raids. A major leader of the Estonian resistance was Lembitu, an elder of Sakala County, but in 1217 the Estonians suffered a significant defeat in the Battle of St. Matthew's Day, where Lembitu was killed. In 1219, Valdemar II landed at Lindanise, defeated the Estonians in the Battle of Lyndanisse, and started conquering Northern Estonia. The next year, Sweden invaded Western Estonia, but were repelled by the Oeselians. In 1223, a major revolt ejected the Germans and Danes from the whole of Estonia, except Reval, but the crusaders soon resumed their offensive, and in 1227, Saaremaa was the last maakond (county) to surrender. After the crusade, the territory of present-day south Estonia and Latvia was named Terra Mariana; later on it became known simply as Livonia. Northern Estonia became the Danish Duchy of Estonia, while the rest was divided between the Sword Brothers and prince-bishoprics of Dorpat and Ösel–Wiek. In 1236, after suffering a major defeat, the Sword Brothers merged into the Teutonic Order becoming the Livonian Order. In the next decades there were several uprisings against the Teutonic rulers in Saaremaa. In 1343, a major uprising encompassed over north Estonia and Saaremaa. The Teutonic Order suppressed the rebellion by 1345, and in 1346 the Danish king sold his possessions in Estonia to the Order. The unsuccessful rebellion led to a consolidation of power for the upper-class German minority. For the subsequent centuries Low German remained the language of the ruling elite in both Estonian cities and the countryside. Reval (Tallinn), the capital of Danish Estonia founded on the site of Lindanise, adopted the Lübeck law and received full town rights in 1248. The Hanseatic League controlled trade on the Baltic Sea, and overall the four largest towns in Estonia became members: Reval, Dorpat (Tartu), Pernau (Pärnu), and Fellin (Viljandi). Reval acted as a trade intermediary between Novgorod and western Hanseatic cities, while Dorpat filled the same role with Pskov. Many artisans' and merchants guilds were formed during the period. Protected by their stone walls and membership in the Hansa, prosperous cities like Reval and Dorpat often defied other rulers of the medieval Livonian Confederation. The Reformation began in central Europe in 1517, and soon spread northward to Livonia despite some opposition by the Livonian Order. Towns were the first to embrace Protestantism in the 1520s, and by the 1530s the majority of the landowners and rural population had adopted Lutheranism. Church services were now conducted in vernacular language, which initially meant Low German, but already from the 1530s onward the regular religious services were held in Estonian. During the 16th century, the expansionist monarchies of Muscovy, Sweden, and Poland–Lithuania consolidated power, posing a growing threat to decentralised Livonia weakened by disputes between cities, nobility, bishops, and the Order. In 1558, Tsar Ivan the Terrible of Russia (Muscovy) invaded Livonia, starting the Livonian War. The Livonian Order was decisively defeated in 1560. The majority of Livonia accepted Polish rule, while Reval and the nobles of Northern Estonia swore loyalty to the Swedish king, and the Bishop of Ösel-Wiek sold his lands to the Danish king. Russian forces gradually conquered the majority of Livonia, but in the late 1570s the Polish-Lithuanian and Swedish armies started their own offensives and the bloody war finally ended in 1583 with Russian defeat. As a result of the war, Northern Estonia became Swedish Duchy of Estonia, Southern Estonia became Polish Duchy of Livonia, and Saaremaa remained under Danish control. In 1600, the Polish–Swedish War broke out, causing further devastation. The protracted war ended in 1629 with Sweden gaining Livonia, including the regions of Southern Estonia and Northern Latvia. Danish Saaremaa was transferred to Sweden in 1645. The wars had halved the population of Estonia from about 250–270,000 people in the mid 16th century to 115–120,000 in the 1630s. While many peasants remained in the status of serfdom during the Swedish rule, legal reforms strengthened both serfs' and free tenant farmers' land usage and inheritance rights – hence this period got the reputation of "The Good Old Swedish Time" in historical memory. Swedish King Gustaf II Adolf established gymnasiums in Reval and Dorpat; the latter was upgraded to Tartu University in 1632. Printing presses were also established in both towns. In the 1680s the beginnings of Estonian elementary education appeared, largely due to efforts of Bengt Gottfried Forselius, who also introduced orthographical reforms to written Estonian. The population of Estonia grew rapidly until the Great Famine of 1695–97 in which 70,000–75,000 people died – about 20% of the population. During the 1700–1721 Great Northern War, the Tsardom of Russia (Muscovy) conquered the whole of Estonia by 1710. The war again devastated the population of Estonia, with the 1712 population estimated at only 150,000–170,000. In 1721, Estonia was divided into two governorates: the Governorate of Estonia, which included Tallinn and the northern part of Estonia, and the southern Governorate of Livonia, which extended to the northern part of Latvia. Russian administration restored all the political and landholding rights of Baltic Germans. The rights of local farmers reached their lowest point, as serfdom completely dominated agricultural relations during the 18th century. Serfdom was formally abolished in 1816–1819, but this initially had very little practical effect; major improvements in farmers' rights started with reforms in the mid-19th century. The Estonian national awakening began in the 1850s as several leading figures started promoting an Estonian national identity among the general populace. Widespread farm buyouts by Estonians and the resulting rapidly growing class of land-owning farmers provided the economic basis for the formation of this new "Estonian identity". In 1857 Johann Voldemar Jannsen started publishing one of the first successful circulating Estonian-language weekly newspapers, Perno Postimees ehk Näddalileht, and began popularising the denomination of oneself as eestlane (Estonian). Schoolmaster Carl Robert Jakobson and clergyman Jakob Hurt became leading figures in a national movement, encouraging Estonian farmers to take pride in their ethnic Estonian identity. The first nationwide movements formed, such as a campaign to establish the Estonian language Alexander School, the founding of the Society of Estonian Literati and the Estonian Students' Society, and the first national song festival, held in 1869 in Tartu. Linguistic reforms helped to develop the Estonian language. The national epic Kalevipoeg was published in 1862, and 1870 saw the first performances of Estonian theatre. In 1878 a major split happened in the national movement. The moderate wing led by Hurt focused on development of culture and Estonian education, while the radical wing led by Jakobson started demanding increased political and economical rights. At the end of the 19th century, Russification began, as the central government initiated various administrative and cultural measures to tie Baltic governorates more closely to the empire. The Russian language replaced German and Estonian in most secondary schools and universities, and many social and cultural activities in local languages were suppressed. In the late 1890s, there was a new surge of nationalism with the rise of prominent figures like Jaan Tõnisson and Konstantin Päts. In the early 20th century, Estonians started taking over control of local governments in towns from Germans. During the 1905 Revolution, the first legal Estonian political parties were founded. An Estonian national congress was convened and demanded the unification of Estonian areas into a single autonomous territory and an end to Russification. The unrest was accompanied by both peaceful political demonstrations and violent riots with looting in the commercial district of Tallinn and in a number of wealthy landowners' manors in the Estonian countryside. The Tsarist government responded with a brutal crackdown; some 500 people were executed and hundreds more jailed or deported to Siberia. In 1917, after the February Revolution, the governorate of Estonia was expanded by the Russian Provisional Government to include Estonian-speaking areas of Livonia and was granted autonomy, enabling the formation of the Estonian Provincial Assembly. The Bolsheviks seized power in Estonia in November 1917, and the Provincial Assembly was disbanded. However, the Provincial Assembly established the Salvation Committee, and during the short interlude between Russian retreat and German arrival, the committee declared independence on 24 February 1918, and formed the Estonian Provisional Government. German occupation immediately followed, but after their defeat in World War I, the Germans were forced to hand over power back to the Provisional Government on 19 November 1918. On 28 November 1918, Soviet Russia invaded, starting the Estonian War of Independence. The Red Army came within 30 km of Tallinn, but in January 1919, the Estonian Army, led by Johan Laidoner, went on a counter-offensive, ejecting Bolshevik forces from Estonia within a few months. Renewed Soviet attacks failed, and in spring, the Estonian army, in co-operation with White Russian forces, advanced into Russia and Latvia. In June 1919, Estonia defeated the German Landeswehr which had attempted to dominate Latvia, restoring power to the government of Kārlis Ulmanis there. After the collapse of the White Russian forces, the Red Army launched a major offensive against Narva in late 1919, but failed to achieve a breakthrough. On 2 February 1920, the Tartu Peace Treaty was signed by Estonia and Soviet Russia, with the latter pledging to permanently give up all sovereign claims to Estonia. In April 1919, the Estonian Constituent Assembly was elected. The Constituent Assembly passed a sweeping land reform expropriating large estates, and adopted a new highly liberal constitution establishing Estonia as a parliamentary democracy. In 1924, the Soviet Union organised a communist coup attempt, which quickly failed. Estonia's cultural-autonomy law for ethnic minorities, adopted in 1925, is widely recognised as one of the most liberal in the world at that time. The Great Depression put heavy pressure on Estonia's political system, and in 1933, the right-wing Vaps movement spearheaded a constitutional reform establishing a strong presidency. On 12 March 1934 the acting head of state, Konstantin Päts, declared a state of emergency, under the pretext that the Vaps movement had been planning a coup. Päts, together with general Johan Laidoner and Kaarel Eenpalu, established an authoritarian régime during the "era of silence", when the parliament did not reconvene and the newly established Patriotic League became the only legal political movement. A new constitution was adopted in a referendum, and elections were held in 1938. Both pro-government and opposition candidates were allowed to participate, but only as independents. The Päts régime was relatively benign compared to other authoritarian régimes in interwar Europe, and the régime never used violence against political opponents. Estonia joined the League of Nations in 1921. Attempts to establish a larger alliance together with Finland, Poland, and Latvia failed, with only a mutual-defence pact being signed with Latvia in 1923, and later was followed up with the Baltic Entente of 1934. In the 1930s, Estonia also engaged in secret military co-operation with Finland. Non-aggression pacts were signed with the Soviet Union in 1932, and with Germany in 1939. In 1939, Estonia declared neutrality, but this proved futile in World War II. A week before the outbreak of World War II, on 23 August 1939, Nazi Germany and the Stalinist Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. In the pact's secret protocol Poland, Romania, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and Finland were divided between USSR and Germany into "spheres of influence", with Estonia assigned to the Soviet "sphere". On 24 September 1939, the Soviet Union demanded that Estonia sign a treaty of "mutual assistance" which would allow the Soviet Union to establish military bases in the country. The Estonian government felt that it had no choice but to comply, and the Soviet–Estonian Mutual Assistance Treaty was signed on 28 September 1939. On 14 June 1940 the Soviet Union instituted a full naval and air blockade on Estonia. On the same day, the airliner Kaleva was shot down by the Soviet Air Force. On 16 June, the USSR presented an ultimatum demanding completely free passage of the Red Army into Estonia and the establishment of a pro-Soviet government. Feeling that resistance was hopeless, the Estonian government complied and, on the next day, the whole country was occupied. On 6 August 1940, Estonia was annexed by the Soviet Union as the Estonian SSR. The USSR established a repressive wartime regime in occupied Estonia. Many of the country's high-ranking civil and military officials, intelligentsia and industrialists were arrested. Soviet repressions culminated on 14 June 1941 with mass deportation of around 11,000 people to Russia. When Operation Barbarossa (accompanied by Estonian guerrilla soldiers called "Forest Brothers") began against the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 in the form of the "Summer War" (Estonian: Suvesõda), around 34,000 young Estonian men were forcibly drafted into the Red Army, fewer than 30% of whom survived the war. Soviet destruction battalions initiated a scorched earth policy. Political prisoners who could not be evacuated were executed by the NKVD. Many Estonians went into the forest, starting an anti-Soviet guerrilla campaign. In July, German Wehrmacht reached south Estonia. The USSR evacuated Tallinn in late August with massive losses, and capture of the Estonian islands was completed by German forces in October. Initially, many Estonians were hopeful that Germany would help to restore Estonia's independence, but this soon proved to be in vain. Only a puppet collaborationist administration was established, and occupied Estonia was merged into Reichskommissariat Ostland, with its economy being fully subjugated to German military needs. About a thousand Estonian Jews who had not managed to leave were almost all quickly killed in 1941. Numerous forced labour camps were established where thousands of Estonians, foreign Jews, Romani, and Soviet prisoners of war perished. German occupation authorities started recruiting men into small volunteer units but, as these efforts provided meagre results and the military situation worsened, forced conscription was instituted in 1943, eventually leading to formation of the Estonian Waffen-SS division. Thousands of Estonians who did not want to fight in the German military secretly escaped to Finland, where many volunteered to fight together with Finns against Soviets. The Red Army reached the Estonian borders again in early 1944, but its advance into Estonia was stopped in heavy fighting near Narva for six months by German forces, including numerous Estonian units. In March, the Soviet Air Force carried out heavy bombing raids against Tallinn and other Estonian towns. In July, the Soviets started a major offensive from the south, forcing the Germans to abandon mainland Estonia in September and the Estonian islands in November. As German forces were retreating from Tallinn, the last pre-war prime minister Jüri Uluots appointed a government headed by Otto Tief in an unsuccessful attempt to restore Estonia's independence. Tens of thousands of people, including most of the Estonian Swedes, fled westwards to avoid the new Soviet occupation. Overall, Estonia lost about 25% of its population through deaths, deportations and evacuations in World War II. Estonia also suffered some irrevocable territorial losses, as the Soviet Union transferred border areas comprising about 5% of Estonian pre-war territory from the Estonian SSR to the Russian SFSR. Thousands of Estonians opposing the second Soviet occupation joined a guerrilla movement known as the "Forest Brothers". The armed resistance was heaviest in the first few years after the war, but Soviet authorities gradually wore it down through attrition, and resistance effectively ceased to exist in the mid-1950s. The Soviets initiated a policy of collectivisation, but as farmers remained opposed to it a campaign of terror was unleashed. In March 1949 about 20,000 Estonians were deported to Siberia. Collectivization was fully completed soon afterwards. The Russian-dominated occupation authorities under the Soviet Union began Russification, with hundreds of thousands of ethnic Russians and other "Soviet people" being induced to settle in occupied Estonia, in a process which eventually threatened to turn indigenous Estonians into a minority in their own native land. In 1945 Estonians formed 97% of the population, but by 1989 their share of the population had fallen to 62%. Occupying authorities carried out campaigns of ethnic cleansing, mass deportation of indigenous populations, and mass colonization by Russian settlers which led to Estonia losing 3% of its native population. By March 1949, 60,000 people were deported from Estonia and 50,000 from Latvia to the gulag system in Siberia, where death rates were 30%. The occupying regime established an Estonian Communist Party, where Russians were the majority in party membership. Economically, heavy industry was strongly prioritised, but this did not improve the well-being of the local population, and caused massive environmental damage through pollution. Living standards under the Soviet occupation kept falling further behind nearby independent Finland. The country was heavily militarised, with closed military areas covering 2% of territory. Islands and most of the coastal areas were turned into a restricted border zone which required a special permit for entry. Estonia was quite closed until the second half of the 1960s, when gradually Estonians began to covertly watch Finnish television in the northern parts of the country, thus getting a better picture of the way of life behind the Iron Curtain. The majority of Western countries considered the annexation of Estonia by the Soviet Union illegal. Legal continuity of the Estonian state was preserved through the government-in-exile and the Estonian diplomatic representatives which Western governments continued to recognise. The introduction of perestroika by the Soviet central government in 1987 made open political activity possible again in Estonia, which triggered an independence restoration process later known as laulev revolutsioon ("the Singing revolution"). The environmental Fosforiidisõda ("Phosphorite war") campaign became the first major protest movement against the central government. In 1988, new political movements appeared, such as the Popular Front of Estonia, which came to represent the moderate wing in the independence movement, and the more radical Estonian National Independence Party, which was the first non-communist party in the Soviet Union and demanded full restoration of independence. On 16 November 1988, after the first non-rigged multi-candidate elections in half a century, the parliament of Soviet-controlled Estonia issued the Sovereignty Declaration, asserting the primacy of Estonian laws. Over the next two years, many other administrative parts (or "republics") of the USSR followed the Estonian example, issuing similar declarations. On 23 August 1989, about 2 million Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians participated in a mass demonstration, forming the Baltic Way human chain across the three countries. In February 1990, elections were held to form the Congress of Estonia. In March 1991, a referendum was held where 78.4% of voters supported full independence. During the coup attempt in Moscow, Estonia declared restoration of independence on 20 August 1991. Soviet authorities recognised Estonian independence on 6 September 1991, and on 17 September Estonia was admitted into the United Nations. The last units of the Russian army left Estonia in 1994. On 28 September 1994, the MS Estonia sank as the ship was crossing the Baltic Sea, en route from Tallinn, Estonia, to Stockholm, Sweden. The disaster claimed the lives of 852 people (501 of them were Swedes), being one of the worst maritime disasters of the 20th century. In 1992 radical economic reforms were launched for switching over to a market economy, including privatisation and currency reform. Estonia has been a member of the WTO since 13 November 1999. Since regaining independence in 1991, Estonian foreign policy has been aligned with other Western democracies, and in 2004 Estonia joined both the European Union and NATO. On 9 December 2010, Estonia became a member of OECD. On 1 January 2011, Estonia joined the eurozone and adopted the euro, the single currency of EU. Estonia was a member of the UN Security Council from 2020 to 2021. Estonia celebrated its centennial anniversary on 24 February 2018, with other celebrations spanning from April 2017 to 2 February 2020, which was 100 years since the Tartu Peace Treaty was signed. A parade took place on 24 February 2018 in Freedom Square. Estonia is situated in Europe, on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea, on the East European Plain between 57°30′ and 59°49′ N and 21°46′ and 28°13′ E. It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland across from Finland, to the west by the sea across from Sweden, to the south by Latvia, and to the east by Lake Peipsi and Russia. Estonian territory covers 45,339 km2 (17,505 sq mi), of which internal waters comprise 4.6%. When including the territorial sea, the Estonian border encompasses 70,177 km2 (27,095 sq mi). Estonia has a 3,794 kilometres (2,357 mi) long coastline, notable for its limestone cliffs at the northern coast and largest islands. The total number of Estonian islands, including those in internal waters, is 2,355, of which 2,222 are in the Baltic Sea. The largest islands are Saaremaa and Hiiumaa. There are over 1560 natural lakes, the largest being Lake Peipus at the border of Russia, and Võrtsjärv in central Estonia. Additionally there are many artificial water reservoirs. There are over 7000 rivers, streams, and canals in the country; of these, only ten are longer than 100 kilometres (62 mi). The longest rivers of Estonia are Võhandu — 162 kilometres (101 mi) and Pärnu —144 kilometres (89 mi), followed by the Põltsamaa, Pedja, Kasari, Keila, and Jägala rivers. Bogs and mires cover 23.2% of the land. Generally the terrain is flat, average elevation above the sea level being about 50 metres (164 ft). Only 10% of the country's terrain is greater than 100 metres (328 ft) in height, with Haanja Upland containing the highest peak, Suur Munamägi, at 318 metres (1,043 ft). Estonia is situated in the temperate climate zone, and in the transition zone between maritime and continental climate, characterized by warm summers and fairly mild winters. Primary local differences are caused by the Baltic Sea, which warms the coastal areas in winter, and cools them in the spring. Average temperatures range from 17.8 °C (64.0 °F) in July, the warmest month, to −3.8 °C (25.2 °F) in February, the coldest month, with the annual average being 6.4 °C (43.5 °F). The highest recorded temperature is 35.6 °C (96.1 °F) from 1992, and the lowest is −43.5 °C (−46.3 °F) from 1940. The annual average precipitation is 662 millimetres (26.1 in), with the daily record being 148 millimetres (5.8 in). Snow cover varies significantly on different years. Prevailing winds are westerly, southwesterly, and southerly, with average wind speed being 3–5 m/s inland and 5–7 m/s on coast. The average monthly sunshine duration ranges from 290 hours in August, to 21 hours in December. Due to varied climatic and soil conditions, and plethora of sea and internal waters, Estonia is one of the most biodiverse regions among the similar sized territories at the same latitude. Many species extinct in most other European countries can be still found in Estonia. Recorded species include 64 mammals, 11 amphibians, and 5 reptiles. Large mammals present in Estonia include the grey wolf, lynx, brown bear, red fox, badger, wild boar, moose, roe deer, beaver, otter, grey seal, and ringed seal. The critically endangered European mink has been successfully reintroduced to the island of Hiiumaa, and the rare Siberian flying squirrel is present in east Estonia. The red deer, once extirpated, has also been successfully reintroduced. In the beginning of the 21st century, an isolated population of European jackals was confirmed in Western Estonia, much further north than their earlier known range. The number of jackals has grown quickly in coastal areas of Estonia and can be found in Matsalu National Park. Introduced mammals include sika deer, fallow deer, raccoon dog, muskrat, and American mink. Over 300 bird species have been found in Estonia, including the white-tailed eagle, lesser spotted eagle, golden eagle, western capercaillie, black and white stork, numerous species of owls, waders, geese and many others. The barn swallow is the national bird of Estonia. Phytogeographically, Estonia is shared between the Central European and Eastern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF, the territory of Estonia belongs to the ecoregion of Sarmatic mixed forests. Estonia has a rich composition of floristic groups, with estimated 6000 (3461 identified) fungi, 3000 (2500 identified) algae and cyanobacteria, 850 (786 identified) lichens, and 600 (507 identified) bryophytes. Forests cover approximately half of the country. 87 native and over 500 introduced tree and bush species have been identified, with most prevalent tree species being pine (41%), birch (28%), and spruce (23%). Since 1969, the cornflower (Centaurea cyanus) has been the national flower of Estonia. Protected areas cover 19.4% of Estonian land and 23% of its total area together with territorial sea. Overall there are 3,883 protected natural objects, including 6 national parks, 231 nature conservation areas, and 154 landscape reserves. Estonia is a unitary parliamentary republic. The unicameral parliament Riigikogu serves as the legislature and the government as the executive. Estonian parliament Riigikogu is elected by citizens over 18 years of age for a four-year term by proportional representation, and has 101 members. Riigikogu's responsibilities include approval and preservation of the national government, passing legal acts, passing the state budget, and conducting parliamentary supervision. On proposal of the president Riigikogu appoints the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the chairman of the board of the Bank of Estonia, the Auditor General, the Legal Chancellor, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces. The Government of Estonia is formed by the Prime Minister of Estonia at recommendation of the President, and approved by the Riigikogu. The government, headed by the Prime Minister, carries out domestic and foreign policy. Ministers head ministries and represent its interests in the government. Sometimes ministers with no associated ministry are appointed, known as ministers without portfolio. Estonia has been ruled by coalition governments because no party has been able to obtain an absolute majority in the parliament. The head of the state is the President who has a primarily representative and ceremonial role. There is no popular vote on the election of the president, but the president is elected by the Riigikogu, or by a special electoral college. The President proclaims the laws passed in the Riigikogu, and has the right to refuse proclamation and return law in question for a new debate and decision. If Riigikogu passes the law unamended, then the President has right to propose to the Supreme Court to declare the law unconstitutional. The President also represents the country in international relations. The Constitution of Estonia also provides possibility for direct democracy through referendum, although since adoption of the constitution in 1992 the only referendum has been the referendum on European Union membership in 2003. Estonia has pursued the development of the e-government, with 99 percent of the public services being available on the web 24 hours a day. In 2005, Estonia became the first country in the world to introduce nationwide binding Internet voting in local elections of 2005. In the 2023 parliamentary elections 51% of the total votes were cast over the internet, becoming the first time when more than half of votes were cast online. In the most recent parliamentary elections of 2023, six parties gained seats at Riigikogu. The head of the Reform Party, Kaja Kallas, formed the government together with Estonia 200 and Social Democratic Party, while Conservative People's Party, Centre Party and Isamaa became the opposition. The Constitution of Estonia is the fundamental law, establishing the constitutional order based on five principles: human dignity, democracy, rule of law, social state, and the Estonian identity. Estonia has a civil law legal system based on the Germanic legal model. The court system has a three-level structure. The first instance are county courts which handle all criminal and civil cases, and administrative courts which hear complaints about government and local officials, and other public disputes. The second instance are district courts which handle appeals about the first instance decisions. The Supreme Court is the court of cassation, conducts constitutional review, and has 19 members. The judiciary is independent, judges are appointed for life, and can be removed from office only when convicted of a crime. The justice system has been rated among the most efficient in the European Union by the EU Justice Scoreboard. As of June 2023, gay registered partners and married couples have the right to adopt. Gay couples gained the right to marriage in Estonia in 2024. Estonia is the first of the former Soviet republics to legalize same-sex marriage. Estonia was a member of the League of Nations from 22 September 1921, and became a member of the United Nations on 17 September 1991. Since restoration of independence Estonia has pursued close relations with the Western countries, and has been member of NATO and the European Union since 2004. In 2007, Estonia joined the Schengen Area, and in 2011 the Eurozone. The European Union Agency for large-scale IT systems is based in Tallinn, and started operations at the end of 2012. Estonia held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union in the second half of 2017. Since the early 1990s, Estonia has been involved in active trilateral Baltic states co-operation with Latvia and Lithuania, and Nordic-Baltic co-operation with the Nordic countries. Estonia is a member of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly, the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers and the Council of the Baltic Sea States. Estonia has built close relationship with the Nordic countries, especially Finland and Sweden, and is a member of Nordic-Baltic Eight. Joint Nordic-Baltic projects include the education programme Nordplus and mobility programmes for business and industry and for public administration. The Nordic Council of Ministers has an office in Tallinn with a subsidiaries in Tartu and Narva. The Baltic states are members of Nordic Investment Bank, European Union's Nordic Battle Group, and in 2011 were invited to co-operate with Nordic Defence Cooperation in selected activities. The beginning of the attempt to redefine Estonia as "Nordic" was seen in December 1999, when then Estonian foreign minister (and President of Estonia from 2006 until 2016) Toomas Hendrik Ilves delivered a speech entitled "Estonia as a Nordic Country" to the Swedish Institute for International Affairs, with the potential political calculation behind it being the wish to distinguish Estonia from its more slowly progressing southern neighbours, which could have postponed early participation in European Union enlargement. Andres Kasekamp argued in 2005, that relevance of identity discussions in Baltic states decreased with their entrance into EU and NATO together, but predicted, that in the future, attractiveness of Nordic identity in Baltic states will grow and eventually, five Nordic states plus three Baltic states will become a single unit. Other Estonian international organisation memberships include OECD, OSCE, WTO, IMF, the Council of the Baltic Sea States, and on 7 June 2019, was elected a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council for a two-year term that began on 1 January 2020. Since the Soviet era, the relations with Russia remain generally cold, even though practical co-operation has taken place in between. Since 24 February 2022, the relations with Russia have further deteriorated due to Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Estonia has very actively supported Ukraine during the war, providing highest support relative to its gross domestic product. The Estonian Defence Forces consist of land forces, navy, and air force. The current national military service is compulsory for healthy men between ages of 18 and 28, with conscripts serving 8- or 11-month tours of duty, depending on their education and position provided by the Defence Forces. The peacetime size of the Estonian Defence Forces is about 6,000 persons, with half of those being conscripts. The planned wartime size of the Defence Forces is 60,000 personnel, including 21,000 personnel in high readiness reserve. Since 2015, the Estonian defence budget has been over 2% of GDP, fulfilling its NATO defence spending obligation. The Estonian Defence League is a voluntary national defence organisation under management of Ministry of Defence. It is organised based on military principles, has its own military equipment, and provides various different military training for its members, including in guerilla tactics. The Defence League has 17,000 members, with additional 11,000 volunteers in its affiliated organisations. Estonia co-operates with Latvia and Lithuania in several trilateral Baltic defence co-operation initiatives. As part of Baltic Air Surveillance Network (BALTNET) the three countries manage the Baltic airspace control center, Baltic Battalion (BALTBAT) has participated in the NATO Response Force, and a joint military educational institution Baltic Defence College is located in Tartu. Estonia joined NATO on 29 March 2004. NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence was established in Tallinn in 2008. In response to Russian war in Ukraine, since 2017 a NATO Enhanced Forward Presence battalion battle group has been based in Tapa Army Base. Also part of NATO, the Baltic Air Policing deployment has been based in Ämari Air Base since 2014. In the European Union, Estonia participates in Nordic Battlegroup and Permanent Structured Cooperation. Since 1995, Estonia has participated in numerous international security and peacekeeping missions, including: Afghanistan, Iraq, Lebanon, Kosovo, and Mali. The peak strength of Estonian deployment in Afghanistan was 289 soldiers in 2009. Eleven Estonian soldiers have been killed in missions of Afghanistan and Iraq. Estonia is a unitary country with a single-tier local government system. Local affairs are managed autonomously by local governments. Since administrative reform in 2017, there are in total 79 local governments, including 15 towns and 64 rural municipalities. All municipalities have equal legal status and form part of a maakond (county), which is an administrative subunit of the state. Representative body of local authorities is municipal council, elected at general direct elections for a four-year term. The council appoints local government. For towns, the head of the local government is linnapea (mayor) and vallavanem for parishes. For additional decentralization the local authorities may form municipal districts with limited authority, currently those have been formed in Tallinn and Hiiumaa. Separately from administrative units, there are also settlement units: village, small borough, borough, and town. Generally, villages have less than 300, small boroughs have between 300 and 1000, boroughs and towns have over 1000 inhabitants. As a member of the European Union and OECD, Estonia is considered a high-income economy by the World Bank. The GDP (PPP) per capita of the country was $46,385 in 2023 according to the International Monetary Fund, ranked 40th. Estonia ranks highly in international rankings for quality of life, education, press freedom, digitalisation of public services and the prevalence of technology companies. Beginning 1 January 2011, Estonia adopted the euro and became the 17th eurozone member state. Estonia produces about 75% of its consumed electricity. In 2011, about 85% of it was generated with locally mined oil shale. Alternative energy sources such as wood, peat, and biomass make up approximately 9% of primary energy production. Renewable wind energy was about 6% of total consumption in 2009. Estonia imports petroleum products from western Europe and Russia. Estonia imports 100% of its natural gas from Russia. Oil shale energy, telecommunications, textiles, chemical products, banking, services, food and fishing, timber, shipbuilding, electronics, and transportation are key sectors of the economy. The ice-free port of Muuga, near Tallinn, is a modern facility featuring good transhipment capability, a high-capacity grain elevator, chill/frozen storage, and new oil tanker off-loading capabilities. Because of the global economic recession that began in 2007, the GDP of Estonia decreased by 1.4% in the 2nd quarter of 2008, over 3% in the 3rd quarter of 2008, and over 9% in the 4th quarter of 2008. The Estonian government made a supplementary negative budget, which was passed by Riigikogu. The revenue of the budget was decreased for 2008 by EEK 6.1 billion and the expenditure by EEK 3.2 billion. In 2010, the economic situation stabilised and started a growth based on strong exports. In the fourth quarter of 2010, Estonian industrial output increased by 23% compared to the year before. The country has been experiencing economic growth ever since. According to Eurostat data, Estonian PPS GDP per capita stood at 67% of the EU average in 2008. In 2017, the average monthly gross salary in Estonia was €1221. However, there are vast disparities in GDP between different areas of Estonia; currently, over half of the country's GDP is created in Tallinn. In 2008, the GDP per capita of Tallinn stood at 172% of the Estonian average, which makes the per capita GDP of Tallinn as high as 115% of the European Union average, exceeding the average levels of other counties. The unemployment rate in March 2016 was 6.4%, which is below the EU average, while real GDP growth in 2011 was 8.0%, five times the euro-zone average. In 2012, Estonia remained the only euro member with a budget surplus, and with a national debt of only 6%, it is one of the least indebted countries in Europe. Estonia's economy continues to benefit from a transparent government and policies that sustain a high level of economic freedom, ranking 6th globally and 2nd in Europe. The rule of law remains strongly buttressed and enforced by an independent and efficient judicial system. A simplified tax system with flat rates and low indirect taxation, openness to foreign investment, and a liberal trade regime have supported the resilient and well-functioning economy. As of May 2018[update], the Ease of Doing Business Index by the World Bank Group places the country 16th in the world. The strong focus on the IT sector through its e-Estonia program has led to much faster, simpler and efficient public services where for example filing a tax return takes less than five minutes and 98% of banking transactions are conducted through the internet. Estonia has the 13th lowest business bribery risk in the world, according to TRACE Matrix. Estonia is a developed country with an advanced, high-income economy that was among the fastest-growing in the EU since its entry in 2004. The country ranks very high in the Human Development Index, and compares well in measures of economic freedom, civil liberties, education, and press freedom. Estonian citizens receive universal health care, free education, and the longest paid maternity leave in the OECD. One of the world's most digitally-advanced societies, in 2005 Estonia became the first state to hold elections over the Internet, and in 2014, the first state to provide e-residency. In 1928, a stable currency, the kroon, was established. It is issued by the Bank of Estonia, the country's central bank. The word kroon (Estonian pronunciation: [ˈkroːn], "crown") is related to that of the other Nordic currencies (such as the Swedish krona and the Danish and Norwegian krone). The kroon succeeded the mark in 1928 and was used until 1940. After Estonia regained its independence, the kroon was reintroduced in 1992. After restoring full independence, in the 1990s, Estonia styled itself as the "gateway between East and West" and aggressively pursued economic reform and reintegration with the West. In 1994, applying the economic theories of Milton Friedman, Estonia became one of the first countries to adopt a flat tax, with a uniform rate of 26% regardless of personal income. This rate has since been reduced several times, e.g., to 24% in 2005, 23% in 2006, and to 21% in 2008. The Government of Estonia finalised the design of Estonian euro coins in late 2004, and adopted the euro as the country's currency on 1 January 2011, later than planned due to continued high inflation. A Land Value Tax is levied which is used to fund local municipalities. It is a state-level tax, but 100% of the revenue is used to fund Local Councils. The rate is set by the Local Council within the limits of 0.1–2.5%. It is one of the most important sources of funding for municipalities. The Land Value Tax is levied on the value of the land only with improvements and buildings not considered. Very few exemptions are considered on the land value tax and even public institutions are subject to the tax. The tax has contributed to a high rate (~90%) of owner-occupied residences within Estonia, compared to a rate of 67.4% in the United States. In 1999, Estonia experienced its worst year economically since it regained independence in 1991, largely because of the impact of the 1998 Russian financial crisis. Estonia joined the WTO in November 1999. With assistance from the European Union, the World Bank and the Nordic Investment Bank, Estonia completed most of its preparations for European Union membership by the end of 2002. Estonia joined the OECD in 2010. The Port of Tallinn, taking into account both cargo and passenger traffic, is one of the largest port enterprises of the Baltic Sea. In 2018, the enterprise was listed in Tallinn Stock Exchange. It was the first time in nearly 20 years in Estonia when a state-owned company went public in Estonia. It was also the 2nd largest IPO in Nasdaq Tallinn in the number of retail investors participating. The Republic of Estonia remains the largest shareholder and holds 67% of the company. Owned by AS Eesti Raudtee, there are many significant railroad connections in Estonia, such as Tallinn–Narva railway, which is 209.6 km (130.2 mi) long main connection to St. Petersburg. The most important highways in Estonia, in other hand, includes Narva Highway (E20), Tartu Highway (E263) and Pärnu Highway (E67). The Lennart Meri Tallinn Airport in Tallinn is the largest airport in Estonia and serves as a hub for the national airline Nordica, as well as the secondary hub for AirBaltic and LOT Polish Airlines. Total passengers using the airport has increased on average by 14.2% annually since 1998. On 16 November 2012 Tallinn Airport has reached two million passenger landmark for the first time in its history. Although Estonia is in general resource-poor, the land still offers a large variety of smaller resources. The country has large oil shale and limestone deposits. In addition to oil shale and limestone, Estonia also has large reserves of phosphorite, pitchblende, and granite that currently are not mined, or not mined extensively. Significant quantities of rare-earth oxides are found in tailings accumulated from 50 years of uranium ore, shale and loparite mining at Sillamäe. Because of the rising prices of rare earths, extraction of these oxides has become economically viable. The country currently exports around 3000 tonnes per annum, representing around 2% of world production. As of 2012, Estonia had forests that covered 48% of the land. Since at least 2009, there has been a substantial increase in logging, and logging occurs not only nationwide in private land, but even in supposedly protected land like the national park. Estonia needs to cut significantly less forest to retain biodiversity and meet the country's carbon sequestration goal, but it is increasing, and in 2022 the government ministry responsible for forestry, the RMK, reported a record profit of 1.4 billion euros. Food, construction, and electronic industries are currently among the most important branches of Estonia's industry. In 2007, the construction industry employed more than 80,000 people, around 12% of the entire country's workforce. Another important industrial sector is the machinery and chemical industry, which is mainly located in Ida-Viru county and around Tallinn. The oil shale-based mining industry, also concentrated in East Estonia, produces around 73% of the entire country's electricity. Although the number of pollutants emitted has been falling since the 1980s, the air is still contaminated with sulphur dioxide from the mining industry the Soviet Union rapidly developed in the early 1950s. In some areas, coastal seawater is polluted, mainly around the Sillamäe industrial complex. Estonia is dependent on other countries for energy. In recent years, many local and foreign companies have been investing in renewable energy sources. Wind power has been increasing steadily in Estonia and the total current amount of energy produced from wind is nearly 60 MW; another roughly 399 MW worth of projects are currently being developed and more than 2800 MW being proposed in the Lake Peipus area and coastal areas of Hiiumaa. Currently[when?], there are plans to renovate some older units of the Narva Power Plants, establish new power stations, and provide higher efficiency in oil shale-based energy production. Estonia liberalised 35% of its electricity market in April 2010; the electricity market as whole was to be liberalised by 2013. Together with Lithuania, Poland, and Latvia, the country considered participating in constructing the Visaginas nuclear power plant in Lithuania to replace the Ignalina nuclear plant. However, due to the slow pace of the project and problems with the nuclear sector (like the Fukushima disaster and bad example of Olkiluoto plant), Eesti Energia shifted its main focus to shale oil production, seen as far more profitable. The Estonian electricity network forms a part of the Nord Pool Spot network. Estonia has a strong information technology sector, partly owing to the Tiigrihüpe project undertaken in the mid-1990s, and has been mentioned as the most "wired" and advanced country in Europe in the terms of e-Government of Estonia. The 2014 e-residency program began offering those services to non-residents in Estonia. Skype was written by Estonia-based developers Ahti Heinla, Priit Kasesalu and Jaan Tallinn, who had also originally developed Kazaa. Other notable startups that originated from Estonia include Bolt, GrabCAD, Fortumo and Wise (formerly known as TransferWise). It has been reported that Estonia has the highest startups per person ratio in the world. As of January 2022, there are 1,291 startups from Estonia, seven of which are unicorns, equalling nearly 1 startup per 1,000 Estonians. Estonia has had a market economy since the end of the 1990s and one of the highest per capita income levels in Eastern Europe. Proximity to the Scandinavian and Finnish markets, its location between the East and West, competitive cost structure and a highly skilled labour force have been the major Estonian comparative advantages in the beginning of the 2000s (decade). As the largest city, Tallinn has emerged as a financial centre and the Tallinn Stock Exchange joined recently with the OMX system. Several cryptocurrency trading platforms are officially recognised by the government, such as CoinMetro. The current government has pursued tight fiscal policies, resulting in balanced budgets and low public debt. In 2007, however, a large current account deficit and rising inflation put pressure on Estonia's currency, which was pegged to the Euro, highlighting the need for growth in export-generating industries. Estonia exports mainly machinery and equipment, wood and paper, textiles, food products, furniture, and metals and chemical products. Estonia also exports 1.562 billion kilowatt hours of electricity annually. At the same time Estonia imports machinery and equipment, chemical products, textiles, food products and transportation equipment. Estonia imports 200 million kilowatt hours of electricity annually. Between 2007 and 2013, Estonia received 53.3 billion kroons (3.4 billion euros) from various European Union Structural Funds as direct supports, creating the largest foreign investments into Estonia. Majority of the European Union financial aid will be invested into the following fields: energy economies, entrepreneurship, administrative capability, education, information society, environment protection, regional and local development, research and development activities, healthcare and welfare, transportation and labour market. Main sources of foreign direct investments to Estonia are Sweden and Finland (As of 31 December 2016[update] 48.3%). Before World War II, ethnic Estonians made up 88% of the population, with national minorities constituting the remaining 12%. The largest minority groups in 1934 were Russians, Germans, Swedes, Latvians, Jews, Poles, and Finns. Other smaller minorities in Estonia are Armenians, Azerbaijanis, Moldovans, Chuvash, Karelians and Romani people. The share of Baltic Germans in Estonia had fallen from 5.3% (~46,700) in 1881 to 1.3% (16,346) by 1934, mainly due to emigration to Germany in the light of general Russification at the end of the 19th century[citation needed] and the independence of Estonia in the 20th century. Between 1945 and 1989, the share of ethnic Estonians in the population resident within the currently defined boundaries of Estonia dropped to 61%, caused primarily by the Soviet occupation and programme promoting mass immigration of urban industrial workers from Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, as well as by wartime emigration and Joseph Stalin's mass deportations and executions. By 1989, minorities constituted more than one-third of the population, as the number of non-Estonians had grown almost fivefold. At the end of the 1980s, Estonians perceived their demographic change as a national catastrophe. This was a result of the migration policies essential to the Sovietization program, which aimed to russify Estonia.[citation needed] In the decade after the restoration of Estonian independence, large-scale emigration by ethnic Russians and the removal of Russian military bases in 1994 caused[citation needed] the proportion of ethnic Estonians in Estonia to increase from 61% to 69% in 2006. Modern Estonia is a fairly ethnically homogeneous country, but this historical homogeneity is a feature of 13 of the country's 15 maakond (counties). The mostly Russian-speaking immigrant population is concentrated in urban areas which administratively belong to two counties. Thus 13 of Estonia's 15 counties are over 80% ethnic Estonian, the most homogeneous being Hiiumaa, where Estonians account for 98.4% of the population. In the counties of Harju (including the capital city Tallinn) and Ida-Viru, however, ethnic Estonians make up 60% and 20% of the population, respectively. The ethnic Russian immigrant minority makes up about 24% of the country's total population today, but accounts for 35% of the population in Harju county and for a near-70% majority in Ida-Viru county. The Estonian Cultural Autonomy law that was passed in 1925 was unique in Europe at that time. Cultural autonomies could be granted to minorities numbering more than 3,000 people with longstanding ties to the Republic of Estonia. Before the Soviet occupation, the Germans and Jewish minorities managed to elect a cultural council. The Law on Cultural Autonomy for National Minorities was reinstated in 1993. Historically, large parts of Estonia's northwestern coast and islands have been populated by the indigenous ethnic group of rannarootslased ("Coastal Swedes"). In recent years, the number of Swedish residents in Estonia has risen again, numbering almost 500 people by 2008, owing to property reforms enacted in the early 1990s. In 2004, the Ingrian Finnish minority in Estonia elected a cultural council and was granted cultural autonomy. The Estonian Swedes minority similarly received cultural autonomy in 2007. During the Russo-Ukrainian war of 2022, tens of thousands of Ukrainian refugees have arrived in Estonia. There is also a Roma community in Estonia. Approximately 1,000-1,500 Roma live in Estonia. Among post-communist states, Estonia is one of the most Westernised countries and the Estonian society has undergone considerable changes since the country had restored full independence in 1991. Some of the more notable changes have taken effect in the level of stratification and distribution of family income. The Gini coefficient has held steadily higher than the European Union average (31 in 2009), although it has clearly dropped. The registered unemployment rate in January 2021 was 6.9%. Estonia is a multinational country in which over a hundred languages are spoken, according to data from one previous census held in 2000. In 2000, 67.3% of the country's adult population spoke Estonian as their first language whereas over 30% of the population spoke other languages at native level. As of 2 July 2010[update], 84.1% of Estonian residents are Estonian citizens, 8.6% are citizens of other countries and 7.3% are "citizens with undetermined citizenship". Since 1992, roughly 140,000 people have acquired Estonian citizenship by passing naturalisation exams. Estonia has also accepted quota refugees under the migrant plan agreed upon by EU member states in 2015. Ethnic distribution in Estonia is very homogeneous at a county level; in most counties, over 90% of residents are ethnic Estonians. In contrast, in the capital city Tallinn and the urban areas of Ida-Viru county (which neighbours Russia) ethnic Estonians account for around 60% of the population and the remainder is mostly composed of Russian and Ukrainian immigrants, who mostly arrived in Estonia during the period of Soviet occupation (1944–1991), however now also includes over 62,000 (ca 6% of total population) war refugees from Ukraine who have settled in Estonia in 2022. The 2008 United Nations Human Rights Council report called "extremely credible" the description of the citizenship policy of Estonia as "discriminatory". According to surveys, only 5% of the Russian community have considered returning to Russia in the near future. Estonian Russians have developed their own identity – more than half of the respondents recognized that Estonian Russians differ noticeably from the Russians in Russia. When compared with results from a 2000 survey, Russians had a more positive attitude toward the future. Estonia was the first former Soviet republic to legalize civil unions for same-sex couples, with a law approved in October 2014. Political disagreements delayed adoption of the necessary implementing legislation, and same-sex couples were not able to sign cohabitation agreements until January 1, 2016. Tallinn is the capital and the largest city of Estonia, and lies on the northern coast of Estonia, along the Gulf of Finland. There are 33 cities and several town-parish towns in the country. In total, there are 47 linna, with "linn" in English meaning both "cities" and "towns". More than 70% of the population lives in towns. Estonia has a diverse religious history, but in recent years it has become increasingly secular, with either a plurality or a majority of the population declaring themselves nonreligious in recent censuses, followed by those who identify as religiously "undeclared". The largest minority groups are the various Christian denominations, principally Lutheran and Orthodox Christians, with very small numbers of adherents in non-Christian faiths, namely Judaism, Islam and Buddhism. Other polls suggest the country is broadly split between Christians and the non-religious / religiously undeclared. Before the Second World War, Estonia was approximately 80% Protestant, overwhelmingly Lutheran, followed by Calvinism and other Protestant branches. Many Estonians profess not to be particularly religious because religion through the 19th century was associated with German feudal rule. There has historically been a small but noticeable minority of Russian Old-believers near the Lake Peipus area in Tartu county. Today, Estonia's constitution guarantees freedom of religion, separation of church and state, and individual rights to privacy of belief and religion. According to the Dentsu Communication Institute Inc, Estonia is one of the least religious countries in the world, with 75.7% of the population claiming to be irreligious. The Eurobarometer Poll 2005 found that only 16% of Estonians profess a belief in a god, the lowest belief of all countries studied. A 2009 Gallup poll found similar results, with only 16% of Estonians describing religion as "important" in their daily lives, making Estonia the most irreligious of the nations surveyed. New polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2012 by Eurobarometer found that Christianity is the largest religion in Estonia accounting for 45% of Estonians. Eastern Orthodox are the largest Christian group in Estonia, accounting for 17% of Estonia citizens, while Protestants make up 6%, and Other Christian make up 22%. Non believer/Agnostic account 22%, Atheist accounts for 15%, and undeclared accounts for 15%. The most recent Pew Research Center, found that in 2015, 51% of the population of Estonia declared itself Christian, 45% religiously unaffiliated—a category which includes atheists, agnostics and those who describe their religion as "nothing in particular", while 2% belonged to other faiths. The Christians divided between 25% Eastern Orthodox, 20% Lutherans, 5% other Christians and 1% Catholic. While the religiously unaffiliated divided between 9% as atheists, 1% as agnostics and 35% as Nothing in Particular. Traditionally, the largest religious denomination in the country was Lutheranism, which was adhered to by 160,000 Estonians (or 13% of the population) according to the 2000 census, principally ethnic Estonians. According to the Lutheran World Federation, the historic Lutheran denomination has 180,000 registered members. Other organisations, such as the World Council of Churches, report that there are as many as 265,700 Estonian Lutherans. Additionally, there are between 8,000 and 9,000 members abroad. However, the 2011 census indicated that Eastern Orthodoxy had surpassed Lutheranism, accounting for 16.5% of the population (176,773 people). Eastern Orthodoxy is practised chiefly by the Russian minority, as well as by the small Seto minority, a Finnic people living in south-eastern Estonia. The Estonian Orthodox Church, affiliated with the Russian Orthodox Church, is the primary Orthodox denomination. The Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church, under the Greek-Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarchate, claims another 28,000 members.[citation needed] Catholics are a small minority in Estonia. They are organised under the Latin Apostolic Administration of Estonia and two Greek Catholic parishes. According to the census of 2000 (data in table to the right), there were about 1,000 adherents of the Taara faith or Maausk in Estonia (see Maavalla Koda). The Jewish community has an estimated population of about 1,900 (see History of the Jews in Estonia), and the Muslim community numbers just over 1,400. Around 68,000 people consider themselves atheists. The official language, Estonian, is a Finnic language, and is conventionally classified as a member of the Uralic language family. Estonian is closely related to Finnish, and one of the few languages of Europe that is not of Indo-European origin. Unlike Estonian and Finnish, the languages of their nearest geographical neighbouring countries, Swedish, Latvian, and Russian, are all Indo-European languages. Although the Estonian and Germanic languages are of different origins, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and German. This is primarily because the Estonian language has borrowed nearly one-third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of German rule, and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22–25 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent. South Estonian languages are spoken by 100,000 people and include the dialects of Võro and Seto. The languages are spoken in South-Eastern Estonia and are genealogically distinct from northern Estonian, but are traditionally and officially considered as dialects and "regional forms of the Estonian language", not separate language(s). Russian is the most spoken minority language in the country. There are towns in Estonia with large concentrations of Russian speakers, and there are towns where Estonian speakers are in the minority (especially in the northeast, e.g. Narva). Russian is spoken as a secondary language by many 40- to 70-year-old ethnic Estonians because Russian was the unofficial language of the Estonian SSR from 1944 to 1990 and was taught as a compulsory second language during the Soviet era. In the period between 1990 and 1995, the Russian language was granted an official special status according to Estonian language laws. In 1995 it lost its official status. In 1998, most first- and second-generation industrial immigrants from the former Soviet Union (mainly the Russian SFSR) did not speak Estonian. However, by 2010, 64.1% of non-ethnic Estonians spoke Estonian. The latter, mostly Russian-speaking ethnic minorities, reside predominantly in the capital city of Tallinn and the industrial urban areas in Ida-Viru county. From the 13th to the 20th century, there were Swedish-speaking communities in Estonia, particularly in the coastal areas and on the islands, which today have almost disappeared. From 1918 to 1940, when Estonia was independent, the small Swedish community was well treated. Municipalities with a Swedish majority, mainly found along the coast, used Swedish as the administrative language and Swedish-Estonian culture saw an upswing. However, most Swedish-speaking people fled to Sweden before the end of World War II, before the invasion of Estonia by the Soviet army in 1944. Only a handful of older speakers remain. Apart from many other areas, the influence of Swedish is distinct in the Noarootsi Parish of Lääne county, where there are many villages with bilingual Estonian or Swedish names and street signs. The most common foreign languages learned by Estonian students are English, Russian, German, and French. Other popular languages include Finnish, Spanish, and Swedish. Lotfitka Romani is spoken by the Roma minority in Estonia. The history of formal education in Estonia dates back to the 13th and 14th centuries when the first monastic and cathedral schools were founded. The first primer in the Estonian language was published in 1575. The oldest university is the University of Tartu, established by the Swedish King Gustav II Adolf in 1632. In 1919, university courses were first taught in the Estonian language. From 2024 all schools will begin to transition to educating solely in the Estonian language. Today's education in Estonia is divided into general, vocational, and hobby. The education system is based on four levels: pre-school, basic, secondary, and higher education. A wide network of schools and supporting educational institutions have been established. The Estonian education system consists of state, municipal, public, and private institutions. There are currently 589 schools in Estonia. Estonia started connecting all its schools to the Internet very early. Tiigrihüpe (Estonian for Tiger Leap) was a project undertaken by the state to heavily invest in the development and expansion of computer and network infrastructure in Estonia, with a particular emphasis on education. In the 2018 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) report, Estonia's students rank 1st in Europe. In the world, Estonia's students rank 5th in reading, 8th in mathematics and 4th in sciences. Additionally, around 89% of Estonian adults aged 25–64 have earned the equivalent of a high-school degree, one of the highest rates in the industrialized world. Academic higher education in Estonia is divided into three levels: bachelor's, master's, and doctoral studies. In some specialties, the bachelor's and master's levels are integrated into one unit. Estonian public universities have significantly more autonomy than applied higher education institutions. In addition to organizing the academic life of the university, universities can create new curricula, establish admission terms and conditions, approve the budget, approve the development plan, elect the rector, and make restricted decisions in matters concerning assets. Estonia has a moderate number of public and private universities. The largest public universities are the University of Tartu, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn University, Estonian University of Life Sciences, Estonian Academy of Arts; the largest private university is Estonian Business School. The Estonian Academy of Sciences is the national academy of science. The strongest public non-profit research institute that carries out fundamental and applied research is the National Institute of Chemical Physics and Biophysics (NICPB; Estonian KBFI). The first computer centers were established in the late 1950s in Tartu and Tallinn. Estonian specialists contributed in the development of software engineering standards for ministries of the Soviet Union during the 1980s. As of 2015[update], Estonia spends around 1.5% of its GDP on Research and Development, compared to an EU average of around 2.0%. Estonia was ranked 16th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023. Some of the best-known scientists related to Estonia include astronomers Friedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve, Ernst Öpik and Jaan Einasto, biologist Karl Ernst von Baer, Jakob von Uexküll, chemists Wilhelm Ostwald and Carl Schmidt, economist Ragnar Nurkse, mathematician Edgar Krahn, medical researchers Ludvig Puusepp and Nikolay Pirogov, physicist Thomas Johann Seebeck, political scientist Rein Taagepera, psychologist Endel Tulving and Risto Näätänen, semiotician Juri Lotman. According to New Scientist, Estonia will be the first nation to provide personal genetic information services sponsored by the state. They aim to minimize and prevent future ailments for those whose genes make them extra prone to conditions like adult-onset diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. The government plans to provide lifestyle advice based on the DNA for 100,000 of its 1.3 million citizens. The culture of Estonia incorporates indigenous heritage, as represented by the Estonian language and the sauna, with mainstream Nordic and European cultural aspects. Because of its history and geography, Estonia's culture has been influenced by the traditions of the adjacent area's various Finnic, Baltic, Slavic and Germanic peoples as well as the cultural developments in the former dominant powers Germany, Sweden and Russia, for this reason it aspires more to be considered a Nordic state. Today, Estonian society encourages liberty and liberalism, with a popular commitment to the ideals of the limited government, discouraging centralised power and corruption. The Protestant work ethic remains a significant cultural staple, and free education is a highly prized institution. As the mainstream culture in the Nordic countries, Estonian culture can be seen to build upon the ascetic environmental realities and traditional livelihoods, a heritage of comparatively widespread egalitarianism out of practical reasons (see: Everyman's right and universal suffrage), and the ideals of closeness to nature and self-sufficiency (see: summer cottage). The Estonian Academy of Arts (Estonian: Eesti Kunstiakadeemia, EKA) is providing higher education in art, design, architecture, media, art history and conservation while the University of Tartu Viljandi Culture Academy has an approach to popularise native culture through such curricula as native construction, native blacksmithing, native textile design, traditional handicraft and traditional music, but also jazz and church music. In 2010, there were 245 museums in Estonia whose combined collections contain more than 10 million objects. The earliest mention of Estonian singing dates back to Saxo Grammaticus Gesta Danorum (c. 1179). Saxo speaks of Estonian warriors who sang at night while waiting for a battle. The older folk songs are also referred to as regilaulud, songs in the traditional regivärss poetic metre shared by all Baltic Finns. Runic singing was widespread among Estonians until the 18th century, when rhythmic folk songs began to replace them. Traditional wind instruments derived from those used by shepherds were once widespread, and are now becoming more commonly played once more. Other instruments, including the fiddle, zither, concertina, and accordion are used to play polka or other dance music. The kannel is a native instrument that is again becoming more popular in Estonia. A Native Music Preserving Centre was opened in 2008 in Viljandi. The tradition of Estonian Song Festivals (Laulupidu) started at the height of the Estonian national awakening in 1869. Today, it is one of the largest amateur choral events in the world. In 2004, about 100,000 people participated in the Song Festival. Since 1928, the Tallinn Song Festival Grounds (Lauluväljak) have hosted the event every five years in July. The last festival took place in July 2019. In addition, Youth Song Festivals are also held every four or five years, the latest taking place in 2017. Professional Estonian musicians and composers such as Aleksander Eduard Thomson, Rudolf Tobias, Miina Härma, Mart Saar, Artur Kapp, Juhan Aavik, Aleksander Kunileid, Artur Lemba and Heino Eller emerged in the late 19th century. Currently, the most well-known Estonian composers are Arvo Pärt, Eduard Tubin, and Veljo Tormis. In 2014, Arvo Pärt was the world's most performed living composer for the fourth year in a row. In the 1950s, Estonian baritone Georg Ots rose to worldwide prominence. In popular music, Estonian artist Kerli Kõiv has become popular in Europe, also gaining in popularity in North America.[citation needed] Estonia won the Eurovision Song Contest in 2001 with the song "Everybody" performed by Tanel Padar and Dave Benton. In 2002, Estonia hosted the event. Maarja-Liis Ilus competed for Estonia in 1996 and 1997, while Eda-Ines Etti, Koit Toome and Evelin Samuel partly owe their popularity to the song contest. Lenna Kuurmaa gained recognition in Europe performing with her band Vanilla Ninja. "Rändajad" by Urban Symphony was the first song in Estonian to chart in the UK, Belgium and Switzerland.[citation needed] Estonian country guitar player Laur Joamets won a Grammy Award with the country singer Sturgill Simpson in 2017 for the Best Country Record of the year, A Sailor's Guide to Earth. Estonian literature refers to literature written in the Estonian language (ca. 1 million speakers). The domination of Estonia after the Northern Crusades, from the 13th century to 1918 by Germany, Sweden, and Russia, resulted in few early literary works being written in the Estonian language. The oldest records of written Estonian date from the 13th century. Originates Livoniae in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia contains Estonian place names, words and sentence fragments. The Liber Census Daniae (1241) contains Estonian place and family names. Many folk tales are told to this day and some have been written down and translated to make them accessible to an international readership. ABD ehk Luggemise-Ramat Lastele, an Estonian-language alphabet book by Otto Wilhelm Masing, was published in 1795. The cultural stratum of Estonian was originally characterised by a largely lyrical form of folk poetry based on syllabic quantity. Apart from a few, albeit remarkable, exceptions, this archaic form has not been widely employed in later times. One of the most outstanding achievements in the field is the national epic Kalevipoeg. At a professional level, the traditional folk song reached its new heyday during the last quarter of the 20th century, primarily thanks to the work of composer Veljo Tormis. Oskar Luts was the most prominent prose writer of early Estonian literature and is still widely read today, particularly his lyrical school novel Kevade (Spring). A. H. Tammsaare's social epic and psychological realist pentalogy, Truth and Justice, captured the evolution of Estonian society from a poor farmer community to an independent nation. In modern times, Jaan Kross and Jaan Kaplinski are Estonia's best-known and most-translated writers. Among the most popular writers of the late 20th and early 21st centuries are Tõnu Õnnepalu and Andrus Kivirähk, who uses elements of Estonian folklore and mythology, deforming them into the absurd and grotesque. The cinema of Estonia started in 1908 with the production of a newsreel about Swedish King Gustav V's visit to Tallinn. The first public TV broadcast in Estonia was in July 1955. Regular, live radio broadcasts began in December 1926. Deregulation in the field of electronic media has brought radical changes compared to the beginning of the 1990s. The first licences for private TV broadcasters were issued in 1992. The first private radio station went on the air in 1990. The most internationally known Estonian films include Those Old Love Letters, The Heart of the Bear, Names in Marble, The Singing Revolution, Autumn Ball, 1944, The Fencer and November. Internationally known Estonian film actors include Lembit Ulfsak, Jaan Tätte, and Elmo Nüganen, who also known as a film director. Estonian media sector has a large number of weekly newspapers and magazines, and Estonians have a choice of nine domestic TV channels and a host of radio stations. Estonia has been internationally recognised for its high rate of press freedom, having been ranked 3rd in the 2012 Press Freedom Index by Reporters Without Borders. Estonia has two news agencies. The Baltic News Service (BNS), founded in 1990, is a private regional news agency covering Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The ETV24 is an agency owned by Eesti Rahvusringhääling which is a publicly funded radio and television organisation created on 30 June 2007 to take over the functions of the formerly separate Eesti Raadio and Eesti Televisioon under the terms of the Estonian National Broadcasting Act. According to the rating of the international organization Reporters Without Borders, in 2013, Estonia dropped from 3rd to 11th place in the world in terms of freedom of speech. The American non-governmental organization Freedom House shares a similar opinion about the high level of freedom of speech in Estonia. In March 2011, the European Parliament adopted a resolution expressing serious concern about media pluralism and freedom in several EU countries, including Estonia. In 2008, the Estonian Journalists' Union named Ansip the main opponent of freedom of speech in Estonia. The architectural history of Estonia mainly reflects its contemporary development in northern Europe. Worth mentioning is especially the architectural ensemble that makes out the medieval old town of Tallinn, which is on the UNESCO World Heritage List. In addition, the country has several unique, more or less preserved hill forts dating from pre-Christian times, a large number of still intact medieval castles and churches, while the countryside is still shaped by the presence of a vast number of wooden manor houses from earlier centuries. The Estonian National Day is the Independence Day celebrated on 24 February, the day the Estonian Declaration of Independence was issued. As of 2013[update], there are 12 public holidays (which come with a day off) and 12 national holidays celebrated annually. Historically, the cuisine of Estonia has been dependent on seasons and the simple food from the local farms and the sea. Today, it also includes many "global" foods. The most typical foods in modern Estonia are black bread, pork, potatoes, and dairy products. Traditionally in summer and spring, Estonians like to eat everything fresh – berries, herbs, vegetables, and everything else that comes straight from the garden. Hunting and fishing have also been very common, although currently hunting and fishing are enjoyed mostly as hobbies. Today, it is also very popular to grill outside in summer. A cardamom-spiced bread roll with almond paste vastlakukkel is a traditional Estonian sweet roll, especially popular from Christmas to Easter. Traditionally in winter, jams, preserves, and pickles are brought to the table. Gathering and preserving fruits, mushrooms, and vegetables for winter has always been popular, but today gathering and preserving is becoming less common because everything can be bought from stores. However, preparing food for winter is still very popular in the countryside.[clarification needed] Estonia first competed as an independent nation at the 1920 Summer Olympics. Estonian athletes took part in the 1952–1988 Olympic Games under the Soviet flag, as the country had been occupied and annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940. The 1980 Summer Olympics Sailing regatta was held in the capital city Tallinn. After regaining independence in 1991, Estonia has participated in all Olympics. Estonia has won most of its medals in athletics, weightlifting, wrestling, and cross-country skiing. Estonia has been one of the most successful nations at the Olympics in terms of medals won per capita. Estonia's best results were being ranked 13th in the total medals' table at the 1936 Summer Olympics, and 12th at the 2006 Winter Olympics. Estonia has many indoor and outdoor facilities dedicated to various sports branches. Kiiking, a relatively new sport, was invented in 1993 by Ado Kosk in Estonia. Kiiking involves a modified swing in which the rider of the swing tries to go around 360 degrees. Estonia portal Europe portal Outline of Estonia Index of Estonia-related articles /ɛsˈtoʊniə/ ess-TOH-nee-ə, Estonian: Eesti [ˈeːsʲti] Various sources classify Estonia differently for statistical and other purposes. For example, the United Nations, and Eurovoc classify Estonia as part of Northern Europe, the OECD classifies it as a Central and Eastern European country, the CIA World Factbook classifies it as Eastern Europe. Usage varies greatly in press sources. After the decline of the Teutonic Order following its defeat in the Battle of Grunwald in 1410, and the defeat of the Livonian Order in the Battle of Swienta on 1 September 1435, the Livonian Confederation was established by a treaty signed on 4 December 1435. "Rv0222U: Population by Sex, Ethnic Nationality and County, 1 January". "Estonia Census 2021". Statistics Estonia. 29 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2014. "Estonia gains 95 islands, but loses 4 square kilometers with updated map". ERR. 22 February 2024. Retrieved 22 February 2024. "Estonia's population grew in 2023". 2 January 2024. "Population census: Estonia's population and the number of Estonians have grown". Statistics Estonia. 1 June 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Estonia)". International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income". EU-SILC survey. Eurostat. Retrieved 22 June 2022. "Human Development Report 2023/2024" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 13 March 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "United Nations Statistics Division- Standard Country and Area Codes Classifications (M49)-Geographic Regions". Unstats.un.org. "Estonia - EU Vocabularies - Publications Office of the EU". op.europa.eu. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Directorate, OECD Statistics. "OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms - Central and Eastern European Countries (CEECs) Definition". stats.oecd.org. "Estonia". CIA World Factbook. 24 December 2023. "Country Profile – LegaCarta". Retrieved 26 November 2019. See, for instance, position expressed by European Parliament, which condemned "the fact that the occupation of these formerly independent and neutral States by the Soviet Union occurred in 1940 following the Molotov/Ribbentrop pact, and continues." European Parliament (13 January 1983). "Resolution on the situation in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania". Official Journal of the European Communities. C 42/78. "Human Development Report 2020: Estonia" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2020. "Estonia (Ranked 21st)". Legatum Prosperity Index 2020. "Pisa rankings: Why Estonian pupils shine in global tests". BBC News. 2 December 2019. "Estonia among top 3 in the UN e-Government Survey 2020". e-Estonia. 24 July 2020. Harold, Theresa (30 October 2017). "How A Former Soviet State Became One Of The World's Most Advanced Digital Nations". Alphr. Retrieved 29 November 2021. "Number of start-ups per capita by country". 2020.stateofeuropeantech.com. Mägi, Marika (2018). In Austrvegr: The Role of the Eastern Baltic in Viking Age Communication across the Baltic Sea. Brill E. pp. 144–145. ISBN 9789004363816. Harrison, D. & Svensson, K. (2007). Vikingaliv. Fälth & Hässler, Värnamo. ISBN 91-27-35725-2 Tvauri, Andres (2012). Laneman, Margot (ed.). The Migration Period, Pre-Viking Age, and Viking Age in Estonia. Tartu University Press. p. 31. ISBN 9789949199365. ISSN 1736-3810. Retrieved 21 January 2020. Rätsep, Huno (2007). "Kui kaua me oleme olnud eestlased?" (PDF). Oma Keel (in Estonian). 14: 11. Retrieved 21 January 2020. Tamm, Marek; Kaljundi, Linda; Jensen, Carsten Selch (2016). Crusading and Chronicle Writing on the Medieval Baltic Frontier: A Companion to the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia. Routledge. pp. 94–96. ISBN 9781317156796. Loit 2008, pp. 144-146 Laurisaar, Riho (31 July 2004). "Arheoloogid lammutavad ajalooõpikute arusaamu" (in Estonian). Eesti Päevaleht. Retrieved 1 November 2016. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 23. ISBN 9042008903. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 24. ISBN 9042008903. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 26. ISBN 9042008903. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 4. ISBN 9780230364509. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 5. ISBN 9780230364509. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 28. ISBN 9042008903. Frucht, Richard C. (2005). Eastern Europe: An Introduction to the People, Lands, and Culture. ABC-CLIO. p. 68. ISBN 9781576078006. Tvauri, Andres (2012). The Migration Period, Pre-Viking Age, and Viking Age in Estonia. pp. 33, 34, 59, 60. Retrieved 27 December 2016. Mäesalu, Ain (2012). "Could Kedipiv in East-Slavonic Chronicles be Keava hill fort?" (PDF). Estonian Journal of Archaeology. 1 (16supplser): 199. doi:10.3176/arch.2012.supv1.11. Retrieved 27 December 2016. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 9. ISBN 9780230364509. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 12. ISBN 9780817928537. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 9–11. ISBN 9780230364509. Enn Tarvel (2007). Sigtuna hukkumine Archived 11 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine Haridus, 2007 (7–8), pp. 38–41 Tvauri, Andres (2012). The Migration Period, Pre-Viking Age, and Viking Age in Estonia. pp. 322–325. Retrieved 19 December 2019. Mägi, Marika (2015). "Chapter 4. Bound for the Eastern Baltic: Trade and Centres AD 800–1200". In Barrett, James H.; Gibbon, Sarah Jane (eds.). Maritime Societies of the Viking and Medieval World. Maney Publishing. pp. 45–46. ISBN 978-1-909662-79-7. Martens, Irmelin (2004). "Indigenous and imported Viking Age weapons in Norway – a problem with European implications" (PDF). Journal of Nordic Archaeological Science. 14: 132–135. Retrieved 19 December 2019. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 4. ISBN 9780817928537. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 227. ISBN 9985701151. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 7. ISBN 9780230364509. Laurisaar, Riho (29 April 2006). "Arheoloogid lammutavad ajalooõpikute arusaamu" (in Estonian). Eesti Päevaleht. Retrieved 4 November 2016. Tyerman, Christopher (2006). God's War: A New History of the Crusades. Harvard University Press. p. 690. ISBN 9780674023871. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 14. ISBN 9780230364509. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 278. ISBN 9985701151. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 15. ISBN 9780230364509. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 279. ISBN 9985701151. Plakans, Andrejs (2011). A Concise History of the Baltic States. Cambridge University Press. p. 54. ISBN 9780521833721. O'Connor, Kevin (2006). Culture and Customs of the Baltic States. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 9–10. ISBN 9780313331251. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 20. ISBN 9780817928537. O'Connor, Kevin (2006). Culture and Customs of the Baltic States. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 10. ISBN 9780313331251. Pekomäe, Vello (1986). Estland genom tiderna (in Swedish). Stockholm: VÄLIS-EESTI & EMP. p. 319. ISBN 91-86116-47-9. Jokipii, Mauno (1992). Jokipii, Mauno (ed.). Baltisk kultur och historia (in Swedish). Bonniers. pp. 22–23. ISBN 9789134512078. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 441. ISBN 9780810875135. Frucht, Richard C. (2005). Eastern Europe: An Introduction to the People, Lands, and Culture, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. p. 100. ISBN 9781576078006. Frost, Robert I. (2014). The Northern Wars: War, State and Society in Northeastern Europe, 1558 – 1721. Routledge. p. 305. ISBN 9781317898573. Raudkivi, Priit (2007). Vana-Liivimaa maapäev (in Estonian). Argo. pp. 118–119. ISBN 978-9949-415-84-7. Mol, Johannes A.; Militzer, Klaus; Nicholson, Helen J. (2006). The Military Orders and the Reformation: Choices, State Building, and the Weight of Tradition. Uitgeverij Verloren. pp. 5–6. ISBN 9789065509130. Frucht, Richard C. (2005). Eastern Europe: An Introduction to the People, Lands, and Culture, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. p. 121. ISBN 9781576078006. O'Connor, Kevin (2003). The History of the Baltic States. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 25. ISBN 9780313323553. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 24. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 25. ISBN 9780817928537. Stone, David R. (2006). A Military History of Russia: From Ivan the Terrible to the War in Chechnya. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 14–18. ISBN 9780275985028. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. pp. 28–29. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 28. ISBN 9780817928537. Williams, Nicola; Herrmann, Debra; Kemp, Cathryn (2003). Estonia, Latvia & Lithuania. University of Michigan. p. 190. ISBN 1-74059-132-1. Frost, Robert I. (2014). The Northern Wars: War, State and Society in Northeastern Europe, 1558 – 1721. Routledge. p. 77. ISBN 9781317898573. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 283. ISBN 9985701151. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. pp. 32–33. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 31. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 33. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 34. ISBN 9780817928537. "The Baltic States from 1914 to 1923 By LtCol Andrew Parrott" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2009. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 38. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 41. ISBN 9780817928537. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. pp. 47–49. ISBN 9780817928537. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 286. ISBN 9985701151. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 90. ISBN 9042008903. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 59. ISBN 9780817928537. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 287. ISBN 9985701151. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 93. ISBN 9042008903. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. pp. 90–91. ISBN 9042008903. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques (2004). Estonia: Identity and Independence. Rodopi. p. 91. ISBN 9042008903. Cultural Policy in Estonia. Council of Europe. 1997. p. 23. ISBN 9789287131652. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 291. ISBN 9985701151. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 10. ISBN 9781136452130. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 292. ISBN 9985701151. Calvert, Peter (1987). The Process of Political Succession. Springer. p. 67. ISBN 9781349089789. Calvert, Peter (1987). The Process of Political Succession. Springer. p. 68. ISBN 9781349089789. Kasekamp, Andres (2000). The Radical Right in Interwar Estonia. Springer. p. 9. ISBN 9781403919557. Pinder, David (1990). Western Europe: Challenge and Change. ABC-CLIO. p. 75. ISBN 9781576078006. Pinder, David (1990). Western Europe: Challenge and Change. ABC-CLIO. p. 76. ISBN 9781576078006. Kasekamp, Andres (2000). The Radical Right in Interwar Estonia. Springer. p. 10. ISBN 9781403919557. Kasekamp, Andres (2000). The Radical Right in Interwar Estonia. Springer. p. 11. ISBN 9781403919557. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 80–81. ISBN 9780810875135. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second edition, updated. Hoover Press. p. 128. ISBN 9780817928537. Leonard, Raymond W. (1999). Secret Soldiers of the Revolution: Soviet Military Intelligence, 1918–1933. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 34–36. ISBN 9780313309908. Bell, Imogen (2002). Central and South-Eastern Europe 2003. Psychology Press. p. 244. ISBN 9781857431360. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 18. ISBN 9781136452130. Misiunas, Romuald J.; Taagepera, Rein (1983). The Baltic States, Years of Dependence, 1940–1980. University of California Press. p. 11. ISBN 9780520046252. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. pp. 19–20. ISBN 9781136452130. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 21. ISBN 9781136452130. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 22. ISBN 9781136452130. van Ginneken, Anique H. M. (2006). Historical Dictionary of the League of Nations. Scarecrow Press. p. 82. ISBN 9780810865136. von Rauch, Georg (1974). Die Geschichte der baltischen Staaten. University of California Press. pp. 108–111. ISBN 9780520026001. Hiden, John; Lane, Thomas (2003). The Baltic and the Outbreak of the Second World War. Cambridge University Press. p. 7. ISBN 9780521531207. Åselius, Gunnar (2004). The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Navy in the Baltic 1921–1941. Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 9781135769604. Lane, Thomas; Pabriks, Artis; Purs, Aldis; Smith, David J. (2013). The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Routledge. p. 154. ISBN 9781136483042. Gärtner, Heinz (2017). Engaged Neutrality: An Evolved Approach to the Cold War. Lexington Books. p. 125. ISBN 9781498546195. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 335. ISBN 978-0-8108-7513-5. Hiden, John; Salmon, Patrick (2014). The Baltic Nations and Europe: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania in the Twentieth Century. Routledge. p. 110. ISBN 978-1-317-89057-7. Raukas, Anto (2002). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 309. ISBN 9985701151. Johnson, Eric A.; Hermann, Anna (May 2007). "The Last Flight from Tallinn" (PDF). Foreign Service Journal. American Foreign Service Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2012. Mälksoo, Lauri (2003). Illegal Annexation and State Continuity: The Case of the Incorporation of the Baltic States by the USSR. Leiden – Boston: Brill. ISBN 90-411-2177-3. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 110. ISBN 978-0-8108-7513-5. Gatrell, Peter; Baron, Nick (2009). Warlands: Population Resettlement and State Reconstruction in the Soviet-East European Borderlands, 1945–50. Springer. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-230-24693-5. Kaasik, Peeter; Raudvassar, Mika (2006). "Estonia from June to October, 1941: Forest brothers and Summer War". In Hiio, Toomas; Maripuu, Meelis; Paavle, Indrek (eds.). Estonia 1940–1945: Reports of the Estonian International Commission for the Investigation of Crimes Against Humanity. Tallinn. pp. 496–517.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) The Baltic Revolution: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Path to Independence by Anatol Lieven p424 ISBN 0-300-06078-5 Lane, Thomas; Pabriks, Artis; Purs, Aldis; Smith, David J. (2013). The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Routledge. p. 34. ISBN 978-1-136-48304-2. Pinder, David (1990). Western Europe: Challenge and Change. ABC-CLIO. p. 80. ISBN 978-1-57607-800-6. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 209. ISBN 978-0-8108-7513-5. "Conclusions of the Commission". Estonian International Commission for Investigation of Crimes Against Humanity. 1998. Archived from the original on 29 June 2008. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 36. ISBN 978-1-136-45213-0. Miljan, Toivo (2004). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Scarecrow Press. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-8108-6571-6. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-8179-2853-7. Kangilaski, Jaan; et al. (2005). Salo, Vello (ed.). The white book: losses inflicted on the Estonian nation by occupation regimes, 1940–1991. Estonian Encyclopaedia Publishers. p. 18. ISBN 9789985701959. Kasekamp, Andres (2010). A History of the Baltic States. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 138. ISBN 978-0-230-36450-9. Kangilaski, Jaan; et al. (2005). Salo, Vello (ed.). The white book: losses inflicted on the Estonian nation by occupation regimes, 1940–1991. Estonian Encyclopaedia Publishers. p. 30. ISBN 9789985701959. Kangilaski, Jaan; et al. (2005). Salo, Vello (ed.). The white book: losses inflicted on the Estonian nation by occupation regimes, 1940–1991. Estonian Encyclopaedia Publishers. p. 37. ISBN 9789985701959. Misiunas, Romuald J.; Taagepera, Rein (1983). The Baltic States, Years of Dependence, 1940–1980. University of California Press. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-520-04625-2. Raun, Toivo U. (2002). Estonia and the Estonians: Second Edition, Updated. Hoover Press. p. 174. ISBN 9780817928537. Purs, Aldis (2013). Baltic Facades: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania since 1945. Reaktion Books. p. 335. ISBN 9781861899323. Taagepera, Rein (2013). The Finno-Ugric Republics and the Russian State. Routledge. p. 128. ISBN 9781136678011. Puur, Allan; Rahnu, Leen; Sakkeus, Luule; Klesment, Martin; Abuladze, Liili (22 March 2018). "The formation of ethnically mixed partnerships in Estonia: A stalling trend from a two-sided perspective" (PDF). Demographic Research. 38 (38): 1117. doi:10.4054/DemRes.2018.38.38. Retrieved 7 January 2020. Misiunas, Romuald (1983). The Baltic States, Years of Dependence: 1940-1990. Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-520-04625-2. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Misiunas, Romuald (1983). The Baltic States, Years of Dependence: 1940-1990. Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press. p. 78. ISBN 978-0-520-04625-2. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 227. ISBN 9780810875135. Spyra, Wolfgang; Katzsch, Michael (2007). Environmental Security and Public Safety: Problems and Needs in Conversion Policy and Research after 15 Years of Conversion in Central and Eastern Europe. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 14. ISBN 9781402056444. Stöcker, Lars Fredrik (2017). Bridging the Baltic Sea: Networks of Resistance and Opposition during the Cold War Era. Lexington Books. p. 72. ISBN 9781498551281. Lepp, Annika; Pantti, Mervi (2013). "Window to the West: Memories of watching Finnish television in Estonia during the Soviet period". VIEW (3/2013). Journal of European Television History and Culture: 80–81. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2021. Feldbrugge, F. J. Ferdinand Joseph Maria; Van den Berg, Gerard Pieter; Simons, William Bradford (1985). Encyclopedia of Soviet Law. BRILL. p. 461. ISBN 9789024730759. Lane, Thomas; Pabriks, Artis; Purs, Aldis; Smith, David J. (2013). The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Routledge. p. xx. ISBN 9781136483042. Frankowski, Stanisław; Stephan III, Paul B. (1995). Legal Reform in Post-Communist Europe: The View from Within. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 73. ISBN 9780792332183. Backes, Uwe; Moreau, Patrick (2008). Communist and Post-Communist Parties in Europe: Schriften Des Hannah-Arendt-Instituts Für Totalitarismusforschung 36. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. p. 9. ISBN 9783525369128. Vogt, Henri (2005). Between Utopia and Disillusionment: A Narrative of the Political Transformation in Eastern Europe. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. pp. 20–22. ISBN 9781571818959. Simons, Greg; Westerlund, David (2015). Religion, Politics and Nation-Building in Post-Communist Countries. Ashgate Publishing. p. 151. ISBN 9781472449719. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. pp. 46–48. ISBN 9781136452130. Walker, Edward W. (2003). Dissolution: Sovereignty and the Breakup of the Soviet Union. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 63. ISBN 9780742524538. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 52. ISBN 9781136452130. Smith, David (2013). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. Routledge. p. 54. ISBN 9781136452130. Gill, Graeme (2003). Democracy and Post-Communism: Political Change in the Post-Communist World. Routledge. p. 41. ISBN 9781134485567. Dillon, Patricia; Wykoff, Frank C. (2002). Creating Capitalism: Transitions and Growth in Post-Soviet Europe. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 164. ISBN 9781843765561. Nørgaard, Ole (1999). The Baltic States After Independence. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 188. ISBN 9781843765561. "Sweden pays tribute". www.thelocal.se. Henley, Jon; correspondent, Jon Henley Europe (23 January 2023). "Estonia ferry disaster inquiry backs finding bow door was to blame". The Guardian. Ó Beacháin, Donnacha; Sheridan, Vera; Stan, Sabina (2012). Life in Post-Communist Eastern Europe after EU Membership. Routledge. p. 170. ISBN 9781136299810. "Estonia and the WTO". World Trade Organization. Retrieved 20 September 2021. Miljan, Toivo (2015). Historical Dictionary of Estonia. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 18–19. ISBN 9780810875135. "Estonia and OECD". Estonia in OECD. "Estonia becomes 17th member of the euro zone". BBC News. 31 December 2010. "Estonia in the UN Security Council | Ministry of Foreign Affairs". vm.ee. "Invitation to the birthday celebrations of the Republic of Estonia". Archived from the original on 4 March 2018. Retrieved 12 March 2018. ERR (24 February 2018). "Gallery: Independence Day parade on Tallinn's Freedom Square". ERR. Retrieved 18 December 2023. Raukas, Anto (2018). "Briefly about Estonia". Dynamiques Environnementales. 42 (42): 284–291. doi:10.4000/dynenviron.2230. ISSN 2534-4358. S2CID 240432618. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Estonia". European Environment Agency. 15 March 2021. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Methodology". United Nations Statistics Division. Retrieved 5 March 2023. Saar, Asmu (2002). "Üldandmed". In Raukas, Anto (ed.). Eesti entsüklopeedia 11: Eesti üld (in Estonian). Eesti Entsüklopeediakirjastus. p. 9. ISBN 9985701151. "Ülemõõtmine: Soome on veidi pisem, Eesti ikka sama suur" (in Estonian). Delfi. 25 February 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Information about Estonia". Estonian Information System Authority. 9 November 2022. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Climate normals - Temperature". Estonian Environment Agency. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Weather records - Temperature". Estonian Environment Agency. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Climate normals - Precipitation". Estonian Environment Agency. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Weather records - Precipitation". Estonian Environment Agency. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Climate normals - Sunshine". Estonian Environment Agency. Retrieved 27 February 2023. Taylor, Neil (2014). Estonia. Bradt Travel Guides. pp. 4, 6–7. ISBN 9781841624877. Timm, Uudo; Maran, Tiit (March 2020). "How much has the mammal fauna in Estonia changed?". Loodusveeb. Retrieved 7 April 2023. "Peep Männil: Läänemaal elab veel vähemalt kaks šaakalit, tõenäoliselt rohkem". Maaleht. 3 April 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Einmann, Andres (1 September 2017). "Šaakalite jahihooaeg pikenes kahe kuu võrra". Postimees. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Taylor, Neil (2014). Estonia. Bradt Travel Guides. pp. 7–8. ISBN 9781841624877. Spilling, Michael (2010). Estonia. Marshall Cavendish. p. 11. ISBN 9781841624877. Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869. "National Flower". Global Road Warrior. World Trade Press. 2023. Retrieved 7 April 2023. "Nature conservation". Ministry of the Environment. 13 July 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2023. Toots, Anu (March 2019). "2019 Parliamentary elections in Estonia" (PDF). Friedrich Ebert Foundation. p. 3. Retrieved 4 January 2020. "What is Riigikogu?". Riigikogu. 15 October 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2020. "What does Riigikogu do?". Riigikogu. 4 September 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2020. Annus, Taavi (27 September 2012). "Government". Estonica. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2020. YLE: Viron presidentinvaali on ajautumassa kaaokseen jo toista kertaa peräkkäin – "Instituutio kyntää pohjamudissa", sanoo politiikan tutkija (in Finnish) Annus, Taavi (27 September 2012). "Duties of the President of the Republic". Estonica. Archived from the original on 24 September 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2020. Liivik, Ero (2011). "Referendum in the Estonian Constitution" (PDF). Juridica International. 18: 21. Retrieved 14 January 2020. Schulze, Elizabeth (8 February 2019). "How a tiny country bordering Russia became one of the most tech-savvy societies in the world". CNBC. Retrieved 4 January 2020. Vinkel, Priit (2012). "Information Security Technology for Applications". Laud P. (eds) Information Security Technology for Applications. NordSec 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 7161. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 7161. Springer Publishing. pp. 4–12. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-29615-4_2. ISBN 978-3-642-29614-7. "Estonia sets new e-voting record at Riigikogu 2023 elections". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. 6 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Reform Party takes landslide win in 2023 Riigikogu elections". 6 March 2023. Retrieved 17 April 2023. "Reformierakonna, Eesti 200 ja Sotsiaaldemokraatide valitsus astus ametisse" (in Estonian). Eesti Rahvusringhääling. 17 April 2023. Retrieved 17 April 2023. Ernits, Madis; et al. (2019). "The Constitution of Estonia: The Unexpected Challenges of Unlimited Primacy of EU Law". In Albi, Anneli; Bardutzky, Samo (eds.). National Constitutions in European and Global Governance: Democracy, Rights, the Rule of Law. The Hague: T.M.C. Asser Press. p. 889. doi:10.1007/978-94-6265-273-6. hdl:10138/311890. ISBN 978-94-6265-272-9. Varul, Paul (2000). "Legal Policy Decisions and Choices in the Creation of New Private Law in Estonia" (PDF). Juridica International. 5: 107. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Madise, Ülle (27 September 2012). "Courts of first instance and courts of appeal". Estonica. Archived from the original on 19 September 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2020. "Supreme Court of Estonia". Supreme Court of Estonia. Retrieved 16 January 2020. Heydemann, Günther; Vodička, Karel (2017). From Eastern Bloc to European Union: Comparative Processes of Transformation since 1990. Berghahn Books. p. 12. ISBN 9781785333187. Vahtla, Aili (6 June 2018). "Study: Estonian judicial system among most efficient in EU". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 16 January 2020. Perry, Sophie (2 January 2024). "Same-sex marriage is now officially legal in Estonia". PinkNews. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Estonia becomes first former Soviet nation to legalize same-sex marriage". 22 June 2023. "Estonian government approves draft same-sex marriage act". ERR News. 15 May 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. Whittaker Briggs, Herbert (1952). The law of nations: cases, documents, and notes. Appleton-Century-Crofts. p. 106. "Estonia country brief". Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "EU Agency for large-scale IT systems". European Commission. 20 July 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Estonian presidency leaves 'more confident' EU". EUobserver. 21 December 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Estonian Chairmanship of the Baltic Council of Ministers in 2011". Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Nordic-Baltic Co-operation". Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 10 July 2012. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Nordplus". Nordic Council of Ministers. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "NordicBaltic Mobility and Network Programme for Business and Industry". Nordic Council of Ministers' Office in Latvia. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "NordicBaltic mobility programme for public administration". Nordic Council of Ministers' Office in Estonia. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Nordic Council of Ministers' Information Offices in the Baltic States and Russia". Nordic Council of Ministers. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Norden in Estonia". Nordic Council of Ministers' Office in Estonia. Retrieved 11 August 2012. "Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania 10-year owners at NIB". Nordic Investment Bank. December 2014. Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018. Smyth, Patrick (7 May 2016). "World View: German paper outlines vision for EU defence union". The Irish Times. Retrieved 22 February 2018. Dahl, Ann Sofie; Järvenpää, Pauli (2014). Northern Security and Global Politics: Nordic-Baltic strategic influence in a post-unipolar world. Routledge. p. 166. ISBN 978-0-415-83657-9. Retrieved 24 December 2016. "NORDEFCO annual report 2015" (PDF). Nordefco.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. Ilves, Toomas Hendrik (14 December 1999). "Estonia as a Nordic Country". Estonian Foreign Ministry. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2009. Mouritzen, Hans; Wivel, Anders (2005). The Geopolitics of Euro-Atlantic Integration (1 ed.). Routledge. p. 143. "List of OECD Member countries – Ratification of the Convention on the OECD". OECD. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Participating States". OSCE. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Gallery: Estonia gains non-permanent UN Security Council seat". ERR News. ERR. 7 June 2019. Retrieved 7 June 2019. "Ambassador: Successes tend to get ignored in Estonian-Russian relations". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. 9 December 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Estonia's Prime Minister: 'We Need to Help Ukraine Win'". Foreign Policy. 3 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Updates: Russia's invasion of Ukraine – reactions in Estonia". Estonian World. Retrieved 15 March 2023. "Compulsory military service". Estonian Defence Forces. 11 March 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Estonian Defence Forces". Estonian Defence Forces. Retrieved 28 December 2019.[permanent dead link] "Kaitse-eelarve" (in Estonian). Estonian Ministry of Defence. 3 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Estonian Defence League". Estonian Defence League. Retrieved 23 March 2023. McLaughlin, Daniel (8 July 2016). "Baltic volunteers guard against threat of Russian stealth invasion". The Irish Times. Retrieved 29 December 2019. Vahtla, Aili (20 April 2017). "Defense chiefs decide to move forward with Baltic battalion project". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Rang, Adam (29 March 2023). "A letter from 1949 indicates Estonia wanted to be a NATO founding member". Estonian World. Whyte, Andrew (5 May 2019). "Nine more nations join NATO cyberdefense center". Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 29 December 2019. Marcus, Jonathan (10 July 2017). "Nato sends 'alive and strong' message from Estonia". BBC. Retrieved 29 December 2019. "Czechs and Belgians take over in latest Baltic air police rotation". LSM. 3 September 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2019. Andresson, Jan Joel (17 February 2015). "If not now, when? The Nordic EU Battlegroup". European Union Institute for Security Studies. Retrieved 29 December 2019. "Estonia joins European Intervention Initiative". Estonian Ministry of Defence. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 29 December 2019. "Operatsioonid alates 1995" (in Estonian). Estonian Defence Forces. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Eesti sõdurite 10 aastat Afganistanis: 9 surnut, 90 haavatut". Postimees (in Estonian). 15 March 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Rohemäe, Maria-Ann (27 April 2014). "Välisoperatsioonidel on hukkunud 11 Eesti sõdurit" (in Estonian). Eesti Rahvusringhääling. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Pesti, Cerlin; Randma-Liiv, Tiina (April 2018). "Estonia". In Thijs, Nick; Hammerschmid, Gerhard (eds.). Public administration characteristics and performance in EU28. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. pp. 252–255. doi:10.2767/74735. ISBN 9789279904530. "Local Governments". Estonian Ministry of Finance. 1 November 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2020. "Estonia (Ranked 21st)". Legatum Prosperity Index 2020. "Pisa rankings: Why Estonian pupils shine in global tests". BBC News. 2 December 2019. "Estonia among top 3 in the UN e-Government Survey 2020". e-Estonia. 24 July 2020. Harold, Theresa (30 October 2017). "How A Former Soviet State Became One Of The World's Most Advanced Digital Nations". Alphr. Retrieved 29 November 2021. "Number of start-ups per capita by country". 2020.stateofeuropeantech.com. Mardiste, David (1 January 2011). "Estonia joins crisis-hit euro club". Reuters. Retrieved 2 January 2011. "Electricity Balance, Yearly" Archived 28 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine 8 June 2010 (Estonian) ""Põlevkivi kasutamise riikliku arengukava 2008–2015" 2011. a täitmise aruanne" (PDF). Valitsus.ee. 6 September 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. "Energy Effectiveness, Yearly" Archived 28 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine 22 September 2010 (Estonian) "Europe's Declining Gas Demand: Trends and Facts about European Gas Consumption – June 2015". (PDF). p.9. E3G. Source: Eurostat, Eurogas, E3G. "DISCOVER BUSINESS AND INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES IN ESTONIA!". Estonian Export Directory. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2013. "Muuga Harbour". Tallinna Sadam. Retrieved 11 August 2023. "Ministry of Finance". fin.ee. 15 May 2008. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Eesti Statistika – Enim nõutud statistika". Stat.ee. 23 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 5 June 2011. "GDP per capita in PPS" (PDF). Eurostat. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 July 2009. Retrieved 25 June 2009. Aron, Allan; Puura, Evelin. "Avaleht – Eesti Statistika". Stat.ee. Retrieved 31 March 2016. Koovit, Kaja (1 June 2011). "bbn.ee – Half of Estonian GDP is created in Tallinn". Balticbusinessnews.com. Retrieved 5 June 2011. Half of the gross domestic product of Estonia is created in Tallinn. Statistics Estonia. Stat.ee. 29 September 2008. Retrieved 23 December 2011. "Real GDP per capita, growth rate and totals". Stat.ee. Statistics Estonia. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 25 November 2012. "Estonia Uses the Euro, and the Economy is Booming". CNBC. 5 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Country Rankings: World & Global Economy Rankings on Economic Freedom". Heritage.org. 13 January 2017. Archived from the original on 16 September 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Corruption Perceptions Index 2016 – Transparency International". Transparency.org. 25 January 2017. Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "2015 International Tax Competitiveness Index". Taxfoundation.org. 28 September 2015. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Rankings & Ease of Doing Business Score". Doing Business. The World Bank. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Digital Economy Estonia: From IT tiger to the World's Most Pre-eminent e-state". New European Economy. 23 May 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Estonia: a digital economy". Treasury Today. June 2015. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Trace Matrix". Traceminternational.org. Retrieved 19 August 2021. "Estonian Economic Miracle: A Model For Developing Countries". Global Politician. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2011. "2020 Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2020. "Asian countries dominate, science teaching criticised in survey". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 15 August 2020. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "Press Freedom Index 2016". Reports Without Borders. 30 January 2013. Retrieved 29 May 2016. Comparing Performance of Universal Health Care Countries, 2016 Fraser Institute Estonia OECD 2016. "Which countries are most generous to new parents?". The Economist. Retrieved 28 October 2016.. "Welcome to E-stonia, the world's most digitally advanced society". Wired. Retrieved 20 October 2018. "What is e-Residency | How to Start an EU Company Online". e-Residency. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "30 years of monetary reform in Estonia: Lessons learned for the decade ahead". www.bundesbank.de. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Bauc, Jaroslaw (April 1995). "Estonian way to a liberal economic system" (PDF). Staehr, Karsten. "Economic Transition in Estonia: Background, Reform and results" (PDF). "Estonia Economic Reform History - Flags, Maps, Economy, History, Climate, Natural Resources, Current Issues, International Agreements, Population, Social Statistics, Political System". photius.com. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Personal Income Tax Archived 2 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Estonia Angioni, Giovanni (31 March 2009). "Estonia Gets Closer to the Euro". Estonian Free Press. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 22 November 2009. "Land Taxation Reform in Estonia" (PDF). Aysps.gsu.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 August 2010. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Homeownership rate graph". Housing Vacancies and Homeownership. US Census. Retrieved 2 June 2015. Schneider, Thomas (March 2013). "Estonia and the European Debt and Economic Crisis". "Estonia's accession to the OECD". OECD. 9 December 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2016. "Port of Tallinn surges nearly 20% minutes after trading begins" ERR, 13 June 2018. "Latvian airBaltic becomes number one airline in Estonia". Estonian World. 4 May 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2016. Liiva, Siiri (18 November 2016). "Nordica lennukipark täieneb ajutiselt ühe LOTi lennukiga". Postimees Majandus (in Estonian). Postimees. Retrieved 19 November 2016. "FOTOD: Vaata, kuidas saabus Tallinna lennujaama kahe miljones reisija" (in Estonian). delfi.ee. 16 November 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2012. IEA (2013). Estonia 2013. Energy Policies Beyond IEA Countries. Paris: IEA. p. 20. doi:10.1787/9789264190801-en. ISBN 978-92-6419079-5. ISSN 2307-0897. "Actions of the state in directing the use of oil shale. Does the state guarantee that oil shale reserves are used sustainably? Report of the National Audit Office to the Riigikogu". National Audit Office of Estonia. 19 November 2014. pp. 7–14, 29. Archived from the original on 13 December 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2015. IEA (2013). Estonia 2013. Energy Policies Beyond IEA Countries. Paris: IEA. p. 7. doi:10.1787/9789264190801-en. ISBN 978-92-6419079-5. ISSN 2307-0897. "Uranium production at Sillamäe". Ut.ee. Archived from the original on 4 January 2015. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Rofer, Cheryl K.; Kaasik, Tõnis (2000). Turning a Problem into a Resource: Remediation and Waste Management at the Sillamäe Site, Estonia. Volume 28 of NATO science series: Disarmament technologies. Springer. p. 229. ISBN 978-0-7923-6187-9. Reigas, Anneli (1 December 2010). "Estonia's rare earth break China's market grip". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 1 December 2010. "Forest resources based on national forest inventory". Statistics Estonia. 2012. Millington, David (11 April 2022). "The war on Estonian forests". Estonian World. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "Kas metsanduse arengukava kaitseb Eesti metsi?". Bioneer (in Estonian). 14 December 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2023. ERR, Marko Tooming | (20 March 2023). "RMK 2022 profit €153 million". ERR. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "What Are The Biggest Industries In Estonia?". WorldAtlas. 2 July 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2023. "Invest in Estonia: Overview of the Construction industry in Estonia". Archived from the original on 21 October 2007. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Energy emergency revives Estonia's polluting oil shale industry". POLITICO. 28 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2023. M. Auer (2004). Estonian Environmental Reforms: A Small Nation's Outsized Accomplishments. In: Restoring Cursed Earth: Appraising Environmental Policy Reforms in Eastern Europe and Russia. Rowman & Littlefield. pp 117–144. "Environment – current issues in Estonia. CIA Factbook". Umsl.edu. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Kütt, Ave (28 October 2022). "Estonia to use 100% renewable energy by 2030". Invest in Estonia. Retrieved 11 August 2023. "The EBRD invests in renewable energy developer Sunly in Estonia". www.ebrd.com. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Howey, William (26 May 2023). "Baltic states ramp up investment in energy sector". Economist Intelligence Unit. Retrieved 11 August 2023. "Estonian Wind Power Association". Tuuleenergia.ee. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Peipsile võib kerkida mitusada tuulikut, Postimees. 21 October 2007 (in Estonian) Archived 22 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine Henrik Ilves Tuule püüdmine on saanud Eesti kullapalavikuks Archived 2 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Eesti Päevaleht. 13 June 2008 (in Estonian) "State Environment in Estonia". Enrin.grida.no. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Developing Estonian energy policy hand in hand with EU energy packages" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2010. "Visaginas recognised with nuclear site name". World Nuclear News. 30 July 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Nuclear Power Plant Project in Lithuania is Feasible. Press release". Lietuvos Energija. 25 October 2006. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2007. "Liive: Eesti Energia ditched nuclear plant plans for shale oil". ERR. 24 November 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2015. "Nord Pool". Nordpoolspot.com. Retrieved 23 July 2017. Hackers Take Down the Most Wired Country in Europe, August 2007 Thomann, Andreas (6 September 2006). "Skype – A Baltic Success Story". credit-suisse.com. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2008. "Not only Skype". The Economist. 11 July 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2015. "Estonian Startup Database". Startup Estonia. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "The Estonia-Singapore tech corridor: A conversation with Priit Turk, Estonian ambassador to Singapore". KrASIA. 7 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "GNI per capita in PPP dollars for Baltic states". Google WorldBank. Retrieved 27 February 2015. "CoinMetro License". Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 8 August 2018. "CIA World Factbook: Estonia". Cia.gov. Retrieved 23 December 2010. "European Union Structural Funds in Estonia". Struktuurifondid.ee. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Vosman, Livia (13 November 2010). "Europostitus on jõudnud 350 000 kodusse". Rahandusministeerium (in Estonian). Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 29 April 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Estonian Economy Overview | Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Vm.ee. 16 June 2017. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Rahvaarv rahvuse järgi, 1. jaanuar, aasta". Statistics Estonia. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Rahvaarv, 1. jaanuar, aasta". Statistics Estonia. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Ethnic minorities in Estonia: past and present". Einst.ee. 26 December 1998. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Estonia - World Directory of Minorities & Indigenous Peoples". 2 November 2023. "Baltic Germans in Estonia". Estonian Institute. Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. Černoušek, Štěpán (June 2020). "Soviet repression and deportations in the Baltic states". Gulag Online. Retrieved 29 October 2021. Smith, David James (2005). The Baltic States and Their Region: New Europe Or Old?. Rodopi. p. 211. ISBN 978-90-420-1666-8. "National Minorities Cultural Autonomy Act". Riigi Teataja. Retrieved 7 April 2022. Viies, Mare (July 2011). "Estonia - Promoting Social Inclusion of Roma". European Commission. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. "Report: Estonia is most westernised of former Soviet Union members". The Baltic Times. 1 May 2018. Retrieved 29 November 2021. CIA World Factbook Archived 10 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine. . Retrieved 7 November 2011 "Töötuse määr" [Unemployment rate] (in Estonian). Statistics Estonia. Retrieved 20 September 2021.[permanent dead link] "Population by the place of residence and mother tongue, statistical database: Population Census 2000". Statistics Estonia (government agency at the area of administration of the Ministry of Finance). July 2010. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Citizenship". Estonia.eu. 13 July 2010. Archived from the original on 27 August 2010. Retrieved 18 August 2010. Eesti andis mullu kodakondsuse 2124 inimesele, Postimees. 9 January 2009 "Refugees frustrated and trapped in chilly Baltic states". BBC News. 4 July 2017. Tambur, Silver (29 December 2022). "Estonia has accepted the largest share of Ukrainian refugees in the EU". Estonian World. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Naturalisation in Estonia Statement by the Legal Information Centre for Human Rights (Tallinn, Estonia) ([...]the Special Rapporteur considers extremely credible the views of the representatives of the Russian-speaking minorities who expressed that the citizenship policy is discriminatory[...]) Eesti ühiskond Society Archived 2 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine. (2006, PDF in Estonian/English). Retrieved 23 December 2011. Kangsepp, Liis (9 October 2014). "Estonia Passes Law Recognizing Gay Partnerships". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 4 January 2014. "RV068: POPULATION BY CITIZENSHIP AND PLACE OF RESIDENCE, 1 JANUARY". PxWeb. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "PC0454: at least 15-year-old persons by religion, sex, age group, ethnic nationality and county, 31 December 2011". Statistics Estonia. 31 December 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2014. "PHC 2011: over a quarter of the population are affiliated with a particular religion". Statistics Estonia. 29 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2014. Ivković, Sanja Kutnjak; Haberfeld, M.R. (10 June 2015). Measuring Police Integrity Across the World: Studies from Established Democracies and Countries in Transition. Springer. p. 131. ISBN 9781493922796. Estonia is considered Protestant when classified by its historically predominant major religion (Norris and Inglehart 2011) and thus some authors (e.g., Davie 2003) claim Estonia belongs to Western (Lutheran) Europe, while others (e.g., Norris and Inglehart 2011) see Estonia as a Protestant ex-Communist society. Ringvee, Ringo (16 September 2011). "Is Estonia really the least religious country in the world?". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 October 2014. For this situation there are several reasons, starting from the distant past (the close connection of the churches with the Swedish or German ruling classes) up to the Soviet-period atheist policy when the chain of religious traditions was broken in most families. In Estonia, religion has never played an important role on the political or ideological battlefield. The institutional religious life was dominated by foreigners until the early 20th century. The tendencies that prevailed in the late 1930s for closer relations between the state and Lutheran church [...] ended with the Soviet occupation in 1940. Edovald, Triin; Felton, Michelle; Haywood, John; Juskaitis, Rimvydas; Michael Thomas Kerrigan; Lund-Lack, Simon; Middleton, Nicholas; Miskovsky, Josef; Piatrowicz, Ihar; Pickering, Lisa; Praulins, Dace; Swift, John; Uselis, Vytautas; Zajedova, Ilivi (2010). World and Its Peoples: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland. Marshall Cavendish. p. 1066. ISBN 9780761478966. It is usually said that Estonia is a Protestant country; however, the overwhelming majority of Estonians, some 72 percent, are nonreligious. Estonia is the European Union (EU) country with the greatest percentage of people with no religious belief. This is in part, the result of Soviet actions and repression of religion. When the Soviet Union annexed Estonia in 1940, church property was confiscated, many theologians were deported to Siberia, most of the leadership of Evangelical Lutheran Church went into exile, and religious instruction was banned. Many churches were destroyed in the German occupation of Estonia, from 1941 through 1944, and in World War II (1939–1945), and religion was actively persecuted in Estonia under Soviet rule 1944 until 1989, when some measure of tolerance was introduced. "Estonia – Religion". Country Studies. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Constitution of Estonia#Chapter 2: Fundamental Rights, Liberties, and Duties Article 40.–42. "Social Values" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2006. Retrieved 5 June 2011. Crabtree, Steve (31 August 2010). "Religiosity Highest in World's Poorest Nations". Gallup. Retrieved 27 May 2015. (in which numbers have been rounded) "Discrimination in the EU in 2012" (PDF), Special Eurobarometer, 383, European Union: European Commission, p. 233, 2012, archived from the original (PDF) on 2 December 2012, retrieved 14 August 2013 The question asked was "Do you consider yourself to be...?" With a card showing: Catholic, Orthodox, Protestant, Other Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, Buddhist, Hindu, Atheist, and Non-believer/Agnostic. Space was given for Other (SPONTANEOUS) and DK. Jewish, Sikh, Buddhist, Hindu did not reach the 1% threshold. "Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe" (PDF). 10 May 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe | Pew Research Center". Pewforum.org. 10 May 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe: 1. Religious affiliation; Pew Research Center, 10 May 2017 "Churches in Estonia". lutheranworld.org. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 16 February 2016. "Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church". oikoumene.org. January 1948. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2015. "Maavald". Maavald.ee. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Kaasik, Ahto. "Old Estonian Religions". Einst.ee. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Barry, Ellen (9 November 2008). "Some Estonians return to pre-Christian animist traditions". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Statistical database: Population Census 2000 – Religious affiliation". Statistics Estonia. 22 October 2002. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Laakso, Johanna; Sarhimaa, Anneli; Spiliopoulou Åkermark, Sia; Toivanen, Reeta (3 March 2016). Towards Openly Multilingual Policies and Practices: Assessing Minority Language Maintenance Across Europe (1 ed.). Bristol; Buffalo: Multilingual Matters. ISBN 9781783094950. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Eesti NSV Keeleseadus". Riigi Teataja. 7 January 1990. Retrieved 20 August 2021. "Kirch, Aksel. "Russians in contemporary Estonia – different strategies of the integration in to the nation-state."". Ies.ee. 10 February 1998. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Table ML133, Eesti Statistika. Retrieved 30 April 2011 "Names of populated places changed with the reform of 1997". Institute of the Estonian Language. 29 September 1998. Retrieved 12 August 2012. "Information about the bilingual Estonian/Swedish parish of Noarootsi". Noavv.ee. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Estonian Foreign Languages Strategy 2009 – 2015". Ministry of Education and Research. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 22 August 2014. "ESTONIAN LOTFITKA ROMANI" (PDF). "University of Tartu". www.topuniversities.com. "Ajaloost: Koolihariduse algusest" (in Estonian). University of Tartu. 24 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "Estonia: Action plan approved for transition to Estonian-language education". 16 December 2022. "Haridus- ja Teadusministeerium". Hm.ee. Retrieved 23 December 2010. "Koolide, huvikoolide, koolieelsete lasteasutuste kontaktandmed". Archived from the original on 17 June 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2009.. Estonian Education Infosystem, (in Estonian) "BBC World Service – Witness History, Estonia's internet 'Tiger Leap'". BBC. "PISA 2018: Estonian students rank 1st in Europe". Education Estonia. 28 May 2020. "PISA 2018: Insights and Interpretations" (PDF). "OECD Better Life Index". Retrieved 27 March 2015. "National Registry of Cultural Monuments 7010 Eesti Üliõpilaste Seltsi hoone Tartus, J.Tõnissoni 1, 1901.a." Retrieved 18 November 2022. "National summary sheets on education systems in Europe and ongoing reforms: Estonia". Eurydice. February 2009. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2009. "Implementation of Bologna Declaration in Estonia". Bologna-berlin2003.de. Archived from the original on 9 July 2009. Retrieved 2 June 2010. A. Kalja; J. Pruuden; B. Tamm; E. Tyugu (1989). "Two Families of Knowledge Based CAD Environments". In Kochan, Detlef (ed.). Software for manufacturing: proceedings of the 7th International IFIP/IFAC Conference on Software for Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Dresden, German Democratic Republic, 14–17 June 1988. North-Holland. pp. 125–134. ISBN 978-0-444-87342-2. H. Jaakkola; A. Kalja (1997). "Estonian Information Technology Policy in Government, Industry and Research". Technology Management: Strategies and Applications. 3 (3): 299–307. "Research and development expenditure (% of GDP)". World Bank. 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2019. WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". www.wipo.int. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. Retrieved 23 October 2023. "Estonia to give genetic testing and advice to 100,000 residents". New Scientist. Retrieved 3 April 2018. Estonia as a Nordic Country – Välisministeerium Nordic ideals of Estonia and Finland: a longing for a strong leader sets Finland and Estonia apart from Scandinavia – ICDS Eesti 245 muuseumis säilitatakse 10 miljonit museaali. Postimees, 30 October 2011. (in Estonian) Sir George Grove; Sadie, Stanley (June 1980). The New Grove dictionary of music and musicians. Macmillan Publishers. p. 358. ISBN 978-0-333-23111-1. Ross, Jan; Lehiste, Ilse (2002). The Temporal Structure of Estonian Runic Songs (Reprint 2015 ed.). Berlin: DeGruyter Mouton. p. 9. doi:10.1515/9783110885996. ISBN 9783110170320. Retrieved 9 May 2022. Margus Haav Pärimusmuusika ait lööb uksed valla (Estonian Native Music Preserving Centre is opened) Archived 12 September 2012 at archive.today. Postimees. 27 March 2008 (in Estonian) The 12th Estonian youth song and dance celebration Archived 6 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Estonian Song and Dance Celebration Foundation "Popular awareness in Estonian music". Estonica.org. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "2014 Classical music statistics: Lis(z)tmania". Bachtrack.com. 8 January 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2016. "Ots, Georg". Museum Collection. 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021. "Estonian guitarist Laur Joamets is among the Grammy winners". 13 February 2017. "Estonian literature". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Kurman, George (1968). The development of written Estonian. Indiana University. ISBN 9780877500360. Tiidu the Piper. Basel: Collegium Basilea. 2014. ISBN 9781500941437. History – Estonian Children's Literature Centre Spotted Mother Tongue – Vaba Eesti Sõna Seeking the contours of a 'truly' Estonian literature Estonica.org Literature and an independent Estonia Archived 21 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Estonica.org Liukkonen, Petri. "Anton Tammsaare". Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi). Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on 5 October 2007. Jaan Kross at google.books Andrus Kivirähk. The Old Barny (novel) Archived 4 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine Estonian Literature Centre "Cinema of Estonia". Einst.ee. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Press Freedom Index 2011–2012 – Reporters Without Borders". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Johnstone, Sarah (2007). Europe on a Shoestring. Lonely Planet. p. 325. ISBN 978-1-74104-591-8. Maier, Michaela (2006). Campaigning in Europe. LIT Verlag Berlin-Hamburg-Münster. p. 398. ISBN 978-3-8258-9322-4. "Press Freedom Index 2013 — Reporters Without Borders". Archived from the original on 15 February 2013. "Freedom in the World 2011" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2011. "Hungarian media law needs to be changed further, says European Parliament". Archived from the original on 14 March 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2011. Европарламент беспокоит свобода СМИ в Эстонии, dzd.ee "Свобода слова, эстонская версия" [Freedom of speech, Estonian version] (in Russian). Archived from the original on 21 March 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2011. "Historic Centre (Old Town) of Tallinn". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Pada hill forts". VisitEstonia.com. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Varbola hill fort". VisitEstonia.com. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "10 Historic Estonian Castles". HeritageDaily.com. 25 November 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Castles & manors". VisitEstonia.com. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Churches". VisitEstonia.com. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Pühade ja tähtpäevade seadus" (in Estonian). Riigi Teataja. Retrieved 19 December 2010. In effect since 26 February 2010 "Estonian Holidays in 2010". Estonian Foreign Ministry. Archived from the original on 6 January 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2010. "Estonian Food Inforserver". Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. (in Estonian) Rosa, Natalia (27 February 2020). "A first timer's guide to wholesome and delicious Estonian Food". Trafalgar.com. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Tambur, Silver (23 July 2021). "Estonia at the Olympics". EstonianWorld.com. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Sports and games". VisitEstonia.com. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "A wild sport invented in Estonia - kiiking | Visit Estonia". Visitestonia.com. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Giuseppe D'Amato Travel to the Baltic Hansa. The European Union and its enlargement to the East. Book in Italian. Viaggio nell'Hansa baltica. L'Unione europea e l'allargamento ad Est. Greco&Greco editori, Milano, 2004. ISBN 88-7980-355-7 Hiden, John; Salmon, Patrick (1991). The Baltic Nations and Europe: Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania in the Twentieth Century. London: Longman. ISBN 0-582-08246-3. Kangilaski, Jaak; et al. (2005). Valge raamat: eesti rahva kaotustest okupatsioonide läbi; 1940-1991 (PDF) (in Estonian). Justiitsministeerium. ISBN 9985-70-194-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2011. Kropotkin, Peter Alexeivitch; Bealby, John Thomas; Eliot, Charles Norton Edgcumbe (1911). "Esthonia" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 797–798. Laar, Mart (1992). War in the Woods: Estonia's Struggle for Survival, 1944–1956. Translated by Tiina Ets. Washington, D.C.: Compass Press. ISBN 0-929590-08-2. Lieven, Anatol (1993). The Baltic Revolution: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and the Path to Independence. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-05552-8. Meyendorff, Alexander Feliksovich (1922). "Esthonia" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.). London & New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company. Naylor, Aliide (2020). The Shadow in the East: Vladimir Putin and the New Baltic Front. London: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 9781788312523. Raun, Toivo U. (1987). Estonia and the Estonians. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, Stanford University. ISBN 0-8179-8511-5. Smith, David J. (2001). Estonia: Independence and European Integration. London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-26728-5. Smith, Graham, ed. (1994). The Baltic States: The National Self-determination of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-12060-5. Subrenat, Jean-Jacques, ed. (2004). Estonia, identity and independence. Amsterdam & New York: Rodopi. ISBN 90-420-0890-3. Taagepera, Rein (1993). Estonia: Return to Independence. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. ISBN 0-8133-1199-3. Taylor, Neil (2004). Estonia (4th ed.). Chalfont St. Peter: Bradt. ISBN 1-84162-095-5. Williams, Nicola; Herrmann, Debra; Kemp, Cathryn (2003). Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (3rd ed.). London: Lonely Planet. ISBN 1-74059-132-1. Estonia at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Recipes from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity The President of Estonia The Parliament of Estonia Estonian Government Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Statistical Office of Estonia Chief of State and Cabinet Members Archived 20 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine Official gateway to Estonia Archived 4 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine E-Estonia Portal VisitEstonia Portal Estonia travel guide from Wikivoyage google.com map of Estonia Geographic data related to Estonia at OpenStreetMap Encyclopedia Estonica Archived 13 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine Estonian Institute Estonia. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. BBC News – Estonia country profile Estonia at UCB Libraries GovPubs Estonia at Curlie Wikimedia Atlas of Estonia 59°N 26°E﻿ / ﻿59°N 26°E﻿ / 59; 26