Ineos Grenadiers (UCI team code: IGD) (stylised as INEOS Grenadiers) (formerly Team Sky from 2010 to 2019, and Team Ineos from 2019 to 2020) is a British professional cycling team that competes at the UCI WorldTeam level. The team is based at the National Cycling Centre in Manchester, England, with a logistics base in Deinze, Belgium. The team is managed by British Cycling's former performance director, Sir Dave Brailsford. The company Tour Racing Ltd. is the corporate entity behind the team in all its iterations, which in line with cycling practice adopts the name of their current primary sponsor. The team launched in 2010 with the ambition of winning the Tour de France with a British rider within five years, a goal achieved in two years when Bradley Wiggins won the 2012 Tour de France, becoming the first British winner in its history, while teammate and fellow Briton Chris Froome finished as the runner up and then went on to win the 2013 Tour de France. Froome won Sky's third Tour de France title in 2015, fourth in 2016 and fifth in 2017. Froome went on to win the 2017 Vuelta a España and the 2018 Giro d'Italia, making him the champion of all three Grand Tours at once. Froome was retrospectively awarded victory in the 2011 Vuelta a España, after the original victor Juan José Cobo was stripped of his title due to doping. The team won the 2018 Tour de France with Geraint Thomas, the 2019 Tour de France and 2021 Giro d'Italia with Egan Bernal, and the 2020 Giro d'Italia with Tao Geoghegan Hart, meaning that the team won seven of the eight editions of the Tour de France between 2012 and 2019, with four different riders, and five further grand tours between 2011 and 2021. Following the decision by British media company Sky UK not to renew sponsorship, the team secured financial support from the British chemicals group Ineos, with the team thereby renamed as Team Ineos from April 2019. Effective from August 2020 the team was rebranded as Ineos Grenadiers to reflect Ineos Automotive's proposed new off-road vehicle, the Ineos Grenadier. The creation of the team was announced on 26 February 2009, with the major sponsorship provided by BSkyB. The company was searching for a sport in which they could have a positive and wide-ranging impact through their sponsorship. British Cycling first began their relationship with BSkyB in 2008 with a £1 million a year sponsorship for their track cycling team. After a trip to the Manchester Velodrome, British Cycling's National Cycling Centre, in 2008, then BSkyB chairman James Murdoch quickly became keen on the sport. Over the summer of 2008 BSkyB were lobbied by British Cycling and key figures such as David Brailsford and Chris Boardman to launch a British road cycling team which would compete in road cycling's major events. BSkyB agreed to finance the team with €15 million a year, aiming for a British rider to win the Tour de France within five years. Initially a supermarket was in talks to become a co-sponsor. Team Sky's original intention was to build a 25-man squad with a core of British riders and to nurture the young talent. The first six riders confirmed were Geraint Thomas, Steve Cummings, Chris Froome, Russell Downing, Ian Stannard and Peter Kennaugh, all British riders. The ambition to "ensure competitiveness" through other signings, including a number of foreign riders, was expressed. On 10 September 2009, a further ten riders were confirmed as set to ride for the team. These were Edvald Boasson Hagen, Thomas Löfkvist, Kurt Asle Arvesen, Simon Gerrans, Juan Antonio Flecha, Kjell Carlström, John-Lee Augustyn, Greg Henderson, Lars Petter Nordhaug, and Morris Possoni. Further additions to the squad, including Chris Sutton and Bradley Wiggins from Garmin–Slipstream, Michael Barry, and Ben Swift from Team Katusha were made before the beginning of the 2010 season. Prior to their first season six jerseys were screen tested to ensure visibility whilst filmed in race conditions. The team gained a victory in its first race in January 2010, the Cancer Council Helpline Classic in Adelaide, Australia, a one-day race prior to the Tour Down Under, with Greg Henderson and Chris Sutton taking first and second respectively. Team Sky's first ProTour event was the Tour Down Under in January. The team was awarded a wild-card entry for the Tour de France. Team Sky was also invited to compete in the other two of the year's Grand Tours. In February 2010 the team got its first one-day victory when Juan Antonio Flecha won the Belgian semi-classic Omloop Het Nieuwsblad with a solo break. On 9 May Wiggins became the first Sky rider to wear the leader's jersey of a Grand Tour when he won the opening prologue of the Giro d'Italia. That same month Ben Swift became the first rider to win an overall classification winning the Tour de Picardie. In the Team's first Tour de France, Geraint Thomas finished second on the cobblestones of stage three, and wore the white jersey as leader of the young rider classification. The Tour was a disappointment for Sky though, with Thomas Löfkvist in 17th overall being their highest placed rider (Wiggins finished in 24th place). Löfkvist led Team Sky at the Vuelta a España, but the team withdrew after stage seven following the death of soigneur Txema González. In total Team Sky recorded 22 wins in their debut season, with a further 50 podiums. Team Sky again began the season in Australia, with Ben Swift winning two stages of the Tour Down Under, and finishing third overall. Juan Antonio Flecha and Jeremy Hunt finished fourth and sixth respectively in the Tour of Qatar in February, while Boasson Hagen finished first in the points classification and second overall in the Tour of Oman later that month. In the Classics season, Wiggins finished third overall in Paris–Nice and Geraint Thomas finished second overall at the Dwars door Vlaanderen. The team enjoyed a successful Tour of California, with Ben Swift winning stage two and Greg Henderson taking victory in stage three. At the Giro d'Italia, Thomas Lofkvist was the highest placed Sky rider, finishing 21st overall. The closest the team came to a stage victory was Davide Appollonio's second place on stage 12. Geraint Thomas secured Sky's first overall victory of the season, by winning the five-day Bayern-Rundfahrt race at the end of May. Boasson Hagen and Wiggins also won stages in the event, with Boasson Hagen claiming the points jersey. In June, Wiggins won the Critérium du Dauphiné, an important victory for Sky at the time. At the Tour de France Sky finished third on stage two, the team time trial. Boasson Hagen secured the team's first ever Tour stage win on stage six. On stage seven, just over 40 km (24.9 mi) from the finish, a crash brought down team leader Wiggins breaking his collarbone and ending his tour. This prompted a change of approach from Sky, with their riders targeting stage wins. On stage nine, Juan Antonio Flecha was hit by a French media car, which resulted in Flecha colliding with Vacansoleil–DCM rider Johnny Hoogerland, who crashed into a barbed-wire fence. Both riders were able to continue despite sustaining injuries in the incident. Geraint Thomas won the combativity award on stage 12. Boasson Hagen came second to compatriot Thor Hushovd (Garmin–Cervélo) on stage 16, before winning the next stage with a solo breakaway. He also finished second on the stage 21 on the Champs-Élysées. Rigoberto Urán was the highest placed Sky rider with 24th overall, whilst Boasson Hagen's efforts gave the team two stage wins in an eventful Tour. After the Tour de France, Boasson Hagen's good form continued, as he won the Vattenfall Cyclassics and took a clean sweep of jerseys at the Eneco Tour. In the third and final Grand Tour of the 2011 season, the Vuelta a España, Sky riders Froome and Wiggins finished second and third respectively in the general classification. Chris Sutton won stage two, while Froome won stage 17 of the event. On 11 October, it was announced that world champion Mark Cavendish would be joining the team for the 2012 season, bringing an end to months of speculation. He was joined by his HTC–Highroad teammate Bernhard Eisel. On 17 July 2019, the UCI awarded Froome the Vuelta title after then winner Juan José Cobo was disqualified for abnormalities related to performance-enhancing drugs on his biological passport. This now recognizes Froome as the first British cyclist to win any of the Grand Tours, and the result also elevated Wiggins to second place. In January, Team Sky confirmed their squad for the 2012 season which included eight new signings, Cavendish, Eisel, Sergio Henao, Danny Pate, Richie Porte, Salvatore Puccio, Luke Rowe and Kanstantsin Sivtsov. At the Tour Down Under in January, Boasson Hagen won the sprint classification. In February Sky claimed the team classification at the Volta ao Algarve, with Porte winning the overall and Boasson Hagen the points classification. Wiggins won the overall classifications in the Paris–Nice in March and the Tour de Romandie in April. Sky dominated the Tour de France general classification with Wiggins first and Froome second overall, and Cavendish winning three stages including the sprint on the final stage on the Champs-Élysées in Paris. On 9 September, the team achieved their 100th victory with Lars Petter Nordhaug's win in the Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal. The team also topped the UCI World Tour teams classification, with a total score of 1767 points. In preparation for the 2013 season, the signings of Vasil Kiryienka and David López García from Movistar Team and 2012 Italian national time trial champion, Dario Cataldo from Omega Pharma–Quick-Step were secured. The team also signed Gabriel Rasch, and on 1 October it was revealed that the team had also signed Joe Dombrowski and Ian Boswell from the Bontrager-Livestrong team as neo-pros. The year's Tour of Britain winner, Jonathan Tiernan-Locke had signed a two-year deal with the team. At the end of the 2012 season, Cavendish moved to Omega Pharma–Quick-Step, Lars Petter Nordhaug moved to Blanco Pro Cycling, Davide Appollonio moved to Ag2r–La Mondiale, Juan Antonio Flecha moved to Vacansoleil–DCM, Alex Dowsett moved to Movistar Team, and Michael Rogers moved to Saxo Bank–Tinkoff Bank. Michael Barry and Jeremy Hunt both retired. Doctor Geert Leinders, who had been employed by the Team since 2011, was subject of an internal investigation after allegations of involvement in doping at Blanco Pro Cycling earlier in his career, and on 9 October it was announced he would no longer work for the team. The impact of the USADA reasoned decision on doping by Lance Armstrong and teammates at the US Postal team led Sky to re-inforce its zero tolerance anti-doping policy, with all riders and staff being subjected to internal interviews. Two members of the coaching staff, Bobby Julich and Steven de Jongh were released from their contracts under the policy. Head Director Sportif Sean Yates also left the squad in October citing personal reasons, although the Telegraph linked his departure to past involvement in doping. The 2013 season began with the Tour Down Under, where Geraint Thomas won stage two and claimed the points classification. In February Froome won the overall classification, points classification and stage 5 Tour of Oman. In March Richie Porte won the Paris–Nice, including two of the last three stages in the race, the queen stage and the concluding time trial. Sergio Henao claimed his first victory for the team at the Volta ao Algarve, whilst Froome took a stage win at Tirreno–Adriatico. The team then picked up a one–two at the Critérium International with Froome securing victory with a win on the final stage and Porte finishing runner up with a victory in the stage two time trial, also securing the points competition. After his victory in the 2012 Tour de France Bradley Wiggins built his early season around targeting the 2013 Giro d'Italia and supporting Froome in the Tour de France. The team took victory in the stage 2 team time trial, culminating in Salvatore Puccio taking over the pink jersey as leader of the general classification. Wiggins was hampered behind a crash on stage 7 and then himself crashed on stage 8. Wiggins abandoned the Giro due to a chest infection on stage 13. Froome followed up with overall wins at the Tour de Romandie in April and Critérium du Dauphiné in June. Boasson Hagen retained his Tour of Norway title, winning the points classification and stage four of the race in the process. In July, Froome went on to win the 100th and 2013 edition of the Tour de France; claiming dominant stage victories on the stage eight final climb of Ax 3 Domaines, stage 15 to the summit of Mont Ventoux and the stage 17 individual time trial. Froome was narrowly beaten to the King of the Mountains prize by Movistar Teams Colombian climber and runner up, Nairo Quintana. After the Tour de France, some of the team's key domestiques secured stage victories at the Eneco Tour (David Lopez), and Vuelta a España (Vasil Kiryienka). After the disappointment of the Giro, Wiggins returned with a renewed focus on the 2013 UCI Road World Championships Individual time trial event. As part of his build up he won the seventh stage time trial at the 2013 Tour de Pologne from Fabian Cancellara by a winning margin of 56 seconds. The team then recorded their first ever victory in their home stage race, with Wiggins claiming the overall title in the Tour of Britain winning the stage three time trial in Knowsley Safari park. Wiggins finished his season with second in the World time trial championships, finishing 46 seconds behind triple world champion, Tony Martin, with the team taking the bronze in the team time trial. On 4 June 2013 it was announced that Australian Nathan Earle of the Continental team, Huon Salmon–Genesys Wealth Advisers, had been signed by the team for the 2014 season. On 1 August 2013, the first day of the cycling transfer window, it was confirmed that Rigoberto Urán would move to Omega Pharma–Quick-Step for the 2014 season. On 22 August it was announced that Mathew Hayman would leave the team at the completion of the season and join Orica–GreenEDGE on a 2-year deal. On 6 September it was announced that the Irishman Philip Deignan of UnitedHealthcare would be joining the team after a strong 2013 season. After heavy speculation at the road world championships it was announced on 1 October that Spanish climber, Mikel Nieve, would join the team on a two-year contract, following the closure of his current team (Euskaltel–Euskadi) at the end of the season. On 23 December Sebastián Henao (cousin of Team Sky rider Sergio Henao) was announced as the team's final signing for the 2014 season. The 2014 season started off well. Froome defended and retained his Tour of Oman crown and Kennaugh won his first stage race, the Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali. Throughout the season, the team endured repeated illnesses and injuries. Geraint Thomas pulled out of the Paris–Nice after crashing out on stage seven whilst leading the general classification. Richie Porte abandoned the Tirreno–Adriatico and the Volta Ciclista a Catalunya, resulting in Porte not competing in the Giro d'Italia. A further blow came when Kennaugh pulled out of the Giro, with the team citing illness. In April, the team's fortune began to turn; Froome defended and won the Tour de Romandie, Wiggins won the overall classification of the Tour of California and Geraint Thomas won overall classification of the Bayern-Rundfahrt – each taking control of the race by winning the individual time trial stage respectively. Poor luck returned at the Critérium du Dauphiné, where Froome crashed whilst wearing the leaders jersey, despite taking three stage wins (two stages for Froome, one for Nieve) Froome finished outside of the top 10, 4' 25" down on race winner Andrew Talansky. In July, Froome returned to racing to defend his Tour de France victory, hopeful of overall victory. Froome crashed twice on stage four and abandoned the race, having also crashed the day before, with Xabier Zandio abandoning on the sixth stage of the race. As a result, Richie Porte inherited team leadership duties but lost time in both the Alpine and Pyrenean stages. The team's highest rider on general classification was Nieve in 18th position, 46 minutes 31 seconds behind the winner, Vincenzo Nibali this marked one of the worst performances of the team at the Tour de France. Not selected to ride the Tour, Kennaugh went on to take his second overall race victory at the Tour of Austria, taking the points classification in the process. After abandoning the Tour de France, Froome announced he would ride the 2014 Vuelta a España where he finished in second position, finishing one minute ten seconds, behind the winner Alberto Contador. Froome was awarded the overall combativity award for the entire race. In September, Wiggins returned to the Tour of Britain with the stated aim of defending his title. He finished third overall, winning the final day time trial by eight seconds from Sylvain Chavanel. Wiggins returned to action later in September at the road world championships, again with the aim of winning the time trial event. Wiggins won the time trial by over 25 seconds from perennial opponent, Tony Martin. Wiggins won Team Sky's first ever rainbow jersey. On 28 July 2014, the team announced that Thomas had signed a two-year contract extension, keeping him at the team until the end of the 2016 season. In September Swift signed a two-year contract extension. On 13 August 2014, Cyclingnews.com reported that Edvald Boasson Hagen would not renew his contract and would leave the team at the end of the season. After the cycling World Championships, Sky announced that they had signed Leopold König, Nicolas Roche, Wout Poels, and Andrew Fenn, with Lars Petter Nordhaug rejoining the team after two years at Belkin. On 1 October 2014, it was announced that Dario Cataldo would leave the team at the end of the season to join Astana. On 24 October, the team announced the signing of their sixth rider, Elia Viviani. American climber Joe Dombrowski also left Team Sky to join Cannondale–Garmin. On 5 January 2015, Wiggins signed a contract extension with the team up until and including the 2015 Paris–Roubaix. On 8 January, Richie Porte scored the team's first victory of the season by winning the Australian National Time Trial championships and went on to record the team's first stage win at the Tour Down Under. Elia Viviani scored his first win for the team, taking sprint victory on stage two of the Dubai Tour. In February the team dominated the Vuelta a Andalucía and Volta ao Algarve with both Froome and Thomas taking both overall wins respectively. At the end of February Stannard scored the team second classic, taking a second successive victory at Omloop Het Nieuwsblad. The victory was made more impressive as Stannard made the four-man selection with three Etixx–Quick-Step riders; Boonen, Terpstra and Vandenbergh. The team's next victory came at Paris–Nice where Porte led a team one-two (along with Thomas) at the summit finish of Croix de Chaubouret. Porte won the stage 7 time trial to the summit of Col d'Èze. In the same week, Wout Poels recorded his first win for the team when he secured victory on the fifth stage of Tirreno–Adriatico to Castelraimondo. In late March, Thomas emerged victorious in E3 Harelbeke after attacking his co-breakaway companions, Zdeněk Štybar and Peter Sagan, and soloing to victory. Ben Swift then won the second stage of Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali the same day and Richie Porte moved into the lead and eventually won the Volta a Catalunya Victory in Catalunya represented Porte's second overall win of the season and the fourth for the team. In April, Bradley Wiggins won his final time trial for the team at the Three Days of De Panne. Later in the same week, Bradley Wiggins retired from the team and joined his own WIGGINS team, allowing him to focus on the 2016 Olympic Games. In late April Porte won the Giro del Trentino taking a decisive stage victory on the queen stage summit finish to Brentonico. The team then rounded off a successful April by taking victory in the Team Time Trial at the Tour de Romandie, placing Geraint Thomas in the yellow leaders jersey whilst new signing Wout Poels underwent surgery on a broken shoulder bone courtesy of his crash at La Flèche Wallonne. The team began May with success; Lars Petter Nordhaug took the opening stage win at the inaugural Tour de Yorkshire, whilst Ben Swift crashed out later requiring surgery. The team entered the 2015 Giro d'Italia with Porte as team leader with the aim of winning the general classification. After limiting the time loss in the stage 1 team time trial Elia Viviani secured the first win for the team in a Grand Tour since the 2013 Vuelta a España on stage 2, also taking over the Maglia rossa. On stage 10 Porte lost 47 seconds, docked two minutes fine for accepting outside intervention, resulting in Porte dropping down to 12th on the general classification. Porte lost more time on the uphill finish on stage 12, a further two minutes on stage 13, and 27 minutes on stage 15. He then abandoned on the second rest day. Chris Froome returned to action at the Critérium du Dauphiné, as part of his build up for the Tour de France, and the team won three stages and took the overall title for the fourth time. Peter Kennaugh opened the team's account taking the victory on stage one, just in front of the bunch sprint finish. Froome went on to dominate the final two summit finish stages, taking victory at Montée du Bettex (stage 7) and Modane Valfréjus (stage 8) giving him a lead of 10 seconds over Tejay van Garderen. The team went into the 2015 Tour de France with their "strongest team ever" After a strong performance on the Mur de Huy Froome took over the race lead, and general classification by one second over Tony Martin. As the Tour entered the second week of racing stage 10 saw the first mountains stage, the summit finish of La Pierre-Saint-Martin, where Froome went on to take the stage win, putting significant time into his general classification rivals. During the remainder of the race the team faced intense scrutiny regarding their dominant performances; Porte was punched in the ribs by a spectator in the Pyrenees, and Froome had urine thrown at him by another spectator. On the first rest of the Tour de France, Porte confirmed he would leave the team at the end of the season. This would later, in August, be confirmed to be CCC Pro Team. The team signed Alex Peters and Tao Geoghegan Hart as stagiares for the remainder of the season, with the former also signing for two years. In September, Mikel Landa confirmed his move to the team for the 2016 season, with Mikel Nieve also signing a two-year extension with the team. Later, in the same month the team then signed their second neo-pro, Gianni Moscon, Michał Gołaś, Danny van Poppel, Beñat Intxausti and the 2014 World Road Race champion Michał Kwiatkowski. On 28 September the team confirmed that Nathan Earle, Bernhard Eisel, Danny Pate, Richie Porte, Kanstantsin Siutsou and Chris Sutton would be leaving the team. The team also confirmed that Ian Boswell, Philip Deignan, Sebastián Henao, Peter Kennaugh, Vasil Kiryienka, Christian Knees, Mikel Nieve, Luke Rowe, Ian Stannard and Xabier Zandio would be staying after signing new contract extensions. Later in September Sky retained the World Time Trial Championships in Richmond when Vasil Kiryienka won by nine seconds from Adriano Malori. With Chris Froome delaying the start of his season a number of key deluxe-domestiques were afforded opportunities to aim for race victories at the start of the season. Peter Kennaugh took the team's first one-day race win at the second Cadel Evans Great Ocean Road Race, whilst Wout Poels claimed his first overall GC victory at the Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana, in the process taking two stages, the mountains and the points classifications. Froome returned towards the end of the Australian cycling season to claim the team's first ever GC win at the Herald Sun Tour. Geraint Thomas enjoyed a successful start to his 2016 campaign, notching up overall victories at Volta ao Algarve (for the second successive year) and Paris–Nice. Thomas' victory in the French stage race means that Sky have won four of the past five editions. Sky entered the spring classics campaign with the perennial aim of claiming their first monument race. New recruit, Michał Kwiatkowski, took his first victory for the team in the E3 Harelbeke semi-classic. As the classics campaign progressed the team showed great consistency, but fell short of their goal again, taking second in Milan–San Remo, fifth at the Tour of Flanders and third at Paris–Roubaix. Upon entering the Ardennes classics the team pinned their hopes on Kwiatkowski at La Flèche Wallonne, to no avail. Entering the final monument of the spring, Liège–Bastogne–Liège, the team again led with Kwiatkowski. Sky finally achieved their coveted monument win, but it wasn't Kwiatkowski, but rather, domestique Wout Poels who emerged victorious on a day with poor weather conditions and enduring snow. New recruit Mikel Landa claimed his first overall win for team – taking the GC at the 2016 Giro del Trentino only a week after claiming his first stage win for the team. Landa's stated aim for the first half of the season is the Giro d'Italia. Froome added to Sky's race win total by successfully defending his Critérium du Dauphiné title after taking the overall lead with a victory on stage 5 to Vaujany, becoming the fifth rider to win the overall title three times. The team went into the 2016 Tour de France with what was without question an even stronger squad than the previous year. A week into the race on stage 8, Froome took many by surprise by attacking on the descent of the Col de Peyresourde which caught his main rivals off guard, resulting in a solo victory into Bagnères-de-Luchon to take the yellow jersey. On stage 11 to Montpellier in crosswinds, he gained more time as part of a 4-man breakaway in the final 12 kilometres of the stage alongside green jersey wearer Peter Sagan, Sagan's Tinkoff teammate Maciej Bodnar, and Froome's own teammate Geraint Thomas, placing second to Sagan in a sprint finish. On stage 12 to Mont Ventoux, which was shortened to Chalet Reynard due to high winds, Froome was involved in a crash involving a stopped motorbike that also sent Richie Porte and Bauke Mollema down. With no usable bike, Froome had no choice but to run partway up the mountain until he was able to get a spare bike from his team car. Provisionally he had fallen to sixth place overall which would have given the yellow jersey to Adam Yates, however race officials decided to give him and Porte the same time as Mollema, ensuring Froome would hold on to his first overall position. Superb performances in both the individual time trials (second on stage 13 to La Caverne du Pont-d'Arc and winner of stage 18 to Megève) allowed Froome to gain even more time on his rivals, and despite a crash on stage 19 to Saint-Gervais-les-Bains where he finished the stage on Thomas' bike with support from Wout Poels, it was enough for him to win the race overall 4:05 ahead of second-placed Romain Bardet, becoming the first British rider to win the Tour on three occasions, the fourth rider to become a 3-time winner (joining Philippe Thys, Louison Bobet and Greg LeMond), and the first since Miguel Induráin in 1995 to successfully defend his title. It was also the first time the team finished a Grand Tour with all nine riders intact. Sky started off their 2016 Vuelta a España campaign in late August by winning the team time trial on stage 1 and holding the red jersey for 2 days before surrendering it on stage 3, where Chris Froome took a 4th-place finish at Mirador de Ézaro to elevate himself into third place in the overall standings. He then got the victory on stage 11 at Peña Cabarga, the very same mountain where he got his first-ever Grand Tour stage win in 2011, and put himself into second overall just under a minute behind race leader Nairo Quintana. A series of early attacks by Quntana and Alberto Contador on stage 15 to Aramon Formigal blew the race apart, causing Froome to be isolated from his teammates and to lose more than 2+1⁄2 minutes on his rival. He gained most of that time back on the stage 19 time trial to Calp with a dominant performance, but was unable to make up the difference in the penultimate stage, finishing second overall in the end by just 1:23 behind Quintana. It was Froome's second Grand Tour podium following his win at the Tour de France, and just coming off of winning the bronze medal in the time trial at the Olympic Games in Rio. In August 2016 the news broke that the team had signed Olympic Team Pursuit champion, Owain Doull from WIGGINS and Tao Geoghegan Hart from Axeon–Hagens Berman Later, in the same month, the team confirmed their third signing of the season – Polish rider Łukasz Wiśniowski from Etixx–Quick-Step. For the 2017 season Nicolas Roche will leave for BMC Racing Team, as well as Andy Fenn, Lars Petter Nordhaug (both to new Irish team Aqua Blue Sport) and Leopold König (to Bora–Hansgrohe). Luke Rowe, Chris Froome, Christian Knees, Salvatore Puccio and Geraint Thomas have renewed with the team. In September the team announced the signing of Kenny Elissonde from Groupama–FDJ on a two-year deal. On 30 September, Wout Poels signed a three-year contract extension with the team. Elia Viviani signed a new 2-year deal on 26 October. The team announced on 27 October that it had signed Diego Rosa from Astana Qazaqstan Team on a 3-year deal, and on 8 November announced the signing of Doull's WIGGINS teammate Jonathan Dibben. The team finished the 2016 season 3rd overall in the UCI World Tour team rankings, with Froome as its highest-ranked rider, finishing 3rd overall in the individual rider ranking. Sky started the 2017 season with three stage wins at the Herald Sun Tour as well as winning the teams classification, with new team member Kenny Elissonde finishing on the podium in 3rd place and Chris Froome finishing sixth overall. The team's first race win of the season came at Strade Bianche when Michał Kwiatkowski took a solo victory after attacking 15 kilometres from the finish. Geraint Thomas took a stage win at Tirreno–Adriatico and held the leader's jersey for one day, also taking the overall victory and one stage win at the Tour of the Alps. Sky won Paris–Nice for the fifth time in sixth years courtesy of Sergio Henao, who won the race overall by just two seconds over Alberto Contador. Kwiatkowski added to Sky's win total by winning Milan–San Remo in a three-up sprint, giving the team its second Monument win. Neo-pro Jonathan Dibben won the individual time trial stage at the Tour of California, the team winning the team classification with Tao Geoghegan Hart and Ian Boswell placing in the final top ten overall. Thomas and Mikel Landa were appointed the team's joint leaders for the Giro d'Italia. At one point in the race, Thomas was sitting second in the general classification, however on the 9th stage to Blockhaus a fair chunk of the peloton was involved in a crash involving a stopped motorbike, which took down Thomas, Landa and most of the other members of the team. Thomas attempted a comeback after placing second in the following day's time trial, but the extent of his injuries were as such that he abandoned the race prior to stage 11. Landa continued as sole leader, taking several top-3 finishes on several mountain stages before winning stage 19 to Piancavallo. He went on to win the mountains classification and the super-combativity prize, also winning the Cima Coppi for being the first to cross the summit of the Stelvio Pass on stage 16. The team then participated in the inaugural Hammer Series, a three-day event pitting teams against each other in various skills competitions. Impressive performances by Tao Geoghegan Hart in the climbing event and Elia Viviani in the sprint event gave the team enough points to take the overall lead. In the team time trial-style Chase event, they held on by one second over Team Sunweb to win the entire competition. Froome returned to action at the Critérium du Dauphiné and finished fourth overall, just one second off the podium. Teammate Peter Kennaugh won the penultimate stage at Alpe d'Huez. The team then went into the 2017 Tour de France with yet another strong lineup and the goal to help Froome achieve his fourth overall victory. In the opening prologue stage in Düsseldorf the team placed four riders within the top eight led by Geraint Thomas, who became the first Welsh rider to wear the yellow jersey. He was followed by Vasil Kiryienka in third, Froome in 6th and Kwiatkowski in eighth – Froome putting between 35 seconds and nearly a minute into most of his general classification rivals. On stage five to La Planche des Belles Filles, Froome took third place behind stage winner Fabio Aru, moving him into yellow and Thomas to second place. The 1–2 placing on GC held until stage nine to Chambéry, when Thomas was involved in a crash on the descent of the Col de la Biche and had to abandon the race with a fractured collarbone. On stage 12 to Peyragudes, Froome cracked within the final kilometre, ceding 22 seconds and the yellow jersey to Aru. On the final approach on stage 14 to Rodez the team stretched out the peloton, splitting it into several groups due to crosswinds allowing Froome to put 25 seconds into Aru, enough to retake yellow by a margin of 18 seconds overall. On stage 15 to Le Puy-en-Velay, Froome ran into mechanical trouble on the ascent of the Col de Peyra Taillade and was distanced by more than 40 seconds thanks to a brutal acceleration by the AG2R La Mondiale team. With the help of his teammates he managed to make it back to the main group of GC contenders to keep his overall lead intact. Froome and Landa performed strongly in the Alpine stages to Serre Chevalier and Izoard, helping Landa move into fourth overall. In the final time trial in Marseille, Froome's strength in the discipline helped him put nearly two minutes into Romain Bardet and 25 seconds into Rigoberto Urán, finishing third on the stage six seconds behind stage winner Maciej Bodnar and 5 seconds behind second-place Kwiatkowski. Froome secured his fourth Tour victory and third consecutively, putting him one win away from joining the likes of Anquétil, Indurain, Merckx and Hinault. He became the 7th man to win the Tour overall without winning a stage, however he did amass ten top-ten finishes. Sky won the team classification for the first time in their history, leading from start to finish. A week after the end of the Tour de France, Kwiatkowski continued his strong rides in the one-day classics by winning the Clásica de San Sebastián, and on 8 August signed a three-year contract extension. After months of recovery following his injury, Wout Poels returned to form by winning the final stage of the Tour de Pologne and finishing third overall, with teammate Diego Rosa taking the mountains classification. Landa followed up his performance in the Tour with overall victory in the Vuelta a Burgos, also winning two stages, the mountains classification and the points classification. The team sent its strongest-ever squad to the Vuelta a España, with Froome on a mission to finally win the race that had eluded him on multiple occasions.[citation needed] After a 4th-place finish in the opening team time trial in Nîmes, Froome took third place on the third stage at Andorra behind Vincenzo Nibali. Combined with bonus seconds picked up from the stage's intermediate sprint, it was enough to move him into the overall race lead, collecting his first red jersey since stage 10 in 2011. Several days later, he took his first stage win of his season at Cumbre del Sol, which moved him into the lead in the points classification, followed by a second-place finish at Calar Alto on stage 11. The following day to Antequera, Froome crashed twice after a mechanical, but managed to limit his time losses with the help of his teammates and bounced back on the next 3 stages with consecutive top-10 finishes and regained the points lead after stage 15. Froome then dominated the stage 16 individual time trial to Logroño, extending his lead to nearly 2 minutes ahead of Nibali. He struggled on the steep slopes to Los Machucos the next day, dropping about 40 seconds to Nibali. He regained half that loss on stage 18, and cemented the overall lead as well as the combination classification with a third-place finish at Alto de l'Angliru behind Alberto Contador on stage 20. In a bunch sprint finish on the final stage in Madrid, he held on to the points classification by two points over Matteo Trentin.[citation needed] With the victory, Froome became the first British rider to win the Vuelta, the third man to complete the Tour-Vuelta double in the same year (joining Jacques Anquetil and Bernard Hinault), and the first to complete the feat in the modern era since the Vuelta moved to its current August–September time period.[citation needed] A week after the Vuelta victory, the team won the bronze medal in the team time trial at the 2017 UCI Road World Championships in Bergen. On 30 June, the eve of the Tour de France Grand Départ, Froome signed a 2-year contract extension with the team. The team announced the signings of Jonathan Castroviejo (Movistar Team) and David de la Cruz (Quick-Step Floors) for the 2018 season. On 27 August 2017, the team also announced the signing of 2017 Tour de l'Avenir winner Egan Bernal (Androni–Sidermec–Bottecchia). A day later, they announced the signings of reigning Under 23 Road Race World Champion Kristoffer Halvorsen (Joker Icopal) and 2017 Girobio overall winner Pavel Sivakov (BMC Development Team), On 1 September, it was revealed that 2017 British Under-23 road race champion Chris Lawless had been signed from Axeon–Hagens Berman. Dylan van Baarle (Cannondale–Drapac) was signed on 18 September 2017. On 5 December 2017, the team announced that they had signed Leonardo Basso, a stagaire with Trek–Segafredo. Whilst Mikel Landa transferred to Movistar, Mikel Nieve to Mitchelton–Scott, Peter Kennaugh to Bora–Hansgrohe and Ian Boswell to Team Katusha–Alpecin. Elia Viviani ended his contract a year early to join QuickStep for the 2018 and 2019 seasons. Christian Knees, Michał Gołaś, Sebastián Henao, Phil Deignan, David Lopez and Ian Stannard all signed multi-year contract extensions. The team finished the 2017 season on top of the UCI World Tour team ranking for the first time since 2012. Chris Froome was the highest-ranked rider in the individual rankings, placing second. The team's first victory of the year came via highly regarded new recruit, Egan Bernal claiming victory in the Colombian national time trial championships. Teammate Sergio Henao would also claim victory in the national road race championships leading to a clean sweep of national titles. Bernal continued his strong early season form, claiming overall victory at the Colombia Oro y Paz. As the European stage racing season kicked-off Wout Poels and David de la Cruz claimed victories at Vuelta a Andalucía. Michał Kwiatkowski and Geraint Thomas claimed a one–two victory at Volta ao Algarve. Poels and de la Cruz continued their strong form, claiming stage victories at Paris–Nice, whilst Kwiatkowski claimed a second overall general classification victory, winning Tirreno–Adriatico – the team's first victory at the race. In the lead up to the first Grand Tour of the year, the 2018 Giro d'Italia, Diego Rosa emerged victorious at Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali, claiming his first overall win for the team. New recruits Chris Lawless and Pavel Sivakov claimed their first classification victories for the team, with Lawless also winning a stage of the race. Bernal had been en route to claim second place at his first World Tour event of the year, Volta a Catalunya, however a late crash on the final stage of the race saw Bernal abandon. Bernal next raced at the Tour de Romandie where he won the stage three time trial and with it, the young rider classification. Moving on to the 2018 Tour of California, Bernal lead the team's general classification ambitions, resulting in his first World Tour stage race victory, claiming two stages as well. Chris Froome entered the Giro d'Italia as favourite to win the overall race. As the current champion of both the Tour de France and Vuelta a España, Froome had the opportunity to join an elite group of riders who concurrently held all Grand Tour titles. The Giro started in Israel for the first time. Before the race began, Froome crashed during a recon of the first stage time trial route. Froome ceded over 30 seconds to main race rival, Tom Dumoulin as well as 20 seconds to Simon Yates. As the race returned to Italian land, Froome found himself over 50 seconds down on the maglia rosa – Rohan Dennis. By the end of stage six, the races first summit finish at the top of Mount Etna Froome had moved up to eighth position overall, but had lost over a minute to new race leader, Yates. By the end of the eighth stage and third mountain-top finish at Gran Sasso d'Italia, Froome trailed Yates by nearly two and a half minutes, with general classification hopes looking all but impossible. Froome's domestiques, Poels and Sergio Henao, were 18th and 25th overall 3' 14" and 5' 56" behind the race leader. By the end of stage 13, Froome had slipped back to 12th overall 3' 20" behind race leader, Yates. Stage 14 saw the riders face the fearsome climb of Monte Zoncolan, with gradients reaching nearly 20%. Froome attacked the main selection of favourites, winning the stage from Yates. Froome's improved form was not maintained into stage 15, with Yates claiming the victory on the medium-mountain stage by a margin of 41 seconds over everyone else. Yates' lead in the race grew to 2' 11" over Dumoulin and 4' 52" over Froome – who was now sat in seventh place overall. The time trial on stage 16, from Trento to Rovereto, had been a focus-point for Froome, hoping to claw back significant amounts of time over Yates' by virtue of his stronger time-trialling ability. Froome cut the deficit to 3' 50" by the end of the stage, having taken back over a minute from Yates. Deep into the third week of the race, stage 18 saw the first sign of weakness from Yates, cracking on the final climb of the day to Prato Nevoso, with the deficit to Dumoulin in second cut to 28 seconds and 3' 22" to Froome. Stage 19 of the 2018-edition of the race had been designated as the races' queen stage. Starting in Venaria Reale, the stage climbed over a trio of mountains; the part-gravel Colle delle Finestre, with the climb to Sestriere ending at Bardonecchia. Yates' poor form continued into stage 19, culminating in him being dropped by the peloton on the lower slopes of the Finestre, promoting Domoulin to virtual race leader. With over 80 kilometres remaining in the stage Froome attacked the peloton on the gravel section of the Finestre, pulling away from the main group of favourites. This attack continued over the subsequent two climbs with Froome ultimately winning the stage by three minutes from second place Richard Carapaz, but importantly by over 3' 20" from Dumoulin. Froome was now leading the race overall by 40 seconds from Dumoulin with two stages remaining. Froome maintained his race lead, becoming the fifth rider to simultaneously hold all three grand tour titles. Froome won the mountains classification largely due to his stage 19 exploits, and Team Sky won the overall team classification. As the cycling season entered the European summer, the build to the 2018 Tour de France had begun. Geraint Thomas claimed overall victory at the Critérium du Dauphiné improving his chances of being promoted to team-leader for the Tour de France. The team scored a number of national title victories: Jonathan Castroviejo won the Spanish time trial title, Kwiatkowski the Polish road race, Dylan van Baarle the Dutch time trial, Thomas the British time trial and Vasil Kiryienka the Belarusian time trial. As the Tour de France began, the team lead with a two-pronged attack, incumbent champion Froome hoping for a fourth straight grand tour win and fifth overall title and Thomas reigning Dauphiné champion and super-domestique in previous editions of the race. By the end of the first week of racing, Thomas had ridden a flawless race and was second overall, only six seconds behind Greg Van Avermaet. Froome was 14th, over a minute behind the Belgian race leader. Thomas and Froome both lost time to Van Avermaet on stage nine as the race transitioned across the cobbles of Roubaix, with Thomas 43 seconds and Froome 1' 42" behind the race leader. By the end of stage 10 these deficits had grown to 2' 22 for Thomas and 3' 21" for Froome. As the race entered the Alps Thomas cemented his control on the race and the team, claiming consecutive victories at the summit finishes of La Rosière and Alpe d'Huez. By the end of stage 12 Thomas lead had grown to 1' 39" over team-mate Froome. Colombian prodigy, Bernal, in his first grand tour of his career was 19th overall 21' 22" behind Thomas. Following the 15th stage, controversy arouse around Gianni Moscon, who had been seen punching Fortuneo–Samsic rider Élie Gesbert during the opening kilometres of the stage. After reviewing footage of the incident, the race jury disqualified him for 'particularly serious aggression', leaving Sky with 7 riders for the remaining stages. On stage 17 Froome cracked, slipping to third overall 2' 31" behind Thomas. This promoted Giro d'Italia runner-up, Tom Dumoulin, to second overall 1' 59" behind Welshman Thomas. Thomas ultimately won the race overall, and the team recorded their fourth consecutive grand tour win, fifth Tour de France title and second successive year achieving more than one grand tour win. Thanks to his second-place performance on the penultimate day time trial, Froome joined Thomas on the final podium finishing third overall. Into the latter part of the season, Kwiatkowski maintained his good form from the Tour de France, winning his home stage race – the Tour de Pologne, claiming two stage wins. He headed into the final grand tour of the year, the Vuelta a España, as the team's general classification leader and finished 43rd overall, nearly an hour and three quarters behind race winner, Simon Yates. The teams best finisher was de la Cruz, 15th overall and 28 minutes behind the race winner. The team went on to claim two stage wins at the Tour of Britain courtesy of Poels and Ian Stannard. Gianni Moscon returned after a five-week suspension in good form as the road to the final monument of the year began, winning Coppa Ugo Agostoni and the Giro della Toscana, as well as the Italian national time trial title. Moscon went on to take the overall victory at the 2018 Tour of Guangxi – the team's final victory of the year. In mid-December 2018, Sky announced they would withdraw their sponsorship as part of an ongoing review brought on by their acquisition by Comcast. 21st Century Fox also announced that it would end its partnership at the end of the season, forcing the team into a sponsorship search in order to continue. In February 2019, Cyclingnews.com reported that potential sponsorship could be sourced via a combination of the Colombian government and state-controlled oil and gas company, Ecopetrol. Later reports claimed that no deal had been forthcoming. In mid-March, Cyclingnews.com again broke the news that another potential sponsor had been found. The report linked the team with British-based multi-national chemical company, Ineos, with the team expected to become Team Ineos for the 2020 season. Ineos is controlled by Manchester-born billionaire, Jim Ratcliffe, who has amassed an estimated fortune of over £21 billion. Ratcliffe has also invested over £100 million in Ben Ainslie's sailing team. The web-domain "TeamIneos.com" was discovered to have been registered on 5 March, and the Twitter handle "@teamineos" was also registered. On 19 March, Team Sky confirmed its new title sponsor, announcing it was to be renamed 'Team Ineos' on 1 May, ahead of the 2019 Tour de Yorkshire. However, the UCI's rules prevent teams from racing under different names at the same time – Sky had planned to take part in the 2019 Tour de Romandie, starting on 30 April as well as the Tour de Yorkshire. As a consequence, it announced that the Romandie would be the first race under the Ineos name, with the team wearing a special black kit, while the Yorkshire would see the launch of the team's new colours. For the 2019 season the team signed world individual pursuit champion, Filippo Ganna and former rider, Ben Swift (UAE Team Emirates); former Ecuadorian national road champion, Jhonatan Narváez (Quick-Step Floors). After a protracted transfer the team also signed Colombian talent – Iván Sosa (Androni Giocattoli–Sidermec). Philip Deignan and David López retired, Sergio Henao left to join UAE Team Emirates, Beñat Intxausti joined Euskadi–Murias and Łukasz Wiśniowski joined the newly Polish-sponsored BMC team, CCC Pro Team. Jonathan Dibben also left the team. For the 2020 season the team announced a number of new signings: 2019 Giro d'Italia champion, Richard Carapaz (Movistar Team), double and reigning Time Trial World Champion, Rohan Dennis, Ethan Hayter, Brandon Rivera (GW–Shimano) and Carlos Rodriguez. David de la Cruz left the team to join UAE Team Emirates, Kenny Elissonde joined Trek–Segafredo, Kristoffer Halvorsen joined (EF Education First Pro Cycling), Wout Poels joined Team Bahrain McLaren and Diego Rosa joined Arkéa–Samsic. Ineos had the highest payroll of any team in cycling for the 2020 season, and of the top ten highest paid riders in the sport, five of them rode for Ineos. In Euros, Carapaz was paid 2.1 million, Kwiatkowski 2.5 million, Bernal 2.7 million, Geraint Thomas 3.5 million and Chris Froome was the 2nd highest paid cyclist in the sport contracted to make 4.5 million. On 30 January 2020, the team announced the retirement of Vasil Kiryienka due to heart problems. The following day, Australian Cameron Wurf joined the squad. On 3 March 2020, the team's lead sports director Nicolas Portal died suddenly of a heart attack at the age of 40. A day later, the team announced that it would temporarily withdraw from racing until 23 March in time for the Volta a Catalunya. The reasoning behind the decision was twofold: to allow the team to properly mourn Portal's passing, and to keep all its members safe amidst the growing coronavirus outbreak which saw the final two stages of the UAE Tour cancelled. Additional races on the 2020 calendar were either postponed to later in the year or cancelled outright due to restrictions and lockdowns in several European countries forced by the pandemic. On 12 April, the entire team took part in a special event via interactive cycling site Zwift. Over 15,000 fans from around the world rode with the team in a virtual group ride, which was followed by an e-race where all 30 riders on the active roster competed against each other. It was streamed on YouTube and the team's Facebook page, with commentary by Eurosport's Rob Hatch and Matt Stephens. The race was won by Rohan Dennis. On 9 July 2020, it was announced that the contract of Chris Froome would not be renewed, ending his 10-year association with the team. An hour later, Froome signed a multi-year deal with Israel Start-Up Nation for the 2021 season. On 12 October 2022, the team announced the signing of their first ever female rider; the multi discipline star Pauline Ferrand-Prévot. According to the results of a study commissioned by Cyclingnews.com and performed by Repucom, the team gave more media value to their sponsors and partners than any other cycling team. The team delivered approximately $550m in advertising value, the highest amount achieved by any professional team. BSkyB provided £30 million in sponsorship for the team and will back the team as name sponsor until the end of 2013. The team also receives further sponsorship from 21st Century Fox (previously News Corporation) and Sky Italia. Pinarello supplies bicycle frames and forks. On 5 January 2010, Adidas were announced as the team's official apparel and accessories partner. Gatorade, Marks & Spencer, Oakley, IG Markets are additional sponsors. Jaguar are providers of the team cars. The team jerseys were changed to black and green beginning with the 2011 Tour de France, when the team formed Sky Rainforest Rescue, a three-year partnership with WWF to help raise awareness of deforestation in Brazil. At the 2018 Tour de France, the team wore special kit in support of the Sky Ocean Rescue initiative, with the goal of eliminating single-use plastic team-wide by 2020. On 25 June 2013, the team announced that the logo of 21st Century Fox, the direct successor to News Corporation following the spin-off of its publishing business, would appear on the team's kit and team vehicles. On the second rest day of the 2016 Tour de France, the team announced they had signed a four-year extension with Pinarello – supplying the team with bikes until 2020. Castelli started providing the team's kit beginning in 2017 after their 3-year partnership with Rapha ended. The new kit was revealed during the Rouleur Classic event on 3 November 2016. On 12 December 2018, Sky's parent company 21st Century Fox confirmed that they would withdraw sponsorship of the team at the end of the 2019 season, but would until the 2019 Tour de France seek a new sponsor. On 19 March 2019, Team Sky announced that Ineos, a multinational chemicals company owned by Jim Ratcliffe, would become the new title sponsor as of 1 May 2019. In 2021, the team announced that Belgian kit manufacturer Bioracer will provide the team kit from 2022 onwards. On the 13th of December 2023, the team announced that Gobik would become their new on-bike race apparal partner from 2024, replacing Bioracer as the maufacturer of the teams kits in a 'long-term partnership.' A five-part documentary series following the team's 2012 season, Team Sky and British Cycling: The Road to Glory, premiered on Sky Atlantic on 30 August 2012. Another documentary Bradley Wiggins: A Year in Yellow, following Wiggins's exploits in the 2012 season was first shown on the same channel in November 2012. The team have also produced two books chronicling the 2012 Tour de France and 2013 season- 21 Days to Glory and The Pain and the Glory. The team claims to have a zero-tolerance approach to doping. All its riders and staff must sign an agreement that they have no past or present involvement in taking illegal substances. Anyone breaching the agreement at any time must leave the squad. Previous team members such as team doctor Geert Leinders, sports director Steven de Jongh and coach Bobby Julich have all left the team when their involvement in doping prior to working with Sky became known. This approach has been criticised by David Howman of WADA, who has argued that fear of losing their job will discourage people with a history of doping from confessing. Although there have been speculations that Team Sky's tactics and success imply use of banned substances, Brailsford has strenuously denied any team use of illegal substances, citing his team's success in the Olympics as proof that you don't need to dope to dominate. In September 2013, Jonathan Tiernan-Locke was asked by the UCI to explain a potential discrepancy in his biological passport data. In December 2013, British Cycling confirmed it had been instructed to begin disciplinary proceedings against Tiernan-Locke by the UCI. Sky stated the blood values in question were taken in 2012, when Tiernan-Locke was a member of the Endura Racing squad, and he was suspended from all team activities pending a decision. In July 2014 Tiernan-Locke was banned from competition until 31 December 2015 by the UCI, resulting in his contract with the team being terminated with immediate effect. In March 2014, Sergio Henao was removed from race schedules for at least eight weeks pending the conclusion of an "altitude research programme", following tests that were taken over the winter whilst Henao was training at altitude in Colombia. In June 2014, Henao returned to racing at the Tour de Suisse, after completing an independent research programme investigating the physiology of "altitude natives" in conjunction with the University of Sheffield. In April 2016, the Cycling Anti-Doping Foundation (CADF) opened an investigation into Sergio Henao's biological passport data from between 2011 and 2015. As a result, the team withdrew Henao from their active roster. After investigation, including a review of the research done in the previous year for Team Sky, CADF declared Henao had no case to answer, and he was restored to the racing squad. In December 2017 Chris Froome returned an adverse analytical finding (AAF) for salbutamol over the WADA threshold of 1000 ng/mL, potentially resulting in a ban and the loss of his 2017 Vuelta title. On 2 July 2018, the UCI with the assistance of WADA concluded there was no AAF upon further investigation of the evidence and closed the case against Froome, exonerating him from any wrongdoing which allowed his Vuelta title to stand. Both Froome and the team welcomed the decision. In September 2016, Russian cyber espionage group Fancy Bear hacked the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) ADAMS anti-doping system and released data on a number of athletes, including Chris Froome and Bradley Wiggins. Therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) are medical exemptions athletes can be given when they need treatment for pre-existing medical conditions where the drugs used in the treatment are on the WADA prohibited compound list. The leak demonstrated that Wiggins had received TUEs for triamcinolone acetonide in June 2011, June 2012 and April 2013, a number of days before the start of the 2011 Tour de France, 2012 Tour de France, and 2013 Giro d'Italia respectively. Wiggins also received TUEs for salbutamol, fluticasone, formoterol and budesonide whilst at Team Highroad. Froome had received TUEs for prednisolone in May 2013 and during the 2014 Tour de Romandie. In response Froome said he had "no issues" with the leak whilst Wiggins's spokesperson said "there's nothing new here". In October 2016, UK Anti-Doping (UKAD) opened an investigation into Team Sky and British Cycling. It was revealed that Simon Cope delivered a package, to the team, during the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné, giving it to team Doctor Richard Freeman confirming the package contained some form of medicine. Neither the team nor Cope could confirm the exact contents of the package. Former rider, Jonathan Tiernan-Locke (who has since served a ban for an anti-doping violation) claimed that Freeman had administered Tramadol to the British national team during the 2012 UCI Road World Championships. In late October, parliament announced it would open an investigation into the relationship between the medical package and former rider, Bradley Wiggins. In December 2016, UCI President Brian Cookson urged both Team Sky and general manager, Dave Brailsford to give "full disclosure" about what was in the package. British Cycling has warned Cope about his relationship with both the team as well as the British National team. In December 2016, Brailsford announced that the package contained the legal drug, Fluimucil – a mucolytic compound which helps the body to remove sticky and thick mucus that can often be found obstructing the airway, resulting in coughing. British Cycling officials maintained that they did not know the contents of the package. In March 2017, British Cycling admitted its failure in correctly recording the contents of the package, whilst the team maintained that no anti-doping rules had been broken. In early March news broke around a number of riders potentially considering asking Brailsford to resign from the team, however on the same day Geraint Thomas, Luke Rowe, Tao Geoghegan Hart, Peter Kennaugh, Michał Kwiatkowski and Elia Viviani came out in support of their General Manager. In March, former team rider, Joshua Edmondson admitted to the BBC that he violated the team's "no needle" policy by injecting himself with a cocktail of vitamins – carnitine, folic acid, 'TAD' (reduced glutathione) – two or three times a week, for a month. The team stated that they found the vitamins, which were not prohibited compounds, and needles in the riders room. A day later the UCI's Cycling Anti-Doping Foundation asked UK Anti-Doping to assess Edmondson's admission. On 15 November 2017, the UKAD announced that it had closed its investigation and filed no charges, citing that it was impossible to determine the contents of the package. Both the team and British Cycling issued statements welcoming its conclusion. In March 2018, The Commons Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee published the report Combatting doping in sport. The report stated that Team Sky had "crossed an ethical line" by using medical drugs to "enhance the performance of riders" and that Brailsford must "take responsibility for the "damaging scepticism about the legitimacy of his team's performance and accomplishments." Following the report, Bradley Wiggins, in an interview with the BBC, claimed that he "100 per cent did not cheat", and believed he was a victim of a smear campaign. He was also critical of the 'anonymous' source, demanding that the source should be made public. Chris Froome later came out in support of Brailsford remaining team principal, rubbishing the accusations laid out in the report whilst Geraint Thomas said that the team had never even joked about using corticosteroids. Former rider, Bernhard Eisel being interviewed at the 2018 Tirreno–Adriatico, also denied any drug use during his tenure with the team. Eisel also criticised reports for a lack of verifiable proof, further suggesting that this had "created a vacuum, within which he [Eisel] felt social media had filled in the blanks" as well as criticising comments made by former cyclist, Floyd Landis, regarding the removal of Wiggins's 2012 title. As of 5 January 2024. 2010 British Road Race, Geraint Thomas British Time Trial, Bradley Wiggins Norway Time Trial, Edvald Boasson Hagen 2011 British Road Race, Bradley Wiggins British Time Trial, Alex Dowsett Finland Road Race, Kjell Carlström Norway Time Trial, Edvald Boasson Hagen 2012 Norway Road Race, Edvald Boasson Hagen British Road Race, Ian Stannard British Time Trial, Alex Dowsett World Track (Team Pursuit), Geraint Thomas and Peter Kennaugh Olympic Time Trial, Bradley Wiggins Olympic Team Pursuit, Geraint Thomas and Peter Kennaugh 2013 Norway Time Trial, Edvald Boasson Hagen Belarus Time Trial, Kanstantsin Sivtsov 2014 British Road Race, Peter Kennaugh British Time Trial, Bradley Wiggins Belarus Time Trial, Kanstantsin Sivtsov World Time Trial, Bradley Wiggins 2015 Australian Time Trial, Richie Porte Belarus Time Trial, Vasil Kiryienka British Road Race, Peter Kennaugh World Time Trial, Vasil Kiryienka European Omnium, Elia Viviani 2016 Czech Time Trial, Leopold König Irish Time Trial, Nicolas Roche Irish Road Race, Nicolas Roche Olympic omnium, Elia Viviani 2017 Colombia Road Race, Sergio Henao Polish Time Trial, Michał Kwiatkowski Italian Time Trial, Gianni Moscon 2018 Colombia Time Trial, Egan Bernal Colombia Road Race, Sergio Henao Spain Time Trial, Jonathan Castroviejo Polish Road Race, Michał Kwiatkowski Dutch Time Trial, Dylan van Baarle British Time Trial, Geraint Thomas Belarusian Time Trial, Vasil Kiryienka Italian Time Trial, Gianni Moscon 2019 World Track (Individual Pursuit), Filippo Ganna Italian Time Trial, Filippo Ganna Spain Time Trial, Jonathan Castroviejo British Road Race, Ben Swift 2020 World Track (Individual Pursuit), Filippo Ganna Italian Time Trial, Filippo Ganna World Time Trial, Filippo Ganna 2021 Olympic Road Race, Richard Carapaz Olympic Cross-country, Tom Pidcock Olympic Team Pursuit, Filippo Ganna European Team relay, Filippo Ganna World Time Trial, Filippo Ganna British Time Trial, Ethan Hayter British Criterium, Ethan Hayter British Road Race, Ben Swift World Track (Team Pursuit), Filippo Ganna World Track (Omnium), Ethan Hayter 2022 Australian Road Race, Luke Plapp World Cyclo-cross, Tom Pidcock Colombian Time Trial, Daniel Martínez Ecuador Time Trial, Richard Carapaz Italian Time Trial, Filippo Ganna British Time Trial, Ethan Hayter Spain Road Race, Carlos Rodríguez European XCO Championships, Tom Pidcock World Track (Individual Pursuit), Filippo Ganna World Track (Team Pursuit), Ethan Hayter World Track (Elimination Race), Elia Viviani World Track (Omnium), Ethan Hayter 2023 Australian Road Race, Luke Plapp British Time Trial, Joshua Tarling Italian Time Trial, Filippo Ganna Polish Time Trial, Michał Kwiatkowski Spain Time Trial, Jonathan Castroviejo World Track (Individual Pursuit), Filippo Ganna World Mountain Bike Championships (Short Track), Pauline Ferrand-Prévot World Mountain Bike Championships (XCO), Pauline Ferrand-Prévot World Mountain Bike Championships (XCO), Tom Pidcock European Time Trial, Joshua Tarling 2024 Ecuador Road Race, Jhonatan Narváez Velonews.com Velo Awards – Best Men's Team (2013) Velonews.com Velo Awards – Support Rider of the Year – Richie Porte (2013) Vélo d'Or – Best rider – Chris Froome (2013, 2015, 2017) London Design Awards – Product Design, Sport and Active life category – for the Dogma F8 in conjunction with Pinarello and Jaguar (2014) European Sponsorship Association Excellence Awards – Best Use of PR – in conjunction with Jaguar (2014) Cyclingnews.com – Best Male Team (2015, 2016, 2017) Cyclingtps.com.au CT Awards – Ultimate Team Player – Richie Porte (2015) Cyclingtps.com.au CT Awards – Most Impressive Team (2015) Cyclingnews.com – Moment of the Year (Chris Froome's run up Mont Ventoux, 2016) Cyclingnews.com – Best Male Road Rider – Chris Froome (2017) Cyclingnews.com – Rider of the Year – Chris Froome (2017) Sports Journalists' Association Sportsman of the Year – Chris Froome (2017) Liontrust's Sporting Hero award – Chris Froome (September 2017) "Team Sky hands Knaven and Portal directeur sportif roles". cyclingnews.com. 2 February 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2015. "Brett Lancaster retires from racing, joins Sky as sport director". VeloNews.com. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "INEOS GRENADIERS". UCI. Union Cycliste Internationale. Retrieved 4 October 2020. William Fotheringham (26 February 2009). "Sky to sponsor British Tour de France team". The Guardian. London. "TOUR RACING LIMITED overview - Find and update company information - GOV.UK". find-and-update.company-information.service.gov.uk. Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Team Sky: A meteoric rise to success in just two years". The Independent. 22 July 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2013. Team Sky launched in 2010 with the ambition of winning the Tour de France with a British rider within five years. Bradley Wiggins has achieved it in three. "Team Ineos set to race for first time earlier than planned". BBC Sport. 19 April 2019. Retrieved 19 April 2019. "The new TDF bikes and kit of the rebranded Ineos Grenadiers". CyclingTips. 26 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. Sabbagh, Dan (23 July 2012). "James Murdoch was key force behind Sky team's Tour de France victory". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Ned, Boulting (2011). How I won the yellow jumper : dispatches from the Tour de France. London: Yellow Jersey Press Random House. ISBN 9780224092401. OCLC 872702451. Gallagher, Brendan (26 February 2009). "Sky establish GB Tour de France team". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Team Sky on target". Sky Sports. 25 August 2009. "Sky to nurture young talent". Cyclingnews. 31 December 2009. Alex Murray (9 September 2009). "Team Sky names the Brit pack". "More stars for Team Sky". Sky Sports. 10 September 2009. Les Clarke (23 October 2009). "Sutton's Sky switch makes good sense". Cyclingnews.com. Jonathan Turner (10 December 2009). "Wiggins signs for Team Sky". Sky Sports. Shane Stokes (4 January 2010). "Swift set to move to Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. Team Sky make stunning race debut with one-two finish BBC, 10:49 GMT, Sunday, 17 January 2010 "Announcing Team Sky – A Professional British Road Cycling Team". BSkyB. 26 February 2009. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2009. "Tour de France wildcard place awarded to Team Sky". Cycling Weekly. 30 March 2010. Stephen Roche: Sky faces steep learning curve Bikeradar, Thursday 22 April 2010 Omloop Het Nieuwsblad, last kilometers Sporza, Saturday, 27 February 2010 Omloop Het Nieuwsblad, Interview Senior Sports Director Scott Sunderland and Juan Antonio Flecha Sporza, De Laatste Show, Monday 29 February 2010 Sunderland hails Flecha Archived 2 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Sky Pro Cycling Team, Sunday 28 February 2010 "Pro Cycling | Team | Geraint Thomas". Team Sky. 25 May 1986. Archived from the original on 2 January 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Vuelta a España | Stage 7 | Sky withdraws from Vuelta". Team Sky. 4 September 2010. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Cycling Quotient". Cqranking.com. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Tour Down Under | Latest News | Perfect finish in Adelaide". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Tour of Oman | Latest News | Boasson Hagen seals second". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 1 July 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Paris – Nice | Latest News | Wiggins bags third in France". Team Sky. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Dwars door Vlaanderen | So close for Thomas". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Tour of California | Latest News | Swift strikes gold in USA". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Tour of California | Team Sky's US invasion". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Giro d'Italia | Plenty to take out of Giro". Team Sky. 2 June 2011. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Bayern-Rundfahrt | Latest News | Thomas the boss in Bavaria". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. Purnell, Gareth (13 June 2011). "Cycling: Wiggins seals Dauphiné triumph". The Independent. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Tour de France – Cavendish wins, Wiggins out". Yahoo! Eurosport. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Video: TV Car Crashes Flecha, Hoogerland | This Just In". Bicycling.com. 10 July 2011. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Tour bosses eject car after crash". BBC News. 10 July 2011. Wynn, Nigel (19 July 2011). "Thomas signs to Sky for further three years". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Chris Froome and Bradley Wiggins make Vuelta history". BBC Sport. 11 September 2011. Retrieved 22 September 2011. "Chris Froome wins Vuelta a España 17th stage". BBC Sport. 7 September 2011. Retrieved 22 September 2011. "Mark Cavendish announces Team Sky move". BBC Sport. 11 October 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2011. "Team Sky sign Eisel". Sky Sports. 11 October 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2011. "Chris Froome awarded 2011 Vuelta a Espana as Juan Jose Cobo stripped of title". BBC Sport. 18 July 2019. "Mark Cavendish's Team Sky confirm line-up for 2012 season". BBC Sport. 4 January 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2012. Brown, Gregor (22 January 2012). "Gerrans wins Tour Down Under overall, Greipel takes final stage". Cycling Weekly. Adelaide. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Wiggins: Algarve a "brilliant week" for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 21 February 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Wiggins not so easy on Eze". Paris–Nice. Amaury Sport Organisation. 11 March 2012. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 11 March 2012. "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour de Romandie for Team Sky". BBC Sport. 29 April 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2012. "Bradley Wiggins wins 2012 Tour de France". BBC Sport. 22 July 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Cavendish on top in Paris". Team Sky. 22 July 2012. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Team Sky wrap up WorldTour victory". Team Sky. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Sky sign new American riders". 1 October 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2012. "Sky sign JTL". 4 October 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2012. "Cavendish moves to OPQ". 18 October 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Nordhaug moves to Rabobank". 18 October 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Appollonio moved to AG2R". 18 October 2012. Archived from the original on 6 January 2013. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Flecha moves to VCD". 20 August 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Dowsett to MOV". 30 October 2012. Retrieved 5 November 2012. "Rogers to Saxo–Tinkoff". 7 December 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2012. "Barry retires". 6 September 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "Hunt retires". 9 September 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. MacMichael, Simon (9 October 2012). "Team Sky confirms it will no longer work with Dutch doctor Geert Leinders". road.cc. Farrelly Atkinson Limited. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Yates & De Jongh released from sky". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (29 October 2012). "Sean Yates leaves post at Team Sky and retires from cycling for health reasons". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Gallagher, Brendan (28 October 2012). "Sean Yates parts company with Team Sky as Dave Brailsford's doping cull continues". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Geraint Thomas wins stage to take lead in Tour Down Under". BBC Sport. 23 January 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2013. Wynn, Nigel (16 February 2013). "Chris Froome wins the Tour of Oman". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 16 February 2013. Pryde, Kenny (10 March 2013). "Richie Porte wins Paris–Nice after final time trial victory". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 10 March 2013. "Froome-Porte secure 1–2 at Critérium International". Cycling Weekly. 25 March 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2013. "Sutton: Wiggins needs to support a Froome-led Sky at Tour de France". Cyclingnews.com. 28 May 2013. Gallagher, Brendan (23 October 2012). "Chris Froome may lead Sky's 2013 Tour de France bid with Bradley Wiggins in support". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. "Team Sky dominate stage two time trial". aljazeera.com. Barry Ryan (5 May 2013). "Puccio takes overall Giro d'Italia lead in Ischia". Cyclingnews.com. Barry Ryan (10 May 2013). "Wiggins slides down the pecking order at Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. William Fotheringham (12 May 2013). "Bradley Wiggins' Giro d'Italia hopes go downhill on wet Florence stage". The Guardian. Stephen Farrand (17 May 2013). "Wiggins pulls out of the Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. "Chris Froome wins Tour de Romandie". Cycling Weekly. 28 April 2013. "Chris Froome wins 2013 Criterium du Dauphine". Cycling Weekly. 9 June 2013. "Edvald Boasson Hagen wins Tour of Norway as Team Sky fend off late attacks". SkySports. "Eneco Tour: David Lopez wins stage six from breakaway as Tom Dumoulin takes overall lead". Sky Sports. "David Lopez wins on stage six of the Eneco Tour". Cycling Weekly. 17 August 2013. "Vasil Kiryienka solos to win Vuelta stage 18 as Chris Horner gains time". Cycling Weekly. 12 September 2013. Sport, Telegraph (10 September 2013). "UCI Road World Championships 2013: Sir Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome head up Great Britain squad". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Daniel Benson. "UCI Road World Championships 2013: Elite Men Time Trial Results". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Earle signs on for 2014 with Team Sky". Cycling News. 4 June 2013. Retrieved 15 July 2013. "Renshaw, Uran to Omega Pharma-QuickStep". Cycling News. 1 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "Hayman leaves Team Sky for Orica–GreenEDGE". Cycling News. 21 August 2013. Retrieved 22 August 2013. "Deignan signs for Team Sky". Cycling News. 6 September 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Nieve confirms two-year deal with Sky". Cycling News. 1 October 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2013. "Ten Riders Extend With Team SKY". Team Sky. 23 December 2013. Archived from the original on 5 January 2019. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Thomas out of Paris–Nice after crash". Cyclingnews.com. 16 March 2014. "Illness forces Porte out of Tirreno–Adriatico". Cyclingnews.com. 16 March 2014. "Richie Porte quits Catalunya". Cyclingnews.com. 25 March 2014. Cary, Tom (7 April 2014). "Richie Porte out of Team Sky squad for 2014 Giro d'Italia". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. "Kennaugh out of Giro d'Italia with illness". Cyclingnews.com. 6 May 2014. "BBC Sport – Froome triumphs in Tour de Romandie after time trial win". BBC Sport. 4 May 2014. "Bradley Wiggins takes Tour of California for first win of season". The Guardian. 18 May 2014. "Geraint Thomas seals Bayern Rundfahrt victory as Sam Bennett wins final stage". SkySports. "Chris Froome crashes in Critérium du Dauphiné but retains lead". The Guardian. 13 June 2014. "Critérium du Dauphiné 2014 – General Classification". ProCyclingStats. "Team Sky suffer new blow as Zandio abandons Tour". reuters.com. 10 July 2014. "Tour de France 2014 – General Classification". ProCyclingStats. "BBC Sport – Britain's Peter Kennaugh wins Tour of Austria in Vienna". BBC Sport. 13 July 2014. Stephen Farrand (24 September 2014). "UCI Road World Championships 2014: Men's Elite Individual Time Trial Results". Cyclingnews.com. "Thomas to continue with Team Sky for two more years". Cyclingnews.com. 28 July 2014. "Ben Swift". ProCyclingStats. "Edvald Boasson Hagen to leave Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 13 August 2014. "Team Sky sign Leopold König, Nicolas Roche, Wout Poels, Andy Fenn, Lars Petter Nordhaug". SkySports. "Astana sign Cataldo from Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. October 2014. Sky, Team. "Team Sky". "Dombrowski Q&A: Moving to Cannondale, time with Sky, and surgery". VeloNews.com. 9 October 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2014. "Wiggins signs with Team Sky until Paris–Roubaix". Cyclingnews.com. 5 January 2015. Zeb Woodpower (8 January 2015). "2015 starts with a bang for Richie Porte". Cyclingnews.com. "Ian Stannard wins Omloop Het Nieuwsblad for second year in a row". SkySports. "Omloop Het Nieuwsblad Elite 2015: Results". Cyclingnews.com. 28 February 2015. "Paris – Nice 2015: Stage 4 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 12 March 2015. "Paris – Nice 2015 – Stage 4". ProCyclingStats. "Crashes nearly spell disaster for Sky in Paris–Nice". Cyclingnews.com. 14 March 2015. "Paris – Nice 2015: Stage 7 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 15 March 2015. "Paris – Nice 2015 – Stage 7 (ITT)". ProCyclingStats. "E3 Harelbeke 2015: Results". Cyclingnews.com. 27 March 2015. "Team Sky – Thomas caps a day to remember". teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali 2015: Stage 2 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 27 March 2015. "Team Sky – Super Swift wins to take lead". teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "Volta Ciclista a Catalunya 2015: Stage 5 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 27 March 2015. "Team Sky – Wind blows Porte into lead". teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Alasdair Fotheringham (29 March 2015). "Volta Ciclista a Catalunya 2015: Stage 7 Results". Cyclingnews.com. "Volta a Catalunya: Richie Porte seals victory as Alejandro Valverde wins final stage". Sky Sports. "Team Sky – Porte clinches Catalunya title". teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 1 April 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2015. Stephen Farrand (2 April 2015). "Driedaagse De Panne-Koksijde 2015: Stage 3b Results". Cyclingnews.com. Barry Ryan (12 April 2015). "Wiggins bids Team Sky adieu at Paris–Roubaix". Cyclingnews.com. Kirsten Frattini (24 April 2015). "Giro del Trentino 2015: Stage 4 Results". Cyclingnews.com. Stephen Farrand (22 April 2015). "Porte takes charge at the Giro del Trentino". Cyclingnews.com. "Tour de Romandie 2015: Stage 1 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 28 April 2015. "News shorts: LottoNL-Jumbo, BMC confirm Tour de Yorkshire teams". Cyclingnews.com. 29 April 2015. Peter Cossins (May 2015). "Tour de Yorkshire favourite Swift crashes out". Cyclingnews.com. "Swift to undergo surgery after Tour de Yorkshire crash". Cyclingnews.com. 3 May 2015. Alasdair Fotheringham (19 May 2015). "Giro d'Italia: Porte loses time to Contador and Aru with late puncture on stage 10". Cyclingnews.com. Barry Ryan (19 May 2015). "Giro d'Italia: Richie Porte docked two minutes". Cyclingnews.com. Alasdair Fotheringham (19 May 2015). "Contador expresses sympathy for Porte after Sky rider docked time". Cyclingnews.com. Barry Ryan (21 May 2015). "Giro d'Italia: Porte and Urán limit damage at Monte Berico". Cyclingnews.com. "Crash upsets general classification on Giro d'Italia stage 13". Cyclingnews.com. 22 May 2015. "Richie Porte abandons Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. 25 May 2015. "Critérium du Dauphiné 2015: Stage 1 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 7 June 2015. "Critérium du Dauphiné 2015: Stage 7 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 13 June 2015. "Critérium du Dauphiné 2015: Stage 8 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 14 June 2015. "Froome: We've got the strongest Tour de France team we've ever had". Cyclingnews.com. 3 July 2015. "Tour de France 2015 – Stage 10". ProCyclingStats. "Porte says that he was 'punched' in the Pyrenees". VeloNews. 18 July 2015. Archived from the original on 11 August 2015. Retrieved 20 July 2015. "Froome: Spectator Threw Urine In My Face". Sky News. "Porte confirms he will leave Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 13 July 2015. "Porte confirmed with BMC for 2016". Cyclingnews.com. August 2015. "Team Sky add Geoghegan Hart and Peters as stagiaires". Cyclingnews.com. 29 July 2015. "Landa confirms transfer to Team Sky in 2016". Cyclingnews.com. 16 September 2015. "Transfer news: Mikel Nieve extends with Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 19 September 2015. "News shorts: Boeckmans out of hospital, Moscon to Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 24 September 2015. "Team Sky sign Michał Gołaś from Etixx – Quick-Step". Sky Sports. "Danny van Poppel signs for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 25 September 2015. "Intxausti signs for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 25 September 2015. "Michał Kwiatkowski signs for Team Sky from Etixx – Quick-Step". Sky Sports. "Team Sky – Team Sky 2016 squad confirmed". Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 28 September 2015. "Vasil Kiryienka takes surprise win in men's time trial at World Championships". Cycling Weekly. 23 September 2015. "Peter Kennaugh wins Cadel Evans Great Ocean Road Race". Cycling Weekly. 31 January 2016. "Wout Poels wins Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana on a 'double day' for Team Sky". Cycling Weekly. 7 February 2016. "Volta a la Comunitat Valenciana 2016: Stage 1 Results". Cyclingnews.com. 3 February 2016. "Team Sky's Chris Froome wins Herald Sun Tour in Australia". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 7 February 2016. "Geraint Thomas wins the Volta ao Algarve". Cycling Weekly. 21 February 2016. "Geraint Thomas stages remarkable comeback to hold off Alberto Contador and win Paris–Nice". Cycling Weekly. 13 March 2016. "Kwiatkowski defeats Sagan at E3". VeloNews.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Milan-San Remo 2016: Results". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 20 March 2016. "Tour of Flanders 2016". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Australian Hayman secures shock Paris–Roubaix victory". euronews. 10 April 2016. "Kwiatkowski flops after hard Team Sky graft at Amstel Gold Race". Cyclingnews.com. 18 April 2016. "Wout Poels wins Liège–Bastogne–Liège, Team Sky's first Monument". Cycling Weekly. 24 April 2016. "Mikel Landa takes bonus seconds to seal overall win at Giro del Trentino". Cycling Weekly. 22 April 2016. "Doull and Geoghegan Hart part of Team Sky's 'second generation', says Brailsford". Cycling Weekly. 24 August 2016. "Cycling transfers 2017: All the ins and outs from the WorldTour". Cycling Weekly. 24 August 2016. "Team Sky confirm signing of Etixx–Quick-Step rider". Cycling Weekly. 25 August 2016. "Team Sky sign Kenny Elissonde". Cyclingnews.com. 12 September 2016. "Wout Poels signs new long-term deal with Team Sky". Cycling Weekly. 30 September 2016. "Viviani extends Team Sky stay". 26 October 2016. "Diego Rosa joins Team Sky". Team Sky. 27 October 2016. "Jon Dibben signs for Team Sky". Team Sky. 8 November 2016. "Sagan, Movistar top final UCI WorldTour rankings". Cyclingnews.com. 1 October 2016. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Kwiatkowski gives Sky Strade Bianche tonic". VeloNews. Agence France-Presse. 4 March 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. "Henao wins Paris–Nice as Contador comes up just short". Cyclingnews.com. 12 March 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2017. "Milan–San Remo: Team Sky rider Michał Kwiatkowski wins sprint finish". BBC Sport. 18 March 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Robertshaw, Henry (20 May 2017). "Jon Dibben wins Tour of California time trial as Rafał Majka slips out of yellow". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "General classification 7" (PDF). Matsport.fr. Matsport Timing. 20 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. "Giro d'Italia 2017: Geraint Thomas and Mikel Landa to share Team Sky leadership". BBC Sport. 28 April 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Windsor, Richard (14 May 2017). "Nairo Quintana wins on Blockhaus as Giro d'Italia stage nine marred by motorbike crash". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 14 May 2017. Farrand, Stephen (16 May 2017). "Giro d'Italia: Dumoulin surges to pink in stage 10 time trial". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 16 May 2017. Fletcher, Patrick (17 May 2017). "Giro d'Italia: Fraile cleans up in Bagno di Romagna". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 17 May 2017. Benson, Daniel (26 May 2017). "Giro d'Italia: Landa finally gets his win in Piancavallo". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 26 May 2017. "Tom Doumoulin wins the Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. 28 May 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. O'Shea, Sadhbh (23 May 2017). "Nibali wins queen stage of Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 23 May 2017. "Hammer Series 2017: Hammer Chase Results". Cyclingnews.com. 4 June 2017. "Denmark's Fuglsang wins Dauphiné". VeloNews. Agence France-Presse. 11 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "Dauphiné: Porte punishes Froome, Kennaugh takes stage". VeloNews. 10 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "Team Sky announce Tour de France lineup". Team Sky. 22 June 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Kwiatkowski agrees new three-year deal with Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 8 August 2017. Retrieved 8 August 2017. "Teuns wins Tour de Pologne". Cyclingnews.com. 7 August 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Wynn, Nigel (5 August 2017). "Mikel Landa secures overall win in 2017 Vuelta a Burgos". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Team take third at TTT worlds". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "Chris Froome confirms new contract with Team Sky". Team Sky. 30 June 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2017. "Castroviejo joins Team Sky from Movistar for 2018". Cyclingnews.com. 17 August 2017. "De la Cruz signs for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 17 August 2017. "Egan Bernal signs for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 27 August 2017. "Young sprint talent Kristoffer Halvorsen joins Team Sky". www.teamsky.com. "L'Avenir winner Egan Bernal joins Team Sky". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 6 May 2018. Retrieved 28 August 2017. "Chris Lawless signs for Team Sky". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 26 November 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2017. "Van Baarle joins Team Sky". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017. "Team Sky 2018 roster complete with signing of Leonardo Basso". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2017. "Mikel Landa to leave Team Sky and join Nairo Quintana at Movistar in 2018". The Guardian. Press Association. 15 August 2017. "Mikel Nieve signed by Orica-Scott for 2018". Cycling Weekly. 3 August 2017. Cary, Tom (August 2017). "Peter Kennaugh announces Team Sky departure for two-year deal with Bora-Hansgrohe". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. "Ian Boswell to leave Team Sky to join Katusha-Alpecin for 2018". Cycling Weekly. 10 August 2017. "Elia Viviani ends Team Sky contract to join Quick-Step Floors". Cyclingnews.com. 16 August 2017. "Knees pens two-year extension". www.teamsky.com. "Stannard signs new deal with Team Sky". www.teamsky.com. "Golas signs new deal". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. "Deignan looking forward to 2018 after strong year". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017. "Henao hopes to keep developing". www.teamsky.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 October 2017. "Lopez looking to impart wisdom". www.teamsky.com. "UCI Cycling Gala: the best road cyclists honoured in Guilin". www.uci.ch. "Bernal wins Colombian time trial title". www.efe.com. Sky, Team. "Henao seals second successive Colombian road race title". www.teamsky.com. "Egan Bernal wins Colombia Oro y Paz; Ewan claims Almería: Daily News Digest". CyclingTips. "Vuelta a Andalucia Ruta Ciclista del Sol 2018: Stage 2 Results". 15 February 2018. "Vuelta a Andalucia Ruta Ciclista del Sol 2018". 14 February 2018. "Route revealed for 2019 Volta ao Algarve". 21 November 2018. "Tirreno-Adriatico 2018". 7 March 2018. "Bernal crashes out of Volta a Catalunya". 25 March 2018. "Tour of California analysis: Bernal in the driver's seat after stage 2 win". 15 May 2018. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 6 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 9 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 13 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 14 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 15 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 16 (ITT) – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Giro d'Italia 2018 – Stage 18 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. Cary, Tom (26 May 2018). "Chris Froome on verge of victory at Giro d'Italia to seal one of the most amazing comebacks in cycling history". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. "How Chris Froome won Giro d'Italia thanks to 'spectacular' stage 19 victory". BBC Sport. 5 June 2018. Weekly, Cycling (23 December 2018). "Why Chris Froome's Giro d'Italia win was the best Grand Tour victory of 2018". Cycling Weekly. "Geraint Thomas wins Critérium du Dauphiné ahead of Adam Yates". The Guardian. Associated Press. 10 June 2018 – via www.theguardian.com. "Tour de France 2018 – Stage 7 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Tour de France 2018 – Stage 10 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Tour de France 2018: Thomas wins Stage 11, riding into yellow". Cyclist. 18 July 2018. "Tour de France Stage 12: Thomas wins again on Alpe d'Huez". Cyclist. 19 July 2018. "Tour de France 2018 – Stage 12 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. Whittle, Jeremy (22 July 2018). "Team Sky's Gianni Moscon kicked off Tour de France for striking opponent". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 April 2019. Ryan, Barry (22 July 2018). "Gianni Moscon disqualified from Tour de France". www.cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 9 April 2019. "Tour de France 2018 – Stage 17 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Tour de France 2018 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. "Kwiatkowski savours Tour de Pologne victory after courageous final defence". 11 August 2018. "La Vuelta ciclista a España 2018 – Results". www.procyclingstats.com. Weekly, Cycling (15 September 2018). "Gianni Moscon makes winning return to racing with victory at Coppa Ugo Agostoni". Cycling Weekly. Sky, Team. "Moscon takes Toscana victory". www.teamsky.com. Brown, Gregor (21 October 2018). "Moscon ends season on Guangxi high, aims for 2019 Giro". "Sky to end sponsorship after 2019". 12 December 2018. "Team Sky expected to become Team Ineos". 14 March 2019. Burrows, Josh (2 May 2019). "Brailsford defends £35m-a-year tie-up with pro-fracking tycoon". The Times. No. 72, 836. p. 67. ISSN 0140-0460. "Geraint Thomas reacts to news of Team Sky becoming Team Ineos". 15 March 2019. Sky, Team. "Team Sky to become Team INEOS". www.teamsky.com. "Italy's Filippo Ganna joins Team Sky for 2019". 19 October 2018. "Ben Swift returns to Team Sky for 2019". 22 October 2018. "Narvaez breaks Quick-Step contract to join Team Sky for 2019". 18 October 2018. "Ivan Sosa signs three-year deal with Team Sky and could ride 2019 Giro d'Italia". 26 November 2018. "Philip Deignan retires after 14-year professional career". 27 November 2018. Weekly, Cycling (22 November 2018). "Helping Froome and Valverde win Grand Tours has been a privilege". Cycling Weekly. "Sergio Henao set to leave Team Sky for UAE Emirates". 15 September 2018. "Intxausti leaves Team Sky for Euskadi-Murias". 9 October 2018. "Wisniowski signs for CCC after two years at Team Sky". 19 September 2018. "Team INEOS 2020". Transfer Overview cqranking.com "Top 20 Highest Paid Pro Cyclists in 2020". Gran Fondo Guide. 2020. Malach, Pat (30 January 2020). "Kiryienka retires due to recurring 'cardiac issues'". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 30 January 2020. "Team Ineos announce signing of Cameron Wurf". Cyclingnews.com. 31 January 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Team Ineos temporarily withdraw from racing teamineos.com[dead link] Dennis wins inaugural erace teamineos.com[dead link] "Chris Froome to leave Team INEOS at end of season". "Welcome to our family, Chris Froome". 9 July 2020. Grenadiers, The Ineos. "Pauline Ferrand-Prevot joins INEOS Grenadiers' off-road roster". www.ineosgrenadiers.com. Retrieved 3 January 2024. "New sponsor for Team Sky". Team Sky. BSkyB. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Richard Tyler (9 October 2009). "Pinarello named as Team Sky bike sponsor". Cyclingnews.com. "Sponsors: Pinarello". Team Sky. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2010. it's the first racing frame to boast an asymmetric frame. Introducing the Dogma 60.1: designed and crafted by Pinarello. "Team Sky Show Off Their Pinarello Dogmas". BikeRadar. 11 December 2009. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Adidas unveils apparel partnership with Team Sky – Sports Sponsorship news – Miscellaneous". SportsPro Media. 5 January 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2012. "Pro Cycling | Latest News | Team Sky go green for Tour". Team Sky. 30 June 2011. Archived from the original on 5 September 2011. Retrieved 17 January 2015. "Sky Ocean Rescue Tour de France kit revealed". www.teamsky.com. "Team Sky to continue riding Pinarello bikes until at least 2020". Cycling Weekly. 19 July 2016. "Castelli partnership announced". 3 November 2016. "Team Sky set 2019 Tour de France as deadline to find new sponsors". cyclingnews.com. 12 December 2018. Retrieved 12 December 2018. "Why now and what now? The big questions facing Team Sky". BBC Sport. 12 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. "Ineos announce Castelli split and new Bioracer partnership". Cyclist.co.uk. 20 July 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "Ineos Grenadiers reveal Bioracer kit design for 2022". Cycling News. 3 December 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "INEOS GRENADIERS AND GOBIK ANNOUNCE LONG-TERM PARTNERSHIP". INEOS Grenadiers. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "All the team kits for 2024: Ineos Grenadiers switch to orange with Gobik". Cycling Weekly. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Pinarello extends Team Sky partnership". Team Sky. BSkyB. 27 August 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2013. "Team Sky". Team Sky.[dead link] "Team Sky – Stages Cycling". Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2017. "CNP and Team SKy Win Sports Nutrition Award". www.cnpprofessional.co.uk. 4 March 2014. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Team Sky to use Wahoo Kickr power trainers". BikeRadar. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Ineos Grenadiers to use Garmin and Tacx tech exclusively in 2022". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "The Finances of Team Sky". inrng.com. "Team Sky report budget of £31 million in 2016". Cyclingnews.com. 28 September 2017. "Road to Glory". SkySports. Chris Harvey (22 November 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: a Year in Yellow, Sky Atlantic, review". Telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. "Team Sky". TeamSky.com. Matt, Slater (30 October 2012). "Team Sky strive for cycling's moral high ground". BBC Sport. Retrieved 11 March 2015. Owen Gibson (20 October 2012). "Doping expert wants Team Sky's drug stance put under the microscope". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 July 2013. Wynn, Nigel (18 October 2012). "Team Sky riders and staff must sign anti-doping policy". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Magnay, Jacquelin (25 January 2013). "Former Team Sky doctor Geert Leinders interrogated in Belgian doping inquiry". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2013. "Dave Brailsford: Team Sky to take short-term pain for long term-gain". BBC Sport. 6 November 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Magnay, Jacquelin (5 November 2012). "World Anti-Doping Agency chief David Howman attacks Team Sky for zero-tolerance policy towards drug cheats". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2013. "Dave Brailsford hits back at insinuation that Team Sky's success is built on use of performance-enhancing drugs". The Telegraph. 13 March 2013. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2013. "Jonathan Tiernan-Locke: Team Sky cyclist in UCI inquiry". BBC Sport. 29 September 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2014. "Team Sky's Jonathan Tiernan-Locke to face anti-doping hearing". BBC Sport. 17 December 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2014. "Home". UCI. "Tiernan-Locke banned for two years". Cyclingnews.com. 17 July 2014. Westby, Matt (19 March 2014). "Sergio Henao withdrawn from racing by Team Sky amid concern over test results". Sky Sports. Retrieved 20 March 2014. "Henao to return to racing". Team Sky. 13 June 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2014. Daniel Benson & Patrick Fletcher (20 April 2016). "UCI opens biological passport case against Sergio Henao". Cyclingnews.com. "Team Sky: We believe in Sergio Henao". Cyclingnews.com. 20 April 2016. "Chris Froome returns adverse analytical finding for salbutamol". Cyclingnews.com. 13 December 2017. "UCI statement on anti-doping proceedings involving Mr Christopher Froome". www.uci.org. "Team Sky welcome Froome verdict". www.teamsky.com. Poulson, Kevin (21 July 2018). "Mueller Finally Solves Mysteries About Russia's 'Fancy Bear' Hackers". The Daily Beast. "Froome has 'no issues' with leaked TUE data from WADA hack". Cyclingnews.com. 15 September 2016. "Wiggins spokesperson on WADA leak: 'There's nothing new here'". Cyclingnews.com. 15 September 2016. "Tour de France winners Froome and Wiggins named in confirmed 'Fancy Bear' WADA hack". Cyclingnews.com. 15 September 2016. "Cope: I don't know what was in the package for Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 11 October 2016. "British Cycling physio faces questions over Team Sky's Dauphine medical package". Cyclingnews.com. 12 October 2016. "UKAD ramps up investigation into Team Sky and British Cycling". Cyclingnews.com. 14 October 2016. "Parliament to look into Wiggins 'mystery package' – News shorts". Cyclingnews.com. 28 October 2016. "Cookson calls on Team Sky to give full disclosure of contents of mysterious Jiffy bag". Cyclingnews.com. 14 December 2016. "British Cycling warned about Team Sky relationship months before Cope's delivery". Cyclingnews.com. 30 December 2016. "Brailsford says mysterious package contained legal drug Fluimucil". Cyclingnews.com. 19 December 2016. "British Cycling deny knowledge of mystery package contents". Cyclingnews.com. 19 December 2016. "British Cycling admits failures in Wiggins medical delivery". Cyclingnews.com. March 2017. "Brailsford explains Fluimucil delivery, insists there was no anti-doping rule violation". Cyclingnews.com. 7 March 2017. "Exclusive: Team Sky riders consider asking Brailsford to resign". Cyclingnews.com. 6 March 2017. "Team Sky riders voice support for Brailsford". Cyclingnews.com. 6 March 2017. "Former Team Sky rider admits violating no-needle rule". Cyclingnews.com. 16 March 2017. "Josh Edmondson: Anti-doping body to assess ex-Team Sky rider claims". BBC Sport. 17 March 2017. "UCI asks UKAD to assess former Sky rider Edmondson's injection claims". Cyclingnews.com. 17 March 2017. "No doping charges to be brought against Team Sky or British Cycling in 'impossible' Jiffy bag investigation". Cycling Weekly. 15 November 2017. "British Cycling and Team Sky issue statements in reaction to UKAD 'Jiffy bag' investigation". Cycling Weekly. 15 November 2017. bbc.co.uk Chris Froome 'completely backs' Team Sky boss Sir Dave Brailsford... House of Commons Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee: Combatting doping in sport "Bradley Wiggins tells BBC he '100% did not cheat'". Cyclingnews.com. 5 March 2018. "Chris Froome firm in support of Brailsford". Cyclingnews.com. 6 March 2018. "Geraint Thomas: We've never even joked about corticosteroid use at Team Sky". Cyclingnews.com. 8 March 2018. "Eisel: I'm more concerned with losing Cavendish than a Team Sky story from years ago". Cyclingnews.com. 9 March 2018. "Landis: I can't see Team Sky surviving to the Tour de France". Cyclingnews.com. 5 March 2018. "INEOS GRENADIERS". UCI. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Velo Awards: Best men's team, best support rider: Sky and Richie Porte – VeloNews.com". VeloNews.com. 22 December 2013. Alex Richards (30 October 2013). "Chris Froome wins the Velo d'Or for best rider of 2013 following Tour de France triumph". mirror. "Team Sky – Dogma F8 wins London Design Award". Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2015. "Pinarello, Jaguar and Team Sky win Gold at the 2014 London Design Awards". "Pinarello Dogma F8". 2014 London Design Awards. "Team Sky – Jaguar and Team Sky win award". "Jaguar and Team Sky win 'Best use of PR' accolade at the European Sponsorship Association Excellence Awards". "Sky voted Best Male Team of 2015 in Cyclingnews Reader Poll". Cyclingnews.com. 10 December 2015. "Team Sky wins male team of the year in Cyclingnews Reader Polll". Cyclingnews.com. 24 December 2016. "Team Sky wins Best Men's Team in 2017 Cyclingnews Reader Poll". Cyclingnews.com. 5 December 2017. "The 2015 CT Awards: the season's best performers". 14 October 2015. "Froome's Mont Ventoux run named Moment of the Year in Cyclingnews Reader Poll". Cyclingnews.com. 21 December 2016. "Froome tops Sagan as Best Male Rider in 2017 Cyclingnews Reader Poll". Cyclingnews.com. 4 December 2017. "Chris Froome wins Cyclingnews Rider of the Year in 2017 Reader Poll". Cyclingnews.com. 10 December 2017. "Froome adds Sportsman of the Year award to stunning 2017". 7 December 2017. Cary, Tom (17 October 2017). "Froome, the all-time great". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Brailsford, Dave; Froome, Chris (2013). The Pain and the Glory: The Official Team Sky Diary of the Giro Campaign and Tour Victory. London: HarperCollins UK. ISBN 978-0-00-754471-4. Edworthy, Sarah; Brailsford, Dave (2012). 21 Days to Glory: The Official Team Sky Book of the 2012 Tour de France. London: HarperCollins UK. ISBN 978-0-00-750661-3. Moore, Richard (2012). Sky's the Limit: Wiggins and Cavendish: British Cycling's Quest to Conquer the Tour de France. London: HarperCollins UK. ISBN 978-0-00-734183-2. The Team Sky Cycling Bible. London: HarperCollins UK. 2014. ISBN 978-0-00-754473-8. Walsh, David (2013). Inside Team Sky: The Inside Story of Team Sky and their Challenge for the 2013 Tour de France. New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4711-3331-2. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Team Ineos. Official website