Alexei Anatolyevich Navalny (Russian: Алексей Анатольевич Навальный, IPA: [ɐlʲɪkˈsʲej ɐnɐˈtolʲjɪvʲɪtɕ nɐˈvalʲnɨj]; 4 June 1976 – 16 February 2024) was a Russian opposition leader, lawyer, anti-corruption activist, and political prisoner. He organised anti-government demonstrations and ran for office to advocate reforms against corruption in Russia and against President Vladimir Putin and his government. Navalny was founder of the Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK). He was recognised by Amnesty International as a prisoner of conscience, and was awarded the Sakharov Prize for his work on human rights. Through his social media channels, Navalny and his team published material about corruption in Russia, organised political demonstrations and promoted his campaigns. In a 2011 radio interview, he described Russia's ruling party, United Russia, as a "party of crooks and thieves", which became a popular byname. Navalny and the FBK have published investigations detailing alleged corruption by high-ranking Russian officials and their associates. Navalny twice received a suspended sentence for embezzlement, in 2013 and 2014. Both criminal cases were widely considered politically motivated and intended to bar him from running in future elections. He ran in the 2013 Moscow mayoral election and came in second with 27% of the vote but was barred from running in the 2018 presidential election. In August 2020, Navalny was hospitalised in serious condition after being poisoned with a Novichok nerve agent. He was medically evacuated to Berlin and discharged a month later. Navalny accused Putin of being responsible for his poisoning, and an investigation implicated agents from the Federal Security Service. In January 2021, Navalny returned to Russia and was immediately detained on accusations of violating parole conditions while he was hospitalised in Germany. Following his arrest, mass protests were held across Russia. In February 2021, his suspended sentence was replaced with a prison sentence of over 2+1⁄2 years' detention, and his organisations were later designated as extremist and liquidated. In March 2022, Navalny was sentenced to an additional nine years in prison after being found guilty of embezzlement and contempt of court in a new trial described as a sham by Amnesty International; his appeal was rejected and in June, he was transferred to a high-security prison. In August 2023, Navalny was sentenced to an additional 19 years in prison on extremism charges. In December 2023, Navalny went missing from prison for almost three weeks. He re-emerged in an Arctic Circle corrective colony in the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug. On 16 February 2024, the Russian prison service reported that Navalny had died at the age of 47. His death sparked protests, both in Russia and in various other countries. Accusations against the Russian authorities in connection with his death have been made by many Western governments and international organisations. Navalny was born into a family of mixed ethnicity. His father, Anatoly Ivanovich Navalny (b. 28th of January, 1947, in Zalissia village, Ukraine) is of Ukrainian heritage, his mother, Lyudmila Ivanovna Navalnaya (b. 4th of April, 1954, near Zelenograd, Russia) is of Russian descent. He identified as half Russian and half Ukrainian. His father was from Zalissia, a village near the Ukraine-Belarusian border that was relocated due to nuclear contamination after the Chernobyl disaster in Ivankiv Raion, Kyiv Oblast, Ukraine. Young Navalny grew up in Obninsk, about 100 kilometres (62 mi) southwest of Moscow, but spent his childhood summers with his grandmother in Ukraine, acquiring proficiency in the Ukrainian language. His parents privately own a basket-weaving factory, which they have run since 1994, in the village of Kobyakovo, Vologda Oblast. As of 2012, they were still running the factory. Navalny graduated from Kalininets secondary school (level 3 according to the ISCED) in 1993. He graduated from the Peoples' Friendship University of Russia in 1998 with a law degree. He then studied securities and exchanges at the Financial University under the Government of the Russian Federation, graduating in 2001. In 2010, upon recommendation from Garry Kasparov, Yevgeniya Albats and Sergey Guriev Navalny received a scholarship to the Yale World Fellows program at Yale University and there he studied political science and world affairs. As a World Fellow at Yale University's World Fellows Program, Navalny aimed at "creating a global network of emerging leaders and to broaden international understanding" in 2010. From 1998, Navalny worked as a lawyer for various Russian companies. In 2009, Navalny became an advocate and a member of advocate's chamber (bar association) of Kirov Oblast (registration number 43/547). In 2010, due to his move to Moscow, he ceased to be a member of advocate's chamber of Kirov Oblast and became a member of advocate's chamber of Moscow (registration number 77/9991). In November 2013, after the judgement in the Kirovles case had entered into force, Navalny was deprived of advocate status. In 2000, following the announcement of a new law that raised the electoral threshold for State Duma elections, Navalny joined the Russian United Democratic Party Yabloko. According to Navalny, the law was stacked against Yabloko and Union of Right Forces, and he decided to join, even though he was not "a big fan" of either organisation. In 2001, he was listed as a member of the party. In 2002, he was elected to the regional council of the Moscow branch of Yabloko. In 2003, he headed the Moscow subdivision of the election campaign of the party for the parliamentary election held in December. In April 2004, Navalny became Chief of Staff of the Moscow branch of Yabloko, where he remained until February 2007. Also in 2004, he became Deputy Chief of the Moscow branch of the party. From 2006 to 2007, he was a member of the Federal Council of the party. In August 2005, Navalny was admitted to the Social Council of the Central Administrative Okrug of Moscow, created before the Moscow City Duma election held later that year, in which he took part as a candidate. In November, he was one of the initiators of the Youth Public Chamber, intended to help younger politicians take part in legislative initiatives. At the same time, in 2005, Navalny started another youth social movement, named "DA! – Democratic Alternative". The project was not connected to Yabloko or any other political party. Within the movement, Navalny participated in several projects. In particular, he was one of the organisers of the movement-run political debates, which soon resonated in the media. Navalny also organised television debates via state-run Moscow channel TV Center; two initial episodes showed high ratings, but the show was suddenly canceled. According to Navalny, the authorities prohibited the appearance of certain people on television. In late 2006, Navalny appealed to the Moscow City Hall, asking it to grant permission to conduct the nationalist 2006 Russian march. However, he added that Yabloko condemned "any ethnic or racial hatred and any xenophobia" and called on the police to oppose "any fascist, Nazi, xenophobic manifestations". In December 2007, Yabloko lost legislative election to Russian State Duma by receiving only 1.6% votes. At a meeting of the party bureau, Navalny had proposed to reform the party and change its leadership because of the failure in the elections. He sharply criticized many actions by the party and asked for "immediate resignation of the party chairman and all his deputies, re-election of at least 70 percent of the bureau". He said: "Yabloko completely failed in these elections ... This is not a matter of counting [the votes]. The elections were dishonest and unfair. But we would get even less in fair elections. Because fair elections should not be just a live broadcast for Grigory Alekseevich. Everyone must be able to participate. This means that the more popular Kasparov and Ryzhkov would have been on the same live broadcast. This means that Kasyanov with his financial resources would take part in the elections. ... I argue that Yabloko has collapsed because it has turned itself to a sect. We demand that everyone must be a democrat, but we don't want to be democrats ourselves. ... And the worse the results, the stronger the leadership's position." He was expelled from Yabloko at the same meeting for his nationalist views and for participating in the Russian March. According to Russian opposition politician Ilya Yashin, Navalny was expelled from Yabloko because he challenged party leader Grigory Yavlinsky. In December 2011, after parliamentary elections and accusations of electoral fraud, approximately 6,000 people gathered in Moscow to protest the contested result, and an estimated 300 people were arrested, including Navalny. Navalny was arrested on 5 December. After a period of uncertainty for his supporters, Navalny appeared in court and was sentenced to a maximum of 15 days "for defying a government official". Alexei Venediktov, editor-in-chief of Echo of Moscow radio station, called the arrest "a political mistake: jailing Navalny transforms him from an online leader into an offline one". After his arrest, his blog became available in English. Navalny was kept in the same prison as several other activists, including Ilya Yashin and Sergei Udaltsov, the unofficial leader of the Vanguard of Red Youth, a radical Russian communist youth group. Udaltsov went on a hunger strike to protest against the conditions. Upon his release on 20 December 2011, Navalny called on Russians to unite against Putin, who Navalny said would try to claim victory in the presidential election, which was held on 4 March 2012. After his release, Navalny informed reporters that it would be senseless for him to run in the presidential elections because the Kremlin would not allow the elections to be fair, but if free elections were held, he would "be ready" to run. On 24 December, he helped lead a demonstration, estimated at 50,000 people, which was much larger than the previous post-election demonstration. Speaking to the crowd, he said, "I see enough people to take the Kremlin right now". In March 2012, after Putin was elected president, Navalny helped lead an anti-Putin rally in Moscow's Pushkinskaya Square, attended by between 14,000 and 20,000 people. After the rally, Navalny was detained by authorities for several hours, and then released. On 8 May 2012, the day after Putin was inaugurated, Navalny and Udaltsov were arrested after an anti-Putin rally at Clean Ponds, and were each given 15-day jail sentences. Amnesty International designated the two men prisoners of conscience. On 11 June, Moscow prosecutors conducted a 12-hour search of Navalny's home, office, and the apartment of one of his relatives. Soon afterwards, some of Navalny's personal emails were posted online by a pro-government blogger. On 26 June 2012, it was announced that Navalny's comrades would establish a new political party based on e-democracy; Navalny declared he did not plan to participate in this project at the moment. On 31 July, they filed a document to register an organising committee of a future party named "The People's Alliance". The party identified itself as centrist; one of the then-current leaders of the party, and Navalny's ally Vladimir Ashurkov, explained this was intended to help the party get a large share of voters. Navalny said the concept of political parties was "outdated", and added his participation would make maintaining the party more difficult. However, he "blessed" the party and discussed its maintenance with its leaders. They, in turn, stated they wanted to eventually see Navalny as a member of the party. On 15 December 2012 Navalny expressed his support of the party, saying, "The People's Alliance is my party", but again refused to join it, citing the criminal cases against him. On 10 April 2013, the party filed documents for the official registration of the party. On 30 April, the registration of the party was suspended. On 5 July 2013 the party was declined registration; according to Izvestia, not all founders of the party were present during the congress, even though the papers contained their signatures. Navalny reacted to that with a tweet saying, "A salvo of all guns." Following the mayoral election, on 15 September 2013, Navalny declared he would join and, possibly, head the party. On 17 November 2013 Navalny was elected as the leader of the party. On 8 January 2014, Navalny's party filed documents for registration for the second time. On 20 January, registration of the party was suspended; according to Russian laws, no two parties can share a name. On 8 February 2014, Navalny's party changed its name to "Progress Party". On 25 February 2014, the party was registered, and at this point, had six months to register regional branches in at least half of the federal subjects of Russia. On 26 September 2014, the party declared it had registered 43 regional branches. An unnamed source of Izvestia in the ministry said registrations completed after the six-month term would not be taken into consideration, adding, "Yes, trials are taking place in some regions ... they cannot register new branches in other regions during the trials, because the main term is over". Navalny's blog countered, "Our answer is simple. A six-month term for registration has been legally prolonged ad interim prosecution of appeals of denials and registration suspensions". On 1 February 2015, the party held a convention, where Navalny stated the party was preparing for the 2016 elections, declaring the party would maintain its activity across Russia, saying, "We are unabashed to work in remote lands where the opposition does not work. We can even [work] in Crimea". The candidates the party would appoint were to be chosen via primary elections; however, he added, the party's candidates may be removed from elections. On 17 April 2015, the party initiated a coalition of democratic parties. On 28 April 2015, the party was deprived of registration by the Ministry of Justice, which stated the party had not registered the required number of regional branches within six months after the official registration. Krainev claimed that the party could be eliminated only by the Supreme Court, and he added that not all trials of registration of regional branches were over, calling the verdict "illegal twice". He added that the party would appeal to the European Court of Human Rights, and expressed confidence that the party would be restored and admitted to elections. The next day, the party officially challenged the verdict. On 30 May 2013, Sergey Sobyanin, the mayor of Moscow, argued an elected mayor is an advantage for the city compared to an appointed one, and on 4 June, he announced he would meet President Vladimir Putin and ask him for a snap election, mentioning the Muscovites would agree the governor elections should take place in the city of Moscow and the surrounding Moscow Oblast simultaneously. On 6 June, the request was granted, and the next day, the Moscow City Duma appointed the election on 8 September, the national voting day. On 3 June, Navalny announced he would run for the post. To become an official candidate, he would need either seventy thousand signatures of Muscovites or to be pegged for the office by a registered party, and then to collect 110 signatures of municipal deputies from 110 different subdivisions (three-quarters of Moscow's 146). Navalny chose to be pegged by a party, RPR–PARNAS. Among the six candidates who were officially registered as such, only two (Sobyanin and Communist Ivan Melnikov) were able to collect the required number of the signatures themselves, and the other four were given a number of signatures by the Council of Municipal Formations, following a recommendation by Sobyanin, to overcome the requirement (Navalny accepted 49 signatures, and other candidates accepted 70, 70, and 82). On 17 July, Navalny was registered as one of the six candidates for the Moscow mayoral election. On 18 July, he was sentenced to a five-year prison term for the embezzlement and fraud charges that were declared in 2012. Several hours after his sentencing, he pulled out of the race and called for a boycott of the election. Later that day, the prosecution office requested that Navalny be freed on bail and released from travel restrictions, since the verdict had not yet taken legal effect, saying that he had previously followed the restrictions. Navalny was a mayoral candidate, and imprisonment would thus not comply with the rule for equal access to the electorate. On his return to Moscow after being freed, pending an appeal, he vowed to stay in the race. The Washington Post has speculated that his release was ordered by the Kremlin in order to make the election and Sobyanin appear more legitimate. Navalny's campaign was successful in fundraising: out of 103.4 million rubles (approximately $3.09 million as of the election day), the total size of his electoral fund, 97.3 million ($2.91 million) were transferred by individuals throughout Russia; such an amount is unprecedented in Russia. It achieved a high profile through an unprecedentedly large campaign organisation that involved around 20,000 volunteers who passed out leaflets and hung banners, in addition to conducting several campaign rallies a day around the city; they were the main driving force for the campaign. The New Yorker described the resulted campaign as "a miracle", along with Navalny's release on 19 July, the fundraising campaign, and the personality of Navalny himself. The campaign received very little television coverage and did not utilise billboards. Thanks to Navalny's strong campaign (and Sobyanin's weak one), his result grew over time, weakening Sobyanin's, and in the end of the campaign, he declared the runoff election (to be conducted if none of the candidates receives at least 50% of votes) was "a hair's breadth away". The largest sociological research organisations predicted that Sobyanin would win the election, scoring 58% to 64% of the vote; they expected Navalny to receive 15–20% of the vote, and the turnout was to be 45–52%. (Levada Center was the only one not to have made any predictions; the data it had on 28 August was similar to that of other organisations.) The final results of the voting showed Navalny received 27% of the vote, more than candidates appointed by the parties that received second, third, fourth, and fifth highest results during the 2011 parliamentary elections, altogether. Navalny fared better in the center and southwest of Moscow, which have higher income and education levels. Sobyanin received 51% of the vote, winning the election. The turnout was 32%. The organisations explained the differences were because Sobyanin's electorate did not vote, as they felt that their candidate was guaranteed to win. Navalny's campaign office predicted Sobyanin would score 49–51%, and Navalny would get 24–26% of votes. Many experts said the election had been fair, that the number of irregularities had been much lower than those of other elections held within the country, and that the irregularities had had little effect on the result. Dmitri Abyzalov, leading expert of Center of Political Conjuncture, added low turnout figures provide a further sign of fairness of the election, because that shows they were not overestimated. However, according to Andrei Buzin, co-chairman of the GOLOS Association, State Departments of Social Security added people who did not originally want to vote to lists of those who would vote at home, with the number of such voters being 5% of those who voted, and added this did cause questions if Sobyanin would score 50% if this did not take place. Dmitry Oreshkin, leader of the "People's election commission" project (who did a separate counting based on the data from election observers; their result for Sobyanin was 50%), said now that the runoff election was only 2% away, all details would be looked at very closely, and added it was impossible to prove "anything" juridically. On 9 September, the day following the election, Navalny publicly denounced the tally, saying, "We do not recognise the results. They are fake". Sobyanin's office rejected an offer of a vote recount. On 12 September, Navalny addressed the Moscow City Court to overturn the result of the poll; the court rejected the assertion. Navalny then challenged the decision in the Supreme Court of Russia, but the court ruled that the election results were legitimate. Following the mayoral election, Navalny was offered a position as the fourth co-chairman of RPR-PARNAS. On 14 November 2014, the two remaining RPR-PARNAS co-chairmen, Boris Nemtsov and former Prime Minister of Russia Mikhail Kasyanov, declared it was the right moment to create a wide coalition of political forces, who favour the "European choice"; Navalny's Progress Party was seen as one of the potential participants. However, on 27 February 2015, Nemtsov was shot dead. Prior to his assassination, Nemtsov worked on a project of a coalition, in which Navalny and Khodorkovsky would become co-chairmen of RPR-PARNAS. Navalny declared merging parties would invoke bureaucratic difficulties and question the legitimacy of party's right to participate in federal elections without signatures collecting. However, Nemtsov's murder accelerated the work, and on 17 April, Navalny declared a wide discussion had taken place among Progress Party, RPR-PARNAS, and other closely aligned parties, which resulted in an agreement of formation of a new electoral bloc between the two leaders. Soon thereafter, it was signed by four other parties and supported by Khodorkovsky's Open Russia foundation. Electoral blocs are not present within the current[when?] law system of Russia, so it would be realised via means of a single party, RPR-PARNAS, which is not only eligible for participation in statewide elections, but is also currently[when?] not required to collect citizens' signatures for the right to participate in the State Duma elections scheduled for September 2016, due to the regional parliament mandate previously taken by Nemtsov. The candidates RPR-PARNAS would appoint were to be chosen via primary elections. On 5 July 2015, Kasyanov was elected as the only leader of RPR-PARNAS, and the party was renamed to just PARNAS. He added he would like to eventually re-establish the institution of co-chairmanship, adding, "Neither Alexei Navalny nor Mikhail Khodorkovsky will enter our party today and be elected as co-chairmen. But in the future, I think, such time will come". On 7 July, in an interview released by TV Rain, he specified Navalny could not leave a party of his, and this would need to be completed by PARNAS adsorbing members of the Progress Party and other parties of the coalition, and Navalny would be to come at some point when he "grows into this and feels this could be done" and join the party as well. The coalition claimed to have collected enough citizens' signatures for registration in the four regions it originally aimed for. However, in one region, the coalition would declare some signatures and personal data have been altered by malevolent collectors; signatures in the other regions have been rejected by regional election commissions. In Novosibirsk Oblast, some election office staff went on a hunger strike, which was abandoned almost two weeks since its inception, when Khodorkovsky, Navalny, and Kasyanov publicly advised to do so. Сomplaints have been issued to the Central Election Commission of Russia, after which the coalition has been registered as a participant in a regional election in one of the three contested regions, Kostroma Oblast. According to a source of Gazeta.ru "close to the Kremlin", the presidential administration saw coalition's chances as very low, yet was wary, but the restoration in one region occurred so PARNAS could "score a consolation goal". According to the official election results, the coalition scored 2% of votes, not enough to overcome the 5% threshold; the party admitted the election was lost. With growing popular support Navalny announced his entry into the presidential race on 13 December 2016, however on 8 February 2017, the Leninsky district court of Kirov repeated its sentence of 2013 (after the case has been sent to a new trial with a different judge by the Supreme Court which annulled the initial sentence after the decision of ECHR, which ruled that Russia had violated Navalny's right to a fair trial, in the Kirovles case) and re-sentenced him with a five-year suspended sentence. This sentence, if it came into force and remained valid, might prohibit the future official registration of Navalny as a candidate. Navalny announced that he would pursue the annulment of the sentence that clearly contradicts the decision of ECHR. Moreover, Navalny announced that his presidential campaign would proceed independently of court decisions. He referred to the Russian Constitution (Article 32), which deprives only two groups of citizens of the right to be elected: those recognised by the court as legally unfit and those kept in places of confinement by a court sentence. According to Freedom House and The Economist, Navalny was the most viable contender to Vladimir Putin in the 2018 election. Navalny organised a series of anti-corruption rallies in different cities across Russia in March. This appeal was responded to by the representatives of 95 Russian cities, and four cities abroad: London, Prague, Basel and Bonn. Navalny was attacked by unknown assailants outside his office in the Anti-Corruption Foundation on 27 April 2017. They sprayed brilliant green dye, possibly mixed with other components, into his face in a Zelyonka attack that can damage eyes of the victim. He had been attacked before, earlier in the spring. In the second attack, the green-colored disinfectant had evidently been mixed with a caustic chemical, resulting in a chemical burn to his right eye. He reportedly lost 80 percent of the sight in his right eye. Navalny accused the Kremlin of orchestrating the attack. Navalny was released from jail on 27 July 2017 after spending 25 days of imprisonment. Before that, he was arrested in Moscow for participating in protests and was sentenced to 30 days in jail for organising illegal protests. In September 2017, Human Rights Watch accused Russian police of systematic interference with Navalny's presidential campaign. "The pattern of harassment and intimidation against Navalny's campaign is undeniable," said Hugh Williamson, Europe, and Central Asia director at Human Rights Watch. "Russian authorities should let Navalny's campaigners work without undue interference and properly investigate attacks against them by ultra-nationalists and pro-government groups." On 21 September, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe invited Russian authorities, in connection with the Kirovles case, "to use urgently further avenues to erase the prohibition on Mr. Navalny's standing for election". Navalny was sentenced to 20 days in jail on 2 October 2017 for calls to participate in protests without approval from state authorities. In December 2017, Russia's Central Electoral Commission barred Navalny from running for president in 2018, citing Navalny's corruption conviction. The European Union said Navalny's removal cast "serious doubt" on the election. Navalny called for a boycott of the 2018 presidential election, stating his removal meant that millions of Russians were being denied their vote. Navalny filed an appeal against the Russian Supreme Court's ruling on 3 January, however a few days later on 6 January, the Supreme Court of Russia rejected his appeal. Navalny led protests on 28 January 2018 to urge a boycott of Russia's 2018 presidential election. Navalny was arrested on the day of the protest and then released the same day, pending trial. OVD-Info reported that 257 people were arrested throughout the country. According to Russian news reports, police stated Navalny was likely to be charged with calling for unauthorised demonstrations. Two of Navalny's associates were given brief jail terms for urging people to attend unsanctioned opposition rallies. Navalny stated on 5 February 2018 the government was accusing Navalny of assaulting an officer during the protests. Navalny was among 1600 people detained during 5 May protests prior to Putin's inauguration; Navalny was charged with disobeying police. On 15 May, he was sentenced to 30 days in jail. Immediately after his release on 25 September 2018, he was arrested and convicted for organising illegal demonstrations and sentenced to another 20 days in jail. During the 2019 Moscow City Duma election Navalny supported independent candidates, most of whom were not allowed to participate in the elections, which led to mass street protests. In July 2019, Navalny was arrested, first for ten days, and then, almost immediately, for 30 days. On the evening of 28 July, he was hospitalised with severe damage to his eyes and skin. At the hospital, he was diagnosed with an "allergy," although this diagnosis was disputed by Anastasia Vasilyeva, an ophthalmologist who previously treated Navalny after a chemical attack by an alleged protester in 2017. Vasilyeva questioned the diagnosis and suggested the possibility that Navalny's condition was the result of "the damaging effects of undetermined chemicals". On 29 July 2019, Navalny was discharged from hospital and taken back to prison, despite the objections of his personal physician who questioned the hospital's motives. Supporters of Navalny and journalists near the hospital were attacked by the police and many were detained. In response, he initiated the Smart Voting project. Navalny campaigned against the vote on constitutional amendments that took place on 1 July, calling it a "coup" and a "violation of the constitution". He also said that the changes would allow President Putin to become "president for life". After the results were announced, he called them a "big lie" that did not reflect public opinion. The reforms include an amendment allowing Putin to serve another two terms in office (until 2036), after his fourth presidential term ends. In 2008, Navalny sought to become an activist shareholder in five Russian oil and gas companies (Rosneft, Gazprom, Gazprom Neft, Lukoil, and Surgutneftegas), investing 300,000 rubles with the ultimate goal of increasing the transparency of their financial assets. Such transparency is required by law, but there are allegations that high-level managers of these companies are involved in theft and resisting transparency. In November 2010, Navalny published confidential documents about Transneft's auditing. According to Navalny's blog, about US$4 billion were stolen by Transneft's leaders during the construction of the Eastern Siberia–Pacific Ocean oil pipeline. In December, Navalny announced the launch of the RosPil [ru] project, which seeks to bring to light corrupt practices in the government procurement process. The project takes advantage of existing procurement regulation that requires all government requests for tender to be posted online. Information about winning bids must be posted online as well. The name RosPil is a pun on the slang term "распил" (literally "sawing"), implying the embezzlement of state funds. In May 2011, Navalny launched RosYama (literally "Russian Hole"), a project that allowed individuals to report potholes and track government responses to complaints. In August, Navalny published papers related to a scandalous real estate deal between the Hungarian and Russian governments. According to the papers, Hungary sold a former embassy building in Moscow for US$21 million to an offshore company of Viktor Vekselberg, who immediately resold it to the Russian government for US$116 million. The property's real value was estimated at US$52 million. Irregularities in the paper trail implied collusion. Three Hungarian officials responsible for the deal were detained in February 2011. Navalny was founder of the Anti-Corruption Foundation (FBK). In February 2012, Navalny concluded that Russian federal money going to Ramzan Kadyrov's Chechen Interior Ministry was being spent "in a totally shadowy and fraudulent way." In May, Navalny accused Deputy Prime Minister Igor Shuvalov of corruption, stating that companies owned by Roman Abramovich and Alisher Usmanov had transferred tens of millions of dollars to Shuvalov's company, allowing Shuvalov to share in the profit from Usmanov's purchase of the British steel company Corus. Navalny posted scans of documents to his blog showing the money transfers. Usmanov and Shuvalov stated the documents Navalny had posted were legitimate, but that the transaction had not violated Russian law. "I unswervingly followed the rules and principles of conflict of interest," said Shuvalov. "For a lawyer, this is sacred". In July, Navalny posted documents on his blog allegedly showing that Alexander Bastrykin, head of the Investigative Committee of Russia, owned an undeclared business in the Czech Republic. The posting was described by the Financial Times as Navalny's "answering shot" for having had his emails leaked during his arrest in the previous month. In August 2018, Navalny alleged that Viktor Zolotov stole at least US$29 million from procurement contracts for the National Guard of Russia. Shortly after his allegations against Zolotov, Navalny was imprisoned for staging protests in January 2018. Subsequently, Viktor Zolotov published a video message on 11 September challenging Navalny to a duel and promising to make "good, juicy mincemeat" of him. In March 2017, Navalny published the investigation He Is Not Dimon to You, accusing Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev of corruption. The authorities either ignored the accusation or argued that it was made by a "convicted criminal" and not worth comment. On 26 March, Navalny organised a series of anti-corruption rallies in cities across Russia. In some cities, the rallies were sanctioned by authorities, but in others, including Moscow and Saint Petersburg, they were not allowed. The Moscow police said that 500 people had been detained, but according to the human-rights group OVD-Info, 1,030 people were detained in Moscow alone, including Navalny himself. On 27 March, he was fined 20,000 rubles minimum for organising an illegal protest, and jailed for 15 days for resisting arrest. On 19 January 2021, two days after he was detained by Russian authorities upon his return to Russia, an investigation by Navalny and the FBK was published accusing President Vladimir Putin of using fraudulently obtained funds to build a massive estate for himself near the town of Gelendzhik in Krasnodar Krai, in what he called "the world's biggest bribe". The estate was first reported on in 2010 after the businessman Sergei Kolesnikov, who was involved in the project, gave details about it. According to Navalny, the estate is 39 times the size of Monaco, with the Federal Security Service (FSB) owning 70 square kilometers of land around the palace, and the estate cost over 100 billion rubles ($1.35 billion) to construct. It also showed aerial footage of the estate via a drone, and a detailed floorplan of the palace that Navalny and the FBK said was given by a contractor, which was compared to photographs from inside the palace that were leaked onto the Internet in 2011. Using the floorplan, computer-generated visualisations of the palace interior were also shown. There are impregnable fences, its own port, its own security, a church, its own permit system, a no-fly zone, and even its own border checkpoint. It is absolutely a separate state within Russia. — Alexei Anatolievich Navalny This investigation also detailed an elaborate corruption scheme allegedly involving Putin's inner circle that allowed Putin to hide billions of dollars to build the estate. Navalny's team also said that it managed to confirm reporting about Putin's alleged lovers Svetlana Krivonogikh and Alina Kabaeva. Navalny's video on YouTube garnered over 20 million views in less than a day, and over 92 million after a week. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov in a press conference called the investigation a "scam" and said that citizens should "think before transferring money to such crooks". Putin denied ownership of the palace and the oligarch Arkady Rotenberg, Putin's childhood friend and judo partner, claimed ownership. On 30 July 2012, the Investigative Committee charged Navalny with embezzlement. The committee stated that he had conspired to steal timber from Kirovles, a state-owned company in Kirov Oblast, in 2009, while acting as an adviser to Kirov's governor Nikita Belykh. Investigators had closed a previous probe into the claims for lack of evidence. Navalny was released on his own recognisance but instructed not to leave Moscow. Navalny described the charges as "weird" and unfounded. He stated that authorities "are doing it to watch the reaction of the protest movement and of Western public opinion ... So far they consider both of these things acceptable and so they are continuing along this line". His supporters protested before the Investigative Committee offices. In April 2013, Loeb & Loeb LLP issued "An Analysis of the Russian Federation's prosecutions of Alexei Navalny", a paper detailing Investigative Committee accusations. The paper concludes that "the Kremlin has reverted to misuse of the Russian legal system to harass, isolate and attempt to silence political opponents". The Kirovles trial commenced in the city of Kirov on 17 April 2013. On 18 July, Navalny was sentenced to five years in jail for embezzlement. He was found guilty of misappropriating about 16 million rubles' ($500,000) worth of lumber from a state-owned company. The sentence read by the judge Sergey Blinov was textually the same as the request of the prosecutor, with the only exception that Navalny was given five years, and the prosecution requested six years. Later that evening, the Prosecutor's Office appealed Navalny and Ofitserov jail sentences, arguing that until the higher court affirmed the sentence, the sentence was invalid. The next morning, the appeal was granted. Navalny and Ofitserov were released on 19 July, awaiting the hearings of the higher court. The prosecutor's requested decision was described as "unprecedented" by experts.[who?] The prison sentence was suspended by a court in Kirov on 16 October 2013, still being a burden for his political future. On 23 February 2016, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Russia had violated Navalny's right to a fair trial, and ordered the government to pay him 56,000 euros in legal costs and damages. On 16 November 2016, Russia's Supreme Court overturned the 2013 sentence, sending the verdict back to the Leninsky District Court in Kirov for review. On 8 February 2017, the Leninsky district court of Kirov repeated its sentence of 2013 and charged Navalny with a five-year suspended sentence. Navalny announced that he will pursue the annulment of the sentence that clearly contradicts the decision of ECHR. In 2008, Oleg Navalny made an offer to Yves Rocher Vostok, the Eastern European subsidiary of Yves Rocher between 2008 and 2012, to accredit Glavpodpiska, which was created by Navalny, with delivering duties. On 5 August, the parties signed a contract. To fulfill the obligations under the agreement, Glavpodpiska outsourced the task to sub-suppliers, AvtoSAGA and Multiprofile Processing Company (MPC). In November and December 2012, the Investigating Committee interrogated and questioned Yves Rocher Vostok. On 10 December, Bruno Leproux, general director of Yves Rocher Vostok, filed to the Investigative Committee, asking to investigate if the Glavpodpiska subscription company had damaged Yves Rocher Vostok, and the Investigative Committee initiated a case. The prosecution claimed Glavpodpiska embezzled money by taking duties and then redistributing them to other companies for lesser amounts of money, and collecting the surplus: 26.7 million rubles ($540,000) from Yves Rocher Vostok, and 4.4 million rubles from the MPC. The funds were claimed to be subsequently legalised by transferring them on fictitious grounds from a fly-by-night company to Kobyakovskaya Fabrika Po Lozopleteniyu, a willow weaving company founded by Navalny and operated by his parents. The Navalnys denied the charges. The Navalny brothers' lawyers claimed the investigators "added phrases like 'bearing criminal intentions' to a description of regular entrepreneurial activity". According to Oleg Navalny's lawyer, Glavpodpiska did not just collect money, it controlled provision of means of transport, execution of orders, collected and expedited production to the carriers, and was responsible before clients for terms and quality of executing orders. None of the witnesses confirmed that there were any losses, except MPC CEO Sergei Shustov who said he had learned about his losses from an investigator and believed him without making audits. Both brothers and their lawyers claimed Alexei Navalny did not participate in the Glavpodpiska operations, and witnesses all stated they had never encountered Alexei Navalny in person before the trial. Following the imputed violation of travel restrictions, Navalny was placed under house arrest and prohibited from communicating with anyone other than his family, lawyers, and investigators on 28 February 2014. Navalny claimed the arrest was politically motivated, and he filed a complaint to the European Court of Human Rights. On 7 July, he declared the complaint had been accepted and given priority; the court compelled the Government of Russia to provide answers to a questionnaire. The house arrest, in particular, prohibited usage of the internet; however, new posts were released under his social media accounts after the arrest was announced. A 5 March post claimed the accounts were controlled by his Anti-Corruption Foundation teammates and his wife Yulia. On 13 March, his LiveJournal blog was blocked in Russia, because, according to the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology, and Mass Media (Roskomnadzor), "functioning of the given web page breaks the regulation of the juridical decision of the bail hearing of a citizen against whom a criminal case has been initiated". The house arrest was eased a number of times: On 21 August, Navalny was allowed to communicate with his co-defendants; a journalist present in the courthouse at the moment confirmed Navalny was allowed to communicate with "anyone but the Yves Rocher case witnesses". On 10 October, his right to communicate with the press was confirmed by another court, and he was allowed to make comments on the case in media (Navalny's plea not to prolong the arrest was, however, rejected). On 19 December, he was allowed to mail correspondence to authorities and international courts. Navalny again pleaded not to prolong the arrest, but the plea was rejected again. The verdict was announced on 30 December 2014. Both brothers were found guilty of fraud against Multiprofile Processing Company (MPC) and Yves Rocher Vostok and money laundering, and were convicted under Articles 159.4 §§ 2 and 3 and 174.1 § 2 (a) and (b) of the Criminal Code. Alexei Navalny was given 31⁄2 years of suspended sentence, and Oleg Navalny was sentenced to 31⁄2 years in prison and was arrested after the verdict was announced; both had to pay a fine of 500,000 rubles and a compensation to the MPC of over 4 million rubles. In the evening, several thousand protesters gathered in the center of Moscow. Navalny broke his house arrest to attend the rally and was immediately apprehended by the police and brought back home. Both brothers filed complaints to the European Court of Human Rights: Oleg's was communicated and given priority; Alexei's was reviewed in the context of the previous complaint related to this case and the Government of Russia had been "invited to submit further observations". The second instance within the country confirmed the verdict, only releasing Alexei from the responsibility to pay his fine. Both prosecutors and defendants were not satisfied with this decision. On 17 October 2017, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Navalny's conviction for fraud and money laundering "was based on an unforeseeable application of criminal law and that the proceedings were arbitrary and unfair." The Court found that the domestic court's decisions had been arbitrary and manifestly unreasonable. ECHR found the Russian courts' decisions violated articles 6 and 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights. On 15 November 2018, the Grand Chamber upheld the decision. After the Yves Rocher case, Navalny had to pay a compensation of 4.4 million rubles. He declared the case was "a frame up", but he added he would pay the sum as this could affect granting his brother's parole. On 7 October 2015, Alexei's lawyer announced the defendant willingly paid 2.9 million and requested an installment plan for the rest of the sum. The request was granted, except the term was contracted from the requested five months to two, and a part of the sum declared paid (900,000 rubles; arrested from Navalny's banking account) was not yet received by the police; the prosecutors declared that may happen because of inter-process delays. Later that month, Kirovles sued Navalny for the 16.1 million rubles' declared pecuniary injury; Navalny declared he had not expected the suit, as Kirovles did not initiate it during the 2012–2013 trial. On 23 October, a court resolved the said sum should be paid by the three defendants. The court denied the defendants' motion 14.7 million had already been paid by that point; the verdict and the payment sum were justified by a ruling by a Plenum of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. Navalny declared he could not cover the requested sum; he called the suit a "drain-dry strategy" by authorities. In late December 2012, the Investigative Committee of Russia asserted that Allekt, an advertising company headed by Navalny, defrauded the Union of Right Forces (SPS) political party in 2007 by taking 100 million rubles ($3.2 million) payment for advertising and failing to honor its contract. If charged and convicted, Navalny could be jailed for up to 10 years. Leonid Gozman, a former SPS official, was quoted as saying: "Nothing of the sort happened—he committed no robbery". Earlier in December, as reported by the BBC, "the Investigative Committee charged ... Navalny and his brother Oleg with embezzling 55 million rubles ($1.76 million) in 2008–2011 while working in a postal business." Navalny, who denied the allegations in the two previous cases, sought to laugh off news of the third inquiry with a tweet stating "Fiddlesticks". In April 2020, Yandex search engine started artificially placing negative commentary about Navalny on the top positions in its search results for his name. Yandex declared this was part of an "experiment" and returned to presenting organic search results. Navalny alleged that Russian billionaire and businessman Yevgeny Prigozhin was linked to a company called Moskovsky Shkolnik (Moscow schoolboy) that had supplied poor quality food to schools which had caused a dysentery outbreak. In April 2019, Moskovsky Shkolnik filed a lawsuit against Navalny. In October 2019, the Moscow Arbitration Court ordered Navalny to pay 29.2 million rubles. Navalny said that "Cases of dysentery were proven using documents. But it's us that has to pay." By April 2019, Navalny had won six complaints against Russian authorities in the ECHR for a total of €225,000. Prigozhin was quoted by the press service of his catering company Concord Management and Consulting on 25 August 2020 as saying that he intended to enforce a court decision that required Navalny, his associate Lyubov Sobol and his Anti-Corruption Foundation to pay 88 million rubles in damages to the Moskovsky Shkolnik company over a video investigation. On 20 August 2020, Navalny fell ill during a flight from Tomsk to Moscow and was hospitalised in the Emergency City Clinical Hospital No. 1 in Omsk (Городская клиническая больница скорой медицинской помощи №1), where the plane had made an emergency landing. The change in his condition on the plane was sudden and violent, and video footage showed crewmembers on the flight scurrying towards him as he screamed loudly. Later, he said that he was not screaming from pain, but from the knowledge that he was dying. Navalny's spokeswoman, Kira Yarmysh, later said that he was in a coma and on a ventilator in the Omsk hospital. She also said that since he arose that morning, Navalny had consumed nothing but a cup of tea, acquired at the airport. It was initially suspected that something was mixed into his drink, and physicians stated that a "toxin mixed into a hot drink would be rapidly absorbed". The hospital said that he was in a stable but serious condition. Although staff initially acknowledged that Navalny had probably been poisoned, after numerous police personnel appeared outside Navalny's room, the medical staff was less forthcoming. The Omsk hospital's deputy chief physician later told reporters that poisoning was "one scenario among many" being considered. A plane was sent from Germany to evacuate Navalny from Russia for treatment at the Charité Hospital in Berlin. Although the doctors treating him in Omsk initially declared he was too sick to be transported, they later released him. On 24 August, the doctors in Germany made an announcement, confirming that Navalny had been poisoned with a cholinesterase inhibitor. Ivan Zhdanov, chief of Navalny's Anti-Corruption Foundation, said that Navalny could have been poisoned because of one of the foundation's investigations. On 2 September, the German government announced that Navalny was poisoned with a Novichok nerve agent, from the same family of nerve agents that was used to poison Sergei Skripal and his daughter. International officials said that they had obtained "unequivocal proof" from toxicology tests, and have called on the Russian government for an explanation. On 7 September, German doctors announced that he was out of the coma. On 15 September, Navalny's spokeswoman said that Navalny would return to Russia. On 17 September, Navalny's team said that traces of the nerve agent used to poison Navalny was detected on an empty water bottle from his hotel room in Tomsk, suggesting that he was possibly poisoned before leaving the hotel. On 23 September, Navalny was discharged from hospital after his condition had sufficiently improved. On 6 October, OPCW confirmed presence of cholinesterase inhibitor from the Novichok group in Navalny's blood and urine samples. On 14 December, a joint investigation by The Insider and Bellingcat in co-operation with CNN and Der Spiegel was published, which implicated agents from Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) in Navalny's poisoning. The investigation detailed a special unit of the FSB, which specialises in chemical substances, and the investigators then tracked members of the unit, using telecom and travel data. According to the investigation, Navalny was under surveillance by a group of operatives from the unit for 3 years and there may have been earlier attempts to poison Navalny. In an interview with Spanish newspaper El País, Navalny said that "It is difficult for me to understand exactly what is going on in [Putin's] mind. ... 20 years of power would spoil anyone and make them crazy. He thinks he can do whatever he wants." On 21 December 2020, Navalny released a video showing him impersonating a Russian security official and speaking over the phone with a man identified by some investigative news media as a chemical weapons expert named Konstantin Kudryavtsev. During the call, he revealed that the poison had been placed on Navalny's clothing, particularly in his underwear, and that Navalny would have died if not for the plane's emergency landing and quick response from an ambulance crew on the runway. In January 2021, Bellingcat, The Insider and Der Spiegel linked the unit that tracked Navalny to other deaths, including activists Timur Kuashev in 2014 and Ruslan Magomedragimov in 2015, and politician Nikita Isayev in 2019. In February, another joint investigation found that Russian opposition politician Vladimir Kara-Murza was followed by the same unit before his suspected poisonings. The European Union, United Kingdom and United States responded to the poisoning by imposing sanctions on senior Russian officials. On 17 January 2021, Navalny returned to Russia by plane from Germany, arriving at Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow after the flight was diverted from Vnukovo Airport. At passport control, he was detained. The Federal Penitentiary Service (FSIN) confirmed his detention and said that he would remain in custody until the court hearing. Prior to his return, the FSIN had said that Navalny might face jail time upon his arrival in Moscow for violating the terms of his probation by leaving Russia, saying it would be "obliged" to detain him once he returned; in 2014, Navalny received a suspended sentence in the Yves Rocher case, which he called politically motivated and in 2017, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that Navalny was unfairly convicted. Amnesty International declared Navalny to be a prisoner of conscience and called on the Russian authorities to release him. In February 2021, Amnesty briefly revoked the designation after it said it was being "bombarded" with complaints about xenophobic comments made by Navalny in the past; however, they reversed this decision in May of the same year, with a statement that noted that designation of "an individual as Prisoner of Conscience... in no way involves or implies the endorsement of their views" and that the primary purpose of such a designation was to "highlight... the urgent need for his rights... to be recognised and acted upon by the Russian authorities". A court decision on 18 January 2021 ordered the detention of Navalny until 15 February for violating his parole. A makeshift court was set up in the police station where Navalny was being held. Another hearing would later be held to determine whether his suspended sentence should be replaced with a jail term. Navalny described the procedure as "ultimate lawlessness" and called on his supporters to take to the streets. The next day, while in jail, an investigation by Navalny and the FBK was published accusing President Vladimir Putin of corruption. The investigation and his arrest led to mass protests across Russia beginning on 23 January 2021. A Moscow court on 2 February 2021 replaced Navalny's three and a half-year suspended sentence with a prison sentence, minus the amount of time he spent under house arrest, meaning he would spend over 2+1⁄2 years in a corrective labour colony.[excessive citations] The verdict was condemned by the governments of the United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France and others as well as the EU.[excessive citations] Immediately after the verdict was announced, protests in a number of Russian cities were held and met with a harsh police crackdown. Navalny later returned to court for a trial on slander charges, where he was accused of defaming a World War II veteran who took part in a promotional video backing the constitutional amendments last year. The case was launched in June 2020 after Navalny called those who took part in the video "corrupt lackeys" and "traitors". Navalny called the case politically motivated and accused authorities of using the case to smear his reputation. Although the charge is punishable by up to two years in prison if proven, his lawyer said that Navalny cannot face a custodial sentence because the law was changed to make it a jailable offence after the alleged crime had taken place. The European Court of Human Rights ruled on 16 February 2021 that the Russian government should release Navalny immediately, with the court saying that the resolution was made in "regard to the nature and extent of risk to the applicant's life". Navalny's lawyers had applied to the court for an "interim measure" for his release on 20 January 2021 after his detention. However Russian officials indicated that they would not comply with the decision. Justice Minister Konstantin Chuychenko called the measure a "flagrant intervention in the operation of a judicial system of a sovereign state" as well as "unreasonable and unlawful", claiming that it did not "contain any reference to any fact or any norm of the law, which would have allowed the court to take this decision". In December 2020, a series of laws were also passed and signed that gave the constitution precedence over rulings made by international bodies as well international treaties. A few days later, a Moscow court rejected Navalny's appeal and upheld his prison sentence, however it reduced his sentence by six weeks after deciding to count his time under house arrest as part of his time served. Another court convicted Navalny on slander charges against the World War II veteran, fining him 850,000 rubles ($11,500). A resolution by the ECHR called for his release. Navalny was reported on 28 February 2021 to have recently arrived at the Pokrov correctional colony in Vladimir Oblast, a prison where Dmitry Demushkin and Konstantin Kotov were also jailed. In early March 2021, the European Union and United States imposed sanctions on senior Russian officials in response to Navalny's poisoning and imprisonment. In March 2021, Navalny in a formal complaint accused authorities of torture by depriving him of sleep, where authorities consider him a flight risk. Navalny told lawyers that guards wake him up eight times a night announcing to a camera that he was in his prison cell. A lawyer of Navalny said that he was suffering from health problems, including a loss of sensation in his spine and legs, and that prison authorities denied Navalny's requests for a civilian physician, claiming his health was "satisfactory". On 31 March 2021, Navalny announced a hunger strike to demand proper medical treatment. On 6 April 2021, six doctors, including Navalny's personal physician, Anastasia Vasilyeva, and two CNN correspondents, were arrested outside the prison when they attempted to visit Navalny whose health significantly deteriorated. On 7 April 2021, Navalny's attorneys claimed he had suffered two spinal disc herniations and had lost feeling in his hands, prompting criticism from the U.S. government. Agnès Callamard, Secretary General of Amnesty International accused Vladimir Putin of slowly killing Alexei Navalny through torture and inhumane treatment in prison. He also complained that he was not allowed to read newspapers or have any books including a copy of the Quran that he planned to study. On 17 April 2021, it was reported that Navalny was in immediate need of medical attention. Navalny's personal doctor Anastasia Vasilyeva and three other doctors, including cardiologist Yaroslav Ashikhmin, asked prison officials to grant them immediate access, stating on social media that "our patient can die any minute", due to an increased risk of a fatal cardiac arrest or kidney failure "at any moment". Test results obtained by Navalny's lawyers showed heightened levels of potassium in the blood, which can bring on cardiac arrest, and sharply elevated creatinine levels, indicating impaired kidneys. Navalny's results showed blood potassium levels of 7.1 mmol (millimoles) per liter; blood potassium levels higher than 6.0 mmol per liter usually require immediate treatment. Later that night, an open letter, addressed to Putin and open for Russian citizens to sign, was signed and published by 11 politicians representing several regional parliaments, demanding an independent doctor be allowed to visit Navalny, and for a review and cancellation of all of his criminal cases. "We regard what is happening in relation to Navalny as an attempt on the life of a politician, committed out of personal and political hatred," said the letter, "You, the President of the Russian Federation, personally bear responsibility for the life of Alexey Navalny on the territory of the Russian Federation, including in prison facilities – [you bear this responsibility] to Navalny himself, to his relatives, and to the whole world." Among the signatories were chairman of the Pskov Oblast branch of the Yabloko party, the deputy of the regional assembly Lev Schlossberg, the deputy from Karelia, the ex-chairman of Yabloko Emilia Slabunova, and the deputy of the Moscow City Duma Yevgeny Stupin. The following day, his daughter called on Russian prison authorities to let her father be checked by doctors in a tweet written from Stanford University, where she is a student. Prominent celebrities such as J.K. Rowling and Jude Law also addressed a letter to Russian authorities asking to provide Navalny with proper medical treatment. U.S. president Joe Biden called his treatment "totally unfair" and National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan said that the Kremlin had been warned "that there will be consequences if Mr. Navalny dies." The European Union's head diplomat Josep Borrell stated that the organisation held the Russian government accountable for Navalny's health conditions. The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, also expressed her concern for his health. However, Russian authorities rebuked such concerns by foreign countries. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov said that Russian prison officials are monitoring Navalny's health, not the president. On 19 April 2021, Navalny was moved from prison to a hospital for convicts, according to the Russian prison service, for "vitamin therapy". On 23 April 2021, Navalny announced that he was ending his hunger strike on advice of his doctors and as he felt his demands had been partially met. As of June 2021[update], his newspapers were still being censored as articles were cut out. On 16 April 2021, the Moscow prosecutor office requested the Moscow City Court to designate organisations linked to Navalny including the FBK and his headquarters as extremist organisations, claiming: "Under the disguise of liberal slogans, these organisations are engaged in creating conditions for the destabilisation of the social and socio-political situation." In response, Navalny aide Leonid Volkov stated: "Putin has just announced full-scale mass political repression in Russia." On 26 April 2021, Moscow's prosecutor office ordered Navalny's network of regional offices, including those of the FBK, to cease its activities, pending a court ruling on whether to designate them as extremist organisations. Volkov explained that it will limit many of the group's activities as prosecutors seek to label the Foundation as "extremists". The move was condemned by Germany as well as Amnesty International, which, in a statement, said: "The objective is clear: to raze Alexei Navalny's movement to the ground while he languishes in prison." On 29 April 2021, Navalny's team announced that the political network would be dissolved, in advance of a court ruling in May expected to designate it as extremist. According to Volkov, the headquarters would be transformed into independent political organisations "which will deal with investigations and elections, public campaigns and rallies". On the same day, his allies said that a new criminal case had been opened against Navalny, for allegedly setting up a non-profit organisation that infringed on the rights of citizens. The next day, the leader of Team 29, Ivan Pavlov, who also represents Navalny's team in the extremism case, was detained in Moscow. On 30 April, the financial monitoring agency added Navalny's regional campaign offices to a list of "terrorists and extremists." On 20 May, the head of the Russian prison system and Navalny's ally Ivan Zhdanov reported that Navalny had "more or less" recovered and that his health was generally satisfactory. On 7 June, Navalny was returned to prison after fully recovering from the effects of the hunger strike. On 9 June 2021, Navalny's political network, including his headquarters and the FBK, were designated as extremist organisations and liquidated by the Moscow City Court. Vyacheslav Polyga, judge of Moscow City Court, upheld the administrative claim of the prosecutor of Moscow city Denis Popov and, rejecting all the petitions of the defense, decided to recognise Anti-Corruption Foundation as extremist organisation, to liquidate it and to confiscate its assets; similar decision had been taken against Citizens' Rights Protection Foundation; the activity of the Alexei Navalny staff was prohibited (case No.3а-1573/2021). Case hearing was held in camera because, as indicated by advocate Ilia Novikov, the case file including the text of the administrative claim was classified as state secret. According to advocate Ivan Pavlov, Navalny was not the party to the proceedings and the judge refused to give him such status; at the hearing, the prosecutor stated that defendants are extremist organisations because they want the change of power in Russia and they promised to help participants of the protest with payment of administrative and criminal fines and with making a complaints to the European Court of Human Rights. On 4 August 2021, First Appellate Ordinary Court in Moscow upheld the decision of the court of first instance (case No.66а-3553/2021) and this decision entered into force that day. On 28 December 2021, it was reported that Anti-Corruption Foundation, Citizens' Rights Protection Foundation and 18 natural persons including Alexei Navalny filed a cassation appeals to the Second Cassation Ordinary Court. On 25 March 2022, the Second Cassation Ordinary Court rejected all cassation appeals and upheld the judgements of lower courts (case No.8а-5101/2022). In October 2021, Navalny said that the Russian prison commission designated him as a "terrorist" and "extremist", but that he was no longer regarded as a flight risk. In January 2022, Russia added him and his aides to the "terrorists and extremists" list. On 28 June 2022, Navalny lost his appeal on being designated as "extremist" and "terrorist". In February 2022, Alexei Navalny faced an additional 10 to 15 years in prison in a new trial on fraud and contempt of court charges. The charges alleged that he stole $4.7m (£3.5m) of donations given to his political organisations and insulted a judge. He was tried in a makeshift courtroom in the corrective colony at which he was imprisoned. Amnesty International independently analysed the trial materials calling the charges "arbitrary" and "politically motivated". On 21 February 2022, prosecution witness Fyodor Gorozhanko refused to testify against Navalny in the trial, stating that investigators had "pressured" him to testify to the information they wanted and that he did not believe Navalny had committed any crimes. On 24 February, during his trial, Navalny condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine that began that day and asked the court to include his statement to the trial's protocol. He said that it would "lead to a huge number of victims, destroyed futures, and the continuation of this line of impoverishment of the citizens of Russia." He called the war a distraction to the population to "divert their attention from problems that exist inside the country". On 22 March 2022, Navalny was found guilty of contempt of court and embezzlement and given a 9-year sentence in a maximum-security prison; he was also ordered to pay a fine of 1.2 million rubles (approx. $13,000). Amnesty International described the trial as a "sham". On 17 May 2022, Navalny opened an appeal process against the sentence; the court said the process would resume on 24 May after Navalny requested to postpone the hearing to have a family meeting before being transferred. On 24 May, the Moscow City Court upheld the judgement of the court of first instance. On 31 May 2022, Navalny said that he was officially notified about new charges of extremism brought against him, in which he was facing up to an additional 15 years in prison. In mid-June 2022, Navalny was transferred to the maximum security prison IK-6 in Melekhovo, Vladimir Oblast. On 11 July 2022, Navalny announced the relaunch of his Anti-Corruption Foundation as an international organisation with an advisory board including his wife Yulia Navalnaya, Guy Verhofstadt, Anne Applebaum, and Francis Fukuyama; Navalny also stated that the first contribution to Anti-Corruption Foundation International would be the Sakharov Prize ($50,000) that was awarded to him. On 7 September 2022, Navalny said that he had been placed in solitary confinement for the fourth time in just over a month, after just being released. He linked his recent treatment to his attempts to establish a labour union in his penal colony and his "6000" list of individuals he has called to be sanctioned. The next day, he said that his attorney-client privilege was revoked with prison authorities accusing him of continuing to commit crimes from prison. On 4 October 2022, allies of Navalny said they were relaunching his regional political network to fight the mobilization and war. On 17 November 2022, Navalny stated that he was now in permanent solitary confinement. Infractions besides the attempt to start a labour union among the prisoners were that he did not button his collar, did not clean the prison yard well enough, and that he addressed a prison official by his military rank rather than his patronymic. On 10 January 2023, over 400 doctors in Russia signed an open letter to president Putin demanding that prison authorities "stop abusing" Navalny, after it became known that he fell ill with flu in solitary confinement and his lawyers were not allowed to give him basic medication. Less than a month later, Navalny was transferred to an isolated punishment cell, a stricter form of imprisonment reserved for those who violate prison rules, for the maximum term of six months. On 4 August 2023, Navalny was sentenced to an additional 19 years in a "special regime" colony on charges including publicly inciting extremist activity, financing extremist activity, and "rehabilitating Nazi ideology"; the Moscow City Court found him guilty on all charges in a closed-doors trial. In a social media post published the previous day, Navalny stated that he had expected to be given a "Stalinist" sentence and called on supporters to fight against corruption. According to his lawyers, following this latest sentencing, Navalny would have been released in December 2038. On 13 October 2023, three of his lawyers, Vadim Kobzev, Igor Sergunin and Alexei Liptser, were detained on charges about participating in an "extremist group". Navalny commented that "Just like in Soviet times, not only political activists are being prosecuted and turned into political prisoners, but their lawyers, too". On 11 December 2023, Navalny's aides revealed that they had not had any contact with Navalny for six days. According to their statements, he was removed from the penal colony where he had been imprisoned and his current whereabouts are not known. The disappearance came after Navalny was sentenced to an additional 19 years in August and the beginning of campaigning for the 2024 Russian presidential election, which Putin recently announced his candidacy for. Navalny's aides had been preparing for his transfer to a "special regime" colony (the harshest grade in Russia's prison system). His last known whereabouts was the IK-6 prison camp in Vladimir Oblast, where on 15 December staff commented that Navalny had left the facility and was being moved to a different prison. On 25 December 2023 he was discovered to be in the IK-3 "special regime" colony, known as "Polar Wolf", in Kharp in the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug. He remained there until his death on 16 February 2024. Human Rights Centre Memorial recognised Navalny as a political prisoner in 2021. PACE also considered Navalny a political prisoner. On 16 February 2024, the Federal Penitentiary Service announced that Navalny had died at the prison in Yamalo-Nenets in Western Siberia after taking a walk and feeling unwell that morning. He reportedly died at 14:17 Yekaterinburg Time. The prison statement stated: "All necessary resuscitation measures were carried out but did not yield positive results... The paramedics confirmed the death of the convict." Kira Yarmysh, Navalny's spokeswoman, confirmed his death the following day, and demanded his body to be returned to his family. Prior to his death, Navalny had been treated in a hospital after complaining of malnourishment and other ailments due to mistreatment in the prison. His body was returned to his mother on 24 February 2024. On 27 February 2024, Vasily Dubkov, a lawyer for Navalny, was briefly detained in Moscow for "violating public order", as part of the ongoing crackdowns on Navalny's legal team and the Anti-Corruption Foundation by Russian authorities. In October 2010, Navalny was the winner of an online poll for the mayor of Moscow, held by Kommersant and Gazeta.Ru. He received about 30,000 votes, or 45%, with the closest rival being "Against all candidates" with some 9,000 votes (14%), followed by former First Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Boris Nemtsov with 8,000 votes (12%) out of a total of about 67,000 votes. The reaction to Navalny's actual mayoral election result in 2013, where he came second, was mixed: Nezavisimaya Gazeta declared, "The voting campaign turned a blogger into a politician", and following an October 2013 Levada Center poll that showed Navalny made it to the list of potential presidential candidates among Russians, receiving a rating of 5%, Konstantin Kalachev, the leader of the Political Expert Group, declared 5% was not the limit for Navalny, and unless something extraordinary happened, he could become "a pretender for a second place in the presidential race". On the other hand, The Washington Post published a column by Milan Svolik that stated the election was fair so the Sobyanin could show a clean victory, demoralising the opposition, which could otherwise run for street protests. Putin's press secretary Dmitry Peskov stated on 12 September, "His momentary result cannot testify his political equipment and does not speak of him as of a serious politician". When referring to Navalny, Putin never actually pronounced his name in public, referring to him as a "mister" or the like; Julia Ioffe took it for a sign of weakness before the opposition politician, and Peskov later stated Putin never pronounced his name in order not to "give [Navalny] a part of his popularity". In July 2015, Bloomberg's sources "familiar with the matter" declared there was an informal prohibition from the Kremlin for senior Russian officials from mentioning Navalny's name. Peskov rejected the assumption there is such a ban; however, in doing so, he did not mention Navalny's name either. In a 2013 Levada Center poll, Navalny's recognition among the Russian population stood at 37%. Out of those who were able to recognise Navalny, 14% would either "definitely" or "probably" support his presidential run. The Levada Center also conducted another survey, which was released on 6 April 2017, showing Navalny's recognition among the Russian population at 55%. Out of those who recognised Navalny, 4% would "definitely" vote for him and 14% would "probably" vote for him in the presidential election. In another poll carried out by the same pollster in August 2020, 4% of respondents said that they trusted Navalny the most (out of a list of politicians), an increase from 2% in the previous month. According to polls conducted by the Levada Center in September 2020, 20% of Russians approved of Navalny's activities, 50% disapproved, and 18% had never heard of him. Out of those who were able to recognise Navalny, 10% said that they have "respect" for him, 8% had sympathy and 15% "could not say anything bad" about him. 31% were "neutral" towards him, 14% "could not say anything good" about him and 10% disliked him. During and after the Kirovles trial, a number of prominent people expressed support to Navalny and/or condemned the trial. The last Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev called it "proof that we do not have independent courts". Former Minister of Finance Alexei Kudrin stated that it was "looking less like a punishment than an attempt to isolate him from social life and the electoral process". It was also criticised by novelist Boris Akunin, and jailed Russian oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky, who called it similar to the treatment of political opponents during the Soviet era. Vladimir Zhirinovsky, leader of the nationalist LDPR, called the verdict "a direct warning to our 'fifth column'", and added, "This will be the fate of everyone who is connected with the West and works against Russia". A variety of state officials condemned the verdict. United States Department of State Deputy Spokesperson Marie Harf stated that the United States was "very disappointed by the conviction and sentencing of opposition leader Aleksey Navalniy". The spokesperson for European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton said that the outcome of the trial "raises serious questions as to the state of the rule of law in Russia". Andreas Schockenhoff, Germany's Commissioner for German-Russian Coordination, stated, "For us, it's further proof of authoritarian policy in Russia, which doesn't allow diversity and pluralism". The New York Times commented in response to the verdict that "President Vladimir Putin of Russia actually seems weak and insecure". The verdict in the case of Yves Rocher caused similar reactions. According to Alexei Venediktov, the verdict was "unfair", Oleg Navalny was taken "hostage", while Alexei was not jailed to avoid "furious reaction" from Putin, which was caused by the change of measure of restraint after the Kirovles trial. A number of deputies appointed by United Russia and LDPR found the verdict too mild. Experts interviewed by the BBC Russian Service expressed reactions close to the political positions their organisations generally stand on. The spokesperson for EU foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini stated the same day that the sentence was likely to be politically motivated. Public opinion of Navalny in Russia varied over time. According to Levada Center, 20% of people thought the Kirovles case had been caused by an actual violation of law, while 54% agreed the rationale beyond the case was his anti-corruption activity in May 2011. In May 2013, the shares of people who held these opinions were 28% and 47%, respectively. In September 2013, the shares were 35% and 45%. The organisation suggested this had been caused by corresponding coverage in media. By September 2014, the percentages had undergone further changes, and equaled 37% and 38%. The center also stated the share of those who found the result of another criminal case against him was unfair and Navalny was not guilty dropped from 13% in July 2013 to 5% in January 2015, and the number of those who found the verdict was too tough also fell from 17% to 9%. The share of those who found the verdict to be either fair or too mild was 26% in July 2013, and has exceeded 35% since September 2013. In February 2011, in an interview with the radio station finam.fm, Navalny called the main Russian party, United Russia, a "party of crooks and thieves". In May 2011, the Russian government began a criminal investigation into Navalny, widely described in media as "revenge", and by Navalny himself as "a fabrication by the security services". Meanwhile, "party of crooks and thieves" became a popular slogan among the opposition. His views about Russian nationalism evolved over time. In 2011, Navalny stated that he considered himself a "nationalist democrat". He previously participated in the "Russian march" from 2006, a parade uniting Russian nationalist groups of all stripes, and was one of the co-organisers of the 2011 march. Navalny has also called for ending federal subsidies to the "corrupt" and "ineffective" governments of Chechnya and other republics part of the North Caucasus. In 2007, Navalny co-founded the National Russian Liberation Movement, known as NAROD (The People), which sets immigration policy as a priority. The movement allied itself with two nationalist groups, the Movement Against Illegal Immigration and Great Russia. In the same year, he released several anti-immigration videos, including one where he advocated the deportation of migrants. In one of the videos, in which he advocates for gun rights, he compares Muslims from the Caucasus to cockroaches and mimics shooting one who attempts to "attack" him. According to Leonid Volkov, Navalny later regretted making the 2007 video. In 2013, after ethnic riots in a Moscow district took place, which were sparked by a murder committed by a migrant, Navalny sympathised with the anti-immigration movement and commented that ethnic tensions and crimes are inevitable because of failing immigration policies by the state. However, he later said that "The basis of my approach is that you have to communicate with nationalists and educate them... I think it's very important to explain to them that the problem of illegal immigration is not solved by beating up migrants but by other, democratic means". Since 2016, Navalny deemphasized his past statements on immigration. In June 2020, he spoke out in support of the Black Lives Matter protests against racism. In 2017, Leonid Volkov, Navalny's chief of staff, said that Navalny's team supports the legalisation of same-sex marriage. His views on foreign policy evolved over time. While he strongly criticized the military intervention by Russia in Ukraine and Syria after 2014, he had initially supported Russian actions in Georgia in 2008 and had argued to recognize the independence of Moldova's breakaway region of Transnistria. In early 2012, Navalny said he supported the independence of the Ukrainian state and that Russia, Ukraine and Belarus are "natural allies" who should enhance their economic and political integration. In March 2014, after Russia's annexation of Crimea, Navalny urged further sanctions against officials and businessmen linked to Putin and proposed his own list of sanctions, saying that previous US and EU sanctions were "mocked". In October 2014, Navalny suggested that the fate of Crimea should be resolved by holding a new and fair referendum. Navalny also said that Putin's government should stop "sponsoring the war" in Donbas. Navalny has strongly criticised Vladimir Putin's policies in Ukraine: "Putin likes to speak about the 'Russian world' but he is actually making it smaller. In Belarus, they sing anti-Putin songs at football stadiums; in Ukraine they simply hate us. In Ukraine now, there are no politicians who do not have extreme anti-Russian positions. Being anti-Russian is the key to success now in Ukraine, and that is our fault". In 2018, after the establishment of the autonomous Orthodox Church of Ukraine, an event labelled as the ending of more than three centuries of Russian spiritual and temporal control of the dominant faith in Ukraine, Navalny tweeted: "What took centuries to create has been destroyed by Putin and his idiots in four years ... Putin is the enemy of the Russian World." In February 2022, Navalny compared the recognition of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic by Russia to when Soviet leaders deployed troops to Afghanistan in 1979, describing both events as a distraction to the population from real issues. He said that he believed that while Putin will not allow Ukraine to develop, Russia will pay the same price, and that Putin needed to be removed to save Russia. On 2 March 2022, Navalny urged Russian citizens to stage daily protests against Russia's invasion of Ukraine, saying Russia should not be a "nation of frightened people" and "cowards who pretend not to notice the aggressive war" launched by "our insane tsar". If, to prevent war, we need to fill up the jails and police vans, we will fill up the jails and police vans. Everything has a price and now, in the spring of 2022, we should pay that price. — Alexei Navalny On 5 April 2022, referring to war crimes that took place in Ukraine, Navalny said the "monstrosity of lies" in the Russian state media "is unimaginable. And, unfortunately, so is its persuasiveness for those who have no access to alternative information." He tweeted that "warmongers" among Russian state media personalities "should be treated as war criminals. From the editors-in-chief to the talk show hosts to the news editors, [they] should be sanctioned now and tried someday." The next month, Navalny called the invasion a "stupid war" based on lies. Navalny criticised the 2022 Russian mobilisation. During a court hearing on 21 September, he said: "I don't understand one thing. The army has a million people, Rosgvardia has 350,000 people, the Interior Ministry has another million and a half or two million people, and the Federal Penitentiary Service is full of people. Why are they drafting civilians?" In another court hearing two days later, Navalny said: "You won't shut my mouth with your ShIZO [punishment cell]. This is a crime against my country. I don't relate to it, and I won't be silent. I hope that everyone else who hears me will not be silent about it. Because what's happening now is much more terrible than any 12 or 112 days in a ShIZO [punishment cell]. This is a historic crime, this is involving hundreds of thousands of people in this crime". On 20 February 2023, he condemned Putin for "destroying" Russia's own future "just to make our country look bigger on the map" and said that Russia must end its occupation of Ukraine and recognise Ukraine's borders as they were established in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Navalny also said Russia would have to pay post-war reparations to Ukraine and called for an international investigation into war crimes, saying: "Tens of thousands of innocent Ukrainians have been murdered and pain and suffering have befallen millions more." On 1 February 2024, Navalny and his allies called on supporters to protest President Vladimir Putin and the invasion of Ukraine during the third day of the 2024 Russian presidential election by all going to vote against Putin at the same time. In 2016, Navalny spoke against the Russian intervention in the Syrian civil war, believing that there are internal problems in Russia that need to be dealt with rather than to get involved in foreign wars. He also said Russia should not "try to save Assad, who represents a military junta", and said entering the war in the same side as the Shia Islamist Iran and Hezbollah stoked anger among Russia's predominantly Sunni Muslim community. Navalny was named "Person of the Year 2009" by Russian business newspaper Vedomosti and by stock exchange observer Stock in Focus. On 22 April 2010, Navalny was awarded the Finance magazine prize in the nomination "for protecting the rights of minority shareholders". In 2011, Foreign Policy magazine named Navalny to the FP Top 100 Global Thinkers, along with Daniel Domscheit-Berg and Sami Ben Gharbia of Tunisia, for "shaping the new world of government transparency". FP picked him again in 2012. He was listed by Time magazine in 2012 as one of the world's 100 most influential people, the only Russian on the list. In 2013, Navalny came in at No. 48 among "world thinkers" in an online poll by the UK magazine Prospect. In 2015, Alexei and Oleg Navalny were chosen to receive the "Prize of the Platform of European Memory and Conscience 2015". According to the platform's statement, "The Members of the Platform have voted this year for the Navalny brothers, in recognition of their personal courage, struggle and sacrifices for upholding fundamental democratic values and freedoms in the Russian Federation today. By the award of the Prize, the Platform wishes to express its respect and support to Mr. Oleg Navalny whom the Platform considers a political prisoner, and to Mr. Alexei Navalny for his efforts to expose corruption, defend political pluralism and opposition to the mounting authoritarian regime in the Russian Federation". In June 2017, Navalny was included in Time's list of the World's 25 Most Influential People on the Internet. In December 2017, he was named "Politician of the Year 2017" by Vedomosti. He was named "Politician of the Year 2019" by readers of Vedomosti. Navalny was nominated for the 2021 Nobel Peace Prize by multiple Norwegian members of parliament. An Internet petition to the Nobel Committee in support of Navalny's candidacy was signed by over 38,000 people. Following Navalny's imprisonment in February 2021, the Boris Nemtsov Foundation for Freedom awarded Navalny with the Boris Nemtsov Prize for Courage. A scenic viewpoint of Alexei Navalny was also set in Prague in direct view from the Russian Embassy, near Boris Nemtsov Square in front of the Russian Embassy and the Anna Politkovskaya Promenade. On 8 June 2021, Navalny's daughter accepted the Moral Courage Award at the Geneva Summit for Human Rights and Democracy on behalf of her father. Navalny dedicated the prize to political prisoners. In September 2021, Navalny was included in Time's list of the 100 most influential people. This was his second appearance on the list, having previously been included in 2012. In September 2021, he was awarded the Knight of Freedom Award conferred by the Casimir Pulaski Foundation. In October 2021, he received the Sakharov Prize, the European Parliament's annual human rights prize. David Sassoli, the President of the European Parliament, announced that the award was to recognise that Navalny "has fought tirelessly against the corruption of Vladimir Putin's regime. This cost him his liberty and nearly his life". Later that same year, he also received a German prize for his efforts in sustaining freedom of expression – the M100 Media Award. In 2022, he was awarded U.S. Prize For Civil Courage. In 2023, the documentary film about him, Navalny, directed by Daniel Roher, won Best Documentary at the 76th British Academy Film Awards and Best Documentary Feature at the 95th Academy Awards. Navalny was married to Yulia Navalnaya (maiden name: Yulia Borisovna Abrosimova) and the couple had two children, daughter Darya (Dasha) Navalnaya, who began undergraduate studies at Stanford University in September 2019, and son Zakhar. Starting 1998, Navalny lived primarily in a three-room apartment in Maryino District in southeast Moscow. Navalny was originally an atheist, but later became a member of the Russian Orthodox Church. He has said that turning to the Orthodox church has made him feel a "part of something large and universal." On 17 January 2021, Navalny was again arrested as he was returning to Russia, after having had to leave the country for medical treatment in Germany for a poisoning attempt against his life that had recently occurred in Russia. He remained incarcerated (initially in the IK-2 penal colony) and was housed in the IK-6 maximum security prison in Melekhovo, Vladimir Oblast. Navalny was listed by Amnesty International (AI) as a prisoner of conscience in May 2021, meaning that AI held that Navalny's incarceration was primarily due to his political beliefs. In addition to his native Russian, Navalny also spoke English. Opposing Forces: Plotting the New Russia (8 December 2016) "Vladimir Putin: The 100 Most Influential People of 2022", Time 100, Time, 23 May 2022 2017–2018 Russian protests 2021 Russian protests List of designated prisoners of conscience List of people who survived assassination attempts List of solved missing person cases List of prison deaths Previously known as the People's Alliance (2012–2014) and the Progress Party (2014–2018) Arrested and subsequently imprisoned In this name that follows Eastern Slavic naming customs, the patronymic is Anatolyevich and the family name is Navalny. Sometimes transliterated as Alexey, Aleksei or Aleksey. The Russian word "да" (da) means "yes". Argued as following: "It is clearly stated in the preamble of our declaration that the Yabloko Party thoroughly and sharply opposes any national and racial discord and any xenophobia. However, in this case, when we know ... that the Constitution guarantees us the right to gather peacefully and without a weapon, we see that in these conditions the prohibition of the Russian March as it was announced, provokes the organisers to some activities that could end not so well. Thus we appeal to the Moscow City Hall ... for permission." Article 15, section 7: "Terms, as provided by sections 4 and 6 of the present article, are prolonged if a territorial body has passed a verdict of suspension of state registration of a regional branch of a political party, as provided by section 5.1 of the present article, or a verdict of denial of state registration of a regional branch of a political party has been challenged to a court and, as of the day of expiration of the said terms, has not gone into effect." The following section is given as in force as on 2 April 2012 (the section had not changed by 1 May 2015). Loeb & Loeb LLP, founded by Joseph P. Loeb et al.. LLP stands for Limited liability partnership. Exchange rates used in the article According to the exchange rates set by the Central Bank of Russia for 8 September 2013. Aden, Mareike (5 September 2013). "Alexej Nawalny: Der dunkle Star" [Alexei Navalny: The Dark Star]. Die Zeit Online (in German). Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2020. "Alexei Navalny, Russia's most vociferous Putin critic". BBC News. 16 February 2024. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2024. "About Алексей Навальный". YouTube. Roth, Andrew (24 March 2021). "Alexei Navalny says health has sharply deteriorated in jail". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 24 March 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Isachenkov, Vladimir (15 March 2021). "Russia opposition leader Navalny describes prison conditions". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Troianovski, Anton (2 February 2021). "Russian Activist Navalny Sentenced to More Than 2 Years in Prison". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Gel'man, Vladimir (7 February 2015). "Political Opposition in Russia: A Troubled Transformation". Europe-Asia Studies. 67 (2). Routledge: 184. doi:10.1080/09668136.2014.1001577. ISSN 0966-8136. S2CID 153866197 – via Taylor & Francis. Myagkov, Mikhail; Shchekotin, Evgeniy V.; Kashpur, Vitaliy V.; Goiko, Vyacheslav L.; Baryshev, Alexey A. (2 October 2018). "Activity of non-parliamentary opposition communities in social networks in the context of the Russian 2016 parliamentary election". East European Politics. 34 (4): 483–502. doi:10.1080/21599165.2018.1532411. ISSN 2159-9165. S2CID 158477981. Путин объяснил, почему не называет Навального по имени [Putin explained why he does not call Navalny by name]. RTVI (in Russian). 7 August 2017. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. "Why won't Putin speak Navalny's name? He just doesn't like the guy". Meduza. 15 December 2017. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. Baranovskaya, Marina (15 January 2018). Немецкие эксперты о том, почему имя Навального – табу для Путина [German experts on why Navalny's name is taboo for Putin] (in Russian). Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. Pain, Emil; Fedyunin, Sergey (2019). Популизм и элитизм в современной России: анализ взаимосвязи [Populism and elitism in modern Russia: an analysis of the relationship]. Polis. Political Studies (1): 41. doi:10.17976/jpps/2019.01.04. ISSN 0321-2017. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. "Russia's Navalny in direct confrontation with Putin". Oxford Analytica. Emerald Expert Briefings. oxan–es. 1 January 2020. doi:10.1108/OXAN-ES256612. ISSN 2633-304X. S2CID 240646767. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 28 March 2021 – via Emerald Expert Briefings. Walker, Shaun (3 September 2020). "'This gentleman': Alexei Navalny, the name Putin dares not speak". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2020. Retrieved 3 September 2020. Roache, Madeline (18 January 2021). "'His Fight Is in Russia.' Why Navalny Flew Home Straight into Putin's Clutches". Time. Archived from the original on 15 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. Ward, Alex (29 January 2021). "Alexei Navalny, the Russian opposition leader threatening Putin's rule, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. "Navalny Targets 'Billion-Dollar Putin Palace' in New Investigation". The Moscow Times. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Russia Navalny: Putin critic jailed for nine more years in trial branded 'sham'". BBC News. 22 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Russia: Navalny facing possible 15-year jail term in 'sham' trial set to take place in prison". Amnesty.org.uk. 14 February 2022. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2022. Faulconbridge, Guy (14 June 2022). "Russian opposition leader Navalny moved to high-security penal colony". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. "Alexei Navalny: Russian opposition leader handed further 19 year jail term". BBC News. 4 August 2023. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2023. Trevelyan, Mark (11 December 2023). "Navalny aides says he has disappeared within Russia's prison system". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Алексея Навального доставили в ИК-3 в Ямало-Ненецком автономном округе. С ним не было связи почти три недели". Meduza (in Russian). Archived from the original on 25 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. Sullivan, Helen; Roth, Andrew (16 February 2024). "Russian activist and Putin critic Alexei Navalny dies in prison". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Адвокат Навального сообщил о последнем визите к нему" [Navalny's lawyer announced his last visit to him]. РБК (in Russian). 16 February 2024. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Navavalny's mother and father attending their son's court hearing[1] Hrabovskyi, Serhii. Олексій Навальний як дзеркало російської революції [Alexei Navalny as a mirror of the Russian revolution] (in Ukrainian). day.kyiv.ua. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Село Навальних. Як в Україні земляки і родичі згадують головного ворога Путіна [The village of Navalnykh. How in Ukraine compatriots and relatives remember Putin's main enemy]. BBC News Україна (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 8 February 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "For Putin foe Alexey Navalny, Ukraine has long been a volatile issue". Washington Post. 27 October 2023. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Алексей Навальный [Alexey Navalny] (in Russian). esquire.ru. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Kanygin, Pavel (20 December 2012). Непр(е)ступная фабрика Навальных. Специальный репортаж из родительского гнезда лидера оппозиции [Impenetrable Navalny factory. Special report from the parental nest of the opposition leader]. Novaya Gazeta (in Russian). Archived from the original on 25 November 2018. Retrieved 1 June 2017. Навальный Алексей, российский общественный деятель [Navalny Alexey, Russian public figure]. Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 28 November 2011. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Alexei Navalny". The Moscow Times. 28 February 2012. Archived from the original on 4 February 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Faulconbridge, Guy (11 December 2011). "Newsmaker – Protests pitch Russian blogger against Putin". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 December 2011. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Kremlin critic Navalny: To Moscow via Yale". Deutsche Welle. 14 August 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2019. "Alexey Navalny | Yale Greenberg World Fellows". worldfellows.yale.edu. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2019. "The World Fellows: Alexey Navalny". Yale University. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2011. "Russian register of Advocates – Search Result – Navalny Alexey Anatolievich". Ministry of Justice of the Russian Federation. Archived from the original on 30 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. СК считает адвокатский статус Навального незаконным [UK considers Navalny's legal status illegal]. BBC Russian Service. 27 February 2013. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2022. Адвокатская палата Москвы лишила Навального статуса адвоката из-за приговора по делу "Кировлеса" [The Moscow Chamber of Advocates deprived Navalny of the status of a lawyer due to the verdict in the Kirovles case]. Pravo.ru. 4 December 2013. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Russian opposition leader Alexey Navalny missing from prison, says his team". CNN. 11 December 2023. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Mokrousova, Irina; Reznik, Irina (13 February 2012). "Чем зарабатывает на жизнь Алексей Навальный" [How does Alexei Navalny make a living]. Vedomosti. Archived from the original on 24 November 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "About Navalny" (in Russian). navalny.ru. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2011. "Navalny, Alexei". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2011. Багров, Юрий; Казнин, Дмитрий (November 2006). "Московское "Яблоко" поддержало проведение "Русского марша"" [Moscow "Yabloko" supported the "Russian March"]. Радио Свобода. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2019. Navalny. The man who stole the forest. The history of a blogger and a politician. by Byshok Stanislav Olegovich and Semyonov Alexander Alexandrovich. (Навальный. Человек, который украл лес. История блогера и политика., by Бышок Станислав Олегович, Семенов Александр Александрович.) Книжный мир, 2014, ISBN 978-5-8041-0670-7, pages 5-6: [2] Archived 25 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine. Faulconbridge, Guy (17 February 2024). "Who was Alexei Navalny and what did he say of Russia, Putin and death?". Reuters. Retrieved 25 February 2024. "Alexey Navalny Fast Facts". CNN. 21 February 2024. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024. Mirovalev, Mansur. "Has Alexey Navalny moved on from his nationalist past?". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Putin nemesis Navalny in 10 dates Archived 5 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine by Agence France-Presse. Julia Ioffe (5 December 2011). "Russian Elections: Faking It". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "The Blog on Navalny in English". LiveJournal. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2011. Julia Ioffe (6 December 2011). "Putin's Big Mistake?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Parfitt, Tom (17 December 2011). "Vladimir Putin's persecution campaign targets protest couple". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Faulconbridge, Guy (20 December 2011). "Navalny challenges Putin after leaving Russian jail". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Weir, Fred (24 December 2011). "Huge protest demanding fair Russian elections hits Moscow". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Russia election: Police arrest 550 at city protests". BBC News. 5 March 2012. Archived from the original on 7 March 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Police keep anti-Putin protesters on the run". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. 8 May 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Amnesty Calls Navalny, Udaltsov 'Prisoners of Conscience'". RFE/RL. 18 May 2012. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 18 May 2012. "В квартирах активистов оппозиции прошли обыски" [The apartments of opposition activists were searched] (in Russian). BBC Russian Service. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2020. Clover, Charles (26 July 2012). "Blogger strikes at Putin with data release". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Соратники Навального создадут партию без него: Россия". Lenta.ru. 26 June 2012. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Команда Алексея Навального создает партию" [Alexei Navalny's team creates a party]. Ведомости. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""Лента.ру" изучила устройство "партии Навального"" [Electronic party "Lenta.ru" studied the structure of "Navalny's party"]. Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Решение Навального не вступать в партию не было сюрпризом для его сторонников" [Navalny's decision not to join the party was not a surprise to his supporters]. Kommersant (in Russian). 15 December 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2021. "Регистрация партии соратников Навального приостановлена" [Registration of the party of Navalny's associates has been suspended]. BBC Russian Service. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "О приостановлении государственной регистрации партии – Новости. Народный альянс" [On the suspension of state registration of the party – News. People's Alliance]. Peoplesalliance.ru. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Минюст окончательно отказал в регистрации партии Навального – Известия". Izvestia. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Партии сторонников Навального отказали в регистрации: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Алексей Навальный намерен вступить в незарегистрированную партию "Народный альянс" и, возможно, возглавить ее". Echo of Moscow. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Navalny becomes the People's Alliance party leader | Russia Beyond the Headlines". Rbth.com. 17 November 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Алексей Навальный поборется за "Народный альянс"". Kommersant. 8 January 2014. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Минюст приостановил регистрацию партии А.Навального :: Политика :: РосБизнесКонсалтинг". RBK Group. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Навальный решил отсудить "Народный альянс" у Богданова: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. 28 November 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Партия Навального сменила название: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Партия Навального получила регистрацию: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. 28 February 2014. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Федеральный закон от 11.07.2001 N 95-ФЗ (ред. от 23.05.2015) "О политических партиях" / КонсультантПлюс". Consultant.ru. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Навальный объявил о готовности подтвердить регистрацию партии :: Политика :: РосБизнесКонсалтинг". Top.rbc.ru. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Navalny's party to continue working for participation in elections | Russia Beyond the Headlines". Rbth.com. 1 February 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Алексей Навальный – Объединение состоялось, у нас будет предвыборный список". Navalny.com. 17 April 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Минюст отменил регистрацию "Партии прогресса", нарушившей закон при регистрации отделений". TASS. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Минюст отменил регистрацию "Партии прогресса", нарушившей закон при регистрации отделений". Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""Партия прогресса" обжаловала решение Минюста о ликвидации". The Village.ru. 16 April 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. 24 July 2013. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Synovate Comcon :: О Компании :: Новости". Comcon-2.ru. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""Нужны и демократия, и власть" | Городская власть | Москва | Московские новости". Mn.ru. 30 May 2013. Archived from the original on 6 August 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Отставка Собянина и досрочные выборы мэра: причины и последствия | РИА Новости". RIA Novosti. 19 June 2013. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Собянин подписал указ о временном исполнении обязанностей мэра Москвы | РИА Новости". RIA Novosti. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Досрочные выборы мэра Москвы назначены на 8 сентября". Kommersant. 7 June 2013. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Навальный заявил о намерении участвовать в выборах мэра Москвы: Политика". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""Это рейдерский захват партии". Почему Рыжков ушел из РПР-ПАРНАС". Tvrain.ru. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Навального зарегистрировали кандидатом в мэры Москвы: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. 17 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Совет муниципальных депутатов передал Навальному 49 подписей: Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Smolchenko, Anna (17 July 2013). "Navalny Moscow mayoral bid accepted ahead of verdict". Fox News. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "Navalny pulls out of Moscow poll, calls for boycott". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. "Прокуратура просит выпустить Навального и Офицерова под подписку | РИА Новости" [The prosecutor's office asks to release Navalny and Ofitserov on bail]. RIA Novosti. 19 July 2013. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Freed Kremlin critic arrives in Moscow". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013. Englund, Will (9 September 2013). "Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny has strong showing in Moscow mayoral race, despite loss". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "База данных по курсам валют | Банк России". Cbr.ru. Retrieved 27 December 2015.[dead link] "Алексей НАвАльНый, кандидат в мэры москвы 2013. отчет о предвыборной кампании" [Alexei Navalny, candidate for mayor of Moscow 2013. Report on the election campaign.] (PDF). Report.navalny.ru (in Russian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Ennis, Stephen. "Alexei Navalny runs Western-style campaign in Moscow poll". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Laura Mills; Lynn Berry (8 September 2013). "Strong Showing for Navalny in Moscow Mayoral Race". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Участие Навального в выборах мэра Москвы / Итоги года / Независимая газета". Ng.ru. 31 December 2013. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Lipman, Masha (6 September 2013). "Alexey Navalny's Miraculous, Doomed Campaign". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "navalny: планирование, ребята, планирование". Navalny.livejournal.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2015. "Почему социологические службы не смогли спрогнозировать результаты выборов московского мэра – Газета.Ru". Gazeta.ru. 16 November 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Сведения о проводящихся выборах и референдумах". Moscow_city.vybory.izbirkom.ru. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Выборы мэра превратились в "большую проблему"". Utro.ru. 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Мнения. "Безусловный рефлекс: сколько сомнительных голосов на выборах мэра Москвы". Forbes.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Политолог Д.Орешкин: Выборы мэра Москвы были в 10 раз честнее думских :: Политика :: РосБизнесКонсалтинг. Top.rbc.ru. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Анастасия Агамалова; Наталья Райбман; Алексей Никольский. На Болотной площади прошел митинг в поддержку Навального. Ведомости. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Верховный суд не согласился отменить итоги выборов мэра Москвы. Vesti.ru. 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. От Навального требуют конкретики/ Политика / Независимая газета. Ng.ru. 8 October 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Демократы улучили момент для объединения. Kommersant. 14 November 2014. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Михаил Касьянов и Алексей Навальный пошли на новое объединение". Kommersant. 18 April 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Алексей Навальный – Демократическая коалиция. Уже шесть партий и конкретные планы. Navalny.com. 20 April 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Алексей Навальный – Разворот (in Russian). Echo of Moscow. 17 April 2015. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2015. "Касьянов: в будущем РПР-ПАРНАС могут возглавить Навальный и Ходорковский – Газета.Ru | Новости". Газета.Ru. Archived from the original on 14 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. ""Режим рухнет неизбежно – он не может больше управлять ни экономикой, ни внутренней и внешней политикой"". TV Rain. 7 July 2015. Archived from the original on 28 July 2015. Retrieved 20 July 2015. "ПАРНАС отказалась от выборов в Калужской области". Slon.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Shvets, Dmitry (27 July 2015). "Новосибирский облизбирком отказался регистрировать Демократическую коалицию" [Novosibirsk regional election commission refused to register the Democratic coalition]. Slon.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "ПАРНАС сняли с выборов в Магадане". Slon.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "ПАРНАС сняли с выборов в Костромской области". Slon.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Активисты ПАРНАС прекратили голодовку в Новосибирске". slon.ru. Archived from the original on 20 October 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2015. "ЦИК обязал избирком Костромской области рассмотреть вопрос о регистрации Демкоалиции – Газета.Ru". Gazeta.ru. 13 August 2015. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Озвучены окончательные результаты ПАРНАСа на выборах в Костромской области". vz.ru. Archived from the original on 16 September 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2015. Перцев, Андрей (13 December 2016). "Алексей Навальный намерен участвовать в президентских выборах". Kommersant. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Алексей Навальный (13 December 2016). Пора выбирать: Алексей Навальный – кандидат в президенты России. Archived from the original on 12 February 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2017 – via YouTube. Galperovich, Danila (8 February 2017). "Navalny was re-sentenced to a suspended sentence in the 'Kirovles case'". Voice of America. RFE/RL. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. "Russia". Freedom House. 29 January 2019. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2019. His most potent rival, Aleksey Navalny, had been disqualified before the campaign began due to a politically motivated criminal conviction, creating what the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) called "a lack of genuine competition." "Aleksei Navalny's protesters are a force to be reckoned with". The Economist. 16 June 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2017. "Мы ждем перемен?" [We are waiting for changes?]. Rosbalt. 23 March 2017. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 7 June 2017. Kramer, Andrew E. (2 May 2017). "Kremlin Critic Aleksei Navalny Says Attack Left Him Mostly Blind in an Eye (Published 2017)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 January 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Navalny Accuses Police Of Failing To Investigate Attack". RFE/RL. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. "Zelyonka: The Green 'Weapon Of Choice'". RFE/RL. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. "Navalny Sues Police, Loses Vision in One Eye, and Launches New Manhunt". The Moscow Times. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. "Alexei Navalny, Putin foe, claims vision loss after chemical attack; blames Kremlin". The Washington Post. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. "Russian opposition leader Navalny released from prison". Politico. 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2017. "Russia: Nationwide Assaults on Political Opposition Campaign". Human Rights Watch. 6 September 2017. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. "H46-25 Navalnyy and Ofitserov v. Russian Federation (Application No. 46632/13)". Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. 21 September 2017. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Алексей Навальный арестован на 20 суток. Kommersant (in Russian). 2 October 2017. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2017. "Kremlin queries legality of boycott call". BBC News. 26 December 2017. Archived from the original on 26 December 2017. Retrieved 26 December 2017. Навальный обжаловал решение Верховного суда о недопуске на выборы. РБК. 3 January 2018. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Russian Supreme Court Rejects Navalny Appeal On Presidential Election Ban". RFE/RL. Archived from the original on 6 January 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2018. Heintz, Jim (28 January 2018). "Russian opposition leader arrested amid election protests". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2018. Bennetts, Marc (5 February 2018). "Russian police accuse Navalny of assaulting officer during protest". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2018. Bennetts, Marc (5 May 2018). "Russia's Alexei Navalny arrested as 1,600 detained nationwide". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 May 2018. Retrieved 7 May 2018. Ivanova, Polina (15 May 2018). "Russian opposition leader Navalny jailed for 30 days over protest". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 May 2018. Retrieved 24 May 2018. "Russian court sentences opposition leader Navalny to 20 days in jail | Reuters". Reuters. Walker, Shaun (29 July 2019). "Alexei Navalny discharged from hospital against wishes of doctor". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Kovalev, Alexey (29 July 2019). "Discharge, itching, and lesions: Doctors disagree about why Russia's jailed opposition leader needed to be hospitalised". Meduza. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Pleitgen, Fred; Ilyushina, Mary; Hodge, Nathan; Shukla, Sebastian. "Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny is hospitalized after being detained". CNN. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Russia's regional elections pose serious test for pro-Kremlin party". CNN. 13 September 2020. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny 'poisoned'". BBC News. 20 August 2020. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. "Russians vote on Putin's reforms to constitution". BBC News. 25 June 2020. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. Gershkovich, Evan (10 March 2020). "'President for Life': Putin Opens Door to Extending Rule until 2036". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. "Putin strongly backed in controversial Russian reform vote". BBC News. 2 July 2020. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. Vasilyeva, Nataliya (1 April 2010). "Activist presses Russian corporations for openness". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Как пилят в Транснефти (in Russian). LiveJournal. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2011. "Russia checks claims of $4bn oil pipeline scam". BBC News. 17 November 2010. Archived from the original on 25 November 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2011. Soldatkin, Vladimir (14 January 2011). "Russia's Transneft denies $4 bln theft". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 December 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Navalny, Alexei (29 December 2010). "RosPil". Navalny Live Journal Blog (in Russian). Archived from the original on 17 February 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Parfitt, Tom (21 August 2020). "Alexei Navalny profile: Scourge of Kremlin cronies has long list of powerful enemies". The Times. Moscow. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2021. "Alexei Navalny, Russian opposition leader who galvanised huge protests against Putin – obituary". The Telegraph. 16 February 2024. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Navalny then formalised this project under the name RosPil, a pun on the Russian word for sawdust, or money illegally appropriated. Navalny, Alexei (30 May 2011). "RosYama" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 15 February 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2012. Ablonczy, Bálint (23 July 2012). "It's ugly, but it was ours". Hetivalasz. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Инновационные технологии: как это работает на самом деле (in Russian). Navalny Live Journal. 3 August 2011. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Potts, Andy (21 February 2011). "Vekselberg faces questions over Hungarian property fraud". The Moscow News. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2012. "Hungary: detentions linked to the sale of property in Moscow". OSW. 16 February 2011. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Henry Foy; Aime Williams (10 June 2021). "Russia outlaws Alexei Navalny's organisations as 'extremist'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Anti-Corruption Blogger Navalny Takes On Chechnya's Kadyrov". North Caucasus Weekly. 13 (4). 10 February 2012. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Russian whistleblower accuses Putin's investment czar of multimillion dollar corruption". The Washington Post. Associated Press. 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2012. Andrew E. Kramer (30 March 2012). "Activist Presses for Inquiry into Senior Putin Deputy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. "Акции протеста 12 июня". Levada Centre (in Russian). 13 June 2017. Archived from the original on 18 February 2020. "The director of Russia's National Guard challenges Alexey Navalny to a fistfight". Meduza. 11 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. "Russian opposition leader injured following detention". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. Mortensen, Antonia; Pleitgen, Fred; Rehbein, Matt (25 March 2017). "Kremlin critic detained in tense anti-corruption protests". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 26 March 2017. Walker, Shaun (27 March 2017). "Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny jailed after protests". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 March 2017. Retrieved 27 March 2017. "Russia jails protests leader Alexei Navalny for 15 days". BBC News. 27 March 2017. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "From Kids to Leaders, Russia Cracks Down on Protesters". Human Rights Watch. 23 May 2018. Archived from the original on 16 September 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Navalny video: Putin palace claims reach millions for jailed critic". BBC News. 20 January 2021. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "ФБК опубликовал огромное расследование о "дворце Путина" в Геленджике. Вот главное из двухчасового фильма о строительстве ценой в 100 миллиардов" [FBK has published a huge investigation about the "Putin's palace" in Gelendzhik. Here are the highlights from a two-hour movie about a 100-billion-ruble construction]. Meduza. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "ФБК опубликовал расследование о "дворце Путина" размером с 39 княжеств Монако" [FBK has published an investigation about "Putin's palace" the size of 39 principalities of Monaco]. TV Rain. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Following the money". Meduza. 20 January 2021. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. ""Подумайте перед тем, как переводить деньги таким жуликам". Песков – о расследовании ФБК про "дворец Путина"". Meduza. 20 January 2021. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. "Putin's former judo partner says he owns palace linked to Russian leader". The Guardian. 30 January 2021. Archived from the original on 30 January 2021. Retrieved 30 January 2021. "Russian billionaire Arkady Rotenberg says 'Putin Palace' is his". BBC News. 30 January 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Russian blogger Navalny charged with embezzlement". BBC News. 31 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Alexey Navalny: An archenemy Putin wouldn't name and Kremlin couldn't scare". aljazeera.com. Aljazeera. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Barry, Ellen (31 July 2012). "Russian Prosecutors Charge Protest Movement Leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 July 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Putin critic Navalny charged with theft". Al Jazeera. 31 July 2012. Archived from the original on 1 August 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "An Analysis of the Russian Federation's prosecutions of Alexei Navalny". Archived from the original on 22 April 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2013. "Sergei Guriev says climate of oppression deepening in Russia". Financial Times. 2013. Archived from the original on 17 May 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018. Sandford, Daniel (17 April 2013). "Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny goes on trial". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Brumfield, Ben; Black, Phil; Smith-Spark, Laura (19 July 2013). "Outspoken Putin critic Alexei Navalny hit with prison sentence". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Elder, Miriam (18 July 2013). "Russia: Alexei Navalny found guilty of embezzlement". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "Outspoken Putin critic Alexei Navalny hit with prison sentence". CNN. 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2013. Воронин, Николай (18 July 2013). Как судили Навального: репортаж из зала суда (in Russian). BBC Russian Service. Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "Alexei Navalny freed following anti-Putin protests in Moscow – video". The Guardian. London. 19 July 2013. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Alpert, Lukas I. (19 July 2013). "Alexei Navalny Freed Pending Appeal". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Andrew E. Kramer (16 October 2013). "Navalny Is Spared Prison Term in Russia". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 March 2017. "European Court: Trial Against Putin Foe Navalny Was Unfair". ABC News. 23 February 2016. Archived from the original on 24 February 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2016. "Верховный суд отменил приговор Навальному по делу "Кировлеса"". ТАСС Информационное Агентство России. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 16 November 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2016. "Навальный обжаловал в ЕСПЧ повторный приговор по делу "Кировлеса"" [Navalny appealed to the ECHR against the repeated sentence in the Kirovles case]. Meduza. 22 November 2017. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2020. Baranovskaya, Marina (22 November 2017). "ЕСПЧ принял к рассмотрению жалобу Навального" [ECHR accepted Navalny's complaint for consideration] (in Russian). Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 21 October 2020. "Суть "дела Ив Роше" и братьев Навальных". BBC Russian Service. Archived from the original on 2 January 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Details Of Yves Rocher Case :: Politics :: Society & Politics :: Russia-InfoCentre". Russia-ic.com. 29 December 2014. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Opposition activist Navalny gets suspended sentence in Yves Rocher case | Russia Beyond the Headlines". Rbth.co.uk. 30 December 2014. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Navalny brothers Yves Rocher embezzlement case investigation completed | Russian Legal Information Agency (RAPSI)". Rapsinews.com. 15 November 2013. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Vasilyeva, Nataliya (30 December 2014). "Conviction of Putin foe sets off protest in Moscow". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014. Retrieved 31 December 2014. "Court puts Russian opposition leader under house arrest". Moscow News.Net. 28 February 2014. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Navalny, Alexei, "ЕСПЧ принял жалобу на домашний арест и дал ей приоритет" [The ECHR accepted the complaint against house arrest and gave it priority], navalny.livejournal.com (in Russian), archived from the original on 17 May 2015, retrieved 17 February 2024 "Роскомнадзор заблокировал блог Навального – Газета.Ru | Новости". Gazeta.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""Триумф российского правосудия": суд смягчил условия ареста Алексея Навального". 21 August 2014. Archived from the original on 26 March 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. "Суд спустя полгода снял с Навального "обет молчания", разрешив отвечать на накопившиеся к нему претензии". newsru.com. 21 August 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. "Суд разрешил Алексею Навальному комментировать дело "Ив Роше"". Bfm.ru. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Суд смягчил условия домашнего ареста Навального :: Общество :: РБК". Top.rbc.ru. 19 December 2014. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Third Section Archived 26 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine European Court of Human Rights. 8 March 2016 Smith-Spark, Laura; Chance, Matthew; Eshchenko, Alla (30 December 2014). "Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny gets 3.5-year suspended sentence". CNN. Archived from the original on 30 December 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2014. Mogilevskaya, Anna (17 February 2015). Приговор Алексею и Олегу Навальным вступил в силу [The verdict to Alexey and Oleg Navalny entered into force]. Kommersant. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. Alexander, Harriet (30 December 2014). "Alexei Navalny breaks his house arrest to attend protest against his sentence". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2014. "Алексей Навальный – Некоторые юридические новости". Navalny.com. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Human rights court: Kremlin critic's conviction 'arbitrary and unfair'". Politico. 17 October 2017. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. "HUDOC – European Court of Human Rights". hudoc.echr.coe.int. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 17 October 2017. "La tutela del dibattito politico al di là delle immunità". www.questionegiustizia.it. Archived from the original on 20 February 2019. "Суд предоставил Навальному отсрочку для оплаты долга по "делу "Ив Роше"". Rosbalt. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Алексей Навальный в рамках дела "Ив Роше" выплатил 3 млн рублей". Kommersant. 10 July 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 15 October 2015. Shur, Artem (14 October 2015). "Алексей Навальный получил два месяца отсрочки выплаты по делу "Ив Роше"" [Alexey Navalny received a two-month grace period in the Yves Rocher case]. Kommersant. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 15 October 2015. "Алексей Навальный получил два месяца отсрочки выплаты по делу "Ив Роше"". Kommersant. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Алексей Навальный должен оплатить ущерб по делу "Кировлеса"". Ведомости. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Навальному грозит банкротство после решения суда о выплате "Кировлесу" 16 миллионов". mk.ru. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Russian opposition leader Navalny faces third inquiry". BBC News. 24 December 2012. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012. "Yandex says its experimental search results trashing Alexey Navalny were 'a mistake'". Meduza. 28 April 2020. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. ""Яндекс" выделял в результатах поиска негативные материалы о Навальном. Компания назвала это экспериментом". tvrain.ru. TV Rain. 28 April 2020. Archived from the original on 28 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. ""Яндекс" выделял в выдаче негативные материалы по запросу "Навальный". Компания назвала это экспериментом". Meduza (in Russian). 27 April 2020. Archived from the original on 2 June 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. "Вкладка с обсуждаемым контентом: разбор полётов – Блог Яндекса". yandex.ru. Archived from the original on 4 May 2020. Retrieved 29 April 2020. "Kremlin-Linked Businessman Prigozhin Vows to Ruin Navalny". The Moscow Times. 26 August 2020. Archived from the original on 5 September 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Parents sue tycoon's firm over dysentery outbreak in Moscow". Financial Post. 14 May 2019. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Kremlin Critic Navalny and Allies Hit With $1.4M Lawsuit Payout". The Moscow Times. 28 October 2019. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. Safronov, Evgeniy (9 April 2019). "Навальный получил от ЕСПЧ больше 200 тыс. евро за пять лет" [Navalny received from the ECHR more than 200 thousand euros in five years]. Open Media.io (in Russian). Archived from the original on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "'Putin's chef' promises to ruin comatose Navalny with $1.2m bill". Al Jazeera. 26 August 2020. Archived from the original on 2 September 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. Harding, Luke; Roth, Andrew (20 August 2020). "A cup of tea, then screams of agony: how Alexei Navalny was left fighting for his life". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 20 August 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2020. Bidder, Benjamin; Esch, Christian (1 October 2020). "Russian Opposition Leader Alexei Navalny on His Poisoning". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 20 November 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2020. "Alexei Navalny doctors refuse to let Putin critic leave Russia – aide". The Guardian. 21 August 2020. Archived from the original on 21 August 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2020. "Alexei Navalny: Russian doctors agree to let Putin critic go to Germany". BBC News. 21 August 2020. Archived from the original on 21 August 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2020. "Alexei Navalny arrives in Germany for treatment". BBC News. 22 August 2020. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. Osborne, Samuel (24 August 2020). "Alexei Navalny: Russian opposition leader was poisoned, German hospital suggests". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. Rainsford, Sarah (2 September 2020). "Russia's Navalny poisoned with Novichok – German government". BBC News. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2020. Halasz, Stephania; Jones, Bryony; Mezzofiore, Gianluca (2 September 2020). "Novichok nerve agent used in Alexey Navalny poisoning, says German government". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 September 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2020. Schwirtz, Michael; Eddy, Melissa (2 September 2020). "Aleksei Navalny Was Poisoned With Novichok, Germany Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 September 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2020. "Russia's Navalny out of coma after poisoning". BBC News. 7 September 2020. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2020. "Alexei Navalny: Poisoned Putin critic 'will return to Russia'". BBC News. 15 September 2020. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Navalny team says nerve agent found on Russian hotel room water bottle". Reuters. 17 September 2020. Archived from the original on 18 September 2020. Retrieved 17 September 2020. "Alexei Navalny: Russian activist discharged from Berlin hospital". BBC News. 23 September 2020. Archived from the original on 31 December 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. "OPCW: Novichok found on Alexei Navalny samples". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 6 October 2020. Schwirtz, Michael (14 October 2020). "Nerve Agent Was Used to Poison Navalny, Chemical Weapons Body Confirms". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 6 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Deutsch, Anthony (6 October 2020). "Chemical weapons body confirms nerve agent Novichok in Navalny's blood". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Alexei Navalny: Report names 'Russian agents' in poisoning case". BBC News. 14 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020. Troianovski, Anton (21 December 2020). "Navalny Says Russian Agent Confessed to Plot to Poison Him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 25 January 2021. The call Mr. Navalny released Monday added to the trove of evidence suggesting that the agency had organised – and botched – an assassination attempt against [him] Rainsford, Sarah (1 October 2020). "Alexei Navalny blames Vladimir Putin for poisoning him". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "Alexei Navalny: Report names 'Russian agents' in poisoning case". BBC News. 14 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2022. Lister, Tim; Ward, Clarissa; Shukla, Sebastian (14 December 2020). "CNN-Bellingcat investigation identifies Russian specialists who trailed Putin's nemesis Alexey Navalny before he was poisoned". CNN International. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2020. "FSB Team of Chemical Weapon Experts Implicated in Alexey Navalny Novichok Poisoning". Bellingcat. 14 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2020. "Дело раскрыто. Я знаю всех, кто пытался меня убить" [The case is open. I know everyone who tried to kill me]. www.youtube.com. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2020. "Alexey Navalny: 'I have no doubt that Putin gave the order to poison me'". El País. 14 December 2020. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2020. Litvinova, Daria (20 April 2021). "Navalny releases recording of call to his alleged poisoner". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on 23 December 2020. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Navalny's Alleged FSB Poisoners Linked to Deaths of Journalists, Activists – Investigation". The Moscow Times. 27 January 2021. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "Navalny, Kara-Murza Tailed by Same FSB Squad Before Alleged Poisonings – Investigation". The Moscow Times. 11 February 2021. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2021. Chappell, Bill (15 October 2020). "EU Sanctions Russian Officials Over Navalny Poisoning, Citing Chemical Weapons Use". NPR.org. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Navalny Novichok poisoning: EU sanctions hit top Russians". BBC News. 15 October 2020. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Emmott, Robin; Young, Sarah; Falconbridge, Guy; Marrow, Alexander; Antonov, Dmitry (15 October 2020). "EU, Britain sanction Russian officials over Navalny poisoning". Edited by Andrew Cawthorne, Giles Elgood, William Maclean. Brussels: Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2021. "U.S., EU Sanction Russia Over Navalny Poisoning". The Moscow Times. 2 March 2021. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 2 March 2021. "Navalny Returns to Russia". The Moscow Times. 17 January 2021. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Russia Warns 'Obliged' to Detain Kremlin Critic Navalny on Return". The Moscow Times. 14 January 2021. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Human Rights Court Says Navalny Unfairly Convicted In 'Yves Rocher Case'". RFE/RL. 17 October 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Alexey Navalny remanded in custody for 30 days pending trial". Meduza. 18 January 2021. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Russia: Aleksei Navalny becomes prisoner of conscience after arrest on arrival in Moscow". Amnesty International. 17 January 2021. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Rainsford, Sarah (24 February 2021). "Amnesty strips Alexei Navalny of 'prisoner of conscience' status". BBC Home. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Statement on Alexei Navalny's status as Prisoner of Conscience". Amnesty International. 7 May 2021. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Russia Navalny: Poisoned opposition leader held after flying home". BBC News. 17 January 2021. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Alexei Navalny ordered to be detained on return to Russia, say officials". The Guardian. 14 January 2021. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Alexei Navalny: Poisoned Putin critic Navalny jailed for 30 days". BBC News. 18 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Navalny Urges Russians To 'Take to the Streets' Over Jailing". The Moscow Times. 18 January 2021. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "ФБК опубликовал огромное расследование о "дворце Путина" в Геленджике. Вот главное из двухчасового фильма о строительстве ценой в 100 миллиардов" [FBK has published a huge investigation about the "Putin's palace" in Gelendzhik. Here's the highlight of a two-hour movie about a $100 billion construction]. Meduza. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Detentions and warnings over Navalny protests". BBC News. 23 January 2021. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. Rudnitsky, Jake (28 January 2021). "Russian Court Orders Navalny to Remain in Jail Ahead of Trial". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2021. "In Responding to Navalny's Prison Sentence, the West Has Limited Options". Stratfor. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2021. Palasciano, Andrea (2 February 2021). "As It's Happening: Navalny Sentenced to 2.5 Years in Penal Colony". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Putin critic Navalny jailed in Russia despite protests". BBC News. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Суд отправил Алексея Навального в колонию". Meduza. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Alexei Navalny sentenced to prison term for violating probation as protesters detained". CBC. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Russia: UK responds to Navalny sentencing". Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. Blinken, Antony. "The United States is deeply concerned by Russia's actions toward Aleksey Navalny". Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Germany's Merkel condemns Navalny sentence, demands halt to violence". Reuters. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. Macron, Emmanuel. "La condamnation d'Alexeï @Navalny est inacceptable". Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. Borrell, Josep. "The sentencing of Alexey @navalny runs counter Russia's international commitments on rule of law & fundamental freedoms". Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Вечер после приговора Алексею Навальному. Полиция задерживает людей на Манежной площади". Meduza. 2 February 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021. "Kremlin critic Navalny back in Moscow court for slander trial". France24. 12 February 2021. Archived from the original on 15 February 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021. "Alexey Navalny to appear in court on Friday for war veteran defamation hearing". Meduza. 4 February 2021. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021. "European Rights Court Demands Navalny's 'Immediate' Release". The Moscow Times. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "European Rights Court Rules Russia Should 'Immediately' Release Navalny". RFE/RL. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "Navalny must be freed, European rights court tells Russia". BBC News. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Глава Минюста счел неисполнимым требование ЕСПЧ освободить Навального" [The head of the Ministry of Justice considered unrealistic the demand of the ECtHR to release Navalny]. Interfax. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 18 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "Moscow Court Upholds Prison Term for Kremlin Critic Navalny". The Moscow Times. 20 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "'Release' Alexei Navalny, European Court of Human Rights tells Russia". Deutsche Welle. 17 February 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2021. Sauer, Pjotr (28 February 2021). "'They Will Break You': Inside Navalny's Notorious New Prison Home". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Navalny arrives at Russian penal colony". The West Australian. 28 February 2021. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Navalny arrives in penal colony in Russia's Vladimir region – human rights activist". TASS. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Navalny in 'Strong' Pain, Team Fears for His Life: Lawyer". The Moscow Times. 25 March 2021. Archived from the original on 26 March 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "Alexei Navalny says he is being 'tortured' in prison". Deutsche Welle. 25 March 2021. Archived from the original on 27 March 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "Putin critic Navalny on hunger strike over Russian prison treatment". BBC News. 31 March 2021. Archived from the original on 31 March 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2021. Brennan, David (6 April 2021). "Alexei Navalny's Doctor Arrested as Vladimir Putin Critic Holds Prison Hunger Strike". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 6 April 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2021. "Six doctors, CNN correspondents detained outside Alexei Navalny's prison". ABC Australia. 6 April 2021. Archived from the original on 6 April 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2021. Khurshudyan, Isabelle (7 April 2021). "Jailed Kremlin critic Navalny has two herniated disks, loss of feeling in his hands, lawyers say". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 7 April 2021. Retrieved 7 April 2021. Macias, Amanda (7 April 2021). "U.S. disturbed over imprisoned Kremlin critic Navalny's deteriorating health". CNBC. Archived from the original on 7 April 2021. Retrieved 7 April 2021. Zoe Gujral (7 April 2021). "Amnesty: Russia 'slowly killing' Navalny through inhumane detention conditions". University of Pittsburgh School of Law. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Amnesty International says Russia may be slowly killing Navalny". Reuters. 7 April 2021. Archived from the original on 7 April 2021. Retrieved 7 April 2021. Demidova, Olga (13 April 2021). "Навальный подаст в суд на колонию из-за отказа дать ему привезенный Коран". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021. "Jailed Putin critic Alexei Navalny could die at any minute, doctors warn". The Guardian. 17 April 2021. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Health of Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny worsening amid prison hunger strike, doctor says". 17 April 2021. "Putin critic Navalny could 'die within days', say doctors". BBC News. 17 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. Dixon, Robyn (18 April 2021). "Navalny's daughter pleads for medical care for the imprisoned Kremlin critic amid mounting health concerns". The Washington Post. Moscow. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 21 April 2021. Anna Chernova; Arnaud Siad. "Navalny's life is Putin's 'personal' responsibility, say Russian politicians". CNN. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Шлосберг и другие депутаты обратились к Путину по ситуации с Навальным" [Schlosberg and other deputies appealed to Putin on the situation with Navalny] (in Russian). Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 18 April 2021. Navalny, Dasha (17 April 2021). "Status 6:46 pm". Twitter. Allow a doctor to see my dad. "An open letter to Vladimir Putin On Alexei Navalny's detention". The Economist. 16 April 2021. The president must ensure that the jailed Russian opposition leader has access to the medical care he needs Tétrault-farber, Gabrielle (18 April 2021). "Daughter of jailed Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny says he needs a doctor". Reuters. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Aleksei Navalny Needs His Doctors". The New York Times. 17 April 2021. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. "U.S. Warns of 'Consequences' if Navalny Dies as Russia Protests Called". The Moscow Times. 18 April 2021. "As Western powers raise alarm, Navalny transferred to hospital". Al Jazeera. 19 April 2021. "Kremlin Rejects Western Concerns Over Hunger-Striking Navalny's Health". The Moscow Times. 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Russian prison service transfers Alexei Navalny to hospital". Deutsche Welle. 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Kramer, Andrew E. (23 April 2021). "Navalny, Putin's Nemesis, Ends Hunger Strike in Russia". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2021. "Navalny ends hunger strike after being seen by civilian doctors". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 24 April 2021. Zverev, Anton; Marrow, Alexander (2 June 2021). "Kremlin critic Navalny loses bid to end sleep deprivation 'torture'". The Globe and Mail Inc. Reuters. "Прокуратура потребовала признать ФБК экстремистской организацией". Meduza. 16 April 2021. "Russian Prosecutors Seek to Label Navalny Groups as 'Extremist'". The Moscow Times. 16 April 2021. "Russia suspends activities of Alexei Navalny's campaign groups". Deutsche Welle. 26 April 2021. Retrieved 26 April 2021. "Navalny support network ordered to stop Russia-wide activities". BBC News. 26 April 2021. "Russia Orders Navalny Group to Suspend Activities". The Moscow Times. 26 April 2021. "Navalny Dissolves Political Network Ahead of Expected 'Extremist' Ruling". The Moscow Times. 29 April 2021. "Леонид Волков объявил о закрытии сети штабов Навального" [Leonid Volkov announced the closure of Navalny's network of headquarters]. Meduza (in Russian). 29 April 2021. "Russia opens new criminal case against Navalny – allies". Reuters. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. "В Москве задержали главу "Команды 29" – адвоката Ивана Павлова, защищающего ФБК и Ивана Сафронова" [In Moscow, the head of "Team 29", lawyer Ivan Pavlov, who defends the FBK, and Ivan Safronov, were detained.]. Meduza (in Russian). 30 April 2021. "Russia adds Navalny's regional campaign offices to 'extremism' list". Reuters. 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "Russia: Navalny 'recovered' after hunger strike, says prison authority". Deutsche Welle. 20 May 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2021. "Alexei Navalny returns to prison after hunger strike". Deutsche Welle. 7 June 2021. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Russia Blacklists Navalny's Political and Activist Movements as 'Extremist'". The Moscow Times. 9 June 2021. "Мосгорсуд признал ФБК экстремистской организацией" (in Russian). Deutsche Welle. 9 June 2021. "Решение Московского городского суда от 09.06.2021 года по делу №3а-1573/2021" [Moscow City Court decision of 9 June 2021 in the case No.3а-1573/2021] (PDF) (in Russian). Team29.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2021. "Мосгорсуд признал ФБК и штабы Навального экстремистскими организациями" [The Moscow City Court recognised the FBK and Navalny's headquarters as extremist organisations] (in Russian). Mediazona. 9 June 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2021. ""ФБК – это самая важная организация в России. Прокуроры нас убеждали в том же самом" Интервью адвоката Ильи Новикова – об итогах суда над структурами Навального" (in Russian). Meduza. 11 June 2021. "Суд признал ФБК и Штабы Навального экстремистскими и запретил их" [The court recognised the FBK and Navalny's Headquarters as extremist and banned them] (in Russian). Radio Liberty. 9 June 2021. "ФБК не прошел апелляцию" [FBK did not pass the appeal]. Kommersant (in Russian). 4 August 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Kropman, Vitaliy (28 December 2021). "Признание ФБК "экстремистской организацией" обжаловано в суде". Deutsche Welle (in Russian). "Кассационный суд отклонил жалобы на признание ФБК экстремистской организацией" (in Russian). Russian Agency of Legal and Judicial Information. 25 March 2022. "Kremlin critic Navalny says he is now designated a 'terrorist'". Al Jazeera. "Russia Adds Navalny To 'Terrorists' List As Civil-Society Crackdown Continues". Radio Liberty. 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Russia Adds Navalny, Top Aides To 'Terrorists and Extremists' Register". The Moscow Times. 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Navalny loses appeal over being labelled an extremist and a terrorist". Euronews. 28 June 2022. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Alexei Navalny faces additional 10-year jail sentence on fraud charges". Euronews. 15 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022. "Alexei Navalny faces new trial inside Russian prison". Deutsche Welle. 15 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Putin critic Navalny put on trial again in Russia". BBC News. 16 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny faces a new trial, this time in prison". NPR. Associated Press. 15 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022. "Russia: Fraud charges against Aleksei Navalny are arbitrary and politically motivated" (PDF). Amnesty International. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "На суде над Навальным свидетель обвинения отказался от показаний" [At the trial of Navalny, the witness for the prosecution refused to testify] (in Russian). RFE/RL. Retrieved 22 February 2022. "Jailed Russian Opposition Politician Navalny Condemns Russia's Attack On Ukraine At Trial". RFE/RL. 24 February 2022. "Navalny Sentenced to 9 More Years in Prison". The Moscow Times. 23 March 2022. "Kremlin Critic Navalny Appeals Jail Sentence". The Moscow Times. 17 May 2022. "Навальный. Апелляция на приговор по делу о мошенничестве, день второй". Mediazona (in Russian). 24 May 2022. "Kremlin Foe Navalny Says Facing 15 More Years in Prison". The Moscow Times. 31 May 2022. Muniz, Liliana (15 June 2022). "Alexei Navalny moved to infamous maximum security prison, says aide". Politico Europe. "Алексея Навального отправили в "пыточную" колонию № 6 во Владимирской области". Meduza. 15 June 2022. "Russia's Navalny launches international anti-corruption fund". Reuters. 11 July 2022. "Navalny Put in Solitary Confinement for Fourth Time in Month". The Moscow Times. 8 September 2022. "Navalny Says Russian Prison Authorities Revoked His Attorney-Client Privilege". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 8 September 2022. "Team Navalny Says Relaunching Regional Network to Resist War, Mobilization". The Moscow Times. 4 October 2022. "Navalny says he is now in permanent solitary confinement". NYT. 17 November 2022. "Навальный заболел в ШИЗО. Что говорят врачи, потребовавшие от Путина "прекратить издевательства" над политиком". BBC News Russian. 11 January 2022. "Алексею Навальному ужесточили режим заключения". РБК (in Russian). February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. Berkhead, Samantha (1 February 2023). "Ailing Navalny Ordered to 6 Months in Punishment Cell". The Moscow Times. Retrieved 1 February 2023. "Алексея Навального приговорили к 19 годам колонии "особого режима" по делу об "экстремизме"". Meduza. 4 August 2023. "Russia Sentences Navalny to 19 Years Behind Bars in 'Extremism' Trial". The Moscow Times. 4 August 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Суд утвердил приговор Навальному. Он останется в колонии до 2038 года". Газета.Ru (in Russian). 4 December 2023. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "Russia raids the homes of lawyers for imprisoned opposition leader Alexei Navalny". ABC News. 13 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Trevelyan, Mark (11 December 2023). "Navalny aides says he has disappeared within Russia's prison system". Reuters. "Alexei Navalny is being moved to a new Russian prison – authorities | Reuters". Reuters. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "ФСИН сообщила об убытии Навального "за пределы" Владимирской области". РБК (in Russian). 15 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Sauer, Pjotr (25 December 2023). "Alexei Navalny discovered in remote Arctic penal colony". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Kremlin critic Navalny moved to Arctic penal colony: ally". France 24. 25 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Alexei Navalny: Putin critic dies after 'feeling unwell' and 'losing unconciousness'". Sky News. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Russian opposition leader Navalny has died, prison service says". BBC News. 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Задержание Навального – политически мотивированный произвол и расправа" [The detention of Navalny is politically motivated arbitrariness and reprisal]. memohrc.org (in Russian). Memorial (society). 18 January 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "HRC "Memorial" recognises Alexei Navalny as a political prisoner". Caucasian Knot. 18 January 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "PACE's General Rapporteur for political prisoners strongly condemns Alexei Navalny's recent sentencing". Council of Europe. Retrieved 26 December 2023. Luscombe, Richard; Oladipo, Gloria; Slawson, Nicola. "Russia-Ukraine war live: Alexei Navalny dies in prison after morning walk, says Russian prison service". Guardian. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Yarmysh, Kira [@Kira_Yarmysh] (17 February 2024). "Alexey Navalny was murdered. His death occurred on February 16 at 2:17 p.m. local time, according to the official message to Alexey's mother. An employee of the colony said that the body of Navalny is now in Salekhard. It was picked up by investigators from the IC. Now they are conducting "investigations" with him. We demand that Alexey Navalny's body be handed over to his family immediately" (Tweet). Retrieved 17 February 2024 – via Twitter. Roth, Andrew (16 February 2024). "Russian activist and Putin critic Alexei Navalny dies in prison". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 February 2024. "Navalny's body returned to mother, spokeswoman says". BBC News. 24 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Alexei Navalny: Opposition leader's lawyer briefly held in Moscow - reports". BBC News. 27 February 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny's lawyer 'arrested in Moscow'". The Independent. 27 February 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2024. Petrov, Nikolay (8 December 2010). "The Navalny Effect: RosPil.net". Carnegie Moscow Center. Retrieved 8 September 2021. Выборы мэра Москвы [Election of the mayor of Moscow]. Kommersant (in Russian). 8 October 2010. Retrieved 8 September 2021. Выборы мэра Москвы. Gazeta.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2011. Вера Кичанова. "Republic.ru" Навальный будет претендентом на второе место в президентской гонке. Slon.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Svolik, Milan (12 October 2013). "The best way to demoralise the opposition in Russia? Beat them in a fair election". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 May 2015. Retrieved 29 April 2015. "Песков отказал Навальному в звании "серьезного политика": Политика: Россия". Lenta.ru. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "'This gentleman': Alexei Navalny, the name Putin dares not speak". The Guardian. 3 September 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Ioffe, Julia (18 July 2013). "Aleksei Navalny Trial: Blogger Gets Five Years in Jail". The New Republic. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Песков: Путин не произносит имени Навального, чтобы не делать его популярнее". Mk.ru. 30 September 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Meyer, Henry (23 July 2015). "Murder, Poisoning, Raids: It's Election Season in Russia". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 21 March 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2017. "Песков опроверг запрет на упоминание имени Навального, не произнеся имени оппозиционера". Vedomosti. Archived from the original on 28 February 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017. Volkov, Dennis (5 April 2013). "Analysis of Navalny's Ratings". Levada Center. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Kravchenko, Stepan (5 April 2013). "Putin, Allies Threatened With Jail as Navalny to Seek Presidency". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. "Protests on March 26 and Navalny". Levada Center. 6 April 2017. Archived from the original on 4 June 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. "ДОВЕРИЕ ПОЛИТИКАМ И ПРЕЗИДЕНТСКОЕ ГОЛОСОВАНИЕ". levada.ru. 3 September 2020. "More than half of Russians do not believe Alexey Navalny was poisoned, Levada Center poll says". Meduza. 2 October 2020. Retrieved 19 October 2020. "Алексей Навальный: отношение и отравление" [Alexei Navalny: attitude and poisoning]. Levada Center (in Russian). 2 October 2020. Retrieved 19 October 2020. "Mr. Putin Tries to Crush Another Rival". The New York Times. 31 May 2015. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2015. "Reaction to Russia's Jailing of Alexei Navalny". The Wall Street Journal. 19 July 2013. Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Herszenhorn, David M. (18 July 2013). "Russian Court Convicts Opposition Leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "On the Conviction and Sentencing of Alexey Navalniy and Pyotr Ofitserov". U.S. State Department. 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "Statement by the Spokesperson of High Representative Catherine Ashton on the sentencing of Alexey Navalny and Pyotr Ofitserov" (PDF). Council of the European Union. 18 July 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2013. "Germany criticises verdict against Navalny". Deutsche Welle. 19 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Новости NEWSru.com :: Венедиктов объяснил смысл вердикта братьям Навальным: Олега сделали заложником Алексея". Newsru.com. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Реакция на приговор братьям Навальным". TASS. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Vendik, Yuri (30 December 2014). "Олег Навальный приговорён к 3,5 годам по делу "Ив Роше"" [Oleg Navalny sentenced to 3.5 years in the Yves Rocher case] (in Russian). BBC Russian Service. Archived from the original on 2 January 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2014. "Российский Медиа-ландшафт: Телевидение, Пресса, Интернетt" [Russian Media Landscape: Television, Press, Internet] (PDF). Levada.ru (in Russian). 19 June 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 October 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "Навальный, "Болотное дело", Стрелков: знание и отношение" [Navalny, Bolotnoe delo, Strelkov: knowledge and attitude]. Levada Center (Press release). 7 November 2014. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Parfitt, Tom (10 May 2011). "Russian blogger Alexei Navalny faces criminal investigation". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Belton, Catherine (10 May 2011). "Russia Targets Anti-Graft Blogger". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 14 August 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Bratersky, Alexander (10 May 2011). "Navalny Targeted in Fraud Inquiry". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. Sandford, Daniel (30 November 2011). "Russians tire of corruption spectacle". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "The birth of Russian citizenry". The Economist. 17 December 2011. Archived from the original on 17 December 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "So where's the change in Russia? – Le Monde diplomatique – English edition". Mondediplo.com. 31 March 2012. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. Coalson, Robert (29 July 2013). "Is Aleksei Navalny a Liberal or a Nationalist?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. "Russian March Resists Navalny". The Moscow Times.com. 6 November 2011. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. "В столице отрепетировали "Русский марш" / Регионы России / Независимая газета". Ng.ru. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 27 December 2015. ""I Assert that Putin Was Behind the Crime"". spiegel.de. 10 January 2020. "Алексей Навальный выходит на "Русский марш"". Радио Свобода. 21 October 2011. "Russian Anger Grows Over Chechnya Subsidies". The New York Times. 8 October 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Robert Coalson (28 July 2013). "Russia's Aleksei Navalny: Hope Of The Nation – Or The Nationalists?". RFE/RL. Archived from the original on 10 August 2013. Shuster, Simon (29 December 2011). "Russia Rising: The Blogger Who Is Putin's Greatest Challenger". Time. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. "5 things to know about Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny". politico.eu. 20 August 2020. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. "The Evolution of Alexey Navalny's Nationalism". The New Yorker. 15 February 2021. "Alexei Navalny on Putin's Russia: 'All autocratic regimes come to an end'". The Guardian. 29 April 2017. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. "Putin crafts spectacle for re-election landslide". 18 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 April 2018. "The man who would beat Putin". Politico. 1 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. "The Man Putin Fears". time.com. 19 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. His rhetoric turned many people off. Russian liberals were alarmed by Navalny's early flirtation with the far right, including a pair of videos he released in 2007, one calling for the deportation of migrants "Amnesty strips Navalny of 'prisoner of conscience' status". Al Jazeera. 24 February 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2024. Antonova, Natalia (5 March 2021). "Dissidents Aren't Saints". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 20 March 2024. Siddique, Haroon (8 February 2023). "Muslim employee sues Amnesty over sacking after Alexei Navalny objections". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 March 2024. Barry, Ellen (9 December 2011). "Rousing Russia With a Phrase". The New York Times. Gessen, Masha (15 February 2021). "The Evolution of Alexey Navalny's Nationalism". The New Yorker. Guillory, Sean (1 November 2013). "How Russian Nationalism Fuels Race Riots". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Retrieved 22 December 2020. Shuster, Simon (14 October 2013). "Russia Responds to Anti-Migrant Riots by Arresting Migrants". Time. "Navalny's Failure To Renounce His Nationalist Past May Be Straining His Support". RFE/RL. 25 February 2021. "Alexey Navalny's views on migrants run counter to his pro-democracy discourse". globalvoices.org. Global Voices. 9 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Rutland, Peter; Kazantsev, Andrei (13 July 2020). "Do Black Lives Matter in Russia?". Russia Matters.org. Retrieved 25 January 2022. Alexandrov, Ivan (18 June 2020). "Россия в зеркале Black Lives Matter" [Russia in the mirror of Black Lives Matter]. eurasianet.org (in Russian). Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. "Волков: команда Навального выступает за свободу слова и гей-браки" [Volkov: Navalny's team stands for freedom of speech and gay marriage]. lrt.lt. 2 August 2017. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. Hess, Maximillian; Pigman, Lincoln (21 May 2018). "For Navalny, Foreign and Domestic Policy Are One". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Retrieved 18 June 2022. "Navalinîi: Transnistria, de facto, e independentă de Republica Moldova". Noi.md (in Romanian). 7 June 2017. "Navalny: Integration with Belarus – Main Task for Russia". Telegraf.by. 13 February 2012. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. "Navalny Proposes Sanctions List to the West". The Moscow Times. 20 March 2014. "Navalny Wouldn't Return Crimea, Considers Immigration Bigger Issue Than Ukraine". The Moscow Times. 16 October 2014. Walker, Shaun (17 October 2014). "'Putin is destroying Russia. Why base his regime on corruption?' asks Navalny". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. "Russia's Navalny protests provoke mixed emotions in Ukraine". Atlantic Council. 26 January 2021. "Prayers Answered? Ukrainian Orthodox Church Marks One Year Of Independence From Moscow". RFE/RL. 23 January 2020. ""И тем, и этим нужно одно: отвлечение внимания от реальных проблем". Навальный сравнил признание ДНР и ЛНР с вводом войск в Афганистан" ["Both of them need one thing: distraction from the real problems." Navalny compared the recognition of the DPR and LPR with the introduction of troops into Afghanistan]. Meduza (in Russian). 22 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022. "«Все имеет цену, и сейчас, весной 2022 года, эту цену должны платить мы». Навальный призвал к ежедневным акциям против войны" ["Everything has a price, and now, in the spring of 2022, we must pay this price." Navalny called for daily actions against the war.]. Meduza (in Russian). 2 March 2022. "Navalny Calls on Russians to Take to the Streets to 'Stop the War'". The Moscow Times. 2 March 2022. "Russia's Navalny calls Putin insane and urges anti-war protests". Reuters. 2 March 2022. "Channelling Goebbels: The obscenity of Russian state TV news, as it conceals war crimes for Putin". inews.co.uk. 6 April 2022. "Navalny Calls for Sanctions Against Russian State Media 'Warmongers'". The Moscow Times. 6 March 2022. "Jailed Kremlin foe Navalny lambasts Putin's 'stupid war' in Ukraine". Reuters. 24 May 2022. "Putin orders partial mobilization of Russian reservists and hints using nuclear weapons still possible". CBS News. 21 September 2022. "'There will be five million draft dodgers running around the country.' Navalny on mobilization". Meduza. 21 September 2022. ""Вы своим ШИЗО мне рот не заткнете. Это преступление против моей страны" — Навальный выступил на суде". spektr.press. 23 September 2022. "Навального в пятый раз отправили в штрафной изолятор. На этот раз после речи о мобилизации". BBC News Russian. 23 September 2022. Cordell, Jake (20 February 2023). "Navalny: Putin's war has pushed Russia to 'rock bottom'". BreakingNews.ie. "Navalny Calls for Election Day Protest Against Putin, Ukraine Invasion". The Moscow Times. 1 February 2024. Leonid Bershidsky (14 December 2016). "A Populist Challenge to Putin". Bloomberg News. Sharipzhan, Merhat (22 December 2016). "Russian Presidential Hopeful Slams Kremlin On Syria, Ukraine". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Персоны года – 2009: Частное лицо года" [Person of the Year 2009: Individual of the Year]. Vedomosti (in Russian). 30 December 2009. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2011. "Персоны года – 2009: Частное лицо года" [Person of the Year 2009: Individual of the Year]. banki.ru. 30 December 2009. Retrieved 22 November 2020. "Советник кировского губернатора стал человеком года" [Kirov Governor's Advisor became the person of the year]. Newsler.ru (in Russian). 22 December 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Новости Банка" [Bank News]. cfb.ru (in Russian). 26 April 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Репортаж с церемонии вручения ежегодной премии журнала "Финанс."" [Report from the annual awards ceremony of the "Finance."]. finparty.ru (in Russian). 26 April 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "The FP Top 100 Global Thinkers". Foreign Policy. December 2011. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. "The FP Top 100 Global Thinkers". Foreign Policy. 28 November 2012. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. Kasparov, Garry (18 April 2012). "Alexei Navalny". Time. Archived from the original on 14 September 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "The results of Prospect's world thinkers poll". Prospect. April 2013. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 30 May 2013. "Alexei and Oleg Navalny to receive Prize of the Platform of European Memory and Conscience 2015 | Platform of European Memory and Conscience". MemoryandConscience.eu. 2 May 2015. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2015. "The 25 Most Influential People on the Internet". Time. 26 June 2017. Archived from the original on 18 May 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2017. Политик года – оппозиционер Алексей Навальный [Politician of the Year – Oppositionist Alexei Navalny]. Vedomosti (in Russian). 28 December 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2021. Karaulova, Olga (28 December 2017). СМИ России: Навальный стал политиком года [Russian media: Navalny became the politician of the year]. BBC News Русская Служба (in Russian). BBC Russian Service. Retrieved 4 March 2021. Спецпроект "Персона года 2019" [Special project "Person of the Year 2019"]. Vedomosti (in Russian). Archived from the original on 26 December 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "Flere fredsprisforslag før fristen gikk ut". Aftenposten. Norwegian News Agency. 31 January 2021. "Hektisk nomineringsaktivitet før fredsprisfrist" [Hectic nomination activity before peace prize deadline]. Dagsavisen. 31 January 2021. "Alexander Litvinenko's widow wants man standing up to Putin to get Nobel Prize". Metro. 27 January 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Boris Nemtsov Prize for Courage-2021 awarded to Alexei Navalny". nemtsovfund.org. 27 February 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. Šafhauser, Roman (5 February 2021). "Vyhlídka Alexeje Navalného, hlásá cedule v Praze. Název však není oficiální" [Alexei Navalny's scenic viewpoint, the plaque says in Prague. However, the name is not official]. iDNES.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 28 March 2021. Sojka, Libor (12 February 2021). "Alexei Navalny scenic viewpoint, Stromovka park, Prague". AP Images. Associated Press. Retrieved 28 March 2021. "Russia: Jailed Kremlin critic Navalny dedicates human rights award to political prisoners". Deutsche Welle. 8 June 2021. Retrieved 8 June 2021. Kasparov, Garry (18 April 2012). "Alexei Navalny". Time. Retrieved 16 September 2021. "Alexey Navalny – 2021 Knight of Freedom awardee". Casimir Pulaski Foundation. 30 September 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. "Alexey Navalny – 2021 Knight of Freedom awardee". Warsaw Security Forum. 30 September 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. "Навальный стал лауреатом немецкой премии за вклад в свободу СМИ" [Navalny is the recipient of the German Media Freedom Award]. Voice of America (in Russian). RFE/RL. 7 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. Emmott, Robin (20 October 2021). "Kremlin critic Navalny wins EU rights prize for his "immense bravery"". Reuters. Retrieved 20 October 2021. Suliman, Adela (20 October 2021). "Russia's Navalny awarded prestigious European human rights Sakharov Prize". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 October 2021. "German Freedom of Expression Prize Goes to Navalny". The Moscow Times. Agence France-Presse. 7 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. RFE/RL. "Russia's Imprisoned Navalny Awarded U.S. Prize For Civil Courage". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "BAFTA Film Awards 2023: The full list of winners". Sky News. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "Oscars 2023: the full list of winners". The Guardian. 12 March 2023. Wright, George (2023). "Navalny's life and future death captured in Oscar-winning documentary". bbc.co.uk. BBC. We don't realise how strong we actually are. The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good people to do nothing. So don't be inactive. Navalnaya, Daria (27 June 2019). "What It's Like to Be a Teenager in Putin's Russia". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "Biography". Navalny.com 2018. 2018. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "The Akunin-Navalny interviews (part I)". Open Democracy. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Muniz, Liliana (15 June 2022). "Alexei Navalny moved to infamous maximum security prison, says aide". Politico Europe. "Алексея Навального отправили в "пыточную" колонию № 6 во Владимирской области". Meduza. 15 June 2022. "CNN investigation uncovers tailing of Alexey Navalny prior to poisoning". YouTube. CNN. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Alexey Navalny's interview for HARDtalk, BBC". YouTube. Алексей Навальный. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Alexey Navalny: The 2020 60 Minutes Interview". YouTube. 60 Minutes. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Legvold, Robert (January–February 2017). "Opposing Forces: Plotting the New Russia [review]". Foreign Affairs. 96 (January/February 2017). Navalny, Alexei (23 May 2022). "Vladimir Putin: The 100 Most Influential People of 2022". Time. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Michnik, Adam; Navalny, Alexei (2015). Диалоги [Dialogues] (in Russian). Novoye Izdatel'stvo. ISBN 978-5-98379-198-5. OCLC 1166734566. Library resources about Alexei Navalny Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Dollbaum, Jan Matti (2020). "Protest trajectories in electoral authoritarianism: from Russia's 'For Fair Elections' movement to Alexei Navalny's presidential campaign". Post-Soviet Affairs. 36 (3): 192–210. doi:10.1080/1060586X.2020.1750275. S2CID 216376972. Ebel, Francesca (16 February 2024). "Biden blames Putin for Navalny's death, praises Russian opposition leader". Washington Post. "A Chronology of Navalny's recent health scares". Gupta, Gava (16 February 2024). "Live Updates: Biden Says 'Putin Is Responsible' After Report of Navalny's Death". New York Times. "Here is a timeline of Navalny's career". Alexei Navalny at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Official website (in Russian) Navalny's page for the Yale World Fellows Program "Palace for Putin. History of the biggest bribery" – a video released by Navalny on 19 January 2021, after returning to Moscow. Rai News 24. Video footages (16-17 February 2024; 2:43) of a convoy, presumably carrying the body of Alexei Navalny, moving from Labytnangi across Ob to Salehard. Rai News 24, 20 February 2024 Portals:  Russia  Politics  Liberalism  Biography