Angelique Kerber (German: [ʔan.d͡ʒɛˈliːk ˈkɛɐ̯bɐ] ; born 18 January 1988) is a German professional tennis player. She has been ranked as high as world No. 1 in singles, for a total of 34 weeks, and won three Major titles at the 2016 Australian Open, the 2016 US Open, and the 2018 Wimbledon Championships. She is also an Olympic silver medalist and was the year-end world number one in 2016. Kerber made her professional debut in 2003 and began her rise to prominence upon reaching the semifinals of the 2011 US Open as the world No. 92. An accomplished left-handed player, Kerber's ranking cracked the top 5 in 2012, and she would eventually reach the world No. 1 ranking on 12 September 2016, becoming the 22nd and oldest player to achieve the top ranking. She has won 14 career singles titles, across all surfaces, including three major titles. She has also won a silver medal in women's singles representing Germany at the 2016 Rio Olympics. Kerber was born on 18 January 1988 in Bremen to Polish parents Sławomir Kerber, from Poznań, and Beata (née Rzeźnik), who is also her manager. She has one sister, Jessica. She grew up in Kiel, where her family stayed in an apartment in a training academy where her parents work, and started playing tennis at age three, eventually joining the junior circuit. Although born right-handed, Kerber plays left-handed. Kerber made her first attempt to qualify for a WTA tournament in January 2005, at the Auckland Open, falling to Janette Husárová in the final round. She then recorded her Grand Slam main draw debut year in 2007, at the French Open where she lost to Elena Dementieva in the opening round. Shortly after, she appeared in the main draw of a WTA tournament for the first time, in Birmingham, where she made the third round, losing to fifth seed Marion Bartoli, who was the eventual runner-up at Wimbledon that year. The week after Birmingham, she reached her first main draw quarterfinal at the Rosmalen Open where she was beaten by eventual champion Anna Chakvetadze, and then fell to Chakvetadze once more, in the first round of Wimbledon. At the US Open, Kerber drew Serena Williams in the first round and lost in straight sets. Kerber achieved her first top-100 season finish in 2007, at world No. 84. She also won eight titles on the ITF circuit from 2004 to 2007. Kerber attained her first Grand Slam victory in 2008 at the Australian Open by defeating Maret Ani, before losing to 25th seed Francesca Schiavone. She also made the third round at Indian Wells where she lost to sixth seed Bartoli. Kerber did not progress much that year after that, besides winning a further two ITF titles. Her struggles would continue in 2009 as she managed just three wins in WTA main draws. She did qualify for the US Open that year, where she made the second round. She also won her 11th and final ITF title that year. She finished 2008 and 2009 respectively ranked barely outside the top 100, at No. 108 and No. 106, respectively. In 2010, Kerber qualified for the Australian Open where she reached her third round of a Grand Slam for the first time, losing to third seed Svetlana Kuznetsova in a close three-setter, from a set up. She then reached her maiden WTA final, in Bogotá, finishing runner-up to home star Mariana Duque Mariño, having upset top-seed Gisela Dulko in the semifinals. Kerber proceeded to reach two other quarterfinals that year, in Fes and Copenhagen, and then made the third round of Wimbledon, after defeating Sania Mirza and upsetting 13th seed Shahar Pe'er before losing to Jarmila Groth. At the end of the year, she made the third round in Beijing where she lost to Li Na, and capped off her season with a semifinal run in Luxembourg. She ended the year ranked No. 47. Kerber did not win back-to-back matches in the first seven months of 2011 except once, at her first tournament of the year, in Hobart. At Wimbledon, she lost to youngster Laura Robson in the first round. In Dallas, the week before the US Open, she recorded a semifinal run, where she lost to Aravane Rezaï. Kerber entered the US Open ranked world No. 92, and passed the first hurdle with a win in three sets over Lauren Davis in three sets. Next, she faced 12th seed Agnieszka Radwańska and pulled off a shock three-set victory before going on to beat both Alla Kudryavtseva and Monica Niculescu to reach her maiden Grand Slam quarterfinal. There, Kerber surprised multiple-time quarterfinalist here Flavia Pennetta in three sets to advance to the semifinal, where she lost to ninth seed and eventual champion Samantha Stosur in three sets. Kerber reached a new career-high ranking of world No. 34 after the tournament. She then qualified for the Pan Pacific Open and reached the second round, losing to eventual champion Radwańska from a set up. After that, she reached the semifinals in Osaka where she lost to eventual champion Bartoli. She finished the year as world No. 32, her second finish in a row in the top 50. Kerber's first tournament of 2012 was the Auckland Open where she reached the semifinals, falling to eventual runner-up Pennetta. At the Australian Open, Kerber was seeded at a Grand Slam tournament for the first time, and made the third round where she lost to fourth seed Maria Sharapova. As a result, Kerber rose to a new career-high ranking of world No. 27. She then competed in her first Fed Cup tie in almost five years, where Germany faced defending champions Czech Republic in the quarterfinals, and won her only rubber, defeating Lucie Hradecká in straight sets but the Germans lost the tie 1–3. At her next tournament was in Paris, Kerber lifted her maiden WTA singles title. After seeing off Lucie Šafářová and Niculescu to make the last eight, she upset top seed Sharapova in straight sets. Kerber then beat Yanina Wickmayer in the last four, and faced second seed Bartoli in the final, seeing off the home player in three sets to win the title. She then suffered an early loss at the Qatar Open in hands of unseeded Bulgarian Tsvetana Pironkova in the second round. Kerber's continued her surge up the rankings through the coming three months, that culminated in her cracking the top 10 rankings for the first time in her career. She started with a semifinal appearance at the Indian Wells Open. Seeded 18th with a bye in the first round, she moved past three Americans in Sloane Stephens, Vania King and Christina McHale, the second one via a walkover. Kerber then upset eighth seed Li Na in the quarterfinals, but was stopped by world No. 1 and eventual champion Victoria Azarenka in the last four. Her ranking improved to a career-high world No. 14 as a result. In Miami, Kerber was upset in her opener by Zheng Jie. Her next stop was indoors, at the Danish Open where she was the second seed. In her opener, she struggled past Stéphanie Foretz Gacon and then defeated Anne Keothavong and fellow German Mona Barthel. After that, she defeated third seed Jelena Janković to reach her second final of the year. She won the title by defeating the top seed and defending champion Caroline Wozniacki in straight sets. Starting off her clay season on home soil, in Stuttgart, Kerber advanced to the quarterfinals with wins over Roberta Vinci and sixth seed Wozniacki, before losing to third seed Petra Kvitová. After an early exit in Madrid, Kerber advanced to the semifinals in Rome after avenging her Stuttgart loss to Kvitová in the last eight, which ensured herself a rise to the top 10 rankings for the first time in her career. In the last four, she lost to Sharapova in straight sets. At the French Open, 10th-seeded Kerber amassed back-to-back wins here for the first time after beating Zhang Shuai and Olga Govortsova. She then beat 18th seed Pennetta in three sets before seeing off Petra Martić in the fourth round to reach the quarterfinals, where she lost to eventual runner-up Sara Errani. Kerber continued her steady rise of 2012 on grass, firstly by posting a runner-up appearance in Eastbourne, losing to a close final to Tamira Paszek, having served for the championship in the deciding set and missing five match points. At the Wimbledon Championships, Kerber was seeded eighth. She advanced to her second Grand Slam quarterfinal in a row, this time without losing set, by beating Lucie Hradecká, Ekaterina Makarova, 28th seed Christina McHale and former world No. 1 Kim Clijsters., the latter in 49 minutes. There, she defeated fellow German and 15th seed Sabine Lisicki in three sets, having been down a break in the third. In the semifinals, she lost to Agnieszka Radwańska. This was Kerber's then most recent equal-best Grand Slam result, for another three years until Australian Open in 2016. At the London Olympics, Kerber made her first appearance at this stage, and was seeded seventh. She defeated Petra Cetkovská and Tímea Babos first two rounds, to set up a clash with Venus Williams. There, she beat the former world No. 1 in two tiebreak sets, to make the quarterfinals where she lost to top seed and eventual bronze medallist Victoria Azarenka in straight sets. In the other disciplines, Kerber partnered Philipp Petzschner in mixed doubles and Lisicki in women's doubles, falling in the first and second rounds, respectively. Competing at the Canadian Open to open her US Open Series campaign, Kerber lost early but bounced back at the Cincinnati Open with another strong result. First, she beat Babos and Andrea Hlaváčková to reach the quarterfinals, where she defeated Serena Williams for the first time, winning in straight sets, thus snapping Williams's 19-match winning streak. She continued with a win over Kvitová in the semifinals, to book a spot in her first Premier 5 final, but lost Li from a set up. At the US Open, sixth-seeded Kerber won a close match against Venus Williams in the second round en route to the fourth round, but failed to defend her semifinal points from a year ago when she lost to eventual semifinalist Errani. Kerber's next tournament was the Pan Pacific Open where she made it to the semifinals before losing to defending champion Radwańska. She also reached the quarterfinals of the China Open, but fell to eventual runner-up Sharapova. Her breakthrough season ensured herself qualification for her maiden appearance at the WTA Tour Championships. She also hit the world's top 5 rankings for the first time in her career, at world No. 5, entering the week of the season-ending championships, where she was seeded fifth. There, however, she exited the tournament in the round robin stage, without winning any matches, the losses coming in the hands of Serena Williams, Azarenka and Li. Nevertheless, Kerber ended the 2012 season at world No. 5, with 60 wins amassed throughout the season. Kerber began 2013 at the Brisbane International where she was seeded fourth, and made the quarterfinals where she was stopped by eventual runner-up Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. Seeded second in Sydney, Kerber made the last four but lost to another eventual runner-up once more, this time in Dominika Cibulková. She then reached the fourth round of the Australian Open, completing the set of second-week appearances at all four Grand Slams. Along the way, she defeated Elina Svitolina, Lucie Hradecká, and wildcard Madison Keys. She was subsequently defeated by 19th seed Ekaterina Makarova after struggling with a back injury. After a dry winless spell in the Middle East, Kerber bounced back with a second consecutive semifinal result at the Indian Wells Open, where she was stopped by eighth seed Caroline Wozniacki in three sets, despite having won the first set. Like the previous year, an early exit in Miami followed suit, this time to Sorana Cîrstea. Kerber then reached her first final of 2013 in Monterrey where she was the top seed but lost to Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in three sets. Kerber posted strong results on clay in 2013. Firstly, on Fed Cup, she helped Germany regain its place in the World Group by winning her rubber against Bojana Jovanovski, the German eventually winning the tie 3–2. She then recorded a run to the semifinals in Stuttgart, going one round better than the previous year, where she fell in three sets to defending champion Maria Sharapova. At the Madrid Open, sixth-seeded Kerber moved into the quarterfinals here for the first time after defeating top-40 opposition in Hsieh Su-wei, Alizé Cornet and Svetlana Kuznetsova. There, she lost to Ana Ivanovic in straight sets. At the French Open, Kerber reached the fourth round for the second year in a row but did not go further this time as she was beaten by former champion Kuznetsova in three sets. She did not enjoy much success on grass next, however, as she failed to post back-to-back wins in her tournament appearances on the surface, falling at the second hurdles of both Eastbourne and Wimbledon, to Makarova and Kaia Kanepi, respectively. Having failed to defend her semifinal result at Wimbledon from the year, Kerber fell to world No. 9 in the rankings after the tournament's conclusion. After posting a quarterfinal at the Washington Open, Kerber made her only appearance of the US Open Series in Cincinnati but lost in third round to Li Na, in a rematch of last year's championship match. At the US Open, eighth seed Kerber posted her third fourth-round result at the Grand Slams this year, and second in a row here, after defeating Hradecká, Eugenie Bouchard and 25th seed Kanepi but then lost to 18th seed Carla Suárez Navarro this time. During the Asian swing, Kerber's form improved as she reached her second final of 2013, at the Pan Pacific Open, having defeated Ivanovic, Wozniacki and Radwańska en route, but there, she lost to Petra Kvitová in three sets. The following week at the China Open, she reached the quarterfinals where she lost to Radwańska, and then advanced into her third final of the season, at the Linz Open. There, Kerber scored her third career title, and third indoors, as she defeated two-time champion Ivanovic, thus and filling up the last spot at the WTA Tour Championships. In her second outing at the Championships, Kerber failed to get past the round robin stage, once more, with losses to Serena Williams and Kvitová. However, she did record her maiden victory at this stage by defeating Radwańska, in her second round robin match. Kerber would finish the year as world No. 9. Kerber began 2014 the same way she did in 2013, logging in quarterfinal or better results in both Brisbane and Sydney, going one round better in the latter this time around by making the final but there, she was stunned by qualifier Tsvetana Pironkova in straight sets. She made the fourth round of the Australian Open once more, falling to 28th seed Flavia Pennetta in three sets this time around. At the Open GdF Suez, former champion Kerber made the quarterfinals where she lost to eventual champion Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. In Fed Cup quarterfinal play against Slovakia, Kerber contributed to the German team's victory by winning both her singles rubbers, over Dominika Cibulková and Daniela Hantuchová. At the Qatar Open, Kerber sailed into her first quarterfinal in the Middle East with wins over Karolína Plíšková and Klára Koukalová. She subsequently moved into her second final of 2014 with wins over qualifier Petra Cetkovská and fifth seed Jelena Janković. There, she lost to Simona Halep in straight sets. After a two-match losing streak across Dubai and Indian Wells, fifth-seeded Kerber made her first quarterfinal showing in Miami, where she lost to defending champion Serena Williams in straight sets. In April, Kerber helped put her country in the Fed Cup final, with Germany taking on Australia in the last four, by winning both her singles rubbers, against Samantha Stosur and Casey Dellacqua. However, she then endured a three-match losing streak to begin her season on clay, snapping it on home soil in Nuremberg with a quarterfinal appearance, where she was beaten by Plíšková. At the French Open, Kerber made the last 16 for the second year running, falling to rising star and 18th-seeded Bouchard this time around. On grass, Kerber enjoyed better results this year, starting off with her second appearance in the championship match at the Eastbourne International but finished runner-up once more, her third of 2014, this time to youngster Madison Keys in three sets. At Wimbledon, Kerber was seeded ninth and entered the second week for the fourth Grand Slam tournament running, with victories over the likes of defeated Urszula Radwańska, Heather Watson, and previous year's semifinalist Kirsten Flipkens. In the round of 16, she prevailed over reigning French Open champion and fifth seed Sharapova in three sets to move into the second last eight showing here. There, she lost to eventual runner-up Bouchard in straight sets. Kerber opened her US Open Series campaign in Stanford where she was the third seed. She defeated CoCo Vandeweghe in three sets in her opener, to reach quarterfinals where she saw off Garbiñe Muguruza. A win over Varvara Lepchenko, where she had to save a match point, put her in her fourth final of the year, but she had to settle for the runner-up position again, for the fourth time in 2014 when she lost to Serena Williams. After a string of early exits in Montreal and Cincinnati, Kerber made the third round of the US Open with wins over Russian qualifiers, Ksenia Pervak and Alla Kudryavtseva, but lost to unseeded youngster Belinda Bencic. Kerber posted deep runs in Tokyo and the inaugural Wuhan Open the following month, reaching the semifinals and quarterfinals, respectively. In her final tournament of the season, Kerber made the third round of the China Open where she lost to Svetlana Kuznetsova. Kerber did not qualify for the WTA Finals in 2014 but entered the tournament as an alternate, and would finish the season ranked world No. 10. Kerber finished the year by representing Germany in the Fed Cup final, where the team took on the Czech Republic. After dropping her first match to Lucie Šafářová, she came up against Petra Kvitová. There, Kerber dropped the first set tiebreak, and then avoided a bagel down 0–3 in the second set by coming back to win it 6–4. She came up short in the decider, however, as Kvitová launched her comeback from 1–4 down to win it 6–4, ensuring the Czech team an unassailable 3–0, and the title. Kerber started her year of 2015 by posting deep runs in both Brisbane and 2015 Apia International Sydney, with quarterfinal and semifinal results, respectively. However, at the Australian Open, she crashed out in the opening round to Irina-Camelia Begu, and it was the first time Kerber lost at the first hurdle of a Grand Slam tournament since Wimbledon in 2011. Representing Germany in the Fed Cup quarterfinals where the Germans faced Australia, Kerber scored a win out of her two matches played, over Samantha Stosur, but the 2014 runner-ups would progress by winning the tie 4–1. Her form however did not improve further across the months of February and March as she netted just two wins across five tournaments played, and by the start of April, she had fallen out of the top 10, for the first time since May 2012. At the Charleston Open, fifth seed Kerber overcame a 4–2 third-set deficit to defeat Evgeniya Rodina in her opening match, and then cruised past Lara Arruabarrena to reach the last eight. Her run continued with a win over Begu in two tight sets, followed by another straight-set victory, over fellow German and defending champion Andrea Petkovic, to advance to her first final of 2015. There, Kerber faced seventh seed Madison Keys and she fought back from a 4–1 deficit in the third set to claim her fourth WTA title and her first since the fall of 2013, besides it being her first tournament triumph on clay. In the Fed Cup semifinals, where Germany faced Russia, Kerber won her only rubber played, against Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in straight sets, dropping just one game. The win, however, was not enough as Germany lost the deciding doubles match. Kerber was unseeded in Stuttgart to open her season on red clay, and defeated Alexa Glatch in straight sets, before upsetting three-time defending champion Maria Sharapova in three sets. In the quarterfinals, she saw off Ekaterina Makarova, before beating Madison Brengle to reach her second final of the year. There, she fought back from a set and 5–3 down to prevail over Caroline Wozniacki, thus scoring her fifth career title, also her first on home soil, which saw her extend her winning streak on clay to 11 matches. That streak, however, expired in the hands of Stosur in the opening round of Madrid. At the Italian Open, Kerber reached the second round after defeating Alizé Cornet but lost to Begu once more. After a semifinal run in Nuremberg, Kerber exited the French Open in the third round from a set up, in the hands of Garbiñe Muguruza. On grass, Kerber had a bright start, by lifting the title at the Birmimgham Classic where she was the fourth seed. En route, she advanced to the quarterfinals after defeating Tsvetana Pironkova and Jelena Janković. She then beat Kateřina Siniaková in straight sets to set up an all-German semifinal where she faced Sabine Lisicki, their first meeting since Wimbledon in 2012. Kerber won in straight sets and subsequently advanced to her third final of the season where she defeated Karolina Plíšková in a tight three-setter for her sixth career title, her first on grass. This marked the first time Kerber had won more than two titles in a season. At the Wimbledon Championships, Kerber advanced to the third round where she crossed paths with Muguruza once more, and lost to the eventual runner-up in three sets. Kicking off her US Open Series campaign in Stanford, fifth-seeded Kerber defended her runner-up result from a year ago by beating Daria Gavrilova and Ana Konjuh to make the last eight where she edged past second seed Agnieszka Radwańska in a three-set marathon to reach the last four. She then beat Elina Svitolina to make the final where she met Plíšková, and defeated the Czech in three sets once again, this time to lift her seventh career title, and became the only player to win titles across all surfaces in 2015. Kerber did not enjoy better results on American hard courts in her following tournaments with early losses in Toronto and Cincinnati. At the US Open, she was the 11th seed came up short in the third round again, this time in a three-set defeat to 20th seed and two-time runner-up Victoria Azarenka in an epic encounter. Kerber bounced back with stronger results in the Asian swing, starting off with a quarterfinal showing in Tokyo where she lost to Wozniacki in three sets. At the Wuhan Open, Kerber reached the last eight after dispatching Jelena Janković and Camila Giorgi, before moving past Coco Vandeweghe via retirement. In the semifinals, she lost to Muguruza once again, this time in straight sets. At the China Open next, Kerber advanced to the last eight where she lost to Radwańska in straight sets. Kerber would then reach her fifth final of the year at the Hong Kong Open but finished runner-up for the first time this season, falling to Janković in three sets. It was announced on 21 October that Kerber had qualified for the WTA Finals, marking her third appearance here. As the sixth seed, she was drawn into the same group with Muguruza and fellow left-handed players Petra Kvitová and Lucie Šafářová. She exited in the round-robin stage, managing just one win that came over Petra Kvitová. Having spent patches of 2015 out of the top 10, Kerber eventually concluded the season as world No. 10, maintaining her season finish from 2014. Kerber began the year at the Brisbane International, posting a runner-up result, with wins over Camila Giorgi, Madison Brengle, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova and Carla Suárez Navarro en route to the final, where she lost to former champion Victoria Azarenka. In Sydney, Kerber defeated Elina Svitolina in the opening round but then withdrew with an illness. Kerber was the seventh seed at the Australian Open and defeated Misaki Doi in the first round, having been a match point down. She then scored a triplet of straight-set wins over Alexandra Dulgheru, Brengle, and compatriot Annika Beck to reach her first quarterfinal in Melbourne, completing the sweep of quarterfinal appearances at all four Grand Slams in the process. In the quarterfinals, she avenged her Brisbane loss by defeating two-time champion Victoria Azarenka in straight sets, her first win against the Belarusian, to advance to the third Grand Slam semifinal of her career, her first since Wimbledon in 2012. There, Kerber defeated Grand Slam semifinal debutante Johanna Konta in straight sets to reach her maiden Grand Slam final. She defeated defending champion and world No. 1, Serena Williams, earning her first Grand Slam title and becoming the first German to do so since 1999. Besides becoming the first player to win a Grand Slam having been down match point in the first round, she also recorded her best ranking to date as world No. 2 following the achievement, surpassing her prior career-high of No. 5 set that she had set in 2012. Representing Germany in the Fed Cup quarterfinals where the Germans faced the Swiss team, Kerber went 1–1 in her singles matches, with Germany losing the tie in the end. Kerber then endured a dry spell across the Qatar and Indian Wells Opens, dropping both her openers. However, she bounced back with a run to the semifinals in Miami where she was stopped by eventual champion Victoria Azarenka. At the Charleston Open, top seed and defending champion Kerber sailed into her consecutive semifinal but this time, retired to eventual champion Sloane Stephens due to a viral illness. In the Fed Cup World Group play-offs, the German team faced Romania and Kerber duly emerged victorious in her both her singles rubbers, over Irina-Camelia Begu and Simona Halep, losing only four games to the latter, and also her first ever win over her, to keep Germany in the World Group as the team would win the tie 4–1. Kerber was the defending champion in Stuttgart, and successfully defended a title for the first time in her career. After a first-round bye, she beat Beck, Carla Suárez Navarro, and Petra Kvitová to reach the final. There she faced compatriot and qualifier Laura Siegemund and won ten games in a row from 2–4 down in the first set to defeat Siegemund and score her second title of the year and ninth of her career. Another losing streak ensued to close her clay season, however, which includes a loss to Kiki Bertens at the French Open, Bertens then becoming an eventual semifinalist herself. Prior to Wimbledon, Kerber attempted to defend her title at the Birmingham Classic and sailed into the last eight where she met Suárez Navarro once again but lost to Spaniard. At Wimbledon, fourth-seeded Kerber did not drop a set, with wins over Laura Robson, Varvara Lepchenko, Carina Witthöft, Doi and fifth seed Halep, en route to her second semifinal here. There, she moved past former champion Venus Williams to reach the final, where she was defeated by Serena Williams, in a rematch of their Australian Open championship encounter earlier in the year, in straight sets. After Wimbledon, Kerber played at the Swedish Open where she withdrew before her second round match due to an injury. She then reached her first quarterfinal at the Canadian Open with three-set wins over Mirjana Lučić-Baroni and Svitolina. She then beat Daria Kasatkina to make the last four when lost to eventual champion Halep. At the Olympics, Kerber defeated Mariana Duque Mariño, Eugenie Bouchard, Samantha Stosur to record her second Olympic quarterfinal appearance. Two more wins, over Konta and Madison Keys, saw Kerber book her spot in the gold medal match, where she was defeated by surprise finalist Monica Puig of Puerto Rico in three sets. Kerber's strong summer continued at the Cincinnati Open where she had her first opportunity to dethrone Serena Williams as the world No. 1 but needs to win the title to do so. Kerber did make the final where she faced 15th seed Karolína Plíšková but lost in straight sets. Nevertheless, Kerber's strong results throughout the year thus far ensured herself qualification for the WTA Finals, which was announced on 22 August following the conclusion of the Cincinnati tournament. At the US Open, Kerber beat the likes of Polona Hercog, Lučić-Baroni, CiCi Bellis and 14th seed Petra Kvitová to make the quarterfinals here for the first time since her semifinal run back in 2011. She continued with wins over eighth seed and 2015 runner-up Roberta Vinci, and a resurgent Caroline Wozniacki to reach her third Grand Slam final. Her win over Wozniacki, in the semifinals, combined with Serena Williams' defeat to 10th seed Plíšková in the same round meant that Kerber would unseat Serena Williams as the world No. 1 when the new rankings were released on 12 September the following week. In the championship match, Kerber gained her revenge over Plíšková by prevailing over the Czech in three sets to claim her second Grand Slam title, the 10th title overall of her career. At the Wuhan Open, her first tournament since claiming the world No. 1 ranking, Kerber reached the third round where she fell short to Kvitová in a 3-hour-long match. She then fell in the same round at the China Open, this time to Svitolina. Her penultimate tournament appearance of 2016 came at the Hong Kong Open where she lost in the quarterfinals to Daria Gavrilova. On 17 October 2016, Serena Williams pulled out of the WTA Finals in Singapore due to a shoulder injury, and that withdrawal secured Kerber's spot at the summit of the WTA rankings for the rest of the year, including the year-end No. 1 ranking, another first in Kerber's career. As the top seed of the Tour Finals, Kerber was drawn in the same group alongside Halep, Keys, and Dominika Cibulková. She won all of her round robin matches, scoring back-to-back wins here for the first time in her career as well, en route to her first semifinal here. She then defeated defending champion Agnieszka Radwańska in straight sets to reach the final where she faced Cibulková once again that week, to whom she lost in straight sets. At the start of the 2017 season, Kerber competed at the Brisbane International as the top seed, and won her opening match against Ashleigh Barty in three sets but then lost to Elina Svitolina in the quarterfinals. The following week in Sydney, she dropped opening match to Daria Kasatkina. As the top-seeded player and defending champion at the Australian Open, Kerber overcame a mid-match lapse to see off Lesia Tsurenko in the first round, where she squandered a match point in the second set. Kerber then defeated compatriot Carina Witthöft in the second round and Kristýna Plíšková in the third round. In the fourth round, Kerber lost to eventual semifinalist CoCo Vandeweghe in straight sets. Serena Williams, who lost to Kerber in the championship match here 12 months ago, won the tournament this time and amassed enough points to take back the top ranking from Kerber. After a winless showing in Doha, Kerber made the last four in Dubai where she lost to eventual champion Svitolina. The following month, in Indian Wells, Kerber reached the round of 16 where she lost to another eventual champion, this time in Elena Vesnina, but it was enough for Kerber to regain the world No. 1 ranking owing to Serena Williams' withdrawal from the event. This was then followed by a quarterfinal appearance in Miami where she lost to Venus Williams, and then a runner-up showing in Monterrey, where in a rematch of the 2013 final, Kerber fell short to Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in three sets. Kerber's season on clay began with her ranking at world No. 2, and a loss in her opener in Stuttgart to eventual runner-up Kristina Mladenovic. At the Madrid Open, Kerber won back-to-back wins to reach the third round where she retired against Eugenie Bouchard with a back issue, but returned to world No. 1 after the tournament's conclusion nevertheless. At the French Open, Kerber became the first female top seed in history to be ousted in the first round here, falling in straight sets to Ekaterina Makarova. However, she fared better as the season moved to grass courts, by making the quarterfinals in Eastbourne where she was defeated by Johanna Konta. At Wimbledon, Kerber made the second week, falling in the round of 16 to the eventual champion Garbiñe Muguruza in three sets. Due to Kerber's early exit and Simona Halep's loss to Konta in the quarterfinals, Karolína Plíšková became the new No. 1 after the tournament. Across the US Open Series, Kerber's struggles in 2017 continued as she netted just one victory across three tournament appearances in the North American hard court summer, which includes a first-round loss to Naomi Osaka at the US Open, where she was the defending champion. With this loss Kerber dropped out of the top 10. The following month, at the Pan Pacific Open, Kerber recorded her best result since Monterrey back in April, as she took revenge on Osaka and then defeated Kasatkina and Plíšková, before falling in the last four to Pavlyuchenkova. The said win over Plíšková in Tokyo was Kerber's best win by ranking since the 2016 WTA Finals. She would go on to score just one more win for the rest of the year, however, in the first round of the China Open where she beat Osaka once again. After dropping both her two matches in the group stage at WTA Elite Trophy, to Pavlyuchenkova and Barty, Kerber dropped out of top 20 for the first time since 2012, and finished the year ranked world No. 21. Shortly after, on 16 November 2017, Kerber announced that she had parted ways with longtime coach Torben Beltz and has hired Wim Fissette as new coach. Kerber started her 2018 season with a first ever appearance at the Hopman Cup, where she partnered with Alexander Zverev. She went undefeated in her singles matches and helped the team cruise into the final where they lost to Switzerland. Kerber followed up that performance with her first title in more than a year, at the Sydney International next. To make the final, she edged past Lucie Šafářová and Venus Williams, saving a match point against the former, to make the quarterfinals where she beat Dominika Cibulková. She set up a championship match with home star Ashleigh Barty after moving past Camila Giorgi. There, she beat the Aussie in straight sets for her 11th career title. At the Australian Open, 21st-seeded Kerber moved into the fourth round with wins over Anna-Lena Friedsam, Donna Vekić and former world No. 1 Maria Sharapova, all in straight sets and dropping no more than four games a set. There, she saw off Hsieh Su-wei in three sets to move into her second quarterfinal here, where she swept aside Madison Keys. In the semifinal, a clash against world No. 1, Simona Halep, both had two match points in the third set but neither were converted. The match then ended 9–7 in the third set, with Halep prevailing. Following her strong Australian summer, Kerber returned to the top 10 once again, ranked world No. 9. Kerber then made the last eight at the Qatar Open where she lost to world No. 1 Caroline Wozniacki in three-sets. The following week in Dubai, she lost to Elina Svitolina in the semifinals for the second year in a row, that being her fifth consecutive loss as well. At the Indian Wells Open, 10th seed Kerber beat Ekaterina Makarova and Elena Vesnina, avenging her defeat to the latter here a year ago, to reach the last 16 where she beat Caroline Garcia. She lost in the quarterfinals to Daria Kasatkina. Kerber carried on her good form through the Miami Open by sailing into the quarterfinals, defeating Johanna Larsson, Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova and Wang Yafan en route, where she was stopped by eventual champion Sloane Stephens, thus ensuring the latter her top-10 debut. In the Fed Cup semifinal tie against Czech Republic, Kerber dropped both her matches, to Karolína Plíšková and Petra Kvitová. both of her matches she lost in straight sets, the latter defeat ensuring the Czechs a spot in the final. She gained her revenge over Kvitová at first hurdle of the Stuttgart tournament the week after, before retiring against Anett Kontaveit in the following round. She was forced to skip the tournament in Madrid as a result, but bounced back at the Italian Open by making the last eight here for the second time, her first since 2012, but fell victim to eventual champion Svitolina, for the sixth time running. At the French Open, 12th seed Kerber snapped her losing streak here by defeating compatriot Mona Barthel in the first round. After seeing off Ana Bogdan, Kerber took down 18th seed Kiki Bertens, who had defeated her in the first round here two years ago, and then saw off seventh seed Caroline Garcia to make her second quarterfinal here, her first since 2012. In the quarterfinal, Kerber lost to top-ranked player and eventual champion Simona Halep from a set up. Nevertheless, the result is Kerber's equal-best result here, after her 2012 quarterfinal run. Kerber started the grass court swing as the second seed in Mallorca, where she lost in the first round to Alison Riske. In Eastbourne, she made the semifinals, falling to eventual champion Caroline Wozniacki, Kerber entered Wimbledon as the 11th seed. She defeated 2010 finalist Vera Zvonareva and 2017 junior champion Claire Liu to reach the third round where she moved past 18th seed Naomi Osaka. She then saw off unseeded Belinda Bencic to make the last eight by when she was the highest seed left in the draw. There, she avenged her loss in Indian Wells earlier in the year to Daria Kasatkina, needing seven match points to seal the revenge and then defeated 12th seed Jeļena Ostapenko to reach her second Wimbledon final. There, in a rematch of the 2016 final, she turned the tides this time around by taking down 25th seed Serena Williams in straight sets for her third Grand Slam title and as a result, she became the only player to defeat Serena Williams in multiple Grand Slam finals apart from Venus Williams. Also, with this victory, Kerber found herself one Grand Slam tournament shy of the Career Grand Slam, and also returned to world No. 4 in the rankings. Kerber did not enjoy the same success moving to the US Open Series, suffering a trio of early losses. First, at the Canadian Open, fourth seed Kerber lost her opener to Alizé Cornet in straight sets. At the Cincinnati Masters, Kerber lost in the third round to Keys. This culminated in third-round defeat in the hands of 29th seed Cibulková at the US Open despite having led by a set. However, her strong results in the preceding months of the year ensured her a spot at the WTA Finals, sealing her qualification on 10 September. The Asian swing in 2018 was another uneventful outing for Kerber as she lost in the third round of both Wuhan and Beijing, to Barty and Zhang Shuai, respectively. In her fifth appearance at the season-ending WTA Finals, the final edition to be held in Singapore, Kerber was drawn into the same group as Osaka, Stephens and Bertens. There, she got her sole win of the tournament over the former, defeating the Japanese player in three sets. Kerber subsequently concluded 2018 as world No. 2, her second-best finish to a season. In November, Kerber announced a new partnership with Rainer Schüttler as her new coach, having split with Fisette a month prior. Kerber kicked off the 2019 season with her second appearance at the Hopman Cup, alongside Alexander Zverev once again; they lost in the final to Switzerland in a rematch of last year's final. In Sydney, Kerber failed in her title defence bid with a loss to eventual champion Petra Kvitová in the quarterfinals. At the Australian Open, second-seeded Kerber moved into the last 16 with straight-set wins over the likes of Polona Hercog, Beatriz Haddad Maia (gaining her 100th Grand Slam match win) and Kimberly Birrell, only to be upset by eventual semifinalist Danielle Collins in straight sets. The following month, Kerber made the semifinals at the Qatar Open where she lost to eventual champion Elise Mertens. At the Dubai Tennis Championships, Kerber lost in the third round to eventual semifinalist Hsieh Su-wei in three sets. At the Indian Wells Open, Kerber reached a Premier Mandatory final for the first time in her career, which is also her first at the Premier Mandatory or Premier 5 stage since Cincinnati in 2016. En route to the final, she defeated Yulia Putintseva to begin, and followed up with two three-set wins over Natalia Vikhlyantseva and world No. 9 Aryna Sabalenka, which put her in the last eight. She then advanced to her first semifinal here since 2013 with a win over Venus Williams, where she saw off Belinda Bencic. In the final, young wildcard Bianca Andreescu defeated Kerber in three sets to win the title. At the Miami Open next, Kerber crossed paths with Andreescu once again, in the third round this time, and lost. in three sets. Kerber notably called her opponent "biggest drama queen ever" during their handshake after the match, owing to the multiple medical time-outs the latter had taken during the match. She then recorded a semifinal run at the Monterrey Open where she was the top seed but lost to Victoria Azarenka in three sets. Kerber her clay season in Stuttgart where she made the quarterfinals, but then had to withdraw in the second round of Madrid, having defeated Lesia Tsurenko in straight sets prior, owing to an injury in her right thigh. At the French Open, Kerber lost in the first round to Russian youngster Anastasia Potapova. That match, notably, was the first one played on the newly rebuilt Court Philippe Chatrier. Her form would improve on grass, however, as she started out with a semifinal run in Mallorca where she was the top seed. She followed that up with a runner-up finish in Eastbourne, where she lost to Karolína Plíšková, their fifth encounter in a championship match. However, at the Wimbledon Championships defending champion Kerber was shocked by lucky loser Lauren Davis in the second round. As a result of this defeat, she fell out of the top 10, and then parted ways with her coach Schüttler. Kerber's dip in form stretched through the US Open Series as she was inflicted with a four-match losing streak, including a second-round loss at the US Open in the hands of Kristina Mladenovic. After that defeat, Kerber stated in her post-match interview that she had not reserved plans to find a new coach nor hire former coach Torben Beltz. At the Pan Pacific Open, Kerber won consecutive matches for the first time in three months by seeing off Americans in Nicole Gibbs and Madison Keys to reach the semifinals, where she lost to Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in straight sets. In her closing two events of 2019, the Wuhan and China Opens, Kerber managed just one win, over Zhang Shuai in the opening round of the latter. She subsequently withdrew from the Luxembourg Open and the WTA Elite Trophy due to a leg injury, thus finishing the year as world No. 20. On 21 November, Kerber announced that she has hired former world No. 130 Dieter Kindlmann as her coach. Kerber started her 2020 season in Brisbane, her last appearance here coming back in 2017. However, she was bounced in the opening round by home star Samantha Stosur in two tiebreak sets. Next, at the Adelaide International, she beat Wang Qiang in straight sets to open her tournament here before retiring against eventual runner-up Dayana Yastremska due to a left hamstring injury. At the Australian Open, 17th seed Kerber made the fourth round here for the seventh time in her career, but was defeated by 30th seed Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in three sets. That was Kerber's last tournament appearance before the 2020 season went into a lockdown following the COVID-19 pandemic. In late July, Kerber reunited with her former coach, Torben Beltz, with whom she captured her first two Grand Slam titles. Her first appearance since the tour suspension was lifted came at the US Open where she lost to eventual semifinalist Jennifer Brady in the fourth round. She finished her season with back-to-back defeats at the Italian and French Opens, in the hands of Siniaková and Kaja Juvan, respectively. She would subsequently end the year ranked world No. 25, her lowest since 2011. Kerber opened her 2021 season in Melbourne, entering the Gippsland Trophy, a modified warm-up tournament as part of the 2021 Melbourne Summer Series. However, it was later discovered that her flight to Melbourne carried a COVID-19 infected passenger, forcing her into a mandatory and strict hotel quarantine for two weeks which severely limited her practicing opportunities besides preventing her from participating in the aforementioned tournament. The situation was, however, remedied with the creation of the Grampians Trophy. Seeded eighth, Kerber's run in this tournament returned wins over the likes of Kateřina Siniaková and Ons Jabeur before being defeated by Maria Sakkari in the quarterfinals. At the Australian Open, she crashed out in the opening round to fellow lefty Bernarda Pera in straight sets, citing her lack of preparedness from her strict quarantine. The ensuing months of 2021, until the French Open in late May would prove to be a tough one for Kerber as she netted in just six wins across seven tournaments played, and winning consecutive matches on just one occasion in the same stretch, at the Italian Open, where she beat Alizé Cornet and defending champion Simona Halep, the latter via retirement, before taking a loss in the hands of Jeļena Ostapenko. At the French Open, she was bounced at the first hurdle here for the fifth time in past six appearances, this time to Ukraine's Anhelina Kalinina in straight sets. Kerber's resurgence in 2021, however, did come, on the grass. After an early exit to Victoria Azarenka in Berlin, she won the title at the inaugural Bad Homburg Open, having need to come back from a set down in each of her quarterfinal and semifinal matches, against Amanda Anisimova and Petra Kvitová, respectively, to make her third final in a row on grass, and her first since Eastbourne two years ago. She defeated Siniaková in the final for her third title on grass, her first since Wimbledon in 2018 and the 13th of her career. Seeded 25th at Wimbledon, Kerber navigated her way past the likes of Nina Stojanović, Sara Sorribes Tormo, Aliaksandra Sasnovich and 20th seed Coco Gauff to reach the quarterfinals here for the fifth time in her career. She then saw off 19th seed Karolína Muchová to advance to her fourth semifinal appearance here. There, she lost to world No. 1 and eventual champion Ashleigh Barty in straight sets, despite having served for the second set. Kerber's first tournament of the year's US Open Series was the Cincinnati Masters, where she defeated Maria Sakkari in the first round in straight sets, before recording her first win over Elina Svitolina in seven meetings in the second round. She next defeated Jeļena Ostapenko, despite twice being a break down in the third set, before advancing to the semifinal after Petra Kvitová retired from their quarterfinal match. The quarterfinal match against Petra Kvitová was Angelique Kerber's 1000th match in her professional career. In the semifinal, she notched her second loss in straight sets to again, eventual champion Barty. As the 16th seed at the US Open, Kerber fought to take her campaign to the distance, but she was ultimately ousted in the round of 16, matching her performance from the preceding year. In a first-round thriller against Dayana Yastremska, Kerber was down a set and a break in the deciding set, but she was able to force a tiebreak after Yastremska was serving for the match; in the end, after dropping her serve just once in the tiebreak, she was able to take the match. Following a straight-set win over Anhelina Kalinina in the second round to avenge her loss in the French Open earlier in the year, she encountered Sloane Stephens, an opponent she had lost to on five prior occasions. Though Stephens took the first set, Kerber maintained her offensive tactics and won the match by taking the next two sets. The victory set her up for a match with Leylah Fernandez, who had just defeated defending champion Naomi Osaka; in a grueling three-set match that included a second set tiebreak, which saw Fernandez fight her way back into the match, Kerber lost the third set to end her road at the last Grand Slam of 2021. Kerber took on her last tournament of the year at the Indian Wells Masters. The defending finalist entered as the tenth seed and started her campaign with another grueling three-set match, this time in a rematch against Bad Homburg finalist Siniaková. After she lost the second set tiebreak, she was able to hold off Siniaková in the third set to take the match. She followed up the win with another three-set match that pit her against 2018 finalist Kasatkina; after decisively losing the second set, she saved break points when serving for the third set to win the match. Kerber then handed a straight-set loss to Ajla Tomljanović in the round of 16 to set up a first-time encounter with eventual champion Paula Badosa in the quarterfinals. Kerber dropped the first set and was down a double break in the second set but she saved match points to tie the set before Badosa broke her for a last time to win the match. Due to her success throughout the season, Kerber returned to the top 10 for the first time since July 2019, reaching No. 9 on 1 November 2021. Kerber started off the year having to cancel her preparations for the first Grand Slam of the year when a positive test for coronavirus forced her to skip Sydney. Then, in the first round of the 2022 Australian Open, she fell to Kaia Kanepi by a score of 4–6, 3–6. Kerber then withdrew from Dubai and lost 6–4, 3–6, 2–6 against Jil Teichmann in Doha. Kerber reached the 4th round for the 5th consecutive time at Indian Wells, defeating Zheng Qinwen and Daria Kasatkina. She lost 6–4, 2–6, 3–6 to eventual champion Iga Świątek. Kerber lost in Miami against eventual finalist Naomi Osaka in the 1st round, losing 2–6, 3–6. Kerber began the spring clay season at the Billie Jean King Cup, playing for Germany against Kazakhstan. She lost both singles ties to Yulia Putintseva and Elena Rybakina. In both encounters, She won the first set, but went on to lose in three sets. She proceeded to lose 6–3, 4–6, 4–6 to Anett Kontaveit in Stuttgart, withdraw from the Madrid Open citing a cold, and lose 1–6, 4–6 to 15th seed, Coco Gauff in Rome. In the week preceding Roland Garros, Kerber received a last minute wildcard in Strasbourg. Arriving with a six-match losing streak, she reached her 32nd career final defeating Diane Parry, Aliaksandra Sasnovich, Magda Linette, and Océane Dodin. In the final, Kerber defeated Kaja Juvan in a marathon match lasting 3 hours and 16 minutes to win her 14th career title. It was her first outdoor red clay title and her first clay title since her title defense at Stuttgart in 2016. With Kerber saving 2 match points and striking 83 winners to Juvan's 83, the match was considered one of the best matches of the year. In Paris, Kerber lost in the third round to Aliaksandra Sasnovich in straight sets. Kerber began the grass court season at Bad Homburg as the defending champion. She lost to Alizé Cornet in three sets. At Wimbledon, Kerber was unable to defend her semifinalist points from 2021 due to the Belarusian and Russian ban from Wimbledon, resulting in her ranking dropping to world No. 25; she nevertheless lost in the third round to Elise Mertens in straight sets, who made 14 unforced errors compared to Kerber's 28. On August 24th, she withdrew from the 2022 US Open after announcing her pregnancy, effectively ending her season. Unable to defend her semifinalist points from Cincinnati and her 4th round points from the US Open she won in 2021, alongside her 2021 BNP Paribas Open quarterfinal points dropping in October, Kerber finished the 2022 season ranked No. 103, her lowest year-end ranking since 2009. Kerber became unranked following Wimbledon in 2023. After a year and a half hiatus, Kerber returned to the tour at the 2024 United Cup in Australia as part of Team Germany. In her first match since Wimbledon 2022, Kerber lost to Jasmine Paolini in straight sets, 4–6, 5–7, but won her mixed doubles encounter against Lorenzo Sonego and Angelica Moratelli, partnering with Alexander Zverev for the first time since 2019. She proceeded to lose her succeeding singles matches to Caroline Garcia and Maria Sakkari in the round robin and quarterfinals, respectively, as well as her mixed doubles match against Team France. Despite this, Team Germany qualified for the semifinals against Australia where Kerber defeated Alja Tomljanovic in three sets, saving two match points in the process and scoring a critical match that allowed Team Germany to qualify for the final against Team Poland. With the win, she recorded her first win since Wimbledon in 2022 and her first win in Australia since 2021. In the final, Kerber lost in straight sets, 3–6, 0–6, against world No. 1 Iga Swiatek; Team Germany nevertheless went on to win the tournament after winning the final two matches. Due to the late conclusion in Sydney, Kerber withdrew from the Adelaide International. Kerber then headed to Melbourne, for the first time since 2022, with a protected ranking and lost to Danielle Collins in three sets, ending her Australian summer season. At Indian Wells, Kerber reached the fourth round, defeating Petra Martić, tenth seed Jeļena Ostapenko, her first top-10 win in more than two years since 2021, and 17th seed Veronika Kudermetova, before losing to Caroline Wozniacki. Kerber entered the 2024 Miami Open using her protected ranking, but lost in the first round to Sloane Stephens, a setback after a successful tournament at Indian Wells a week earlier. Kerber is a defensive baseliner, who has been noted for her speed, agility, athleticism, and footwork. She is known for her counterpunching style of play, extending rallies to attempt to draw an error out of more aggressive players, and to be able to hit low-risk winners with ease. Kerber has powerful groundstrokes, allowing her to hit winners from frequently defensive positions. Her forehand is widely considered her most dangerous weapon, with her being able to hit powerful shots with disguise and speed; she is capable of hitting extreme angles with her forehand, which is responsible for many of the winners she accumulates on the court. Her forehand is hit with a short backswing, allowing her to flatten out her forehand, and generate considerable power. Her best shot is her forehand down-the-line. Kerber is known for hitting her backhand whilst squatting, allowing her to generate considerable power and to create sharp angles on the court; she typically utilises her backhand for defensive purposes, however. Her serve is considered her major weakness, rarely serving aces and hitting, on average, fewer service winners than many of her fellow players, with her first serve speed typically peaking at just 104 mph (167 km/h). Her second serve is a particular weakness, and is highly susceptible to attack, meaning that she rarely wins more than 50 percent of second serve points. Despite her weaknesses on serve, Kerber is proficient at defending her serve with her outstanding athleticism. Kerber, however, is one of the best returners on the WTA Tour, ranking consistently in the top 50 players based on percentage of return points won. Kerber experiences her greatest success when she plays with an aggressive mindset, despite her defensive playing style; her occasional slumps in form can be attributed to an over-reliance upon her defensive skills, and an unwillingness to play points aggressively. Kerber's favourite surface is grass, as the fast pace and low bounce afforded on grass courts suits her flat-hitting playing style, although she has had success on hard courts, as well. Kerber is currently based in the Polish town of Puszczykowo, a suburb of Poznań, where her maternal grandfather owns an indoor tennis facility. Kerber speaks German, Polish and English, and also holds dual German-Polish citizenship. She has competed for Germany throughout her career. In an interview, Kerber clarified that, despite strong Polish connection, she considers herself German: "I am German. I play for Germany, I grew up in Germany, and my heart beats for Germany"; however, another time she said: "my heart beats for Poland too". A huge football fan, Kerber has cited German club FC Bayern Munich as her favourite team. Kerber has frequently cited former German tennis player Steffi Graf as her childhood idol and her motivation for pursuing tennis. Kerber is Catholic, telling Emotion Magazine: "[F]aith is important to me... Christian values continue to shape me to this day. In difficult moments, faith in God is an anchor for me. Whereby faith has different forms for me and also comes into play in believing in oneself and one's own path". On August 24, 2022, Kerber announced that she was taking a break from tennis due to pregnancy. Bild reports the father of Kerber's child is Franco Bianco, manager of a sporting facility in Königstein im Taunus. She gave birth to a daughter in 2023. Kerber has endorsement deals with Adidas, her clothing and shoe sponsor, and Yonex, her racquet sponsor. Kerber uses a discontinued Yonex Vcore SI 100. In early 2015, she became global ambassador of Stuttgart car manufacturer Porsche. In late 2016 she signed a deal with insurance group Generali. In late 2016, she became beauty ambassador for the US cosmetics company Bare Minerals, a Shiseido brand. In 2017, she became the global brand ambassador for Australian health snack brand Slim Secrets and signed with both the Swiss luxury watchmaker Rolex and the software corporation SAP. Kerber has also been named ambassador for children's charity UNICEF. In August 2019, Kerber announced that she became a brand ambassador for Head and Shoulders Suprême. In November 2019, Kerber announced that she became a brand ambassador for Ole Lynggaard Copenhagen. In December 2019, she was named tournament ambassador of the inaugural Bad Homburg Open, which due to the COVID-19 pandemic, did not occur until 2021. Her portfolio of endorsements has made her the second highest-paid female athlete in the world in the annual Forbes list of 2017. Kerber has been coached in the past by Torben Beltz (2003—2004, 2011–2013, 2015–2017), Wim Fissette (November 2017–October 2018), Rainer Schüttler (November 2018–July 2019) and Dieter Kindlmann (November 2019–July 2020). In July 2020, she began working with Beltz once again, until they split in November 2021. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Kerber has received the following awards: WTA Player of the Year (2016) German Sportswoman of the Year (2016, 2018) US Open Sportsmanship Award (2016) ITF World Champion (2016) Nominated for the Laureus World Sports Award for Sportswoman of the Year (2016) Named among espnW's Impact25 (2016) Named among "Europe's 30 under 30" by Forbes (2017) World's second highest-paid female athlete by Forbes (2017) Nominated 2018 WTA Player of the Year "WTA Tennis English". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 23 December 2018. "Angelique Kerber" (in German). 3 July 2011. "Angelique Kerber, Niemka polskiego pochodzenia" (in Polish). 5 February 2016. "Angelique Kerber: Is this the beginning of the end?". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Angelique Kerber finds plenty right in going left". The Irish Times. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "Angelique Kerber Rankings History". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 3 July 2021. "Wimbledon 2011: Laura Robson's big win nets tie with Maria Sharapova". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 June 2011. "Tennis: Lisicki to face Rezai in final". Express Tribune. Retrieved 28 August 2011. "Angelique Kerber reaches quarterfinals". ESPN. Retrieved 5 September 2011. "KERBER BEATS PENNETTA IN US OPEN QUARTERFINALS". TENNIS. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Stosur beats Kerber to reach U.S. Open women's final". Reuters. Retrieved 11 September 2011. "Wozniacki eases into third round against Gajdosova". Irish Times. Retrieved 28 September 2011. "Bartoli sees off Stosur in straight sets". RTE. Retrieved 16 October 2011. "Pennetta cruises into Auckland Classic final". Stuff. Retrieved 6 January 2012. "Maria Sharapova: Brutal Draw Won't Keep Red-Hot Russian from Aussie Open Title". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 6 January 2012. "Fed Cup: Czech Republic 3, Germany 1", Taiwan News, 5 February 2012, retrieved 5 February 2012 "Kerber tops Sharapova in Paris", UPI, 10 February 2012, retrieved 10 February 2012 "Angelique Kerber wins Open GDF Suez", ESPN, 13 February 2012, retrieved 13 February 2012 "Azarenka demolishes Radwanska, Li goes out", China Daily, 15 March 2012, retrieved 15 March 2012 "Azarenka to meet Sharapova in Indian Wells final", Hindustan Times, 17 March 2012, retrieved 17 March 2012 "Angelique Kerber beats Caroline Wozniacki to take Copenhagen title", The Guardian, 15 April 2012, retrieved 15 April 2012 "Azarenka, Sharapova advance to Stuttgart semis", Sports Illustrated, 27 April 2012, retrieved 27 April 2012 "Li Na makes quarterfinals at Madrid Open", China Daily, 10 May 2012, retrieved 10 May 2012 "Angelique Kerber breaks into Top 10", Porsche Tennis, 19 May 2012, retrieved 19 May 2012 "Impressive Sharapova reaches Rome final", Chicago Tribune, 19 May 2012, retrieved 19 May 2012 "Kerber reaches French Open quarter-finals for first time", Reuters, 3 June 2012, retrieved 3 June 2012 "French Open 2012: Sam Stosur & Sara Errani into semis", BBC, 5 June 2012, retrieved 5 June 2012 "Andy Roddick and Tamira Paszek seal Eastbourne titles". BBC. Retrieved 23 June 2012. "Wimbledon 2012: Kim Clijsters bows out from special 'Disneyland'". BBC. 2 July 2012. "Wimbledon 2012: Angelique Kerber triumphs in all-German quarter-final". The Guardian. 3 July 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Wimbledon 2012: Agnieszka Radwanska beats Kerber in semi-final". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 July 2012. "Radwanska outplays Germany's Kerber in Wimbledon semi". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 5 July 2012. "Venus ousted by Angelique Kerber". ESPN. Retrieved 1 August 2012. "Serena, Victoria Azarenka move on". ESPN. Retrieved 2 August 2012. "China's Li beats Kerber to win Cincinnati title". Reuters. Retrieved 20 August 2012. "Venus Williams ousted early". ESPN. Retrieved 31 August 2012. "ERRANI BEATS KERBER FOR THIRD SLAM QF OF SEASON". TENNIS. Retrieved 3 September 2012. "Radwanska cruises past Kerber, advances to final". Taipei Times. Retrieved 29 September 2012. "Minus her best weapon, Serena wins first match since U.S. Open". SI. Retrieved 23 October 2012. "AZARENKA BATTLES PAST KERBER IN ISTANBUL". Eurosport. Retrieved 25 October 2012. "Li Na keeps WTA semifinals hope alive". China Daily. Retrieved 26 October 2012. "Short and sharp: Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova". Brisbane International. 5 January 2013. "Radwanska, Cibulkova to face off in Sydney final". USA Today. 10 January 2013. "Makarova wields Melbourne magic with Kerber win". Reuters. 20 January 2013. "Caroline Wozniacki, Maria Sharapova to face off in BNP final". Sports Illustrated. 16 March 2013. "WTA Miami: Maria Sharapova on a roll. Angelique Kerber loses to Sorana Cîrstea". Tennis World USA. 24 March 2013. "Monterrey Open: Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova beats top seed Angelique Kerber for third title". Sky Sports. 8 April 2013. "Germany beat Serbia 3-2, advance in Fed Cup". News18. 22 April 2013. "Sharapova beats Kerber to reach Stuttgart final". San Diego Union Tribune. 27 April 2013. "MADRID: IVANOVIC D. KERBER". TENNIS. 10 May 2013. "Svetlana Kuznetsova beats Angelique Kerber at French Open". SI. 2 June 2013. "Wimbledon 2013: Angelique Kerber beaten by Kaia Kanepi". BBC. 28 June 2013. "Rybarikova ousts Kerber in DC quarters". 9NEWS. 2 August 2013. "Williams and Azarenka progress". Express. 16 August 2013. "US Open 2013: Novak Djokovic cruises into last 16 in New York". BBC. 2 September 2013. "Kvitova defeats Kerber to win tennis Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo". Deutsche Welle. 28 September 2013. "Sizzling Serena cruises into Beijing semis". WTSP. 4 October 2013. "Angelique Kerber through to WTA Championships in Istanbul". BBC. 11 October 2013. "Williams eases past Kerber in WTA Championships". Reuters. 23 October 2013. "Li Na, Angelique Kerber win at WTA Championships". Yahoo!. 25 October 2013. "Victoria Azarenka makes life extremely difficult for herself en route to the Brisbane International semis". Courier Mail. 2 January 2014. "Tsvetana Pironkova wins Sydney International, beating Angelique Kerber for maiden WTA title". ABC News. 10 January 2014. "Pennetta enjoying Grand Slam success past 30". Hartford Courant. 19 January 2014. "Sharapova, Pavlyuchenkova into Open GDF semis". Arab News. 31 January 2014. "Germany beats Slovakia 3-0 in Fed Cup". Taiwan News. 9 February 2014. "LI SUFFERS FIRST LOSS OF SEASON TO QUALIFIER CETKOVSKA IN DOHA". TENNIS. 13 February 2014. "HALEP TOPS RADWANSKA; KERBER BEATS JANKOVIC IN DOHA SEMIS". TENNIS. 15 February 2014. "Halep confirms class with crushing of Kerber". The Star. 17 February 2014. "SERENA, SHARAPOVA TO MEET IN MIAMI SEMIFINALS". TENNIS. 25 March 2014. "Germany end Australia's Fed Cup hopes". The Guardian. 20 April 2014. "Top-seeded Angelique Kerber ousted". ESPN. 23 May 2014. "Bouchard blazes past Kerber into French Open quarters". Reuters. 1 June 2014. "Keys beats Kerber to conquer Eastbourne". ESPN. 21 June 2014. "Angelique Kerber fights back to dispatch Kirsten Flipkens". Wimbledon. 28 June 2014. "Maria Sharapova knocked out of Wimbledon by Angelique Kerber". The Guardian. 1 July 2014. "Eugenie Bouchard beats Angelique Kerber to reach Wimbledon semi-finals". The Guardian. 2 July 2014. "Williams, Ivanovic reach Bank of West quarters". Yahoo!. 1 August 2014. "Petkovic beats Venus Williams at Stanford". USA Today. 1 August 2014. "Serena storms past Petkovic into Stanford final". New Straits Times. 3 August 2014. "Serena Williams beats Angelique Kerber in Stanford final". BBC. 4 August 2014. "Venus Williams and Angelique Kerber play the match of the tournament at the Rogers Cup in Montreal". Yahoo!. 8 August 2014. "Novak Djokovic upset by Robredo at Cincinnati Open". News 18. 15 August 2014. "Swiss Bencic teen topples sixth seed Kerber". Reuters. 30 August 2014. "Ivanovic downs Kerber, to meet Wozniacki in Tokyo final". Reuters. 20 September 2014. "Kvitova ends Garcia's dream run to enter Wuhan semis". Reuters. 25 September 2014. "KVITOVA WINS THRILLER TO GUIDE CZECHS TO FED CUP GLORY". Fed Cup. 9 November 2014. "Svitolina fightback stuns Kerber". Brisbane International. 8 January 2015. "All-Czech final in Sydney". News24. 15 January 2015. "Seeds fall at first round of Australian Open". China Daily. 20 January 2015. "Australia's wait for Fed Cup title continues after defeat to Germany". The Guardian. 8 February 2015. "Top-seeded Bouchard, Kerber lose in Diamond Games second round". SI. 12 February 2015. "Serena Williams Beats 15-Year-Old Bellis 6-1, 6-1 In Miami". CBS Miami. 29 March 2015. "Angelique Kerber beats Andrea Petkovic to set up Charleston final against Madison Keys". ABC News. 12 April 2015. "Angelique Kerber rallies past Madison Keys to win Family Circle Cup". USA Today. 12 April 2015. "Vesnina and Pavlyuchenkova put Russia into Fed Cup final". Yahoo!. 20 April 2015. "Maria Sharapova shocked in Stuttgart second round by Angelique Kerber". The Guardian. 24 April 2015. "Angelique Kerber beats Caroline Wozniacki in Stuttgart final". BBC. 26 April 2015. "Muguruza advances to French Open 4th round; Suarez Navarro ousted". EFE. 29 May 2015. "Pliskova beats Mladenovic, Kerber ousts Lisicki to fill WTA final in Birmingham". Fox News. 20 June 2015. "Aegon Classic: Angelique Kerber wins title in Birmingham". BBC. 21 June 2015. "Muguruza claims Kerber upset". Irish Examiner. 4 July 2015. "Bank of the West Classic: Kerber beats Radwanska in slugfest". East Bay Times. 7 August 2015. "Kerber outlasts Pliskova to win Bank of the West Classic". The Mercury News. 9 August 2015. "Rogers Cup: Serena cruises past Petkovic, Halep edges past Kerber in quarters". First Post. 14 August 2015. "Withdrawals hit Cincinnati event as Bencic rolls on". Reuters. 19 August 2015. "Victoria Azarenka outlasts No. 11 Angelique Kerber in three sets". ESPN. 6 September 2015. "Wozniacki beats Kerber, advances to Pan Pacific semi-final". Yahoo!. 25 September 2015. "Muguruza to meet Venus in Wuhan final". The Star. 2 October 2015. "Radwanska a big step closer to S'pore". The Straits Times. 10 October 2015. "JANKOVIC WINS HONG KONG OPEN FOR 15TH WTA TITLE". TENNIS. 18 October 2015. "Kerber, Pennetta Qualify for Singapore, One Spot Remains". Tennis Now. 21 October 2015. "WTA Finals: Garbine Muguruza, Angelique Kerber take down Lucie Safarova, Petra Kvitova respectively". ABC News. 27 October 2015. "Victoria Azarenka wins Brisbane International with victory over Angelique Kerber". ABC News. 9 January 2016. "Sydney International: Angelique Kerber beats the heat in Sydney". Sydney Morning Herald. 11 January 2016. "Australian Open: Angelique Kerber beats fellow German Annika Beck to reach quarter-finals". ABC News. 25 January 2016. "Angelique Kerber beats Victoria Azarenka to reach Australian Open semi-final". The Guardian. 27 January 2016. "Australian Open: Johanna Konta beaten by Angelique Kerber". BBC. 28 January 2016. "Angelique Kerber stuns Serena Williams to clinch Australian Open title". The Guardian. 30 January 2016. "Australian Open 2016: Angelique Kerber faced match point in first round clash against Misaki Doi". Sydney Morning Herald. 31 January 2016. "BENCIC INSPIRES SWITZERLAND INTO THE LAST FOUR". Fed Cup. 7 February 2016. "Zheng Saisai knocks Angelique Kerber out of Qatar Open". ESPN. 24 February 2016. "Angelique Kerber ousted from Indian Wells by Denisa Allertova". ESPN. 13 March 2016. "Azarenka avenges Kerber loss to reach Miami final". Reuters. 1 April 2016. "Kerber retires; Stephens, Vesnina make Charleston final". Daily Herald. 9 April 2016. "Germany beats Romania in Fed Cup World Group playoff". SI. 17 April 2016. "Qualifier Siegemund upsets Radwanska in Stuttgart; Kerber defeats Kvitova". TENNIS. 23 April 2016. "Kerber ends Siegemund fairytale to defend Stuttgart title". Reuters. 24 April 2016. "Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber loses to Kiki Bertens in Paris". The Guardian. 24 May 2016. "Kerber loses her title as upsets continue in Birmingham". SI. 17 June 2016. "Wimbledon 2016: Serena Williams beats Angelique Kerber to win 22nd Grand Slam". BBC. 9 July 2016. "Injury forces top-seeded Angelique Kerber to quit Swedish Open". USA Today. 21 July 2016. "Venus Williams eliminated by Madison Keys in 3 sets". ESPN. 29 July 2016. "Halep downs Kerber in see-saw battle to reach Montreal final". Yahoo. 31 July 2016. "Jo Konta bows out of Rio 2016 with defeat by Angelique Kerber". The Guardian. 11 August 2016. "ANGELIQUE KERBER, MONICA PUIG TO PLAY FOR GOLD MEDAL AT RIO OLYMPICS". TENNIS. 13 August 2016. "Rio 2016: Puig overcomes Kerber to make Olympic history for Puerto Rico". Deustche Welle. 13 August 2016. "Angelique Kerber wastes chance to supplant Serena Williams at No. 1". USA Today. 21 August 2016. "Serena Williams and Kerber qualify for Tour finals". Reuters. 23 August 2016. "Kerber reaches U.S. Open quarters, closes in on No.1 slot". Reuters. 5 September 2016. "Backed by her belief, Kerber finds solution to Vinci's complex game to reach semifinals". SI. 6 September 2016. "ANGELIQUE KERBER DEFEATS CAROLINE WOZNIACKI TO REACH US OPEN FINAL AND TAKE NO. 1 SPOT". ESPN. 9 September 2016. "New No. 1, New US Open Champ: Kerber tops Pliskova". US Open. 10 September 2016. "Tennis - World number one Kerber knocked out by Kvitova in Wuhan". Reuters. 28 September 2016. "Svitolina too good for Kerber in Beijing, Halep outclassed". beIN Sports. 6 October 2016. "GAVRILOVA STUNS WORLD NO. 1 KERBER AT HONG KONG OPEN". Eurosport. 14 October 2016. "Dominika Cibulkova stuns Angelique Kerber to seal WTA Finals title". The Guardian. 30 October 2016. "Ash Barty gives world No1 a big scare during Brisbane International comeback". The Guardian. 4 January 2017. "Top-ranked Kerber loses to Svitolina in Brisbane quarterfinals". The Oakland Press. 5 January 2017. "Johanna Konta into Sydney quarters as world No1 Angelique Kerber crashes out". The Guardian. 10 January 2017. "Defending Australian Open champion Angelique Kerber survives scare". The Guardian. 16 January 2017. "Australian Open 2017: Champion Angelique Kerber loses to Coco Vandeweghe". BBC. 22 January 2017. "Elina Svitolina to face Caroline Wozniacki in Dubai final". ESPN. 25 February 2017. "Indian Wells Masters: Angelique Kerber, World No 1 in waiting, dumped out by Elena Vesnina". Firstpost. 15 March 2017. "Venus downs Kerber to set up Konta clash in Miami". New Straits Times. 30 March 2017. "Kerber denied again by Pavlyuchenkova in Monterrey final". Reuters. 10 April 2017. "KERBER CALLS LOSS TO MLADENOVIC ONE OF HER WORST MATCHES IN MONTHS". TENNIS. 28 April 2017. "Top-ranked Kerber loses to Svitolina in Brisbane quarterfinals". Eurosport. 11 May 2017. "French Open 2017: Angelique Kerber loses to Ekaterina Makarova in first round". BBC. 28 May 2017. "Two matches, a tumble and tears but Konta past world No1 Kerber at Eastbourne". The Guardian. 30 June 2017. "Wimbledon 2017: Garbine Muguruza beats Angelique Kerber in the last 16". BBC. 10 July 2017. "US Open champion Angelique Kerber loses in first round to Naomi Osaka". The Guardian. 29 August 2017. "Angelique Kerber ousts local favorite Naomi Osaka at Pan Pacific". ESPN. 18 September 2017. "Kerber defeats Pliskova to reach Tokyo semifinal". WTA Tennis. 22 September 2017. "Pavlyuchenkova stuns Kerber in Tokyo thriller". WTA Tennis. 23 September 2017. "Kerber grounds Osaka again to begin week in Beijing". WTA Tennis. 30 September 2017. "Pavlyuchenkova powers past Kerber in Zhuhai". WTA Tennis. 31 October 2017. "Tennis: Barty shocks Kerber to reach Zhuhai semis". The Straits Times. 2 November 2017. "Kerber announces Wim Fissette as new coach". WTA Tennis. 16 November 2017. "Swiss precision lands third Hopman Cup title". Hopman Cup. 6 January 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Top 5 WTA 2018 Matches (No.5): Kerber stops Safarova in Sydney". WTA Tennis. 12 November 2018. "Unstoppable Kerber steams past Venus in Sydney". WTA Tennis. 9 January 2018. "Kerber beats Barty to claim Sydney title". WTA Tennis. 13 January 2018. "ANGELIQUE KERBER SMASHES MARIA SHARAPOVA TO MAKE FOURTH ROUND". Eurosport. 20 January 2018. "Kerber shakes off tricky Hsieh". Australian Open. 22 January 2018. "Australian Open: Angelique Kerber beats Madison Keys to reach semi-finals". ABC News. 24 January 2018. "Halep saves match points, ousts Kerber in epic Aussie SF". WTA Tennis. 25 January 2018. "Ranking Movers: Wozniacki leads the pack, Mertens making moves". WTA Tennis. 29 January 2018. "Wozniacki survives Kerber in classic, retains No.1 ranking". WTA Tennis. 16 February 2018. "Svitolina solves Kerber again, returns to Dubai final". WTA Tennis. 23 February 2018. "Angelique Kerber ends Elena Vesnina's title defence in Indian Wells to reach fourth round". Sport360. 13 March 2018. "Kasatkina 'keeps calm' to overcome Kerber at Indian Wells". WTA Tennis. 15 March 2018. "Sloane Stephens cracks world top 10 with Miami Open semi-final run". TNIE. 28 March 2018. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. "Kvitova outplays Kerber to send Czechs into Fed Cup final". Reuters. 22 April 2018. "Kerber triumphant in Stuttgart return, surges past Kvitova". WTA Tennis. 25 April 2018. "Stuttgart Open: Angelique Kerber, Garbine Muguruza out due to injuries; Jelena Ostapenko reaches quarter-finals". Firstpost. 27 April 2018. "Svitolina scores sixth straight Kerber win to return to Rome SF". WTA Tennis. 18 May 2018. "Kerber edges Bertens to reach Week 2 at Roland Garros". WTA Tennis. 2 June 2018. "RUTHLESS KERBER OVERWHELMS GARCIA". Roland Garros. 4 June 2018. "Halep overhauls Kerber in Paris quarterfinal comeback". WTA Tennis. 6 June 2018. "Riske completes darkness-delayed upset over Kerber in Mallorca". WTA Tennis. 20 June 2018. "Wozniacki saves match point in Kerber win at Eastbourne". 29 June 2018. Retrieved 29 June 2018. "Kerber cruises past Osaka to make Wimbledon fourth round". WTA Tennis. 7 July 2018. "KERBER KEEPING PERSPECTIVE AS SEEDS CONTINUE TO TUMBLE". Roland Garros. 9 July 2018. "Wimbledon: Angelique Kerber forced to work by Daria Kasatkina". Irish Times. 10 July 2018. "Kerber roars back into Wimbledon final after Ostapenko victory". WTA Tennis. 12 July 2018. "Kerber easily beats record-chasing Williams to win first Wimbledon title". CNN. 14 July 2018. "Cornet shocks Kerber in Montréal upset". WTA Tennis. 8 August 2018. "Keys aces Kerber test to reach Cincinnati quarterfinals". WTA Tennis. 16 August 2018. "Cibulkova knocks out Kerber in US Open third-round upset". WTA Tennis. 1 September 2018. "Angelique Kerber secures second singles berth for 2018 WTA Finals in Singapore". WTA Tennis. 10 September 2018. "Kerber falls to Barty on day of upsets in Wuhan". WTA Tennis. 26 September 2018. "'Proud' Zhang Shuai soars to Kerber upset in Beijing". WTA Tennis. 4 October 2018. "Bertens battles past Kerber in Singapore stunner". WTA Tennis. 22 October 2018. "Resilient Kerber overcomes Osaka in Singapore classic". Malay Mail. 24 October 2018. "Stephens stops Kerber to complete Singapore semifinal lineup". WTA Tennis. 26 October 2018. "Angelique Kerber on new coach Rainer Schüttler: 'It all starts with me'". Deutsche Welle. 21 November 2018. "Hopman Cup: Roger Federer & Belinda Bencic retain title for Switzerland". BBC. 5 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "'It was worth the wait' – Kvitová shines to beat Kerber in Sydney". 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Major milestone: Kerber wins 100th match at Slams". Australian Open. 16 January 2019. Retrieved 16 January 2019. "Australian Open 2019: Angelique Kerber celebrates 31st birthday with third-round demolition of Kimberly Birrell". Firstpost. 18 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019. "Collins stuns Kerber to make quarters". Australian Open. 20 January 2019. Retrieved 20 January 2019. "Mertens holds off Kerber for biggest final in Doha". WTA Tennis. 15 February 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2019. "Hsieh springs surprise on Kerber to reach Dubai QF". WTA Tennis. 20 February 2019. Retrieved 20 February 2019. "Venus Williams falls to Angelique Kerber in Indian Wells quarterfinals". Desert Sun. 15 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Angelique Kerber has BNP Paribas Open breakthrough, advances to first Indian Wells final". Desert Sun. 16 March 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Wildcard Bianca Andreescu, 18, shocks Angelique Kerber to win Indian Wells". The Guardian. 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Kerber to victorious Andreescu: 'You're the biggest drama queen ever'". CBC. 23 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "Monterrey Open: Victoria Azarenka beats Angelique Kerber to reach first final for three years". BBC. 7 April 2019. Retrieved 7 April 2019. "Blistering Bertens quells Kerber to reach Stuttgart semifinals". WTA Tennis. 26 April 2019. Retrieved 14 May 2019. "Kerber out of Madrid with right ankle injury". WTA Tennis. 7 May 2019. Retrieved 14 May 2019. "'French Open: Angelique Kerber suffers shock first-round defeat". BBC. 26 May 2019. Retrieved 30 May 2019. "'Challenge accepted' - Russian teen Potapova revels in Kerber upset at French Open". WTA Tennis. 26 May 2019. Retrieved 30 May 2019. "Bencic knocks out top seed Kerber, gets Kenin in Mallorca final". WTA Tennis. 22 June 2019. Retrieved 22 June 2019. "Pliskova soars past Kerber to second Eastbourne title: 'I didn't do much wrong today'". WTA Tennis. 29 June 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "'It's honestly a dream being here': Davis downs defending champ Kerber in Wimbledon shocker". WTA Tennis. 4 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Wimbledon 2019: Angelique Kerber out; Ashleigh Barty & Petra Kvitova through". 4 July 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2019. "Kerber ends coaching partnership with Rainer Schuettler: 'It's the right time for a fresh start'". WTA Tennis. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019. "Mladenovic ousts former champ Kerber in US Open first round". WTA Tennis. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "Press Conference: Angelique Kerber, Round 1". US Open. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "'Going deeper in the tournament I feel more comfortable' – Pavlyuchenkova doubles up, beats Kerber to reach Osaka final". WTA Tennis. 21 September 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "'Kerber squeaks past Zhang in tricky Beijing opener". WTA Tennis. 29 September 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "Kerber announces new coach for 2020". Tennis Majors. 21 November 2019. Retrieved 21 November 2020. "'It's funny – this is the way I want to be all the time' – Stosur holds nerve to stun Kerber in Brisbane opener". WTA Tennis. 6 January 2020. "Yastremska moves past injured Kerber in Adelaide". WTA Tennis. 15 January 2020. "Pavlyuchenkova edges Kerber in nailbiter to make Australian Open quarters". WTA Tennis. 27 January 2020. "WTA suspends tour until 2 May amid coronavirus outbreak". The Guardian. 16 March 2020. "Kerber seeking to recapture top form with Beltz". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Jennifer Brady has gone from under-the-radar to contender at the 2020 US Open". ESPN. 6 September 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2020. "Rome Masters Kerber bows out Rublev advances". The Hindu. 15 September 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2020. "Juvan claims first Roland Garros victory with Kerber stunner". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Melbourne Summer Series kicks off on Sunday". ausopen.com. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "47 Australian Open players forced into quarantine after COVID-19 cases detected on flights". www.abc.net.au. 16 January 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Sakkari, Brady among quarterfinal winners at Grampians Trophy". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Angelique Kerber feels effects of quarantine in early Australian Open exit". The Guardian. 8 February 2021. "Kerber, Ostapenko and Tomljanovic finish first round after Rome rain". WTA Tennis. 11 May 2021. "SIMONA HALEP SUFFERS FRENCH OPEN SCARE AS INJURY FORCES ROME WITHDRAWAL AGAINST ANGELIQUE KERBER". Eurosport. 13 May 2021. "Italian Open 2021: Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal Advance to Quarterfinals". Bleacher Report. 13 May 2021. "Ukraine's red-hot Kalinina causes first upset at Roland-Garros with Kerber win". Tennis Majors. 30 May 2021. "Azarenka maintains Kerber mastery, Muguruza withstands Rybakina in Berlin". WTA Tennis. 17 June 2021. "Kerber salutes in Bad Homburg debut". WLM Tennis. 27 June 2021. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "Angelique Kerber, Petra Kvitova to meet in Bad Homburg semi-finals". Sport24. 25 June 2021. "Bad Homburg Open: Angelique Kerber downs Petra Kvitova on grass to reach final". Firstpost. 26 June 2021. "Kerber triumphs on home soil in Bad Homburg for 13th career title". WTA Tennis. 26 June 2021. "Tennis: Kerber overcomes slow start to down Wimbledon debutant Stojanovic". The Straits Times. 30 June 2021. "Kerber battles past Sorribes Tormo in three-hour thriller". Reuters. 2 July 2021. "Kerber shines after rain to beat Sasnovich and reach Wimbledon fourth round". Reuters. 3 July 2021. "ANGELIQUE KERBER KEPT COCO GAUFF ON THE WRONG FOOT, AND REACHED HER FIRST SLAM QUARTERFINAL SINCE HER 2018 WIMBLEDON TITLE RUN". TENNIS. 5 July 2021. "Former champ Kerber, top seed Barty sweep into Wimbledon semis". WTA Tennis. 6 July 2021. "Angelique Kerber's resurgence fittingly comes at Wimbledon". ESPN. 6 July 2021. "World No.1 Barty steers past former champ Kerber to reach Wimbledon final". WTA Tennis. 8 July 2021. "Kerber beats Sakkari; Badosa saves five match points to win in Cincinnati". Women's Tennis Association. 17 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Osaka overcomes Gauff in three sets; Kerber, Barty win in Cincinnati". Women's Tennis Association. 18 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Kerber triumphs in thriller over Ostapenko, Barty routs Azarenka in Cincinnati". Women's Tennis Association. 19 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Barty wins battle of Slam champions over Krejcikova in Cincinnati; to meet Kerber as Kvitova retires". Women's Tennis Association. 20 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Barty bests Kerber in Cincinnati to reach sixth final of season". Women's Tennis Association. 21 August 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. Cantrell, Cindy (30 August 2021). "Former champ Angelique Kerber defeats Dayana Yastremska in opener". US Open. Retrieved 25 October 2021. Maciel, Clair (2 September 2021). "Angelique Kerber takes routine win, sets up clash with Sloane Stephens". US Open. Retrieved 25 October 2021. Sode, Scott (3 September 2021). "Kerber beats Stephens in battle of former US Open champions". US Open. Retrieved 25 October 2021. di Costanzo, Diane (5 September 2021). "Canadian teen Leylah Fernandez foils Angelique Kerber in Round 4". US Open. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Andreescu makes triumphant Indian Wells return as Golubic stuns Sakkari, Kerber advances". Women's Tennis Association. 10 October 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Kerber overcomes Kasatkina in Indian Wells; Kontaveit ends Andreescu's reign". Women's Tennis Association. 11 October 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Jabeur sets up quarterfinal clash with Kontaveit; Kerber dominates in Indian Wells". Women's Tennis Association. 13 October 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2021. John, Andrew L. (15 October 2021). "BNP Paribas Open: Paula Badosa playing in Indian Wells for first time, reaches semifinals". The Desert Sun. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Giant-killer Kanepi back on the prowl | AO". ausopen.com. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Mesic, Dzevad (11 February 2022). "Angelique Kerber withdraws from Dubai". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Doha: Teichmann claims second straight win over Kerber in three sets". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Swiatek claims comeback win over Kerber in Indian Wells". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Osaka eases by Kerber to advance at Miami Open". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Kontaveit ekes past two-time champion Kerber in Stuttgart". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Mesic, Dzevad (27 April 2022). "Anett Kontaveit, Angelique Kerber withdraw from Madrid". Tennis World USA. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Coco Gauff extends Angelique Kerber's losing run as Leylah Fernandez and Simona Halep also advance at Italian Open". Eurosport. 9 May 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Kerber outlasts Juvan in longest final of season to clinch Strasbourg". "Top matches of 2022: Krejcikova hands Swiatek rare loss". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Saturday (AEST), Angelique Kerber crashed out at the third round of the French Open as Aliaksandra Sasnovich claimed another scalp on. "Sasnovich bundles Kerber out of French Open". beIN SPORTS. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Bad Homburg: Cornet hits 38 winners to end Kerber's title defense". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Maria upsets Sakkari; Mertens ousts Kerber in Wimbledon third round". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Angelique Kerber on Instagram: "I really wanted to play the @usopen but eventually I decided that two against one just isn't a fair competition..."". "New-mom Angelique Kerber reveals 'dream' comeback date after giving birth". Tennis365. 27 June 2023. "Angelique Kerber's comeback plans revealed & German hires Emma Raducanu's ex-coach". Tennis World USA. 7 September 2023. "Djokovic, Swiatek Headline New-Look United Cup". United Cup. 19 October 2023. Staff, ATP/WTA. "Alexander Zverev does double duty to lead Germany to United Cup final | United Cup | Tennis". United Cup. Retrieved 8 January 2024. Staff, ATP/WTA. "Germany rallies, stuns Poland for United Cup title | United Cup | Tennis". United Cup. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "The United Cup effect as Angelique Kerber and Ajla Tomljanovic withdraw from Adelaide International". Tennisuptodate.com. 7 January 2024. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Takeaways: Collins tops Kerber at Australian Open to set Swiatek showdown". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Kerber upsets Ostapenko in Indian Wells for first Top 10 win since 2021". WTA Tennis. 8 March 2024. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "Stephens celebrates birthday with win over Kerber in Miami". WTA Tennis. 20 March 2024. Retrieved 20 March 2024. "Wimbledon 2018: Angelique Kerber's athleticism told in final victory over Serena Williams". The Independent. 14 July 2018. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2020. Kane, David (19 June 2020). "Kerber aims to grow German tennis with grass court warm-ups". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Agnieszka Radwanska, Angelique Kerber and the Polish Fed Cup Connection!". Tennis World USA. 28 September 2016. "About". Angelique-kerber.de. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Who is Angelique Kerber". NBCOlympics.com. Retrieved 13 June 2020. "Angelique Kerber zwyciężczynią Australian Open". Przegląd Sportowy. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2016. "Kerber clarifies that, despite a strong Polish connection, she considers herself German". Tennis.com. 5 February 2016. Retrieved 14 August 2016. "Angelique Kerber: Gram dla Niemiec, ale moje serce bije też dla Polski". Głos Wielkopolski. Retrieved 15 January 2017. "Bundesliga clubs hail Australian Open winner Angelique Kerber | bundesliga.com". bundesliga.com – the official Bundesliga website. Retrieved 29 June 2018. "Angelique Kerber inspired to US Open glory by Steffi Graf". Sky Sports. 11 September 2016. "Angelique Kerber Wishes Steffi Graf on Her 50th Birthday". Tennis World USA. 10 June 2019. "Angelique Kerber im Interview: 'Still sitzen war noch nie mein Ding'" by Ulrike Bremm emotion.de (May 8, 2022); retrieved August 25, 2022 in German "Angelique Kerber to take break from tennis for 'best possible reason' after announcing pregnancy ahead of US Open". eurosport.com. Eurosport. 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. "Angelique-Kerber ist Schwanger. Franco Bianco ist Der Geheimnisvolle Vater?" Bild.de (August 24, 2022) in German "Kerber announces birth of daughter Liana". WTA Tennis. 28 February 2023. "Angelique Kerber – Timeline". Facebook. Retrieved 18 July 2016. "For Tennis Star Angelique Kerber, Sponsorship Millions Beckon". Forbes. 30 October 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2017. "bareMinerals". bareMinerals. Retrieved 22 June 2017. "The 'Secrets' Out – International Sporting Star Angelique Kerber Partners with Australian Brand". Yahoo! Finance. "Rolex TV Commercial, 'One to Watch' Featuring Angelique Kerber". iSpot. "SAP Welcomes Angelique Kerber as Brand Ambassador". 20 April 2017. "Kerber named as UNICEF ambassador". WTA. "Angelique Kerber". www.facebook.com. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "Angelique Kerber on Instagram: "Incredibly proud to call myself part of the @OleLynggaardCopenhagen family for the years to come ..."". Instagram. Archived from the original on 26 December 2021. Retrieved 1 May 2020. Schueller, Sarah (12 December 2019). "ANGELIQUE KERBER IS TOURNAMENT AMBASSADOR – Bad Homburg Open". Bad Homburg Open. Retrieved 1 May 2020. "Serena Williams Heads The Highest-Paid Female Athletes 2017". Forbes. "Kerber: WTA Player of the Year". WTA Tennis. 21 October 2016. "Wahl – Ergebnisse". Sportler des Jahres (in German). ""Sportlerin des Jahres 2018": Angelique Kerber". Sportler des Jahres (in German). E.J. Crawford (8 September 2016). "Kerber named top sportswoman". US Open. "Murray and Kerber named 2016 ITF World Champions". International Tennis Federation. 13 December 2016. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Kerber scores Laureus Award nomination". WTA Tennis. "espnW unveils 2016 IMPACT25 honorees for Woman of the Year consideration". ESPN. 7 December 2016. "World No.1 Kerber named among Forbes' 30 Under 30". WTA Tennis. Natalie Robehmed; Madeline Berg (eds.). "Forbes 30 under 30 Europe: Entertainment". Forbes. Kurt Badenhausen (14 August 2017). "Serena Williams heads the highest-paid female athletes 2017". Forbes. "WTA Player Awards 2018: nominations". WTA Tennis. 8 October 2018. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Angelique Kerber. Official website (in English, German, and Polish) Angelique Kerber at the Women's Tennis Association Angelique Kerber at the International Tennis Federation Angelique Kerber at the Billie Jean King Cup Angelique Kerber at Wimbledon Angelique Kerber at Olympics.com Portals:  Biography  Tennis  Sports  Germany