Noel Thomas David Gallagher (born 29 May 1967) is an English musician, singer and songwriter. He was the primary songwriter, lead guitarist and co-lead vocalist of the rock band Oasis until their split in 2009. After leaving Oasis, he formed Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds. He is one of the most successful songwriters in British music history, as the writer of eight UK number-one singles and co-writer of a further number one, as well as the sole or primary writer of ten UK number-one studio albums. He is widely considered to be one of the most influential songwriters in the history of British rock music, cited by numerous major subsequent artists as an influence. Gallagher began playing the guitar at the age of twelve, and became a roadie and technician for Inspiral Carpets when he was 21. He learnt that his younger brother Liam had joined a band called the Rain, which eventually became Oasis; Liam invited him to join the group as manager. After rejecting the offer, Gallagher agreed to join the band, on the condition that he would take creative control of the group and become its sole songwriter and lead guitarist. The band's debut album, Definitely Maybe (1994), was a widespread critical and commercial success. Their second album, (What's the Story) Morning Glory? (1995), reached the top of the album charts in many countries, and their third studio album, Be Here Now (1997), became the fastest-selling album in UK chart history. Britpop eventually declined in popularity, and Oasis failed to revive it, though their final two albums, Don't Believe the Truth (2005) and Dig Out Your Soul (2008), were hailed as their best efforts in over a decade. In August 2009, following an altercation with his brother, Gallagher announced his departure from Oasis. He went on to form Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds, with whom he has released four studio albums. Oasis's time was marked by turbulence, especially during the peak of Britpop, during which Gallagher was involved in several disputes with Liam; their conflicts and wild lifestyles regularly made tabloid headlines. The band notably had a rivalry with fellow Britpop band Blur. Gallagher himself was often regarded as a pioneer and spearhead of the Britpop movement. Many have praised his songwriting, with Beatles producer George Martin calling him "the finest songwriter of his generation". Conversely, he was voted the most overrated guitarist of the last millennium in a 1999 poll, and the ninth-most-overrated ever in a 2002 listener survey. He cited being named the most overrated guitarist of the last millennium as the accolade he most enjoyed receiving. Noel Thomas David Gallagher was born on 29 May 1967 in the Longsight area of Manchester, to Irish Catholic parents Peggy (née Sweeney) and Thomas Gallagher. Aside from Liam, he also has an older brother named Paul. Shortly after Liam's birth in 1972, the family moved to Ashby Avenue and then Cranwell Drive in the Manchester suburb of Burnage. As the eldest child, Paul was given his own bedroom while Noel had to share his bedroom with Liam. Described as "the weirdo in the family" by Liam, he was known to be a daydreamer and a loner who was often reclusive due to his unhappy childhood. Both he and Paul were beaten regularly by their father, who was an alcoholic. In the documentary Supersonic, Noel quipped that his father "beat the talent into him", and that he had never acknowledged or discussed the abuse with a mental health doctor or in a therapeutic setting. Both he and Paul struggled with stammers which were made worse by their father's abuse and were resolved with weekly sessions in four years of speech therapy. In 1976, Peggy acquired legal separation from Thomas, and in 1982 she left him, taking her three sons with her and continuing to raise them alone as a single mother. As teenagers, the Gallagher brothers were regular truants, often getting into trouble with the police. When his mother took a job in the school canteen, Gallagher ensured that he stopped by to visit her during lunch before skipping the rest of the day. He was expelled from school at the age of 15 for allegedly throwing a "flour bomb" at a teacher, though he has since said that he did not do it and that he was merely present in the classroom when it happened. He used to hang around with the Manchester City hooligan firms Maine Line Crew, Under-5s, and Young Guvnors in the 1980s, and received six months' probation at the age of 14 for robbing a corner shop. It was during this period of probation, with little else to do, that he first began to teach himself to play guitar, a gift from his mother. He would play his favourite songs from the radio, and was particularly inspired by the debut of the Smiths on Top of the Pops in 1983, performing their single "This Charming Man". He later said that, from that day on, he "wanted to be Johnny Marr". He also appeared (and scored) for Manchester Gaelic football team CLG Oisín at Croke Park in Dublin in 1983. As teenagers, the Gallagher brothers maintained limited contact with their father and secured jobs in construction, but the relationship between father and sons continued to be tempestuous; Gallagher said, "Because we were always arguing, we'd still be working at nine o'clock every night." Having left his father's building company, he took a job at another building firm sub-contracted to British Gas. He sustained an injury when a heavy cap from a steel gas pipe landed on his right foot. Following a period of recuperation, he was offered a less physically demanding role in the company's storehouse, freeing up time for him to practise the guitar and write songs. He said he had written at least three of the songs on Definitely Maybe in this storehouse, including "Live Forever". He later called the storehouse "The Hit Hut" and claimed the walls were painted gold. Much of the late 1980s found Gallagher unemployed and living in a bedsit, occupying his time by using recreational drugs, writing songs, and playing the guitar. In May 1988, Gallagher met guitarist Graham Lambert of Inspiral Carpets during a Stone Roses show. The two became acquainted and Gallagher became a regular at Inspiral Carpets shows. When he heard singer Steve Holt was leaving the band, he auditioned to be the new vocalist. He was unsuccessful, but became part of the band's road crew for the next two years. He struck up a friendship with monitor engineer Mark Coyle over their love of the Beatles, and the pair spent soundchecks dissecting the group's songs. Around the time of his work with the Inspiral Carpets, Gallagher – who had already begun writing his own songs – answered an advert in a local newspaper asking for a collaborator and to record some demos. These recordings, featuring tracks such as 'Baj', 'What's It Got To Do With You?' and 'Womb To Tomb' were Gallagher's first steps into recording his own music. In 1991, Gallagher returned from an American tour with the Inspiral Carpets to find that his brother Liam had become a singer with a local band called the Rain. He attended one of their concerts at Manchester's Boardwalk but was unimpressed by the group's act. After rejecting an offer from Liam to be the band's manager, Gallagher agreed to join the band, on the condition that he would take creative control of the group and become its sole songwriter. According to another source, Noel told Liam and the rest of the group after having heard them play for the first time: "Let me write your songs and I'll take you to superstardom, or else you'll rot here in Manchester". His control over the band in its early years earned him the nickname "The Chief". In May 1993, the band heard that a record executive from Creation Records would be scouting for talent at King Tut's in Glasgow. Together, they found the money to hire a van and make the six-hour journey. When they arrived, they were refused entry to the club because no one notified the venue that Oasis had been added to the bill. The band eventually secured the opening slot and played a four-song set that impressed Creation founder Alan McGee. McGee then took the Live Demonstration tape to Sony America and invited Oasis to meet with him a week later in London, at which point they were signed to a six-album contract. Gallagher has since claimed that he only had six songs written at the time, and has put his success in the interview down to "bullshitting". McGee believes that when they met, Gallagher had fifty or so songs written, and merely lied about how prolific he had been following the contract. Richard Ashcroft was so impressed with Oasis during the time that he invited them to tour with his band the Verve as an opening act. Gallagher said he wrote Oasis' first single, "Supersonic", in "the time it takes to play the song". "Supersonic" was released in early 1994 and peaked at No. 31 on the official UK charts. The single was later followed by Oasis' debut album Definitely Maybe, which was released in August 1994 and was a critical and commercial success. It became the fastest-selling debut album in British history at the time and entered the UK charts at number one. Despite their rapidly growing popularity, Gallagher briefly left Oasis in 1994 during their first American tour. The conditions were poor, and he felt the American audience—still preoccupied with grunge and metal—did not understand the band. Gallagher stated that his early songs, especially "Live Forever", were written to refute grunge's pessimism. Tensions mounted between him and Liam, culminating in a fight after a disastrous gig in Los Angeles. Having effectively decided to quit the music industry, he flew to San Francisco without telling the band, management or the crew. It was during this time that Gallagher wrote "Talk Tonight" as a "thank you" for the girl he stayed with, who "talked him from off the ledge". He was tracked down by Creation's Tim Abbot, and during a trip by the pair to Las Vegas, Gallagher decided to continue with the band. He reconciled with his brother and the tour resumed in Minneapolis. Gallagher followed up the debut in 1995 with Oasis' first UK number-one single in "Some Might Say". This preceded their second album, (What's the Story) Morning Glory?, released later that year. Though it suffered initial critical apathy, the album became the second fastest-selling album ever in the UK, entering the UK album charts at number one and peaking at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart. The success of Oasis and his newfound fame and fortune were not lost on Gallagher, and both he and his brother became famous for their "rock and roll lifestyle". They drank heavily, abused drugs, fought fans, critics, peers, and each other, and made celebrity friends such as Ian Brown, Paul Weller, Mani, Mick Jagger, Craig Cash, Kate Moss and Johnny Depp. Gallagher spent extravagantly, buying various cars and a swimming pool despite the fact he can neither drive nor swim. He named his house in Belsize Park in London Supernova Heights (after the song "Champagne Supernova"), and his two cats "Benson" and "Hedges" after his favourite brand of cigarettes. Oasis went on to have greater success with their next two singles, "Wonderwall" and "Don't Look Back in Anger" charting at number two and number one respectively; the former becoming their sole top 10 hit in the US. Originally, Noel had wanted to take lead vocals on "Wonderwall", but Liam insisted on singing it. As compensation, Noel decided he would sing lead vocals on "Don't Look Back in Anger". 1995 also saw Gallagher play two songs for the charity album Help!: "Fade Away", accompanied by friend and Oasis fan Johnny Depp and Depp's then-girlfriend Kate Moss; and the Beatles' 1969 hit "Come Together", along with Paul Weller, Paul McCartney and others in a supergroup called Smokin' Mojo Filters. He began collaborating with the Chemical Brothers, Ian Brown, the Stands, the Prodigy and Weller, amongst others. Gallagher became so influential that a June 1996 NME article argued that "if Noel Gallagher, the most successful songwriter of his generation, champions a group, then said group are guaranteed more mainstream kudos and, quite possibly, more sales. And since Noel has taken to championing only five or six groups, then it's a powerful cabal he's promoting." The NME article grouped the bands Gallagher praised, including the Boo Radleys, Ocean Colour Scene, and Cast, under the banner of "Noelrock". John Harris typified these bands, and Gallagher, of "sharing a dewy-eyed love of the 1960s, a spurning of much beyond rock's most basic ingredients, and a belief in the supremacy of 'real music'". In March 1996, Gallagher and his brother Liam met their father again when the News of the World paid him to go to their hotel during a tour. He left for his room, later commenting "as far as I'm concerned, I haven't got a father. He's not a father to me, y'know? I don't respect him in any way whatsoever". In August 1996, Oasis sold out two nights at Knebworth, playing to over 250,000 fans. Following the worldwide success of Morning Glory?, Be Here Now (1997) became Oasis' most eagerly anticipated album to date. As with the previous two albums, all the tracks were written by Gallagher. After an initial blaze of publicity, positive critical reviews, and commercial success, the album failed to live up to long-term expectations, and public goodwill towards Be Here Now was short-lived. The album was ultimately regarded by many as a bloated, over-indulgent version of Oasis, which Gallagher has since blamed on the drug-addicted state and indifference of the band at the time. While the album was a recordbreaker, selling 813,000 copies in seven days, Gallagher has been critical of the album's popularity, saying: "Just because you sell lots of records, it doesn't mean to say you're any good. Look at Phil Collins." Gallagher began to have drug-induced panic attacks during this period. His depression and paranoia inspired the song "Gas Panic!", subsequently included on the 2000 album Standing on the Shoulder of Giants. He said he stopped using illicit drugs on 5 June 1998. Gallagher stated in 2001, "I liked drugs, I was good at them. But I'd had panic attacks for about a year and I stopped because I wanted to. After you make the decision, it is quite easy." Of the period between 1993 and 1998, Gallagher said, "I can hardly remember a thing." In a 2020 interview Gallagher said that once, during that period, he ended up in a hospital in Detroit for an overdose, and that the doctors didn’t understand the situation because of their misunderstanding for Gallagher’s accent. He told about the experience: "You know, imagine having the psychosis and going to a hospital and having to go through a metal detector and someone asking you what's wrong with you? And they don't understand the words you're saying because of your accent. They're just like, 'Okay, I'm gonna go get someone else. Hang on a minute'". After the hype surrounding the release of Be Here Now had started to wane, critical response to the band became calmer and more considered, leading to a media backlash. In 1997, Gallagher was criticised for attending a high-profile and well-publicised media party at 10 Downing Street, hosted by the new Prime Minister, Tony Blair, along with other celebrities and industry figures who had supported New Labour in the run-up to the general election. Liam and Blur's Damon Albarn declined their invitations, with Albarn commenting "Enjoy the schmooze, comrade". The perception of Gallagher as someone now mixing with politicians and a famous photograph of him sipping champagne with Blair conflicted with the "working class hero" status championed through songs such as "Up in the Sky". In 1999, rhythm guitarist Paul "Bonehead" Arthurs quit the band, with bassist Paul McGuigan following soon afterwards. As a result, the fourth studio album, Standing on the Shoulder of Giants, was recorded by just the Gallaghers and drummer Alan White, with Noel playing all guitar parts. He later commented on Bonehead's departure, "It's hardly Paul McCartney leaving the Beatles, is it?". After the recording sessions were completed, Gallagher selected Gem Archer to join in place of Bonehead. Later that year Alan McGee decided to leave Creation and sold the rest of his 51% stake in the label to Sony. Gallagher took this opportunity to set up Big Brother Recordings, which took over Oasis' distribution in the UK, but Sony imprint Epic Records continued to handle the band's international distribution. Around the time of the album's release, Andy Bell, formerly of Ride, joined the band as bassist. In 2001, Gallagher formed his label, Sour Mash Records, which released records by the likes of Shack and Proud Mary. The incorporation of the label followed Gallagher's debut as a producer, working with Proud Mary on their debut, The Same Old Blues. In 2003, Gallagher received songwriting credits from Girls Aloud's single "Life Got Cold" due to the song's guitar riff being similar to "Wonderwall". In late 2006, Gallagher toured the UK, Europe, Japan, America and Australia in a series of acclaimed intimate semi-acoustic gigs accompanied by Gem Archer and Terry Kirkbride on percussion. The show proved successful and a further series of sets took place in 2007. March 2007 saw Gallagher perform in Moscow—the first time an Oasis member has performed in Russia. Gallagher dismissed claims that he was planning to embark on a solo career. In early 2007, Gallagher joined the rest of Oasis to collect the "Outstanding Contribution to Music" Award at the Brit Awards 2007. Gallagher, along with the band recorded their seventh studio album between 2007 and the next year at Abbey Road Studios and in Los Angeles. At the end of the summer of 2008 the band began a tour that lasted 12 months. In March 2009, The Times in conjunction with iTunes released a selection of live recordings by Noel Gallagher taken from his semi-acoustic performance at the Royal Albert Hall on 27 March 2007 in aid of Teenage Cancer Trust. The Dreams We Have as Children features classic and rare tracks from the Oasis canon along with several cover versions of some of Gallagher's favourite artists. On 28 August 2009, Gallagher quit Oasis after a fight with his brother, Liam. Shortly before midnight on Friday, Gallagher posted a statement on his message board called "Tales from the Middle of Nowhere" on the band's website announcing his departure. Gallagher's first concerts without Oasis were announced on 1 February 2010 to be at London's Royal Albert Hall on 25 and 26 March 2010 for Teenage Cancer Trust. He was supported by the Courteeners and Plan B, respectively. Terry Kirkbride and Gem Archer joined him on-stage, as did Jay Darlington, all of whom Gallagher had previously worked with while he was still a member of Oasis. He played a mostly acoustic set, and played a variety of Oasis album tracks and B-sides. It was almost the same set he played at the Royal Albert Hall in 2007. Gallagher also joined friend Paul Weller onstage in London on 21 April 2010, and played the Oasis song "Mucky Fingers" and a song he co-wrote with Weller, "Echoes Round the Sun". Gallagher confirmed that he would be returning to the studio in August 2010 to record drums for an unnamed artist, later confirmed to be Paul Weller. He also denied rumours that he would be the Best Man for Russell Brand's marriage to Katy Perry. In August, it was mentioned on a UK Music blog, Sourmash Music, that Gallagher had been working with Liverpool group the Sand Band. Lead singer David McDonnell has been co-writing with Gallagher and are looking to collaborate on future solo projects together. On 24 November 2010, Miles Kane revealed that Gallagher sang on a track from his debut solo album titled My Fantasy. Kane also revealed that he will appear on Gallagher's forthcoming album, playing guitar. On 10 February 2011, Gallagher stated he had "not even started" his first solo record, despite Liam rumouring that he 'swiped' material from the Dig Out Your Soul sessions. "I am not recording new stuff, not just yet," he said to Talksport. "It'll be out when it's finished I guess. Well I've not even started it, so I don't know." Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds released a self-titled album on 17 October 2011; a collaboration album with Amorphous Androgynous was to be released in 2012 but has now been shelved indefinitely. He began touring in Dublin on 23 October 2011. The touring band announced for Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds comprised David McDonnell (guitar), Russell Pritchard (bass), Mikey Rowe (keyboards) and Jeremy Stacey (drums); McDonnell left during rehearsals and was replaced before the tour with Tim Smith who had played with Rowe and Stacey previously. On 20 July 2011, Gallagher released a 47-second trailer of his first single "The Death of You and Me". The video for the debut single was released on 25 July at 8:21 am (GMT). Following the self-titled debut, Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds released their second album Chasing Yesterday 2 March 2015. In 2016 Gallagher co-wrote "Birth of an Accidental Hipster" with Paul Weller for the Monkees. In June 2015, Gallagher confirmed he was working on a third High Flying Birds album, later announced to be titled Who Built the Moon? and released on 27 November 2017. On 9 September 2017, Gallagher along with his band served as the headline act of "We Are Manchester", a benefit concert to mark the reopening of Manchester Arena (following a terrorist attack there in May). On 2 May 2019, the band released "Black Star Dancing", the title track of their EP, which was released on 14 June 2019. On 5 August 2019, Gallagher's band released the title track "This Is The Place" for a second EP which was released on 27 September 2019. The same month, Gallagher toured the United States with the Smashing Pumpkins. Gallagher appeared on First We Feast's Hot Ones in October 2019. On 14 November 2019, Noel released a new single 'Wandering Star'. The single was released in promotion of his studio EP 'Blue Moon Rising'. The EP also featured reflex and 7" mixes of the title track, released on 6 March 2020. On 29 April 2021, Gallagher announced the release of the band's first greatest hits album, titled Back the Way We Came: Vol. 1 (2011–2021). The album is a double release, which along with 16 previously released tracks, features two new songs; "We're On Our Way Now" and "Flying On the Ground", the former of which was released as a single the same day as its announcement. It was released on 11 June 2021. In an interview with Apple Music, Gallagher said that Best of Bee Gees is one of his favourite albums and that it inspired the cover of Back The Way We Came. Seven days after its release, Back the Way We Came became Gallagher's 12th UK No. 1 album. In January 2023, Noel Gallagher announced that his fourth studio album with the High Flying Birds, titled Council Skies, would be released on 2 June. The album was previewed with the single "Easy Now", which is accompanied by a video starring Milly Alcock of House Of The Dragon fame. The album sees Gallagher pay homage to his formative years and Mancunian roots. He acknowledges that the title Council Skies was inspired from the title of a book by Sheffield artist Pete Mckee. February 2023 saw the announcement of a North American co-headline tour by the High Flying Birds and Garbage. The 24 date tour begins on 2 June in Auburn, WA and ends on 15 July in Boston. An autumn UK arena tour was announced in March 2023, playing venues in Hull, London, Birmingham, Cardiff, Leeds, Glasgow and Liverpool. In 2004, Gallagher featured on backing vocals on Ricky Gervais's "Free Love Freeway". In April 2009, Gallagher, along with Russell Brand, presented a one-off radio show on talkSPORT. On 10 September 2011, Gallagher alongside his long-time friend Matt Morgan, stood in for Dermot O'Leary on his BBC Radio 2 show. In March 2013, Gallagher, along with Brand, Morgan and Mr Gee, hosted a one-off radio show on XFM in aid of Teenage Cancer Trust. In an interview with NME in 2014 whilst promoting his solo debut album Everyday Robots, Damon Albarn hinted at a collaborative project with Gallagher. Despite the years of animosity during Blur and Oasis' respective heyday, Albarn said: "We're talking. It's not anything to get excited about yet. I mean, he's doing his thing. He's finishing a new record. I've got my record coming out, but the principle of us making music together is something, you know. It would be fair to say, we have discussed it at least once." In March 2015, Gallagher revealed that he was considering retirement from live shows within the following 10 years. He stated: "It's not fun being on a bus for six weeks in America. It's fine when you're young, but I'm almost 50." In February 2016, Gallagher and Morgan hosted a one-off show for Absolute Radio. In March 2017, Albarn's animated band Gorillaz released the track "We Got the Power" featuring Gallagher on backing vocals. On 29 May 2021, Gallagher stood in for Paul Gambaccini on BBC Radio 2's long running show Pick of the Pops. From 8 to 22 August 2021, Gallagher presented The Radio X Residency with Morgan every Sunday 7 pm to 9 pm throughout on Radio X. Gallagher is among those interviewed for the documentary film If These Walls Could Sing directed by Mary McCartney about the recording studios at Abbey Road. As of January 2024, Gallagher has shared plans to record a new, entirely acoustic album, adding that the upcoming project is dedicated "for the fans". Gallagher became engaged to his girlfriend Diane at the age of 18, but they never married and eventually separated. In 1988, he moved out of his family home to live with Louise Jones, whom he described as his "soulmate" and for whom he wrote "Slide Away". They had an on-again, off-again relationship before separating in June 1994, with Gallagher stating, "I don't think I'll ever get over it." In June 1997, Gallagher married Meg Mathews in Las Vegas. He had met her in 1994 through her roommate, MTV presenter Rebecca de Ruvo, whom he was dating at the time and whom he left for Mathews. Mathews gave birth to a daughter, Anaïs Gallagher, on 27 January 2000. Gallagher and Mathews divorced in January 2001 on the grounds of his adultery with Scottish publicist Sara MacDonald, whom he met at Ibiza nightclub Space in June 2000. After the divorce was finalised, Gallagher claimed that he had never actually been unfaithful and had only claimed to have cheated on Mathews to speed up the divorce process. Gallagher then began a relationship with MacDonald, and wrote "Waiting for the Rapture" about their meeting. They have two sons: Donovan Rory MacDonald Gallagher (born 22 September 2007) and Sonny Patrick MacDonald Gallagher (born 1 October 2010). They were married on 18 June 2011 in a private ceremony at the Lime Wood Hotel in New Forest National Park. His close friend Russell Brand was the best man. They lived in Hampshire. In January 2023, the couple announced that they would be divorcing after 11 years of marriage,citing; "When you get to your mid 50s you do come to some kind of crossroads in your life. It’s not uncommon for people who have been in long-term relationships to go their separate ways in their 50s." Gallagher said. Gallagher is friends with Gary Mounfield, Richard Ashcroft (to whom he dedicated the Oasis song "Cast No Shadow"), the Chemical Brothers, John Lydon, Steve Jones, Kasabian, Andy Nicholson, Ricky Hatton, Paul McCartney, Jamie Carragher, Chris Martin, Jonny Buckland, Johnny Marr, Damon Albarn, Morrissey, Bono, Paul Weller, Johnny Depp (who played slide guitar on the Oasis song "Fade In-Out"), and Kate Moss (who used to stay with him when she was visiting London). Around the time that actor Ewan McGregor found out he had been cast as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Gallagher (his next-door neighbour) challenged him to a battle with toy lightsabers in his garden the morning after a party. In 1998, Gallagher made a cameo appearance as himself in an episode of The Young Person's Guide to Becoming a Rock Star. He is also a regular on the digital radio sports show Talksport. In 2001, Gallagher was reported to have an estimated personal fortune of £25 million. In 2009, The Sunday Times Rich List estimated his and Liam's combined personal fortune at £52 million. Gallagher is a lifelong Manchester City F.C. supporter, admitting he "cried like a baby" when they won the 2011–12 Premier League. He is a friend of the team's former midfielder Joey Barton, as well as Italian striker Alessandro Del Piero, who described Gallagher as Italy's "lucky mascot" during the 2006 FIFA World Cup and appeared in the video for Oasis' "Lord Don't Slow Me Down". Gallagher and Kasabian lead guitarist Sergio Pizzorno took part in drawing teams for the FA Cup third round in 2011. Coincidentally, Pizzorno drew his hometown team Leicester City with Gallagher's Manchester City for the third round tie, in which both teams drew 2–2 and Manchester City proceeded to win 4–2 in the replay. He participated in the unveiling of Umbro-sponsored football kits with captain Vincent Kompany. In the advertising campaign, the two men are pictured wearing the new Manchester City home and away shirts for the 2012–13 season. Formerly, Kompany had introduced Gallagher to 80,000 fans during the Rock Werchter music festival in Belgium. After home matches, Manchester City regularly plays the Oasis song "Wonderwall", which was written by Gallagher. Gallagher also supports Scottish football team Celtic F.C.. The son of Irish immigrants, Gallagher has described himself as Irish. In an interview with the Irish Independent in 1994, Gallagher said, "I hope we're not seen as snotty English upstarts. We're really snotty Irish upstarts". Gallagher supports the Irish national football team and has said that he does not consider himself "to be English at all", but he did serve as an official ambassador for England's bid to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Gallagher is also a fan of the National Football League, noting in an ESPN interview, "I love the NFL. I don't have a team per se, but I'm into it. NFL comes on late night in the UK when I'm up. I love the colour and energy of it all. There's so many things going on in American football. It took me a while to get it, but I like it a lot." Gallagher stated in a 2006 radio interview with Russell Brand that he does not believe in "God or an all-guiding force". Despite this, many of his songs have mentioned God (such as "The Hindu Times" and "Little by Little"), and all the tracks he had contributed to Dig Out Your Soul (as well as the other bandmates' songs) have lyrics and references to God and other biblical terms. Dig Out Your Soul has been described by Gallagher as a "religious Armageddon". In 2009, he stated, "See, I don't know what I am. If I was an atheist I'd just write songs about not believing in God – but I don't know what I am." In 2017, he reaffirmed his lack of belief in God in an "Actually Me" segment for GQ. In 1999, Gallagher bought a home in Ibiza from Mike Oldfield for £2.5 million, but in 2008 Gallagher sold it, reportedly because James Blunt was a neighbour and he could not "stand living there in the knowledge that Blunt is nearby making terrible music". Gallagher was reportedly asked by Simon Cowell to be a judge on The X Factor after Dannii Minogue, Cheryl Cole, and Cowell himself declined to participate in series 8, but he declined. In 2012, Gallagher was among the British cultural icons selected by Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork, the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover, to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life. Gallagher was the primary songwriter in Oasis, and the sole songwriting contributor on the group's first three albums. He is often criticised for the praise he gives to his own songs, to which he quipped, "If you'd written 'Live Forever', you'd be walking to a different tune the next day too." He has often been accused by critics of plagiarising the music of his heroes, but he has maintained that outright homages in his music are intentional. In a 1996 Guitar World interview, he described himself as "a fan who writes songs" and stated, "I'm not saying, 'I'm the greatest songwriter in the world. Listen to me.' Usually, I'm saying, 'These are the greatest songwriters in the world. And I'm gonna put them all in this song.'" His response to critics on the topic of "blatantly" stealing riffs was, "No, I don't feel guilty. But you feel pissed off because you didn't do it first." He added, "When I'm making a record, I've always been of the notion that if a song sounds like T. Rex, well, fuck it, let's make it sound more like T. Rex! I know there's bands that might write something that sounds like the Smiths, and they'll go, 'Oh, it sounds like the Smiths, we've got to make it sound not like the Smiths.' If I'm writing a song and I say to myself, 'Oh, hey, it sounds like the Kinks,' then I'm going to turn it into a Kinks track." Gallagher has commented on his musical ability: I've got a certain style and I've got no control over what I write. I'm not technically proficient enough to attempt all kinds of music. I wish I could write a fucking record like Raw Power or Wish You Were Here, or have the ability of a musical chameleon. But fuck it, I'm not. I just write these songs because they're real to me and they're coming from a place of truth. And that's it. I don't give a shit about being different. I want to be the same. And that in itself makes me different. Comparing himself to other guitarists, Gallagher stated, "I can barely play like Peter Green, let alone fucking Jeff Beck." He also said, "I'm unfortunate enough that two of my best mates are Johnny Marr and Paul Weller. Those two are virtuosos to me although neither of them would admit it. On the electric guitar they're it. So if you're asking me how do I compare to those two—and I like to compare myself to the greats—I'm average at fucking best." Weller described Gallagher's ability as a guitarist as "rudimentary", saying, "Noel doesn't pretend to be a guitar god. He's very good at putting chords together and he's got a distinctive style in terms of his chord sequences and his rhythm playing. It's recognisable." Though naturally left-handed, Gallagher plays guitar right-handed, which he said is the only thing he can do with his non-dominant hand. Gallagher has said he sometimes does not understand his own lyrics, commenting in 2005, "When I'm halfway through 'Don't Look Back in Anger' I say to myself, 'I still don't know what these words mean!'" By 2017, he had reflected, "There is a bit of truth in that statement. Like the bit in 'Champagne Supernova' about 'slowly walking down the hall faster than a cannonball'. What does that mean? And the answer is, I don't know what it means. I don't care what it means. It must mean something, though, because I play it to a sea of people every night and they seem to understand it. That's all that matters, I guess." He has stated that he is dyslexic, which slows down the process of his songwriting, and that he can neither read nor write music notation. Gallagher's role as a chief songwriter for Oasis changed over time as he allowed a greater level of lyrical input from the other band members. Standing on the Shoulder of Giants included Oasis' first-ever album track written by his brother Liam. Heathen Chemistry included a further three tracks by Liam (including "Songbird"), one by Gem Archer, and one by Andy Bell. The album Don't Believe the Truth featured another three tracks by Liam (one of them, "Love Like a Bomb", co-written with Archer), one from Archer, and two from Bell. The latter two albums have been greeted with increasing critical and commercial success in the UK, particularly Don't Believe the Truth. The second single from Don't Believe the Truth, "The Importance of Being Idle", became the second Oasis track sung by Noel to top the UK charts and was named 2005's finest track by Q magazine, as well as being nominated for the NME's "Best Song of 2005" award. On the final Oasis albums, Noel's increasing role as lead singer, apparently to compensate for his diminished role as songwriter, caused some tension with Liam. Zak Starkey, son of Beatles drummer Ringo Starr and previous drummer for the Who and Johnny Marr, replaced long-time drummer Alan White during the recording sessions for Don't Believe the Truth. The loss of White prompted Gallagher to comment in a 2005 interview that he credits Oasis' trouble with drummers, in part, to the fact that he is himself a talented drummer: "I get a lot of stick for it, but I'm the best drummer in the group." Gallagher is well known for his controversial and outspoken statements in the press; he acknowledged his tendency for faux pas in the song "My Big Mouth" on the album Be Here Now. He has defended himself, saying, "People think [I'm] controversial for the answers [I] give to silly questions in interviews, but ... I'm not thinking about insulting people; I say what I genuinely feel is in my heart. My conscience is clean, d'you know what I mean? Y'know, I'm true to myself—fuck everybody else." On-stage at the 1996 Brit Awards, where INXS singer Michael Hutchence presented Oasis' "Best Video" award for Wonderwall, after receiving the award from Hutchence, Gallagher pointed his award to Hutchence and said, "Has-beens should not be presenting awards to gonna-be's." referring to INXS' popularity declining. Those words reportedly devastated Michael Hutchence. The most infamous of Gallagher's controversial statements was in a 1995 interview with The Observer, where he expressed a wish for Damon Albarn and Alex James of rivals Blur to "catch AIDS and die". He quickly apologised for the comment and stated that "AIDS is no laughing matter". This statement was preceded by the success of (What's the Story) Morning Glory?, which led to a well-documented feud with Blur. The differing styles of the bands, coupled with their prominence within the Britpop movement, led the British media to seize upon the rivalry between the bands. Both groups played along, with the Gallaghers taunting Blur at the 1996 BRIT Awards by singing a rendition of "Parklife" when they collected their "Best British Band" award, with Liam changing the lyrics to "shite-life". Gallagher maintains that the rivalry was conceived by the magazine NME and members of Blur's entourage as a ploy to raise their respective profiles, and that he has had no respect for either party ever since. However, Albarn has suggested the roots of the feud were much more personal. Tension between the two had largely cooled by 2007, and Gallagher said in an NME interview, "I've got a lot of respect for Damon, I really do mean it. Because I'm indifferent to Damon he thinks that I think he's a cunt. Our Liam will talk to him, I won't because he's just another singer in a band to me, but I don't think he's a cunt." On 23 March 2013, Gallagher, Albarn, Graham Coxon, and Paul Weller performed the Blur hit "Tender" at the Teenage Cancer Trust. Gallagher and Coxon later provided backing vocals on the song "We Got the Power" on Albarn's Gorillaz album Humanz. In 2019, he confirmed in an interview with Dermot O'Leary on BBC Two that he and Albarn had become friends. The Gallagher brothers infamously share a tumultuous relationship, and one of their arguments was even released on the 1995 bootleg single "Wibbling Rivalry". Although their relationship had stabilised in later years, there were a handful of incidents during the band's early career where the two physically attacked each other. At a Los Angeles show during their first American tour in 1994, Liam took to changing the words of the songs so that they were offensive to both Americans and Noel. An argument after the show which led to a chair being thrown and a fight breaking out caused Noel to leave the tour and head for Las Vegas, and he later claimed he had "visions of Fear and Loathing flashing in [his] eyes". During recording sessions for (What's the Story) Morning Glory?, the brothers had a violent fight involving a cricket bat when Liam invited everyone from a local pub into the studio while Noel was trying to work. In 1995, Noel sang "Wonderwall" on Later... with Jools Holland when Liam failed to turn up. In 1996, Noel provided lead vocals at a performance for MTV Unplugged when Liam backed out minutes before the set was due to start. Liam claimed to have been struck down with a "sore throat", but the band later found out that Liam did not like performing acoustically. Noel was further annoyed when Liam proceeded to heckle him from the balcony and "nurse his sore throat" with beer and cigarettes while the band performed. Just before the band were about to board a plane to the United States for a big tour, Liam left the airport, claiming he had to find a house for his then-wife Patsy Kensit. He later joined the band for their last few gigs and the infamous MTV Awards performance, while the remaining dates were scrapped. While on tour in Barcelona in 2000, Oasis were forced to cancel a gig when Alan White's arm seized up, and the band spent the evening drinking instead. Liam made a crude remark about Gallagher's then-wife Meg Mathews and attempted to cast doubt over the legitimacy of his daughter Anaïs, causing Noel to headbutt him. Following this, he declared he was quitting overseas touring, but returned for an Oasis gig in Dublin on 8 July 2000. During the performance, the two brothers shook hands at the end of "Acquiesce". Liam once stated that he did not speak much with Noel and that they "don't really have a relationship". During the final tour, the only time that they ever spoke directly was when onstage. Noel would later reveal that while they were in Oasis, the two "never hung out together outside of the band, ever". The relationship between the two brothers again became strained throughout 2009, eventually leading to a last-minute cancellation of an Oasis concert scheduled to take place on 28 August in Paris due to an "altercation within the group". Later that evening, Gallagher confirmed he had left Oasis as he "simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer". Through the Oasis website, he said, "It's with some sadness and great relief to tell you that I quit Oasis tonight." On 29 August, he expanded further on his blog: "The level of verbal and violent intimidation towards me, my family, friends and comrades has become intolerable. And the lack of support and understanding from my management and band mates has left me with no other option than to get me cape and seek pastures new." When asked in 2012 about his brother and an Oasis reunion, Noel said, "I last texted Liam at Christmas after the City match. I don't think it's gonna happen. It would be great for everyone else except me. It'd be mega for the millions and millions and for everybody else it would be brilliant, but I wouldn't be very happy about it. I guess you don't know what you're gonna feel like in 20-odd years but right now, I mean I was in Oasis for nearly 20 years. I've been doing what I'm doing now for one year and I'd like to see what it's like to do it for longer. I don't think anyone is pushing for a reunion either. Nobody ever brings it up in any seriousness; I mean Liam does publicly but he says a lot of things publicly. I wouldn't take anything he says seriously." After their performance of "Wonderwall" at the London Olympics Closing Ceremony, which Noel had originally turned down, he referred to Liam's band Beady Eye as "Stratford's finest Oasis tribute band". In December 2017, during an interview with an Australian newspaper, Liam claimed that he and Noel had declared a "truce". However, in February 2018, Liam revealed that the truce did not happen and that it was just "in his head" after "a couple of drinks". In a 2019 interview in Norwegian-Swedish talk show Skavlan, Noel said that Liam is spreading a false rumour online that Oasis would get back together if Noel's wife would let him, and that she is receiving lots of abuse because of it. Gallagher criticised the organisers of the 2008 Glastonbury Festival for scheduling U.S. hip-hop artist Jay-Z as a headliner for the traditionally rock-focused festival: "If it ain't broke don't fix it. If you start to break it then people aren't going to go. I'm sorry, but Jay-Z? No chance. Glastonbury has a tradition of guitar music and even when they throw the odd curveball in on a Sunday night you go, 'Kylie Minogue?' I don't know about it. But I'm not having hip-hop at Glastonbury. It's wrong." Emily Eavis, the organiser of the festival, said she was honoured Jay-Z was headlining the event: "He's absolutely the right act for our festival. There's no reason why we should not have the greatest living hip-hop artist on at Glastonbury." Eavis also reminded Gallagher that The Roots, Cypress Hill, and De La Soul had all previously performed at Glastonbury. Jay-Z said, "We don't play guitars, Noel, but hip-hop has put in its work like any other form of music. This headline show is just a natural progression. ... We have to respect each other's genre of music and move forward." Jay-Z opened his Glastonbury set with a cover of Oasis' song "Wonderwall". When Gallagher was asked about the incident, he replied: The way it's played itself out is that I said Jay-Z had no right to play Glastonbury, which is a crock of horseshit. I got off a plane and someone asked me about the fact that Glastonbury hadn't sold out for the first time in years, and if it was because of Jay-Z. From there it grew into this crap that I was standing on an orange crate at Speakers' Corner saying, "Gather round, brothers and sisters. Have you heard what's happening at Glastonbury this year?" I have a certain turn of phrase. So if I say, "Chicken sandwiches in McDonald's are just plain fucking wrong," it doesn't mean I'm attacking all chickens or all sandwiches. I've hung out with Jay-Z in Tokyo. I've seen his show. It's not my bag, but it's all right. We have a mutual friend in Chris Martin. ... I don't dislike rappers or hip-hop or people who like it. I went to the Def Jam tour in Manchester in the '80s when rap was inspirational. Public Enemy were awesome. But it's all about status and bling now, and it doesn't say anything to me. When Jay-Z was asked about Gallagher's comments, he said, "I haven't spoken to [Gallagher], I heard he was reaching out. I don't bear any grudge, it's all good. I just believe in good music and bad music, I've always said that. You look at any interview from the beginning of time, I've always stated that I don't believe in the lines and classifications that people put music in so they can easily define it." When asked who he would be interested in collaborating with, he said, "Anyone. Oasis as well. It doesn't matter to me." Gallagher has frequently criticised Phil Collins, saying his music is bland and the opposite of what he stands for. He was quoted as saying, "People hate fucking cunts like Phil Collins, and if they don't, they fucking should!" He also called Collins the "antichrist". Prior to the 2005 UK election, he stated that he was still supporting the Labour government partly because of his concern that "Phil Collins is threatening to come back and live here [if the Conservatives win] and let's face it, none of us want that". Collins responded by saying that Gallagher "loves slagging me off". He also denied that he was a Conservative Party supporter in an interview in The Guardian. He appeared on the BBC television series Room 101 and nominated to banish the Gallagher brothers, describing them as "rude and not as talented as they think they are". In his 2016 autobiography, Not Dead Yet, Collins recalled meeting Gallagher in 1996 at a bar in Mustique. Gallagher declined Collins' request to jam with him. Gallagher has spoken about his political views on several occasions. He was quoted: "Politics is like football for me. Labour is my team and even if you don't like a striker you don't give up supporting the whole team. Labour is the lesser of two evils. What else should we have? Anarchy? Someone has to be responsible." In 1997, he visited the recently appointed Prime Minister Tony Blair at 10 Downing Street. In an interview that year, when he was asked about why he visited Blair, he replied: I've taken a lot of flack for going to No. 10 Downing Street but the thing about that is, I never considered myself a rebel anyway. I wasn't going there representing the 'Indie community'. I wasn't representing anyone. I was going there for me. You have to understand that from when I went to school and from when I was born all we ever knew was conservative, Tory, right-wing government. What people don't mention is, they say 'He went to meet Tony Blair.' No. I went to meet the Labour prime minister. Our parents always drummed into us that the Labour Party was for the people and the Tory Party was not. I went to meet the Labour prime minister. In an interview in 2007, when asked about politics, he said: I'd been unemployed all my life. It was a big deal for me when they (Labour) got in. Now David Cameron is no different from Tony Blair and Gordon Brown is no different from David Cameron. They're all cut from the same cloth and it annoys me that the biggest political icon in the last 30 years has been Margaret Thatcher. Someone who tried to destroy the working class. It freaks me out. So I don't really think there's anything left to vote for. I believe that I, as a person, can only change things once every 5 years and that's by voting, and my point is that even casting that vote means that the same guy gets in, the only difference is one has a red tie and the other has a blue one. In 1997, he played a 5-song set at the Tibetan Freedom Concert in New York City. As a result, Oasis were deemed "unsuitable" by the Chinese government, forcing a planned tour of the country in 2009 to be cancelled. Gallagher was passionate in his support for Barack Obama's successful bid for President of the United States, calling his acceptance speech to the 2008 Democratic National Convention "spellbinding". Gallagher has been very vocal about knife crime. In 2008 he was quoted: "The scumbags are taking over the streets. I don't know what David Cameron and Gordon Brown are going to do about it. It all goes back to the Thatcher years. It sounds like a cliché but that's when the rot set in." When the interviewer suggested it was for status he replied, "In my day status was about trying to be somebody, not trying to kill somebody, so how's that all changed?" In the 2010 UK general election, Gallagher said he voted for a candidate dressed as a pirate as a protest vote. Speaking out about the August 2011 riots that took place in England, Gallagher stated, "Last August I was on tour in Europe and people were asking me about the riots. All over the world, Syria and Egypt, people were rioting for freedom. And these kids in England are rioting for tracksuits. It's embarrassing." Gallagher claimed that violent video games and violent television shows which children were being exposed to were partially to blame for social problems. In February 2012, Gallagher implied that the UK under the premiership of Thatcher was a more fertile ground for dissent in the arts. He said: "Under Thatcher, who ruled us with an iron rod, great art was made. Amazing designers and musicians. Acid house was born. Very colourful and progressive. Now, no one's got anything to say. 'Write a song? No thanks, I'll say it on Twitter.' It's a sad state when more people retweet than buy records." In a February 2015 interview with The Quietus, Gallagher elaborated on his disillusion with current politicians and how they'll do anything to say they're just regular people: "And now the Conservatives are just ... David Cameron, he's trying to be your mate. 'Oh, I really like the Jam.'" Gallagher then went on to say that Thatcher was brutal but more direct, and "you can kind of respect that". In an interview with HuffPost shortly before the 2015 UK general election, he summed up his views of contemporary political leaders: "David Cameron a bell-end, Ed Miliband a communist, the rest of them don't really count." In 2016, Gallagher stated that, while he remained left-wing, he opposed Labour's new leader Jeremy Corbyn, quipping "Meet the new boss, same as the old boss", and saying "the Tories don't care about the vulnerable, and the communists don't care about the aspirational." Gallagher did not vote in the 2016 Brexit referendum, saying that he "didn't think we should have been given the vote in the first place because as ordinary members of the public how are the fuck are you qualified to talk about the break-up of the oldest continent in the fucking world." He also said that he felt Britain should have remained part of the European Union saying, "I feel right at the time of it happening, we turned our back on the French, who were going through some dark terror shit." Conversely, he also said, "But it's happened now. It was a legal vote. Fucking get it done and let's move on." During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Gallagher garnered attention for refusing to wear a face covering while shopping. He explained during Matt Morgan's podcast, "I choose not to wear one and if I get the virus it's on me, it's not on anyone else." In 2021, after being asked what he thought of the recent controversies surrounding the Royal Family, Gallagher expressed sympathy and support for Prince William and criticised Prince Harry and Meghan Markle over allegations they had made against other Royals by drawing a parallel between the situation and his brother Liam's public statements, stating: "He's got a fucking younger brother shooting his fucking mouth off with shit that is just so unnecessary. I'd like to think I was always the William." Gallagher furthermore accused Meghan of negatively influencing Harry's personality and describing Harry as "coming across like a typical fucking woke snowflake", adding that "this is what happens when you get involved with Americans". Throughout his career, Gallagher has used a wide range of different guitars, effect pedals and amplifiers from his large collection. Most of it emerged from the Standing on the Shoulder of Giants sessions, where he decided to drop the equipment used in the three previous albums and instead buy "loads of really weird pedals, old guitars, and small amps", as the lack of deadline to deliver the album allowed Gallagher to "take quite a few days just messing around". Electric guitars Epiphone Les Paul – Gallagher played a cherry sunburst model in the early years of Oasis. Gibson Les Paul – A sunburst Les Paul was given to Gallagher by Johnny Marr, formerly of the Smiths, in the early days of Oasis. He used this guitar to compose "Cigarettes & Alcohol" and "Slide Away". Before Johnny Marr owned it, it belonged to Pete Townshend. When this Les Paul was severely damaged, Marr gave him another Les Paul, used prominently on the Smiths' album The Queen Is Dead. Fender Telecaster – Gallagher uses several, one of which, a 1960s model, was given to Noel by Johnny Depp as a birthday present. Epiphone Casino Gibson ES-355 Vintage Model – Since 2001, this has become Gallagher's main stage guitar. Epiphone Sheraton – Gallagher used two Epiphone Sheratons, a sunburst one and one with a Union Jack painted on the front which Epiphone sold as a signature model named 'Supernova'. Epiphone Riviera – Gallagher used a dark wine red Riviera throughout 1995. In the early days of Oasis, Gallagher did not use pedals: "I used to just turn up the amps as full as I could get them." Since then, he has begun using a large number of effects, but singled out the Ibanez Tube Screamer. Gallagher has said that he used only 100-watt Marshalls early in his career. After Definitely Maybe, he began using smaller amps, singling out Fenders (Princeton and Bandmaster), and also a combo made by Clark Amplification, which builds amplifiers based on vintage Fender and Marshall amps. While recording What's the Story Morning Glory?, Gallagher also used Orange and Vox amps. Orange later made Gallagher a custom amplifier, which was later sold online for £6,800. Live albums The Dreams We Have as Children – Live at the Royal Albert Hall (2009) Other appearances 1995: Stanley Road by Paul Weller, acoustic guitar on "I Walk on Gilded Splinters" 1998: Saturnz Return by Goldie, guitar on "Temper Temper" 2000: Tailgunner by Tailgunner, drums 2001: The Same Old Blues by Proud Mary, production, plus additional vocals, guitars, bass and percussion 2002: Illumination by Paul Weller, drums, percussion & bass on "One X One" 2003: Polaris by North Mississippi Allstars, vocals on "One To Grow On" & "Polaris" 2003: Live at the Royal Albert Hall by the Who, guitar, backing vocals on "Won't Get Fooled Again" 2004: Always Outnumbered, Never Outgunned by the Prodigy, bass on "Shoot Down" 2004: All Years Leaving by the Stands, guitar on "Some Weekend Night" 2008: 22 Dreams by Paul Weller, bass, piano, mellotron and Wurlitzer on "Echoes Round the Sun" 2011: Colour of the Trap by Miles Kane, backing vocals on "My Fantasy" 2015: A Head Full Of Dreams by Coldplay, guitar on "Up&Up" 2017: "We Got the Power" by Gorillaz, additional vocals 2018: True Meanings by Paul Weller, pump organ 2020: Walls by Louis Tomlinson, writing credits on "Walls" 2020: Where's My Family Gone? by Andrew Cushin, production, guitar, bass, keys, backing vocals on "Where's My Family Gone?" 2004: "Free Love Freeway" – Ricky Gervais feat. Noel Gallagher; credited as a 'special guest' on backing vocals for The Office Christmas Special DVD, on which the video of the recording session featuring Noel & Ricky is available 2011: Well ... All Right! – compilation album compiled by Gallagher, released covermount into Mojo magazine Definitely Maybe (1994) (What's the Story) Morning Glory? (1995) Be Here Now (1997) Standing on the Shoulder of Giants (2000) Heathen Chemistry (2002) Don't Believe the Truth (2005) Dig Out Your Soul (2008) Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds (2011) Chasing Yesterday (2015) Who Built the Moon? (2017) Council Skies (2023) "10 reasons why Oasis are the most influential Britpop band of all time". Alternative Press. 23 July 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "The Great Songwriters". Sky. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Noel Gallagher - New songs, Playlists & Latest News - Eirewave - The Pop Rock Station". Eirewave. Retrieved 24 January 2023. "Noel Gallagher confirms solo career plan". NME. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Kessler, Ted; "Noelrock!". NME, 8 June 1996. "Time Flies – 1994–2009". Oasisnet. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010. Retrieved 12 April 2010. "Gallagher and the Spice Girls have little to celebrate after a bad day at the polls Discord on the first Noel". The Herald. 6 December 1999. Retrieved 12 February 2017. Black, Edward (23 April 2002). "Clapton rocked by guitar poll finding". The Scotsman. Fans polled by the music magazine Uncut ... Most over-rated: 1. Eric Clapton 2. Mark Knopfler 3. Hank Marvin 4. Keith Richards 5. Pete Townshend 6. The Edge 7. Carlos Santana 8. Brian May 9. Noel Gallagher 10. Ronnie Wood. "Did I say that? The words of Noel Gallagher, musician, 41". The Guardian. 8 March 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2017. "Britain's Most Outspoken Rock Star". Esquire. 5 November 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2017. "Oasis for Charlestown". The Mayo News. 13 January 2009. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 7 February 2019. Harris, John. Britpop!: Cool Britannia and the Spectacular Demise of English Rock. Da Capo Press, 2004. Pg. 118. ISBN 0-306-81367-X "Oasis". Behind the Music, VH1. 2000. "Noel Gallagher of Oasis Rocks On". The Stuttering Foundation. Winter 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2022. Harris, pg. 119 Hattenstone, Simon (6 December 2008). "Interview: Noel Gallagher talks Oasis past and present". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "Noel Gallagher admits to football hooligan past | NME". NME. 6 January 2009. Harris, pg. 120 Neville, Conor (20 July 2015). "Noel Gallagher Tells Of How He Scored A Point In Croke Park As A Teenager". Balls.ie. Carruthers, Dick (Director) (2004). Definitely Maybe (VHS/DVD). Sony. Harris, pg. 121 Harris, pg. 123 "Noel Gallagher Co-Hosts XS Manchester Drive with Clint Boon". 5 December 2017 – via YouTube. "Noel's 1988 Demo Tape Under Christies' Hammer in April; Plus Exclusive Track-by-track Review". NME. 9 February 1999. Interview with Frank Skinner, The Frank Skinner Show, 2000 Robertson, Ian (1996). Oasis: What's the Story?. Blake Books. ISBN 0-7119-5695-2. Harris, pg. 128–29 "Bittersweet Triumph". Musicsaves.org. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Oasis Biography, Music News, Discography @ 100 XR – No. 1 Rock Web Station!!!". 100xr.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2011. St. Michael, Mick (1996). Oasis: In Their Own Words. Omnibus Pr. ISBN 0-7119-5695-2. Milner, Greg (January–February 2007). "The Greatest Songs Ever! Live Forever". Blender. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Harris, pg. 189 Mason, Tom; Randall, Lucian (2012). Noel Gallagher - The Biography. John Blake. ISBN 9781782190912. "Noel Gallagher on ten years of Oasis – exclusive interview". Friday Night with Jonathan Ross. 10 September 2004. Retrieved 18 February 2008. I can't drive, but it didn't stop me buying five cars. "Best Oasis Q&A Ever: Noel Gallagher Discusses His Issues With Canada, Lars Ulrich". Rolling Stone. 7 November 2006. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 18 February 2008. "We're just having a bet over there and my mate reckons that you couldn't swim the English Channel." Now I can't swim, but I'd still give it a go. "Morning Stormy". The Times. No. 65986. 4 September 1997. Retrieved 13 July 2020 – via The Times Digital Archive. Barry Egan (17 August 2019). "'Supernova Heights was great for the time but there came a point when I knew I needed to get out of all that...then I met Sara and that was the catalyst for everything'". The Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved 13 July 2020. Interview at Soccer AM (Sky Sports 1), 11 September 2004 "The Help Album: Track By Track". War Child. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Harris, pg. 296 Cavanagh, David (2000). The Creation Records Story: My Magpie Eyes Are Hungry for the Prize. (London) Virgin Books Live Forever: The Rise and Fall of Brit Pop. Passion Pictures, 2004. Savage, Mark (24 November 2013). "1,000 Number ones: A chart history". BBC News. Retrieved 10 January 2017. "Noel Gallagher reveals 'brutal' panic attacks due to cocaine use in 1990s". Sky News. 12 May 2020. "Timeline: Blur v Oasis after Britpop". BBC News. 16 August 2005. Retrieved 16 August 2005. Petridis, Alexis (10 May 2007). "What happened to rock under Blair?". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Robinson, John (19 June 2004). "Not here now". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Oasis record boss quits". BBC. 25 November 1999. Retrieved 18 February 2008. "Oasis Create Big Brother Records". Yahoo!. 5 January 2000. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Davis, Darren (1 April 2001). "Oasis's Noel Gallagher Does The Sour Mash For Proud Mary". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 16 June 2007. Retrieved 1 April 2008. Bromby-Tavenner, Vida (4 December 2006). "Noel Gallagher @ Lowry, Salford". thisislancashire.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 22 September 2007. "I'd be bigger than Elvis says Noel". Yahoo Music. 14 February 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. "Arctic Monkeys And Killers Named Top Winners at BRIT Awards". AHN. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 21 September 2007. "The Official Oasis website and fan community". Oasisinet. Archived from the original on 9 October 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "Noel Gallagher announces first post-Oasis gig | Latest celebrity news". Hello!. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Noel Gallagher Books First Solo Dates". Rttnews.com. 3 February 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Teenage Cancer Trust announces support acts for 10th anniversary gigs at the Royal Albert Hall – Press Releases – Media centre – Teenage Cancer Trust". Teenagecancertrust.org. Archived from the original on 31 March 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Noel Gallagher Plays Oasis B-Sides". Musicrooms.net. 26 March 2010. Archived from the original on 3 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Noel Gallagher Returns For Teenage Cancer Trust | Live4ever – The Brit Rock Daily". Live4ever.uk.com. 25 March 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Noel Gallagher plays first post-Oasis gig in London". NME. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Paphides, Pete (26 March 2010). "Noel Gallagher at the Royal Albert Hall, SW7". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Latest Oasis News With stopcryingyourheartout.com: Noel Gallagher Joined By Ex-Oasis Gem Archer For Teenage Cancer Trust Show". Stopcryingyourheartoutnews.blogspot.com. 25 March 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Review: Noel Gallagher – Teenage Cancer Trust Show, Royal Albert Hall | Live4ever – The Brit Rock Daily". Live4ever.uk.com. 26 March 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Youngs, Ian (26 March 2010). "Noel Gallagher begins solo life". BBC News. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Noel Gallagher heading into the studio 'this week'". NME. UK. 17 August 2010. Retrieved 17 August 2010. "Does Noel Gallagher have a new backing band? « Sourmash Music". Sourmashmusic.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2011. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "NME.com – Miles Kane reveals new Noel Gallagher album collaborations". NME. Retrieved 4 December 2010. Sean Michaels (10 February 2011). "Noel Gallagher: 'I am not recording new stuff' | Music | guardian.co.uk". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 9 July 2011. RETROFUZZ. "The Official Noel Gallagher Website | Home". Noelgallagher.com. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds Confirm First UK Tour Dates | Live4ever Ezine". Live4ever.uk.com. 2 August 2011. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "News | Noel Gallagher Announces Two Solo Albums". The Quietus. Retrieved 9 July 2011. "Noel Gallagher announces new album 'Chasing Yesterday' LP". NME. Retrieved 19 June 2015. "Noel Gallagher 'I'm already a bit of the way into the next record' LP". NME. Retrieved 19 June 2015. "Noel Gallagher releases Black Star Dancing single". Radio X. Earls, John (5 August 2019). "Listen to Noel Gallagher's new single 'This Is The Place' as he unveils EP". NME. "Smashing Pumpkins and Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds Announce Tour". Pitchfork. 4 March 2019. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Noel Gallagher Looks Back in Anger at Spicy Wings". First We Feast. 3 October 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2019. Richards, Will (29 April 2021). "Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds announce Greatest Hits album with new track 'We're On Our Way Now'". NME. Retrieved 8 June 2021. Noel Gallagher: Evolution Since Oasis, Meeting Bruce Springsteen and Best Of Album | Apple Music, retrieved 13 June 2021 "Noel Gallagher scores 12th UK Number One album with 'Back The Way We Came'". NME. 18 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. Skinner, Tom (17 January 2023). "Noel Gallagher announces new album 'Council Skies'". NME. NME Networks. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Pete McKee: Noel Gallagher album named after Sheffield artist's book". BBC News. 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. Geraghty, Hollie (13 February 2023). "Noel Gallagher and Garbage announce joint summer 2023 US tour". NME. NME Networks. Retrieved 13 February 2023. Lally, Kate (31 March 2023). "Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds tickets on sale today for UK tour 2023". Liverpool Echo. The Liverpool Echo. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Enter Password". Damonalbarn.tumblr.com. Retrieved 27 September 2014. "Noel Gallagher says he may retire from playing live within the next 'ten years'". NME. Retrieved 23 March 2015. "Former rivals Damon Albarn and Noel Gallagher record together for first time on Gorillaz's "We've Got the Power" — listen". Consequence of Sound. 23 March 2017. Retrieved 24 March 2017. Moore, Sam (4 August 2021). "Noel Gallagher to host a new Sunday night residency on Radio X". NME. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "If These Walls Could Sing Premieres At Abbey Road". AbbeyRoad.com. Pilley, Max (21 January 2024). "Noel Gallagher recording acoustic album this year "for the fans"". NME. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Davidson, Dougie. "Oasis: Noel's Girlfriends". En.AllExperts.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2009. The Howard Stern Show (Audio). WXRK. June 1997. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "Noel and Meg finally divorce". BBC. 19 January 2001. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "Gallagher becomes a father again". BBC. 22 September 2007. Retrieved 28 May 2009. Michaels, Sean (20 June 2011). "Noel Gallagher gets married without inviting Liam". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 August 2011. GQ (5 December 2017), Noel Gallagher Goes Undercover on Reddit, YouTube, Twitter and Instagram | Actually Me | GQ, retrieved 8 May 2019 "Noel Gallagher's moving to Hampshire after stabbings near London home". Radio X. "Noel Gallagher and Sara MacDonald have announced they are getting divorced". NME. 14 January 2023. Retrieved 15 January 2023. "Hugh Jackman announces divorce after 27 years of marriage". Cosmopolitan. 18 September 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. Richardson, Andy (September 1995). "Morning Story". NME. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "John Lydon official website". Retrieved 28 June 2009. "The Oasis Newsroom". Live4ever.us. 27 November 2008. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Kasabian – Kasabian 'Friends For Life' With Oasis". Contactmusic.com. Retrieved 9 August 2009. MacInnes, Paul (15 March 2005). "Pete to Carl: Will you be my best man?". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 17 August 2009. "Oasis' Liam and Noel Gallagher join Ricky Hatton in Las Vegas". NME. 23 November 2008. Retrieved 17 August 2009. "Noel Gallagher on Radio 1". BBC. 12 January 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "The Gallagher interview in full". The Observer. London. 29 June 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Latest Oasis News With stopcryingyourheartout.com: When Johnny Marr Lent Noel Gallagher His Gibson Guitar". Stopcryingyourheartoutnews.blogspot.com. 19 September 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2009. ""We don't talk about our past": Damon Albarn opens up on close friendship with Noel Gallagher". NME. 10 August 2018. Slate, Jeff (3 March 2015). "Noel Gallagher on Getting Drunk with Morrissey". Esquire. Britton, Luke Morgan (18 May 2015). "Noel Gallagher claims that Bono can drink more than Morrissey". NME. "Total Guitar: Noel Gallagher". Musicfanclubs.org. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Johnny Depp – Oasis Appearance Depp's Career High". Contactmusic.com. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "YouTube – Noel Gallagher on The Evening Session – 20.08.96 – Part 2". 14 September 2008. Archived from the original on 14 January 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. "Oasis' Liam and Noel Gallagher join Ricky Hatton in Las Vegas | News". NME. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Lightsaber Fight Noel Gallagher v Ewan McGregor". Archived from the original on 9 August 2016 – via YouTube. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Noel Gallagher – Young Person's Guide To Becoming a Rockstar" – via YouTube. "Noel Gallagher on Roberto Mancini's sacking as Man City manager". talkSPORT. 15 May 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. Laville, Sandra (10 January 2001). "Noel Gallagher's wife wants £10m divorce deal". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2009. "Oasis' Gallagher Brothers Weather Economic Storm – Worth 52 million". Mog.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 21 November 2012. "Manchester City fan Noel Gallagher on 'mind-blowing' victory". BBC. 14 May 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Gallagher on 'staggering' City takeover". BBC. 3 September 2008. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2009. Whalley, Mike (13 June 2007). "'It's pure City' says Noel". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 22 July 2007. "Oasis Rocker Gallagher Revealed as Del Piero's Lucky Mascot". Deutsche Welle. 7 July 2006. Retrieved 28 June 2009. Smith, Alan (19 February 2016). "The Joy of Six: footballers in music videos". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2024. Durrani, Arif (6 July 2012). "Noel Gallagher and Manchester City's Kompany unveil new Umbro kits". Brand Republic. Retrieved 6 July 2012. "Noel Gallagher: Glasgow's miles better". The Herald. Glasgow. 28 February 2015. Retrieved 16 February 2022. Cumiskey, Neasa (6 January 2022). "Oasis star Noel Gallagher claims he's Irish and has 'no English blood' in him". Sunday World. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Byrne, George (7 September 1994). "Oasis in a desert of pap". Irish Independent. Dublin. Purden, Richard (3 March 2015). "Interview: The Unstoppable Noel Gallagher". Irish Post. Retrieved 22 July 2015. "Nick Clegg hails England's 'unbeatable' World Cup bid". BBC News. 23 August 2010. Frye, Andy. "Noel Gallagher discusses soccer, solo tour". ESPN. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Noel Gallagher on Russell Brand Radio Show.avi". 9 April 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. "Noel Gallagher: The Boss". Clash Music. 2 October 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "James Blunt 'forces' Noel Gallagher to move home". NME. 25 February 2008. Archived from the original on 10 March 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "No forgiveness for Oasis star over X Factor snub". Wales Online. 18 August 2011. Retrieved 21 September 2011. Davies, Caroline (2 April 2012). "New faces on Sgt Pepper album cover for artist Peter Blake's 80th birthday". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 November 2016. Interview with Jonathan Ross, Friday Night with Jonathan Ross, 10 September 2004 Caws, Matthew. "Top of the Pops". Guitar World. May 1996. Bosso, Joe (14 November 2011). "Interview: Noel Gallagher talks guitars, gear and High Flying Birds". MusicRadar. Retrieved 5 November 2019. Greene, Andy (8 August 2011). "Noel Gallagher: 'I'm Not Technically Proficient Enough to Attempt All Kinds of Music'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 26 October 2019. Leonard, Michael (27 January 2009). "Noel Gallagher: "I'm average at fucking best"". MusicRadar. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Sutcliffe, Phil. "Meet the New Boss". Mojo Classic: Morrissey and the Story of Manchester. Vol. 1, issue 13. 2006 "Gallagher: 'I Have No Idea What My Songs Mean'". Contactmusic. 12 August 2005. Retrieved 14 January 2008. "Noel Gallagher Goes Undercover on Reddit, YouTube, Twitter and Instagram". 5 December 2017 – via YouTube. Sennett, Sean; Groth, Simon (2010). Off the Record: 25 Years of Music Street Press. Univ. of Queensland Press. p. 254. ISBN 978-0-7022-3863-5. "Oasis albums reception". Metacritic. Retrieved 18 February 2008. Manning, Toby (27 May 2005). "Oasis: The Whole Truth". Daily Mirror. UK. Archived from the original on 29 January 2008. Retrieved 14 January 2008. NME, issue of 10 December 2005 Noel Gallagher; Etalk Daily Interview; 2005 De Luca-Tao, Amber (4 November 2020). "Apparently INXS' 'Elegantly Wasted' is a clapback to Oasis' Noel Gallagher". Tone Deaf. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Reilly, Nick (16 October 2019). "INXS: director Richard Lowenstein on 'Mystify' the documentary that will change everything you know about Michael Hutchence". NME. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Pierce, Ryan. "Top 10 Music Rivalries: Number 5: Blur vs. Oasis". AskMen.com. Retrieved 17 January 2006. Titorenko, Mark (19 February 1996). "Noel's AIDS comment". The Oasis Archive. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2006. (scroll down to section 3.5) Gallagher and Albarn both interviewed on Live Forever: The Rise and Fall of Brit Pop; John Dower; 2003 "Exclusive: Noel Gallagher interview". NME. 17 February 2007. Retrieved 14 January 2008. Luke Morgan Britton (23 March 2017). "Damon Albarn talks working with Noel Gallagher on new Gorillaz track 'We Got The Power'". NME. Retrieved 26 July 2017. "Noel Gallagher". Reel Stories. 23 June 2019. 9–10 minutes in. BBC Two. British Broadcasting Corporation. Definitely Maybe DVD Interview. "Later ... with Jools Holland". 06. Episode 05. 2 December 1995. BBC Two. McCormick, Neil (2 September 2009). "Oasis v the Beatles: we won't look back in wonder". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2012. Klosterman, Chuck (20 September 2011). "Noel Gallagher After Oasis". Grantland. Retrieved 2 May 2020. "Oasis cancel second festival appearance | News". NME. Retrieved 3 October 2009. "Oasis News". Oasisinet.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2009. Retrieved 3 October 2009. "Entertainment | 'Intimidation' behind Oasis split". BBC News. 29 August 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "Noel Gallagher on Oasis Reunion And More ~ Latest Oasis, Beady Eye And Noel Gallagher News". Stopcryingyourheartoutnews.blogspot.gr. 27 June 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2012. Alex Needham (15 August 2012). "Noel Gallagher calls Beady Eye 'Stratford's finest Oasis tribute band'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 21 November 2012. "Liam Gallagher Rules Out Oasis Reunion Says He And Noel Have Called A Truce". Stopcryingyourheartout.co.uk. Retrieved 23 October 2021. Britton, Luke Morgan (16 February 2018). "Liam Gallagher explains so-called "truce" with Noel". NME. "Noel Gallagher om Liam: Sprider myt om varför Oasis inte återförenas". Svt.se. 31 October 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2019. Paterson, Colin (12 April 2008). "Hip-hop "wrong" for Glastonbury". BBC News. Retrieved 7 May 2008. "Emily Eavis: The real reason we invited Jay-Z to Glastonbury". The Independent. UK. 17 April 2008. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2008. Hancox, Dan (15 April 2008). "Gallagher knows nothing about Glasto". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 August 2013. Odell, Michael (22 September 2008). "The SPIN Interview: Noel Gallagher". Spin. Retrieved 28 June 2009. Reid, Shaheem (3 July 2008). "Jay-Z Says He'd Be Open To Working With Noel Gallagher And Oasis: 'I Don't Bear Any Grudge' For Glastonbury Dis". MTV. Retrieved 28 June 2009. "Phil Collins' Last Stand: Why the Troubled Pop Star Wants to Call It Quits". Rolling Stone. 4 March 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2018. Martin Charles Strong, Brendon Griffin (2008). Lights, camera, sound tracks. Canongate. p. 268. ISBN 978-1-847-67003-8. "Who's backing whom at the election?". BBC News. 21 April 2005. Retrieved 22 July 2015. Collins, Phil (2016). Not Dead Yet: The Autobiography. Random House. p. 323. ISBN 978-1-473-53614-2. Lynskey, Dorian (11 February 2016). "Phil Collins returns: 'I got letters from nurses saying, "That's it, I'm not buying your records"'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 9 December 2018. Tomlinson, Ricky (2007). Cheers My Arse!: The Funniest Drinking Stories You'll Ever Read. Little Brown Book Group. p. 181. ISBN 978-1-847-44168-3. "Room 101". BBC. Retrieved 9 December 2018. "Phil Collins hits back at Noel Gallagher". GenesisFan. 7 September 2005. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 9 December 2018.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Phil Collins on meeting Noel Gallagher". Retrieved 23 October 2021 – via YouTube. "Oasis star attacks war protests". BBC News. 12 March 2003. Retrieved 25 November 2016. "YouTube – Noel & Liam Gallagher on Radio 1 – 23.10.97 – Part 3". 5 October 2008. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "YouTube – Noel on BBC2 NewsNight – Brit Awards". 14 February 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "YouTube – 7 June 1997 – Tibetan Freedom Concert in NYC". 24 November 2006. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. "Oasis China concerts are shelved". BBC News. 2 March 2009. Retrieved 23 October 2011. "Oasis' Noel Gallagher wishes Barack Obama was British | News". NME. 2 September 2008. Archived from the original on 1 March 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2009. Singh, Anita (4 July 2008). "Noel Gallagher blames Margaret Thatcher for knife crime". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2015. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "YouTube – Noel Gallagher speaks out about knife crime". 4 July 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2009 – via YouTube. "Noel Gallagher: 'I voted for a pirate at the last general election'". NME. 12 October 2011. Retrieved 16 November 2020. "Noel Gallagher: 'Britain was better under Margaret Thatcher' – Celebrity News". Digital Spy. 5 February 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. "Noel Gallagher blames 'brutal TV and videogames' for UK riots". NME. 14 August 2011. Retrieved 18 September 2012. "Noel Gallagher: 'Great music was made in spite of Margaret Thatcher' | News". NME. 5 February 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. "The Apolitical Party: Noel Gallagher Interviewed". The Quietus. 16 February 2015. Frost, Caroline (1 May 2015). "Noel Gallagher Calls Prime Minister 'David Cameron A Bell-End, Ed Miliband A Communist' On HuffPost Live (Video)". HuffPost. Retrieved 28 November 2018. Hendicott, James (10 January 2016). "Noel Gallagher hits out at Jeremy Corbyn: 'I don't like communism'". NME. Retrieved 10 January 2016. "Noel Gallagher's explicit Brexit rant is quite something". The Independent. 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Coronavirus: Noel Gallagher refuses to wear face mask despite UK laws". Sky News. Retrieved 18 September 2020. Ntim, Zac (10 June 2021). "Oasis star Noel Gallagher calls Prince Harry a 'woke snowflake': 'This is what happens when you get involved with Americans'". Insider. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Noel Gallagher on Prince Harry: Oasis star says he sympathises with Prince William over younger brother 'shooting his mouth off'". Sky News. 10 June 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Interview with Noel Gallagher". Guitar One. Harris Publications. October 2002. Retrieved 17 August 2009. The Noel Gallagher Guitars & Gear Interview, retrieved 12 June 2023 The section where he talks about it starts at 11:15 Heward, Emily (18 September 2014). "Johnny Marr loaned Noel Gallagher two guitars in early days of Oasis – and never got either back". men. Retrieved 3 February 2019. The Noel Gallagher Guitars & Gear Interview, retrieved 12 June 2023 In the same interview he shows this guitar and mention the accident at 50:40. He points at the les Paul he was holding couple of minutes before which was the sunburst les Paul whilst mentioning a damaged guitar Orange (20 February 2019). "How (What's the story) Morning Glory was recorded". Retrieved 2 January 2021. Reed, John (5 November 2009). Paul Weller: My Ever Changing Moods. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-85712-049-6. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Tibetan Freedom Concert – Various Artists > Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved 31 July 2013. "Gallagher Guests On New Mississippi Allstars Set". Billboard. "Polaris – North Mississippi Allstars | Credits". AllMusic. "Miles Kane reveals new Noel Gallagher album collaborations". NME. 24 November 2010. Reilly, Nick (16 October 2020). "Rising songwriter Andrew Cushin teams up with Noel Gallagher on new track 'Where's My Family Gone'". NME. Retrieved 21 June 2021. Gallagher, Paul; Christian, Terry. Brothers, From Childhood to Oasis (Virgin Books) Harris, John. Britpop!: Cool Britannia and the Spectacular Demise of English Rock. Da Capo Press, 2004. ISBN 0-306-81367-X Hewitt, Paolo. Getting High: The Adventures of Oasis (Boxtree Press) Mathur, Paul. Take Me There: The Story of Oasis (Bloomsbury Publishing PLC) Middles, Mick. Oasis: Round Their Way (Independent Music Press) Moody, P. Oasis: Lost Inside (UFO Music Ltd) Robertson, I. Oasis: What's The Story? (Blake Books) Wheeler, J. Oasis: How Does It Feel? (UFO Books Ltd) Hingley, Tom. Carpet Burns – My life with Inspiral Carpets (Route) ISBN 978-1-901927-54-2 Williams, J. & Cook J. Oasis member attacked on stage (Canoe.ca) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Noel Gallagher. Wikiquote has quotations related to Noel Gallagher. Official website Noel Gallagher at AllMusic Noel Gallagher at IMDb