Sir Bradley Marc Wiggins, CBE (born 28 April 1980) is a British former professional road and track racing cyclist, who competed professionally between 2001 and 2016. He began his cycling career on the track, but later made the transition to road cycling. He won world titles in four disciplines (Madison, individual pursuit, team pursuit and road time trial), and Olympic gold in three (individual pursuit, team pursuit and road time trial). He is the only rider to have won both World and Olympic championships on both the track and the road as well as winning the Tour de France. He has worn the leader's jersey in each of the three Grand Tours of cycling and held the world record in team pursuit on multiple occasions. He won a gold medal at four successive Olympic Games from 2004 to 2016, and held the record as Great Britain's most decorated Olympian with 8 medals until Jason Kenny won his 9th in 2021. He is the only rider to win both the Tour de France and Olympic Gold in the same year, winning them a week apart in 2012. The son of the Australian cyclist Gary Wiggins, Wiggins was born to a British mother in Ghent, Belgium, and raised in London from the age of two. He competed on the track from the early part of his career until 2008. Between 2000 and 2008 he won ten medals at the track world championships, of which six were gold: three in the individual pursuit, two in the team pursuit and one in the madison. His first Olympic medal was a bronze in the team pursuit in Sydney 2000, before winning three medals including the gold in the individual pursuit at the Athens 2004, and two golds in the individual and team pursuit at the Beijing 2008. On the road, Wiggins turned professional in 2001 but made it his focus from 2008. Initially viewed as a time trial specialist and as a rouleur, he showed his ability in stage races when he came fourth in the 2009 Tour de France; he was later promoted to third after Lance Armstrong's results were annulled in 2012. He signed with the newly formed Team Sky in 2010, and in 2011 he claimed his first victory in a major stage race in the Critérium du Dauphiné, as well as finishing third, later promoted to second, in the Vuelta a España. In 2012, Wiggins won the Paris–Nice, the Tour de Romandie, the Critérium du Dauphiné, and became the first British cyclist to win the Tour de France and the time trial at the 2012 Summer Olympics. In 2014, he won gold in the time trial at the road world championships, and founded the WIGGINS cycling team. Wiggins returned to the track at the 2014 Commonwealth Games, and in June 2015 he set a new hour record with a distance of 54.526 km (33.881 mi). In 2016, he won a further world championship in the madison, and gold in the team pursuit at the Olympics, his fifth successive medal winning appearance at the Games. He retired from all forms of professional cycling on 28 December 2016. Wiggins was appointed a CBE in 2009. Following his success in 2012, Wiggins was the subject of further honours and awards: the Vélo d'Or award for best rider of the year, the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award and a knighthood as part of the 2013 New Year Honours. During his career and afterwards he faced a series of allegations that he exploited a loophole in cycling's anti-doping regulations to use a performance-enhancing drug, injections of the powerful corticosteroid, triamcinolone. He did not receive any bans or suspensions in relation to doping during his career. On 5 March 2018, the British House of Commons Committee for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport published their report called "Combatting doping in sport". They concluded inter alia that Team Sky had used the powerful banned corticosteroid triamcinolone in 2012 under TUE (Therapeutic Use Exemption) "to prepare Bradley Wiggins, and possibly other riders supporting him, for the Tour de France. The purpose of this was not to treat medical need, but to improve his power to weight ratio ahead of the race." The report concluded that "we believe that drugs were being used by Team Sky, within the World Anti-Doping Agency rules, to enhance the performance of riders, and not just to treat medical need." Wiggins was born on 28 April 1980 in Ghent, Flanders, Belgium, to an Australian father, Gary Wiggins, and a British mother, Linda. His father lived in Belgium as a professional cyclist. His father left the family when Wiggins was two. Wiggins moved with his mother to her parents' house in Villiers Road, Willesden Green, north-west London, then to a Church Commission flat at Dibdin House estate in neighbouring Maida Vale. He was educated at St Augustine's junior school and then St Augustine's Church of England High School in Kilburn, where his mother was a secretary. He has a younger half-brother, Ryan, from his mother and her partner Brendan. Brendan and Linda separated when Wiggins was in his late teens. Football was his first passion and he was an Arsenal fan, although he would watch rivals Tottenham Hotspur play because his friends supported them. He discovered cycling when his mother told him to watch the television coverage of the individual pursuit final of the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, which Briton Chris Boardman won. She explained it was one of the events at which his father had been successful. He watched the rest of the Olympics and fell in love with cycling and the Olympics itself. In 1992, aged 12, he entered his first race, the West London Challenge 92, on the unopened A312 dual carriageway in Hayes, west London. Later that year he broke a collarbone in a road accident. He received £1,700 compensation for his injuries. He gave his mother £700 and used the rest to buy his first racing bicycle. "At 12", he recalled, "I told my art teacher, I'm going to be Olympic champion, I'm going to wear the yellow jersey in the Tour." He joined the Archer Road Club, where his father had been a member in the late 1970s. He raced at Herne Hill Velodrome and on the road around Crystal Palace National Sports Centre. He gained domestic sponsorship from Condor Cycles's Olympia Sport and then Team Brite. He represented Westminster in the London Youth Games as a teenager. In recognition of his early achievements, 2010 he was inducted into the London Youth Games Hall of Fame. At 16, he won the 1 km (0.6 mi) time trial at the 1996 junior national track championships at Saffron Lane sports centre in Leicester. Selectors invited him to train at weekends at Manchester Velodrome. After leaving school he enrolled on a BTEC foundation course in business studies, but left due to cycling commitments. At the 1997 junior national track championships he won the one-kilometre time trial, 3 km (1.9 mi) individual pursuit, points race and scratch race. He was the only British competitor for the 1997 junior track world championships in Cape Town, coming 16th in the individual pursuit and fourth in the points race. His breakthrough came in June 1998, winning the three-kilometre individual pursuit at the junior track world championships in Cuba, aged 18. The following week, he retained his titles at the junior national track championships in Manchester. He represented England at the Commonwealth Games in Kuala Lumpur, finishing fourth in the individual pursuit, and was a member of the team that won a silver medal in the team pursuit, his first senior medal. He became a full-time Lottery-funded athlete, with a grant of nearly £20,000 a year (equivalent to £37000 in 2024). In 1999, he began training with the Great Britain team pursuit squad and rode the PruTour – now known as the Tour of Britain, his first stage race at that level. In October he competed in the track world championships in Berlin, coming fifth in the team pursuit, and with partner Rob Hayles, came tenth in the Madison, securing qualification for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney. At the Olympics he won a bronze medal in the team pursuit, beating France in the bronze medal match, and came fourth in the Madison with Hayles. In October 2000, he took silver in the team pursuit at the track world championships in Manchester, losing to Germany in the final by under half a second. In 2001, he signed for the Linda McCartney Racing Team, a British professional road cycling team, but it disbanded after internal problems. He was briefly seen in Sigma Sport colours after the collapse of the Linda McCartney team, but then secured further lottery funding, and began racing for the British national team. He came second in the prologue of the Tour of Rhodes, two seconds behind Fabian Cancellara of Mapei–Quick-Step, before winning the general classification in the Cinturón a Mallorca and Flèche du Sud. In September he crashed his bike, requiring two metal pins in his right wrist. Two weeks later he went to the track world championships in Antwerp, managing seventh place in the individual pursuit and consecutive silver in the team pursuit. He joined the French team Française des Jeux in 2002, relocating to Nantes, and soon became homesick, finding it a huge contrast to the British Cycling set-up. At the Commonwealth Games in Manchester he won silver medals in the individual pursuit, losing to Française des Jeux teammate Bradley McGee (Australia) in the final, and team pursuit, beaten by Australia, who set a new world record with a time of three minutes and 59.583 seconds. At the track world championships in Copenhagen, he came fifth in the individual pursuit and won a bronze medal in the team pursuit. Wiggins was frustrated with his result in the individual pursuit at the world championships and became disillusioned with his future with Française des Jeux. British Cycling then enlisted the newly retired Chris Boardman as his mentor. In May 2003, Wiggins made his Grand Tour debut at the Giro d'Italia. On the 18th stage he was eliminated from the race, finishing outside of the time limit in a group of 53 riders. In the summer he competed in the track world championships in Stuttgart, qualifying fastest in the individual pursuit, before beating Russia's Alexei Markov in the first round, setting up a place in the final against Australia's Luke Roberts. He beat Roberts by 0.736 seconds to win the gold medal, his first senior world title. He also came away with a silver medal in the team pursuit, beaten by Australia in the final, who broke their own world record with a time of three minutes and 57.280 seconds. In September he won stage one of the Tour de l'Avenir, beating teammate Benoît Vaugrenard and Rabobank's Joost Posthuma by 14 seconds. In November he won the Six Days of Ghent with Matthew Gilmore of Vlaanderen–T Interim. Wiggins signed with Crédit Agricole for the 2004 season, advised by Boardman, who rode for them his entire professional road career. He began training for the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, at first struggling with illness and fitness, he arrived in peak form; he qualified for the individual pursuit with a time of four minutes and 15.165 seconds, an Olympic record and fifth fastest time in history. In the final he beat McGee by over four seconds to win the gold medal. Wiggins was brought in to the team pursuit squad for the first round against France, replacing Bryan Steel, and advanced into the final, where the team were beaten by Australia, settling for the silver medal. Wiggins then partnered Rob Hayles in the Madison. With 90 laps left of the 200, Hayles crashed with Dutchman Robert Slippens, returning after a few laps. They lost a lap to their rivals, but with 30 to go Wiggins attacked, and they regained the lost lap, moving into second place. They lost points in the final sprint, moving them down to third, taking the bronze medal with 12 points, behind Switzerland on 15 and Australia on 22. Wiggins became the first British athlete in 40 years to win three medals at one Games, the last being Mary Rand at the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. On 31 December 2004 he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2005 New Year Honours, for services to sport. In early 2005, he revealed his desire to compete in road cycling, and in April won the 16 km (9.9 mi) time trial around the town of Briey in northeastern France, on the second stage of the Circuit de Lorraine. In September he won his first race stage since 2001, stage eight of the Tour de l'Avenir; finishing with teammate Saul Raisin, with third-placed Steve Cummings (Landbouwkrediet–Colnago) coming in three minutes and 24 seconds later. Wiggins competed in the Giro d'Italia, finishing 123rd overall. He came seventh in the time trial at the road world championships in Madrid, one minute and 31 seconds down on winner Michael Rogers of Australia. He moved to Cofidis for the 2006 season, and was selected to ride in the Tour de France, finishing his first Tour in 124th place. In March 2007, Wiggins returned to the track for the track world championships in Palma, Majorca, his first appearance at the championships since 2004. In the qualifying round for the individual pursuit, he set his second fastest time since his personal best at the Olympics in Athens, with a time of four minutes and 15.976 seconds; he beat Germany's Robert Bartko in the final to win the gold, catching him after 2750 m. He then went on to win gold in the team pursuit, beating Ukraine in the final. He finished in 13th place in the Madison, with Rob Hayles. On the road he won stage one of the Four Days of Dunkirk and the prologue of the Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré, before competing in the Tour de France and finishing fourth in the prologue in London. On stage six Wiggins launched a solo breakaway after 2 km (1.2 mi) of racing, leading the race for 190.5 km (118.4 mi), before being caught by the peloton with 7 km (4.3 mi) remaining. It was seen as a tribute to British rider Tom Simpson, on the 40th anniversary of his death in the 1967 Tour de France, but was a gift to his wife on her birthday, with Wiggins only finding out about the date's significance after the race. He received the stage's combativity award, for the most aggressive rider. Cofidis withdrew from the race before stage 16 after Cristian Moreni failed a doping test. Wiggins and his teammates were interviewed by police and had their hotel rooms searched. In the aftermath of the positive drug tests on Moreni and on race leader Alexander Vinokourov of Astana, Wiggins spoke out against dopers in the Tour and threw away his Cofidis kit in a bin in Pau Pyrénées Airport, vowing never to race for the team again. Despite this Wiggins continued racing for Cofidis, and in August he won the time trial on stage four of the Tour du Poitou-Charentes. In September, with teammate Michiel Elijzen, he won the Duo Normand, a two-man team time trial over a course of 53.4 km (33.2 mi). His season on the road ended riding for Great Britain at the road world championships in Stuttgart, coming tenth in the time trial, two minutes and ten seconds behind winner Cancellara of Switzerland; a result he was disappointed with, after hoping to finish on the podium. In September he signed for the T-Mobile Team – later known as Team High Road – for the 2008 season, joining compatriot Mark Cavendish, forming a partnership in the Madison. Their first race was the Six Days of Ghent in November, finishing in tenth place; Wiggins still riding for Cofidis. Wiggins then made his only appearance for the T-Mobile Track Team – which is separate from the road team – at the Beijing round of the 2007–08 Track World Cup Classics in December, winning gold in the individual pursuit and silver in the Madison with Cavendish. For the 2008 season, Wiggins's focus was on the track and on the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, deciding not to compete in the Tour de France. In February he travelled to the United States to train, and rode the Tour of California, coming second in the prologue, behind Cancellara (Team CSC). In March Wiggins competed in the track world championships in Manchester, defending his individual pursuit title by beating Dutchman Jenning Huizenga in the final, his third world title in the discipline. He then won the team pursuit, setting a new world record of three minutes and 56.322 seconds in the final against Denmark. Wiggins was due to partner with Hayles in the Madison, but Hayles failed a routine blood test, and was subsequently banned for two weeks. Cavendish was then brought in as his replacement. At around halfway through the race they appeared to be out of contention, with their closest rivals all gaining a lap; but with 35 laps left to race, Wiggins launched an attack which helped them reach the field ten laps later, taking the lead, due to their superior points they had collected in the sprints. They held on to win the gold medal, finishing with 19 points, ahead of Germany on 13. Wiggins then rode the Tour de Romandie and the Giro d'Italia, as preparation for the Olympics in August. At the Giro he was part of the lead-out train that helped Cavendish win two stages. Wiggins came fourth in the final stage's 28.5 km (17.7 mi)-long time trial in Milan, six seconds behind teammate Marco Pinotti, finishing the race in 134th place, three hours, one minute and 39 seconds down on overall winner Alberto Contador of Astana. At the Olympics he began the defence of his title in the individual pursuit, qualifying with a time of four minutes and 15.031 seconds, breaking his own Olympic record from 2004. In the semi-final he beat Russia's Alexander Serov, before taking gold in the final against Hayden Roulston of New Zealand, becoming the first rider to defend an Olympic pursuit title successfully. He was a member of the team pursuit that broke the world record in the heats with a time of three minutes and 55.202 seconds. The following day, the team won the gold medal, beating Denmark by 6.7 seconds with another new world record of three minutes and 53.314 seconds, averaging a speed of 61.719 km/h (38.4 mph). He paired with Cavendish in the Madison, and as the reigning world champions, they were favourites for the gold medal, but they only finished ninth. Cavendish felt that Wiggins had not performed to the best of his ability in the Madison. In September Wiggins joined the American team Garmin–Slipstream for the 2009 season. On 14 December he came ninth in the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award, with 5,633 votes, and was a member of the British cycling team that won the Team of the Year Award. On 31 December he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2009 New Year Honours. Wiggins switched his focus to road and moved with his family to the city of Girona in north-east Spain, where Garmin–Slipstream were based. He started the season in February by helping the team win the opening team time trial of the Tour of Qatar, crossing the line first to take the leaders jersey. In March he came second to Contador in the opening time trial of Paris–Nice, before riding Milan–San Remo and then placing second in the time trial at Critérium International. In April he won the time trial on the final stage of the Three Days of De Panne, twenty seconds ahead of Vacansoleil rider Lieuwe Westra in second place, then had top-30 finishes in the Classics: Gent–Wevelgem and Paris–Roubaix. After finishing in 71st position in the Giro d'Italia and taking second place in the 14.4 km (8.9 mi)-long time trial on the final stage in Rome, he won the Beaumont Trophy, a domestic one-day race in Northumberland, using it as preparation for the Tour de France three weeks later. Wiggins arrived at the Tour de France having lost 6 kg (13.2 lb), and was nicknamed "Twiggo", instead of the usual "Wiggo". He came third in the time trial on stage one in Monaco, 19 seconds behind Team Saxo Bank's Cancellara and one behind Contador. He then helped Garmin–Slipstream to second in stage four's team time trial, despite losing four riders. On stage seven he finished 12th in the first mountain finish and was in fifth place overall at the beginning of the second week. On stage fifteen in Verbier – the second mountain finish, Wiggins finished fifth, rising to third place overall. On stage 17 Contador, Andreas Klöden (Astana) and Team Saxo Bank riders Fränk and Andy Schleck attacked on the final climb – the Col de la Colombière, measuring 7.5 km (4.7 mi) at an average gradient of 8.5%, and was left with Astana's Lance Armstrong and Vincenzo Nibali of Liquigas, who let Wiggins do all the work before attacking one-kilometre from the summit. Wiggins failed to gain time on the descent and finished three minutes and seven seconds down on winner Fränk Schleck, dropping to sixth overall. Wiggins moved back up to fourth, after finishing in second place in the time trial on stage 19, finishing in sixth place 42 seconds down on winner Contador. On stage 20 to Mont Ventoux, Wiggins was dropped by the yellow jersey group 1.4 km (0.9 mi) from the summit, finishing in tenth place and kept fourth overall, three seconds ahead of Fränk Schleck; he held that position in the final stage, equalling Robert Millar's highest ever finish by a British rider in the Tour. In October 2012, following the disqualification of Armstrong, who had originally placed third in the general classification, Wiggins was promoted to third place overall. This decision retroactively gave him the first podium finish by a British rider in Tour de France history. In September Wiggins won the national time trial championship in Buckinghamshire, and in September at the road world championships in Mendrisio, Switzerland, was on course for a bronze medal in the time trial, until a mechanical problem and a delay getting a replacement bike ended with him finishing in 21st place. In October he ended the season by winning the Herald Sun Tour in Victoria, Australia, after helping teammates for most of the race. He led the race after winning the time trial on stage five in Geelong, beating second-placed teammate Svein Tuft by fourteen seconds. Wiggins had been contracted to ride for Garmin Slipstream again in 2010, but it was announced on 10 December that he was to leave to join Team Sky, having signed a four-year contract with the new British team. Wiggins began 2010 as a team leader for the first time and his main target was to win the Tour de France. In February he was part of the team that won the opening team time trial of the Tour of Qatar, before taking second place in the time trial on stage four of the Vuelta a Andalucía, behind Alex Rasmussen of Team Saxo Bank. He then went on to finish third at the Vuelta a Murcia in March, behind winner František Raboň of Team HTC–Columbia and Rabobank rider Denis Menchov in second. In May Wiggins took his first Grand Tour victory on the wet streets of Amsterdam in the opening time trial of the Giro d'Italia, becoming the second Briton to wear the pink jersey after Cavendish in 2009. A series of crashes on the second stage put him 32 seconds behind in the general classification to the new leader Cadel Evans (BMC Racing Team). Another crash on stage three cost him a further three minutes and 58 seconds. He recovered time on stage 11, finishing fourth, from a group of 56 riders, and lay tenth overall. He faded quickly towards the end of the race, however, losing time in the final stages. He came seventh in the 15.3 km (9.5 mi) final time trial in Verona. He finished the race 40th overall, one hour, 47 minutes and 58 seconds behind overall winner Ivan Basso of Liquigas–Doimo. Throughout the race he told the press he was saving himself for the Tour de France, when asked about his form, but in fact felt physically unfit. Wiggins then went to a training camp in the Alps, testing the mountain stages used for the Tour; he struggled to find his fitness. He made a poor start in the Tour, taking 77th place in the prologue after an early starting position left him exposed to poor conditions. He finished eighth on stage three, as cobblestones troubled a number of favourites, but on stage eight at Morzine-Avoriaz, the first mountain summit finish of the Tour, he could only manage 19th place, losing one minute and 45-second to stage winner Andy Schleck (Team Saxo Bank). The following day he lost more time, coming 13th and losing four minutes and 55 seconds to the main contenders. He finished in 36th place on stage fourteen, falling to 18th overall, 11 minutes and 30 seconds behind race leader Andy Schleck; to the press he described his form as "consistently mediocre". On stage 19's time trial from Bordeaux to Pauillac, he finished in ninth place, three minutes and 33 seconds behind winner Cancellara. Wiggins finished the Tour in 24th place, 39 minutes and seven seconds down on winner Contador and seven places behind teammate Thomas Löfkvist. In February 2012, Contador was found guilty of doping and Wiggins's overall position was upgraded to 23rd. He returned to racing in August, at the GP Ouest–France in Plouay. In September he retained his title at the national time trial championships, around the 52.7 km (32.7 mi)-long course in South Wales, before finishing the season at the Tour of Britain. His season ended at the Giro di Lombardia, where he was forced to abandon following a crash. Over the winter he trained with the Great Britain squad at Manchester Velodrome. Wiggins was team leader of Team Sky again at the start of 2011. He opted not to enter the Giro d'Italia, concentrating instead on shorter events and the classics before undertaking altitude training to improve his climbing for the Tour de France. His season began at the Tour of Qatar in February, before winning the team pursuit at the Manchester round of the 2009–10 Track World Cup Classics, with a time of three minutes 55.438, the fifth-fastest time. He then came second in the 27 km (16.8 mi)-long time trial on the sixth stage of the Paris–Nice in March, 20 seconds behind Tony Martin of HTC–Highroad. He finished third overall, behind Martin and Team RadioShack rider Andreas Klöden. In April he rode Paris–Roubaix, and then the Tour de Romandie, finishing third in time trial on stage and helped lead-out teammate Ben Swift to victory on the final stage. In March he finished second in the time trial on the third stage of the Critérium International, four seconds down on Klöden. In May he won the 26 km (16.2 mi)-long time trial on stage four of the Bayern Rundfahrt, beating Leopard Trek's Cancellara by 33 seconds, and finished the event in 14th place overall, while also helping teammate Geraint Thomas to win the event. He then went for altitude training in the Alps, in preparation for the Tour. He took the overall lead in the Critérium du Dauphiné after finishing second in the time trial on stage three. On the final three mountain stages, Wiggins maintained his lead over second-placed Evans to win the race, at that time his biggest victory on the road. In June Wiggins won the national road race championship in Northumberland. On the seventh stage of the Tour, a crash around 40 km (24.9 mi) from the finish in Châteauroux forced Wiggins to retire from the race with a broken collarbone. After he had recovered from his injuries, Team Sky confirmed that Wiggins would ride in the Vuelta a España for the first time, as well as in the road world championships. Wiggins also confirmed that he would take part the Tour in 2012, even though the Olympics would follow soon after. The Vuelta and the world championships were seen as a dress rehearsal for 2012. He had a difficult start to the Vuelta, as Team Sky finished 42 seconds behind winners Leopard Trek in the opening team time trial in Benidorm, but a strong first week brought him back into contention, leaving him twentieth overall after stage eight. On stage nine, Wiggins and teammate Chris Froome attacked on the final climb to finish fourth and fifth respectively, gaining time on Team Katusha rider Joaquim Rodríguez, Michele Scarponi (Lampre–ISD) and other contenders. Wiggins was expected to take the overall lead in the time trial on the following day, but Froome confounded expectations by finishing second on the stage, and Wiggins only rose to third overall. He eventually took the lead after the rest day. Stage fourteen saw Wiggins and Froome gaining on most of their rivals. However, Wiggins lost the lead to Geox–TMC's Juan José Cobo on stage fifteen, when he finished fifth on the climb up the Angliru and dropped to third in the standings, behind Froome, who was second. Wiggins finished the Vuelta in third place – his first podium finish in a Grand Tour. In July 2019 Wiggins was retrospectively promoted to second place in the Vuelta after the UCI stripped Cobo of the win for an anti-doping violation. In September he competed in the road world championships in Copenhagen, he won the silver medal in the 46.3 km (28.8 mi) time trial, finishing one minute and fifteen seconds behind Germany's Martin, and four seconds ahead of reigning champion Cancellara (Switzerland) in third. Four days later, he was part of the Great Britain team that set up Cavendish's victory in the road race; Wiggins took over lead on the final lap of 17 around the 14 km (8.7 mi) circuit, setting a high pace to chase down the breakaway and stop attacks from developing. In 2012 Wiggins continued to focus on road racing. The individual pursuit was removed from the programme at the Olympics later in the year, and in December 2011 coach Rod Ellingworth told The Guardian, "The chances of him doing the team pursuit are really slim now". He began his 2012 season with third place in the Volta ao Algarve, including victory in the concluding time trial, edging out world champion Martin (Omega Pharma–Quick-Step) by less than a second. In March Wiggins finished second in the opening time trial of the Paris–Nice, one second behind Vacansoleil–DCM's Gustav Larsson, who avoided the wet conditions, unlike Wiggins and the other favourites that set off later in the day. The following day he took the lead in the race after being part of a 30-man breakaway as the peloton split into echelons. He held the lead for the rest of the event, winning the final stage, a time-trial on the Col d'Èze, to win the race by eight seconds overall and become the first British rider to win the race since Tom Simpson in 1967. His final stage victory was also good enough to give him the points classification. Wiggins's time is the fastest time for the traditional time-trial on the Col d'Èze. On the stage one of the Tour de Romandie in April, Wiggins took a rare sprint victory from a group of 59 riders. He lost the jersey to Rabobank rider Luis León Sánchez after Sánchez won two consecutive stages, but won the final time trial, despite suffering a dropped chain, to take the overall victory and become the first Briton to win the race in its 65-year history. In June Wiggins competed in the Critérium du Dauphiné, and began the defence of his title with a second-place finish in the prologue, one second behind Team Jayco–AlUla's Luke Durbridge. He took the overall lead the following day, after Durbridge was dropped on one of the stage's six climbs. Wiggins won the fourth stage of the race, a time trial over a course of 53.5 km (33.2 mi), 34 seconds ahead of Martin, his nearest rival, extending his lead over him to 38 seconds. He held the lead to the end, eventually winning by over a minute, with teammate Rogers in second place. Wiggins entered the Tour de France as one of the favourites to win it. Wiggins began the Tour with second place in the prologue, behind Cancellara of RadioShack–Nissan. He took over the yellow jersey by finishing third on stage seven, the first mountaintop finish, becoming the fifth British rider to wear the jersey, and first since David Millar in 2000. Wiggins won the time trial on stage nine. On stage ten, he and his team staved off an attack by Nibali on the descent of the Col du Grand Colombier, with Nibali subsequently accusing Wiggins of disrespecting him: "According to Nibali, Wiggins taunted him at the finish. He turned, looked him in the face and waved". Wiggins extended his lead on stage 11 after Froome helped him to bridge across to his rivals, who had attacked on the finishing climb to La Toussuire. Froome accelerated about 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from the finish, and was ordered via his team radio to wait for his leader. During stage fourteen, a mountain stage, a spectator threw carpet tacks onto the narrow road at the top of the Mur de Péguère climb. Several riders suffered punctures, including Evans, the defending champion, who lost approximately two minutes while his team repaired his bicycle. Wiggins and his fellow members of Team Sky emerged without a puncture. Believing that a puncture resulting from an unfortunate incident should not determine the fate of a competitor, Wiggins then had his teammates and the rest of the peloton slow down to allow Evans and other affected cyclists to catch up. It was perceived as a generous act of sportsmanship and Wiggins was called "Le Gentleman" as a result. On stage 16, Wiggins and Froome were able to follow attacks by Nibali on the final climb of the day and finished with the same time as the Italian. On stage 17, the final mountain stage, Froome and Wiggins finished together in second and third place respectively, with Nibali coming in 19 seconds later. Wiggins won the time trial on stage 19, giving him a lead of three minutes and 21 seconds at the start of the final stage. On that stage, Wiggins helped teammate Cavendish achieve his fourth consecutive victory on the Champs-Élysées and confirmed his own overall victory in the process. Wiggins became the first, and is currently the only person in history to win the Paris–Nice, the Tour de Romandie, the Critérium du Dauphiné and the Tour de France in a single season. Wiggins was selected to participate in two road cycling events at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London – the time trial and the road race. Wiggins finished 103rd in the road race. Wiggins won gold in the time trial ahead of Martin of Germany and Froome of Britain. By doing so he became the most decorated British Olympian, with seven medals, surpassing the six won by Sir Steve Redgrave. This record was soon shared with Sir Chris Hoy, who also obtained his seventh Olympic medal in 2012. Wiggins entered the Guinness World Records, becoming the first cyclist to win an Olympic gold medal and the Tour de France in the same year. Wiggins's boyhood idol Miguel Induráin won five consecutive Tours between 1991 and 1995, and won a gold medal at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta. Wiggins returned to racing at the Tour of Britain in September, pulling out on the sixth stage with a stomach bug. The road race at the road world championships in Limburg, Netherlands, was his last of the season. In October he was awarded the prestigious Vélo d'Or trophy in recognition of his achievements in 2012. In November he was involved in a road accident and taken to hospital with suspected broken ribs, but was released next day with only minor injuries. In December he won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award with 492,064 (30.25%) of the votes cast. Wiggins was knighted in the 2013 New Years Honours for services to cycling, although he claimed he would use the title for 'comedy purposes', stating that he felt "a little bit inferior" to others receiving knighthoods saying "I've won a bike race, you know, and I feel a little bit inferior to everyone", saying "I was just talking to some of the other people getting stuff, and asking them what they've been honoured for, and they're historic things, ground-breaking sciences or whatever". He was among the nominees for the Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year, with Jamaican athlete Usain Bolt taking the prize. It was widely expected that Wiggins would ride to retain his Tour de France title in 2013. However, in February he asserted that his focus for the season would be the Giro d'Italia, after which he would ride the Tour de France in support of teammate Froome. In April he let it be known that he desired to win another Tour, and had hopes of achieving the Tour and Giro double – a feat that has not been achieved since Marco Pantani in 1998. Wiggins participated in a winter training camp in Mallorca. His first race of the season was the Tour of Oman in February. On the first stage he was caught behind a crash, the time delay pushing him back to the back of the field. For the remainder of the race Wiggins helped Froome, who won the overall classification. Wiggins opted not to defend his title at the Paris–Nice, or ride the Tirreno–Adriatico, instead participating in a training camp on Mount Teide in Tenerife. He returned to action at the Volta a Catalunya in March, finishing the race in fifth place overall, 54 seconds behind winner Dan Martin of Garmin–Sharp. In April Wiggins rode the four-day Giro del Trentino in Northern Italy as preparation for the Giro d'Italia. The first day's race schedule consisted of a road race followed by a team time trial. An unexpected breakaway in the road race caused Wiggins to lose over six minutes. However he led the team to victory later in the day during the team time trial. On stage two he cut his deficit to race leader Maxime Bouet of Ag2r–La Mondiale in half, lifting Wiggins into the top-five overall. On the fourth and final stage Wiggins suffered a mechanical problem at the foot of the final 14.6 km (9.1 mi) climb. He ended up finishing the race in fifth place, one minute and 40 seconds down on winner Nibali (Astana). Wiggins entered the Giro d'Italia as one of the favourites for the general classification. Team Sky won the stage two team time trial on the island of Ischia, covering the distance of 17.4 km (10.8 mi) 14 seconds quicker than Nibali's Astana squad. On stage four Wiggins lost 17 seconds after being delayed by a crash within the final 3 km (1.9 mi), dropping him in the standings from second to sixth. A wet stage seven saw Wiggins crash while making a descent some 6 km (3.7 mi) from the finish, placing him in difficulty. Teammates Rigoberto Urán and Sergio Henao helped pace him back toward the leaders, but could not close the gap. Wiggins finished 90 seconds down on the race favourites, dropping him out of the race's top 20. In the following stage, a 54.8 km (34.1 mi) time trial, Wiggins placed second to compatriot Alex Dowsett of Movistar Team. A bike change compelled by a puncture cost Wiggins some time, and he ended up finishing the race ten seconds down on Dowsett. Wiggins struggled on the wet roads of stage nine, losing touch with the peloton on the descent of the Vallombrosa some 60 km (37.3 mi) from the finish. A group of teammates helped pace him back, and the gap was closed. Following stage 11 Wiggins revealed that he was suffering from a chest infection. He withdrew from the race the following day, after losing over three minutes on the day's stage. The presence of a knee injury was disclosed to the public on 31 May, which forced Wiggins to forgo defending his title in the Tour de France. He subsequently suggested he may never ride the Tour again. He returned to racing at the Tour de Pologne, winning stage seven's 37 km (23.0 mi) time trial, 56 seconds ahead of second placed Cancellara. In September, Wiggins led Team Sky at his home race, the Tour of Britain. He won the time trial on stage three on roads around Knowsley Safari Park, close to his home in Lancashire. He held the lead for the rest of the week to win the race for the first time, and take his first stage race victory of the season. The following week at the world championships, he took the silver medal in the time trial, behind winner Tony Martin and ahead of Cancellara in a repeat of the 2011 podium. Wiggins was also selected to ride the road race, but abandoned after one lap, and was soon followed by the other British riders as none finished the race. Wiggins had stated that his main targets for 2014 were the Paris–Roubaix one day Classic, the Tour of California and the road world championships, as well as riding the Tour de France in support of Chris Froome. Wiggins rode the Tour of Flanders as a replacement for the injured Ian Stannard, and finished 32nd, one minute 43 seconds behind the winner Fabian Cancellara, having helped Geraint Thomas on his way to eighth. Wiggins contested Paris–Roubaix for the first time since 2011, becoming the first former Tour de France winner to compete at the race since Greg LeMond in 1992, and secured ninth position, his only top ten finish in a monument as part of a group twenty seconds down on race winner Niki Terpstra. At the Tour of California, Wiggins won the time trial on stage two by a margin of 40 seconds over second placed Rohan Dennis (Garmin–Sharp) to move into the overall lead which he would keep for the rest of the race. Despite that good result, Wiggins was not selected by his team to be riding the Tour de France, prompting his return to the track cycling team as preparation for the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. At the Commonwealth Games in July, Wiggins participated in the 4000m team pursuit with Steven Burke, Ed Clancy and Andy Tennant, managing to win the silver medal. The following day Wiggins announced that he was "done with the road" and that he would likely never ride a grand tour again. He did not rule out some road events but wants to concentrate his training on preparation for the team pursuit at the 2016 Summer Olympics. In September Wiggins rode the Tour of Britain, winning the final 8.8 km (5.5 mi) time trial in London and ending the race in third overall behind the winner, Garmin–Sharp's Dylan van Baarle, and Michał Kwiatkowski (Omega Pharma–Quick-Step). Wiggins then won gold in the time trial at the world road championships in Ponferrada, Spain, with a winning margin of 26 seconds over Tony Martin over the 47.1 km (29.3 mi) course. In January 2015 it was confirmed that Wiggins had signed a contract extension with Team Sky to the end of April 2015, with a focus on attempting to win Paris–Roubaix, before transferring to his newly founded WIGGINS team in order to prepare alongside other members of the British track endurance squad for the team pursuit at the 2016 Summer Olympics. It was also confirmed that he would attempt to break the hour record in 2015. In March he confirmed that he would make his debut with his eponymous team at the inaugural Tour de Yorkshire at the start of May. Early in the season, Wiggins rode the Tour of Qatar, in which he lost out on contention for the general classification after being caught out by a split in the peloton and then finished third in the race's individual time trial stage behind Cancellara and Niki Terpstra, his first opportunity to wear his rainbow skinsuit. Wiggins then took part in the traditional opening race of the classics season, Omloop Het Nieuwsblad, finishing 44th as his teammate Ian Stannard took victory. Wiggins returned to Paris–Nice, a race he had won in 2012. The race opened and closed with time-trials; Wiggins finished 12th in the prologue, did not feature in the following five stages, often riding at the back of the peloton, and then withdrew before the traditional mountain time-trial up the Col d'Èze, a stage for which Wiggins holds the fastest ever time, a legacy of his 2012 victory there. Again, his teammate Richie Porte was victorious in the race. Wiggins was set to ride E3 Harelbeke in March, a return to the cobbled classics in the lead up to his main objective of Paris–Roubaix, but withdrew. Instead he rode Gent–Wevelgem two days later; however, he abandoned the race, which was hit by severe weather conditions with much heavy wind and rain, and only 39 riders finished the race. During the mid-week Three Days of De Panne, which began on 31 March, Wiggins acted as a lead-out man of Sky's sprinter, Elia Viviani, and then convincingly won the final stage's short time trial, expected to be his last in Sky colours, which also gave him 3rd place overall in the race. At Paris–Roubaix, Wiggins's much publicised last race with Sky and primary goal of the early season, he finished in 18th position. He attacked with 30 km (18.6 mi) left to race, but was reabsorbed by the peloton. A few days after the race it was announced that Wiggins would make his bid to break the hour record on 7 June at Lee Valley VeloPark. He participated to the Tour de Yorkshire with WIGGINS Team, but did not register a significant result. A few weeks after leaving Team Sky, Wiggins said he felt "liberated" and "happier". On 7 June 2015 Wiggins broke the hour record, riding 54.526 km (33.881 mi), surpassing Dowsett's mark of 52.937 km (32.894 mi), set five weeks earlier, by more than 3%. On 16 August, Wiggins joined Cavendish on the track for the first time since the 2008 Olympics, winning the Madison in the first round of the Revolution cycling series at the newly opened Derby Velodrome. In October Wiggins took his first gold medal at the European track championships when he was part of the British squad that won the team pursuit. Wiggins competed at the world championships in London, where he took two medals: in the team pursuit, he was part of the British squad that qualified for the final, where they took the silver behind Australia despite leading with 500 metres to go and going on to set the fastest time in competition by a British quartet since 2012. However Wiggins said that he was happy with his performance, stating "that (was) the strongest I've been in a team pursuit, so there's a bit of life left in me yet, and I've got another four or five months to get a bit better". Subsequently, he raced with Cavendish in the madison, where they clinched their second world title in the discipline as a pairing using similar tactics to their 2008 win: accumulating points in the sprints in the early stages of the race, before making up a one lap deficit on their French, Colombian and Swiss rivals by working with the Spanish pairing of Sebastián Mora and Albert Torres in a breakaway, taking the lead and holding on for the win despite Cavendish crashing with 11 laps to go. Through the spring of 2016 Wiggins focused on training for the Olympics, limiting his road racing to a small number of events, finishing low down the placings in all of them. As part of a five-man squad for the team pursuit, Wiggins was reported to be breaking world records in Olympic training, despite apparent disagreements between Wiggins and Cavendish, who was nominated as the squad's fifth rider in order to allow him to enter the omnium at the games. The team pursuit squad achieved the fastest time in qualification for the tournament, before reaching the final with a world record time in a victory against New Zealand. In the final, Great Britain defeated Australia to bring Wiggins his eighth Olympic medal, and his fifth gold. Subsequently, Wiggins announced his plan to retire after the Six Days of Ghent in November. He plans to expand his activities in supporting and running Team Wiggins, including an aim to create a women's team. In his penultimate racing event, the Six Days of London, Wiggins placed second overall with Cavendish, before the pair won his final event, the Six Days of Ghent. After the event, Wiggins confirmed that this had been his last race as a team with Cavendish, but that he may go back on his decision to retire, in the right circumstances. However, on 28 December 2016 he announced that he was retiring from professional cycling saying "2016 is the end of the road for this chapter, onwards and upwards, 'feet on the ground, head in the clouds' kids from Kilburn don't win Olympic Golds and Tour de Frances! They do now." The leaking of his personal medical history by a group of hackers called the Fancy Bear, in September 2016, raised questions about Wiggins's use of therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs), which allow athletes with certified medical conditions to take banned substances so as to allow them to compete with healthy athletes. The leaked files show that he received six TUEs during his career for substances which are otherwise banned by WADA. In 2008, he was granted TUEs for salbutamol (which has since been legalised), formoterol and budesonide to treat asthma. Wiggins later received three intramuscular injections of the drug triamcinolone, a powerful corticosteroid. Triamcinolone is a banned substance because it allows riders to lose weight while maintaining power. The injections were administered to treat hayfever shortly before the 2011 and 2012 Tour de France races, and the 2013 Giro d'Italia. Dr. Jeroen Swart, the South Africa-based exercise physiologist who oversaw Chris Froome's independent physiological testing, has suggested that the 2012 injection of triamcinolone ahead of Wiggins's historic Tour de France victory may have been administered as a preventive measure, rather than to treat existing symptoms, even though it is not a first-line therapy. Whilst the use of banned performance-enhancing substances under TUEs is permitted by the sporting authorities provided the exemption was granted in terms of the WADA rules, questions have been raised about the in-competition use of such drugs. Dr Jeroen Swart questioned the choice of medication, the timing of the injections, the presence of disgraced doctor Geert Leinders on Wiggins's team at the time, and the fact that Wiggins said in his 2012 autobiography My Time that he had only ever received injections for immunisations and some drips. Prentice Steffen, who was team doctor at Garmin–Slipstream when Wiggins rode for the team in 2009, said in a 2016 interview with the BBC that he was "surprised" that Wiggins was granted TUEs for the injection of triamcinolone immediately before three Grand Tours, that the decision by the team to apply for these TUEs was "questionable", and that he felt they should not have been granted. Wiggins has denied that Geert Leinders had any direct involvement in his taking of the TUE drugs. UK Anti-Doping (UKAD), an independent body which is responsible for planning and implementing anti-doping programs in UK sport, began a 14-month investigation in 2016 into the contents of a Jiffy bag which was delivered to Team Sky at the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné for Wiggin's use. In November 2017, it found that there was insufficient evidence to conclude that the jiffy bag had contained a banned substance. UKAD reached its conclusion because of insufficient and lost medical records within British Cycling and Team Sky. The package was collected from British Cycling's office in Manchester by the British Cycling women's manager, Simon Cope, on the request of Shane Sutton – then the technical director for British Cycling. Cope carried the package on a flight to Geneva, after which he drove to meet Richard Freeman, the British Cycling doctor who administered the drug to Wiggins. Cope denied knowing what was in the package. UKAD began its investigation in 2016 following a tip-off that the bag delivered to Wiggins contained the banned corticosteroid triamcinolone, which allows riders to lose weight while maintaining power. UKAD's investigation was hindered by Freeman, who was too ill to give evidence to the inquiry. Freeman had also failed to upload medical records as required, and later reported that his laptop had been stolen while on holiday. He had since resigned from British Cycling. The head of Ukad, Nicole Sapstead, had testified to Parliament that there were no records of British Cycling purchasing Fluimucil in the UK. She told the MPs that British Cycling had however purchased significant amounts of triamcinolone, a corticosteroid generally banned in sport, which Wiggins is known to have used in other cases under a TUE. In December 2016 Sir Dave Brailsford, who ran British Cycling and Team Sky in 2011, informed the Digital, Culture, Media and Sport select committee that the package contained Fluimucil, a brand of legal decongestant, which can be bought at chemists in France without a prescription. Nigel Huddleston MP said it was "extraordinary" that a select committee was required for this simple fact to emerge, and he questioned "the transparency, communication and governance of UK cycling". UK Anti-Doping closed its investigation into the package after being unable to find evidence that it contained a banned substance. It released a statement which said that its investigation had been hampered by the lack of availability of detailed medical records. Parts of the investigation remain open, as Ukad has not yet been able to establish why products containing testosterone were delivered to the national cycling centre. Damian Collins MP, the chairman of the select committee, said that the decision was "not an exoneration of anyone", and that "If Sky and British Cycling had kept proper medical records, this could have been wrapped up a lot sooner. It is unacceptable. A cloud now hangs over one of our greatest Olympians." Wiggins has always denied any wrongdoing on his part, and has described the investigation as a "malicious witch-hunt". The Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee made two major findings against Wiggins in a report released in March 2018. The committee believed Team Sky used the drug triamcinolone to "enhance the performances of riders and not just to treat medical need". The committee noted that there is no written evidence to substantiate a claim by Team Sky boss David Brailsford that the "jiffy-bag" contained Fluimucil. The committee stated that Team Sky doctor Richard Freeman, who had originally failed to record Wiggins's use of medical products, could no longer confirm that the contents of the bag were Fluimucil. It also noted that Freeman was "the only reported source of this information." On 5 March 2018, the British House of Commons Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee published their report called "Combatting doping in sport". Their inquiry spanned the work of two committees, and started in August 2015. Among other things, the committee looked into doping in cycling, in response to the Fancy Bear hacking into the database of WADA and their publication of Therapeutic Use Exemption certificates (TUEs) issued to Bradley Wiggins in 2011, 2012 and 2013. They specifically inquired into the medication used at that time by Wiggins and Team Sky. In their conclusions, in paragraph 110, they state as follows: From the evidence that has been received by the Committee regarding the use of triamcinolone at Team Sky during the period under investigation, and particularly in 2012, we believe that this powerful corticosteroid was being used to prepare Bradley Wiggins, and possibly other riders supporting him, for the Tour de France. The purpose of this was not to treat medical need, but to improve his power to weight ratio ahead of the race. The application for the TUE for the triamcinolone for Bradley Wiggins, ahead of the 2012 Tour de France, also meant that he benefited from the performance enhancing properties of this drug during the race. This does not constitute a violation of the WADA code, but it does cross the ethical line that David Brailsford says he himself drew for Team Sky. In this case, and contrary to the testimony of David Brailsford in front of the Committee, we believe that drugs were being used by Team Sky, within the WADA rules, to enhance the performance of riders, and not just to treat medical need. The committee noted in its report that there is no written evidence to substantiate a claim by Team Sky boss David Brailsford that the "jiffy-bag" couriered to Team Sky at the 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné for Wiggins's use contained Fluimucil, a legal decongestant used for clearing mucus. The committee now says that Team Sky doctor Richard Freeman, who had failed to properly record Wiggins's use of medical products, can no longer confirm it was in fact Fluimucil. They also noted that Freeman was "the only reported source of this information." The BBC called the report "A devastating blow to the reputations of some of the biggest names in British sport", and The Irish Times reported that Wiggins's Tour de France win is now in question. The Guardian wrote that: "It is only three months since we were last asking whether the latest crisis would signal the end for Team Sky. Now here we are again, wondering how much longer this organisation can continue when every scintilla of credibility they had as a completely clean team has been decimated by another inquiry." Wiggins and Team Sky have continued to deny that any drugs were used without medical need. Wiggins was married to Catherine (née Cockran), whom he met during the 2002 Commonwealth Games, after first meeting as juniors in 1997; they have three children together, Ben, Rebekah and Isabella. Ben is also a racing cyclist, who has enjoyed success at the junior level, including winning the points race title at the 2022 European Track Championships and taking the silver medal in the time trial at the 2023 Road World Championships. Their family lived in Eccleston, Lancashire, close to the Manchester Velodrome, the home of British Cycling and Ineos Grenadiers. In May 2020, it was announced that Wiggins and his wife had separated. Wiggins endured a difficult relationship with his father Gary Wiggins, who made no effort to contact Bradley for 14 years, since leaving the family when Bradley was two years old. Bradley only knew his father had been a professional cyclist. Their first meeting was in 1999, when Bradley was at a training camp in Australia; also meeting his two half-sisters from relationships his father had in Australia before and after the one with his mother. They next met the following year, when Bradley was back in Australia training and had gone out three weeks in advance to stay with Gary. Bradley quickly became disillusioned at his father's alcohol and drug problems, and they never met again. Gary Wiggins died in Aberdeen, New South Wales in 2008, aged 55. Bradley did not attend the funeral. Wiggins is a well-known mod and owns a collection of classic motor scooters and guitars from the 1960s and 1970s. He is a keen musician and guitarist and in December 2012 he made a surprise appearance at a Paul Weller charity concert, playing guitar on "That's Entertainment"; and together recorded a special for BBC Radio 6 Music discussing their love of music and mod culture, broadcast on Boxing Day. He supports Liverpool Football Club and Wigan Warriors rugby league club, and in 2012 the latter gave him a life membership, which he described as his highlight of the year. Wiggins presented the winner of the European Super League's 2012 Man of Steel Award to the Warriors player Sam Tomkins. In July 2012 it was announced that Wiggins would collaborate with the Fred Perry clothing label "to develop an authentic, non-technical range of cycle wear". The clothing range, known as the Bradley Wiggins X Fred Perry Collaboration, was launched in July 2012 under a six-year contract. In 2012 Wiggins launched the Bradley Wiggins Foundation to draw people into sport and regular exercise. The foundation backed the professional women's team Wiggle–Honda, which launched for the 2013 season. However, in February 2015 Wiggins announced that the Foundation would be wound down in the run-up to the 2016 Olympics. On 10 May 2015, Wiggins was interviewed by Kirsty Young as guest castaway on BBC Radio 4's Desert Island Discs; his favourite musical piece was "Sound and Vision" by David Bowie, his book choice was Slaying the Dragon: How to Turn Your Small Steps to Great Feats by Michael Johnson and his luxury item was a family photo album. Wiggins served as guest editor of Radio 4's The Today Programme on 29 December 2015: as part of this he interviewed Paul Smith about fashion, Gary Lineker about making the transition from being a sportsman to working in the media, and discussed cycling with Jeremy Corbyn and Steve Hilton. In 2019, in The Times, he revealed himself to be a fan of Only Fools And Horses and Chas and Dave, but "not really a reader" nor a lover of art or theatre. In August 2019, Wiggins announced his intention to become a social worker after enrolling for a degree at the Open University. He said that his upbringing, in Kilburn, London, gave him a "mental toughness" that would be helpful in supporting others. He also said that he doesn't "give a shit" about his cycling career and that he is "detached from it". Wiggins speaks fluent French through his participation with French cycling teams and after living in France for a number of years. In a period after the 2004 Olympics, Wiggins started to drink heavily as he struggled to cope with his newfound fame. He stopped when his son Ben was born. "We had a baby. So then it was a case of, 'well, I've got to earn some fucking money' and the responsibility takes over", he explained. At the 2012 Olympics, Wiggins rang the Olympic Bell to mark the start of the opening ceremony inside the Olympic Stadium. Wiggins has written a number of books about his career. The first, entitled In Pursuit of Glory, was published in 2008 and covers his success as a track cyclist up to the Beijing Olympics. It was updated in 2009 to include his 2009 Tour de France fourth place (later updated to third). On Tour was published in 2010 and covers that year's Tour de France. Following his success at the 2012 Tour de France he published The Bradley Wiggins Opus. That same year he also published My Time which largely deals with the 2012 Tour de France and Olympics. My Story was published in 2013 and is an edited version of My Time for younger readers. In 2015 he added My Hour which tells of his successful attempt at the Hour record. In 2018 he added a seventh book, Icons, which details some of the riders who inspired him. Wiggins's power output has been measured to be over 450 watts at anaerobic threshold. In March 2014 Wiggins made an appearance as himself in an episode of BBC Radio 4's soap opera The Archers as part of the Sport Relief charitable appeal. Two years later he appeared in a comedy sketch filmed at the London Olympic Velodrome with Michael Crawford on Sport Relief 2016 where Crawford reprised his Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em character Frank Spencer. A sculpture dedicated to and inspired by Wiggins was unveiled in 2014 at St Augustine's CE High School, his former school. On 5 January 2017 it was announced that Wiggins would be a contestant on the Channel 4 winter sports reality television programme The Jump. However he was forced to withdraw from the show during the second week when he fractured his leg during training. In June 2017 Wiggins revealed that he had taken up rowing on a serious basis after initially using it as a means to keep fit, with fellow Olympic champion James Cracknell as his coach. He stated that he was planning to compete in the British Indoor Rowing Championships in December of the same year with a view to competing at the 2020 Summer Olympics. He competed in the elite 2000m at the Championships, finishing 21st in a time of 6:22.5 after a slow start due to mistakenly believing that the race had false started. In 2018 Wiggins launched The Bradley Wiggins Show, a cycle racing podcast produced in association with Eurosport, for a series of four episodes covering that year's Tour de France. The series received over a million downloads, and the show was renewed for a 20-episode run the following year, featuring discussion of the spring classics, Grand Tours and Road World Championships. He also took up punditry work for the channel in 2019, providing studio-based analysis for the Giro d'Italia before acting as a motorbike-mounted reporter for the Tour de France. In July 2019 Comedy Central announced that they had approved the production of five episodes of Gods of the Game, a half-hour gameshow to be hosted by Wiggins featuring members of the public competing against elite sportspeople, including Mo Farah, Chris Hoy, Rebecca Adlington, Nicola Adams and Tim Henman, in "comedy versions" of their sports. Wiggins co-presented the programme with Tom Rosenthal. In a review of the show, Stuart Heritage of The Guardian wrote that "Gods of the Game is shooting for high-concept absurdity, but for the most part it falls short and only manages to be slightly diverting". Wiggins said in an interview with Men's Health in 2022 that he had been groomed sexually by a cycling coach when he was 13. He said that he could not tell his stepfather about the abuse, because his stepfather was violent towards him. In May 2023 Wiggins revealed the name of the abuser. Sources: 2000 7th Overall Circuit des Mines 2001 1st Overall Cinturón a Mallorca 1st Stages 1 (ITT) & 2 1st Overall Flèche du Sud 1st Stage 1 3rd Overall International Tour of Rhodes 9th Lincoln International GP 10th Overall Circuit des Mines 2003 1st Stage 1 (ITT) Tour de l'Avenir 5th Overall Tour du Poitou-Charentes 2005 (1 pro win) 1st Stage 8 Tour de l'Avenir 4th Overall Circuit de Lorraine 1st Stage 2 (ITT) 7th Time trial, UCI World Championships 7th LuK Challenge Chrono (with Christophe Moreau) 2007 (4) 1st Duo Normand (with Michiel Elijzen) 1st Prologue Critérium du Dauphiné Libéré 1st Stage 1 (ITT) Four Days of Dunkirk 1st Stage 4 (ITT) Tour du Poitou-Charentes 10th Time trial, UCI World Championships Combativity award Stage 6 Tour de France 2009 (4) 1st Time trial, National Championships 1st Overall Herald Sun Tour 1st Stage 5 (ITT) 1st Beaumont Trophy 1st Stage 3b (ITT) Three Days of De Panne 1st Stage 1 (TTT) Tour of Qatar 3rd Overall Tour de France 2010 (2) 1st Time trial, National Championships Giro d'Italia 1st Stage 1 (ITT) Held after Stage 1 1st Stage 1 (TTT) Tour of Qatar 3rd Overall Vuelta a Murcia 2011 (3) 1st Road race, National Championships (Beaumont Trophy) 1st Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 1st Stage 4 (ITT) Bayern Rundfahrt 2nd Time trial, UCI World Championships 2nd Overall Vuelta a España Held after Stages 11–15 3rd Overall Paris–Nice 9th UCI World Tour 2012 (12) 1st Time trial, Olympic Games 1st Overall Tour de France 1st Stages 9 (ITT) & 19 (ITT) 1st Overall Paris–Nice 1st Points classification 1st Stage 8 (ITT) 1st Overall Tour de Romandie 1st Stages 1 & 5 (ITT) 1st Overall Critérium du Dauphiné 1st Stage 4 (ITT) 2nd UCI World Tour 3rd Overall Volta ao Algarve 1st Stage 5 (ITT) 2013 (3) 1st Overall Tour of Britain 1st Stage 3 (ITT) 1st Stage 7 (ITT) Tour de Pologne 1st Stage 2 (TTT) Giro d'Italia 2nd Time trial, UCI World Championships 5th Overall Giro del Trentino 1st Stage 1b (TTT) 5th Overall Volta a Catalunya 2014 (5) 1st Time trial, UCI World Championships 1st Time trial, National Championships 1st Overall Tour of California 1st Stage 2 (ITT) 3rd Overall Tour of Britain 1st Stage 8a (ITT) 9th Paris–Roubaix 2015 (1) 3rd Overall Three Days of De Panne 1st Stage 3b (ITT) Sources: 1998 1st Individual pursuit, UCI World Junior Championships National Junior Championships 1st Points race 1st Scratch 2nd Team pursuit, Commonwealth Games 1999 1st Madison (with Rob Hayles), National Championships 2000 2nd Team pursuit, UCI World Championships 3rd Team pursuit, Olympic Games 3rd Six Days of Grenoble (with Rob Hayles) 2001 1st Individual pursuit, UEC European Under-23 Championships 2nd Team pursuit, UCI World Championships 2002 Commonwealth Games 2nd Individual pursuit 2nd Team pursuit 2nd Six Days of Ghent (with Matthew Gilmore) 3rd Team pursuit, UCI World Championships 2003 UCI World Championships 1st Individual pursuit 2nd Team pursuit 1st Six Days of Ghent (with Matthew Gilmore) 2004 Olympic Games 1st Individual pursuit 2nd Team pursuit 3rd Madison (with Rob Hayles) 2007 UCI World Championships 1st Individual pursuit 1st Team pursuit UCI World Cup Classics 1st Individual pursuit, Manchester 1st Team pursuit, Manchester 1st Team pursuit, Sydney 1st Individual pursuit, Beijing 2nd Madison (with Mark Cavendish), Beijing 2008 Olympic Games 1st Individual pursuit 1st Team pursuit UCI World Championships 1st Individual pursuit 1st Team pursuit 1st Madison (with Mark Cavendish) 2011 1st Team pursuit, UCI World Cup Classics, Manchester 2014 2nd Team pursuit, Commonwealth Games 2015 Hour record: 54.526 km 1st Team pursuit, UEC European Championships Revolution Series, Derby 1st Team pursuit 1st Madison (with Mark Cavendish) 2016 1st Team pursuit, Olympic Games UCI World Championships 1st Madison (with Mark Cavendish) 2nd Team pursuit 1st Six Days of Ghent (with Mark Cavendish) 2nd Six Days of London (with Mark Cavendish) Sources: Cycling Weekly Cyclist of the Year: 2000 Officer of the Order of the British Empire: 2005 Commander of the Order of the British Empire: 2009 London Youth Games Hall of Fame: 2010 GQ Lifetime Achievement: 2012 Vélo d'Or: 2012 Sports Journalists' Association's Sportsman of the Year: 2012 Cyclingnews.com Rider of the Year: 2012 International Flandrien of the Year: 2012 Bidlake Memorial Prize: 2012 BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 2012 Laureus World Sports Sportsman of the Year Award (nominated): 2013 Knight Bachelor: 2013 Biography portal Sports portal Olympics portal 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics gold post boxes List of British cyclists List of British cyclists who have led the Tour de France general classification List of Grand Tour general classification winners List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games List of multiple Olympic gold medalists List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists List of Olympic medalists in cycling (men) List of people from Ghent List of sporting knights and dames World record progression track cycling – Men's team pursuit Yellow jersey statistics "Knights Bachelor" (PDF). Cabinet Office. 29 December 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2012. Harvey, Chris (1 August 2012). "All hail Wiggo, the people's Olympian". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2012. "Bradley Wiggins". Team Sky. BSkyB. Archived from the original on 28 December 2014. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Olympics – Which British athlete has won the most Olympic medals for Team GB? All you need to know". Eurosport UK. 1 April 2020. Retrieved 2 June 2020. Ballinger, Alex (22 May 2020). "TUEs don't help you win an Olympic medal, according to anti-doping study". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 25 September 2020. House of Commons Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee – Combatting doping in sport – Fourth Report of Session 2017–19; HC 366 Published on 5 March 2018; by authority of the House of Commons Wiggins 2012a, p. 20–24. Lewis, Tim (22 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: the undisputed king of the road". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013. Retrieved 23 January 2015. Elrington 1989, p. 212–217. Wiggins 2012a, p. 24–26. Lefley, Jack (19 August 2008). "The boy who became a double Olympic champion". Evening Standard. Evening Standard Limited. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Wallace, Sam (21 July 2012). "Tour de France: The making of Bradley Wiggins". The Independent. Wiggins 2012a, p. 26. O'Hagan, Simon (23 February 2003). "How rising star of British cycling Bradley Wiggins is learning from the great Chris Boardman". The Independent. Independent Print. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 27. Wiggins 2012a, p. 28. Wiggins 2012a, p. 29. Wiggins 2012a, p. 31–32. Hattenstone, Simon (2 November 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: 'Kids from Kilburn aren't supposed to win the Tour'". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 November 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 29–32. McManus, Gerry (2001). "Cyclingnews talks with Bradley Wiggins". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 29 November 2012. "Hall of Fame". London Youth Games. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 34–35. Wiggins 2012a, p. 35. Wiggins 2012a, p. 36. "Bradley Wiggins". Cycling Archives. de Wielersite. Retrieved 30 October 2012. "1998 Junior Track World Championships". Cyclingnews.com. June 1998. Retrieved 25 February 2013. "British National Track Championships". Cyclingnews.com. 28 July 1998. Retrieved 8 March 2013. "British Track Championships, Manchester Velodrome". Cyclingnews.com. 30 July 1998. Retrieved 8 March 2013. "1998 Commonwealth Games Track Results". Cyclingnews.com. September 1998. Retrieved 20 December 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 38. UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Wiggins 2012a, p. 40. "2000 Olympics Track Cycling – Day 4". Cyclingnews.com. 19 September 2000. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "2000 Olympics Track Cycling – Day 6". Cyclingnews.com. 21 September 2000. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "2000 World Track Championships – Day 2". Cyclingnews.com. 26 October 2000. Retrieved 1 March 2013. "Wiggins wheels his way to history". BBC Sport. 31 December 2004. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 59. "2001 Tour of Rhodes Prologue". Cyclingnews.com. 25 February 2013. Retrieved 2 March 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 59–60. "World Track Championships – Day 2". Cyclingnews.com. 27 September 2001. Retrieved 11 March 2013. "World Track Championships – Day 3". Cyclingnews.com. 28 September 2011. Retrieved 11 March 2013. McManus, Gerry (2002). "Cyclingnews talks with Bradley Wiggins". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 62-64. Hughes, Dewi (31 July 2002). "Aussies ride to gold". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 December 2012. Lindsay, Clive (1 August 2002). "Aussies set world best". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 December 2012. "World Track Championships – Men's Individual Pursuit". Cyclingnews.com. September 2002. Retrieved 25 February 2013. "World Track Championships – Men's 4000m Team Pursuit". Cyclingnews.com. September 2002. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 66–67. Fotheringham, William (31 July 2003). "Boardman the big wheel still has role". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Henry, Chris (29 May 2003). "Frigo returns, Garzelli crashes but hangs on to GC position". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 1 March 2013. "World Track Championships – Men's Individual Pursuit". Cyclingnews.com. 2003. Retrieved 15 March 2013. Mangnall, Valkerie (2003). "World Track Championships – Men's Team Pursuit". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 15 March 2013. "Wiggins first leader". Cyclingnews.com. 4 September 2003. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Rosenthal, Nick (23 November 2003). "Gilmore and Wiggins hungry for a win at Gent". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 29 November 2012. "Wiggins jumps to Crédit Agricole". VeloNews. 27 August 2003. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 2 March 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 76-77. Wiggins 2012a, p. 83. "Wiggins through to final". BBC Sport. 21 August 2004. Retrieved 25 January 2013. "Wiggins wins battle of the Brads". Cyclingnews.com. Australian Associated Press. 21 August 2004. Retrieved 16 March 2013. Jones, Rob (22 August 2004). "Track Day 3 Round Up". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 16 March 2013. "Aussie cyclists defeat GB". BBC Sport. 23 August 2004. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Jones, Jeff (25 August 2004). "Australians repeat in Athens". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 17 March 2013. "Wiggins claims third medal". BBC Sport. 25 August 2004. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Fraser, Andrew (25 August 2004). "Wiggins shocked by medal haul". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 January 2013. "New Year Honours List 2005" (PDF). The National Archives. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 March 2005. Retrieved 27 November 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (7 January 2005). "Cycling jester takes to the road". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2013. McGrath, Andy (4 April 2005). "44th Circuit de Lorraine (2.1) – Stage 2 and 3". Daily Peloton. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Quénet, Jean-François (8 September 2005). "A new page opened in Olympic star's success story". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Tan, Anthony (29 May 2005). "Salvation for Savoldelli". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Stokes, Stokes; Alvarez Macias, Hernan (22 September 2005). "Gutierrez and Cancellara take silver and bronze". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 25 January 2013. "Wiggins switches to Cofidis team". BBC Sport. 28 September 2005. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 140. Stokes, Shane (29 March 2007). "Wiggins dominates pursuit final". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Stokes, Shane (30 March 2007). "Great Britain take team gold". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Stokes, Shane (1 April 2007). "Madison title for Marvulli and Risi". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 14 March 2013. "Next goal: Triple gold in Beijing". Cyclingnews.com. 23 October 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2013. "Cancellara claims Tour prologue". BBC Sport. 7 July 2007. Retrieved 23 February 2013. Adamson, Mike (13 July 2007). "Bold Wiggins wilts at the last". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2013. Decaluwé, Brecht (12 July 2007). "Wiggins' long day". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 12 March 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 150–151. "Sir Bradley Wiggins CBE". British Cycling. 28 April 1980. Retrieved 26 September 2013. "Wiggins' Cofidis team out of Tour". BBC Sport. 25 July 2007. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Wiggins, Bradley (13 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: I can never dope because it would cost me everything". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 March 2013. "Wiggins wins Poitou Charantes Time trial". Cycling Weekly. 31 August 2007. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Osborne, Ian (25 September 2007). "Wiggins and Elijzen win 23rd Duo Normand". BikeRadar. Future plc. Archived from the original on 24 May 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Farrand, Stephen (27 September 2007). "Wiggins and Millar disappointed with TT rides". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Farrand, Stephen (28 September 2007). "Wiggins: "I'm happy to be joining T-Mobile'". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2013. "Wiggins and Cavendish join forces". BBC Sport. 1 November 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2013. Farrand, Stephen (26 November 2007). "Kennaugh and Blythe win in ghent". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2013. Atkins, Ben (30 November 2007). "Bradley Wiggins' and Mark Cavendish's Dolan track bikes". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 14 March 2013. Birnie, Lionel (2 December 2007). "Wiggins on track for first and only T-Mobile appearance". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 13 March 2013. "Wiggins snatches gold in Beijing". BBC Sport. 7 December 2007. Retrieved 8 February 2013. Birnie, Lionel (9 December 2007). "Beijing Night 3: Wiggins and Cavendish come good". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2013. "GB pair ditch Tour for Olympics". BBC Sport. 23 November 2007. Retrieved 14 March 2013. Wiggins 2012a, p. 178. "Wiggins claims gold for Team GB". BBC Sport. 26 March 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2013. "2008 World Championships Final Results". TissotTiming.com. Union Cycliste Internationale. Retrieved 12 August 2016. Moore, Richard (27 March 2008). "Hayles exclusion takes shine off Wiggins gold". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 March 2013. Atkins, Ben; Stokes, Shane (29 March 2008). "Wiggins and Cavendish get the High Road over the Germans". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 1 December 2012. Stokes, Shane (15 May 2008). "Wiggins satisfied with Giro". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 208. Farrand, Stephen (1 June 2008). "Contador Seals Giro d'Italia Victory in Final time trial". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Williams, Richard (15 August 2008). "Wiggins clicks into gear and breaks Games record". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 March 2013. "Superb Wiggins grabs pursuit gold". BBC Sport. 16 August 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2012. "GB pursuit team set world record". BBC Sport. 17 August 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Foursome put the 'great' in Great Britain". Cyclingnews.com. 18 August 2008. Retrieved 22 March 2013. Fotheringham, Alasdair (20 August 2008). "Wiggins and Cav' miss out on Olympic Madison". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Caroe, Charlie (30 September 2008). "Bradley Wiggins hasn't spoken to Mark Cavendish since Beijing Olympics". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2013. Chadband, Ian (23 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins and Mark Cavendish fired up to banish their Beijing heartache". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2012. Birnie, Lionel (3 September 2008). "Wiggins on his move to Garmin-Chipotle". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 1 December 2012. "Wiggins walks a different road". Cycling Weekly. 22 December 2008. Retrieved 14 March 2013. "Sports Personality 2008". BBC Sport. 14 December 2008. Retrieved 29 October 2012. "No. 58929". The London Gazette (Supplement). 31 December 2008. p. 8. Wiggins 2012a, p. 167–168. Fotheringham, Alasdair (1 February 2009). "Wiggins leads Qatar after Garmin take opening team time trial". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 270. "Cavendish and Wiggins win stages". BBC Sport. 2 April 2009. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Tan, Anthony (31 May 2009). "From Russia to Roma, with love: Menchov falls for maglia rosa". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Wynn, Nigel (14 June 2009). "Wiggins shows international class with Beaumont Trophy win". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 27 January 2013. Bevan, Chris (26 July 2009). "From track star to Tour contender". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 March 2013. "Fabian Cancellara in yellow". BikeRadar. Future plc. Agence France-Presse. 4 July 2009. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Brendan, Gallagher (7 July 2009). "Lance Armstrong loses out on yellow jersey after Astana stage win". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Birnie, Lionel (10 July 2009). "Feillu wins at Arcalis, Nocentini takes yellow, Contador leap-frogs Lance". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 28 October 2012. Barnett, Chris (19 July 2009). "Alberto Contador of Astana wins stage 15 to take yellow jersey". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Farrelly, Tony (22 July 2009). "Schlecks move up as Wiggins & Armstrong pushed down". road.cc. Farrelly Atkinson. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Bevan, Chris (22 July 2009). "Tour de France – stage 17 as it happened". BBC Sport. Retrieved 27 March 2013. Tan, Anthony (23 July 2009). "Tour title set in concrete for Contador". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 27 March 2013. "Brave Wiggins holds on to fourth". BBC Sport. 25 July 2009. Retrieved 29 October 2012. "Bradley Wiggins 2009 Tour de France result upgraded". BBC Sport. 29 October 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Wynn, Nigel (6 September 2009). "Wiggins and Pooley take British TT Champs titles". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 24 February 2013. Farrand, Stephen (24 September 2009). "Wiggins accepts Worlds time trial defeat". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 27 January 2013. Farrand, Stephen (17 October 2009). "Wiggins ends the season with Sun Tour win". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Wynn, Nigel (16 October 2009). "Wiggins wins Sun Tour TT and takes race lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 27 January 2013. Fotheringham, William (10 December 2009). "Bradley Wiggins joins Team Sky on four-year-deal". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Bevan, Chris (4 January 2010). "Bradley Wiggins targets winning the 2010 Tour de France". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Fotheringham, Alasdair (7 February 2010). "Team Sky win opening stage in Qatar to put Boasson Hagen in yellow". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Fotheringham, Alasdair; Wynn, Nigel (24 February 2010). "Wiggins second in Andalusia TT as Rogers takes lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Moore, Richard (7 March 2010). "Bradley Wiggins takes third for Team Sky in Tour of Murcia". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Moore, Richard (8 May 2010). "Bradley Wiggins wins opening stage of the Giro d'Italia for Team Sky". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 April 2013. Wynn, Nigel (9 May 2010). "Farrar wins crash-strewn Giro stage 2; Evans takes lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Canning, Andrew (10 May 2010). "Weylandt wins stage three of the Giro as Evans loses race lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Canning, Andrew (19 May 2010). "Petrov wins epic Giro stage 11 as GC race turns on its head". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 6 September 2012. Wynn, Nigel (1 June 2010). "Brits at the Giro d'Italia 2010: How did they do?". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 6 September 2012. "Larsson takes final stage as Basso wins overall". Cycling Weekly. 30 May 2010. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Wiggins 2012b, p. 18. "Team Sky's decision to put Wiggins off early back-fires". Cycling Weekly. 4 July 2010. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (6 July 2010). "Thor Hushovd sprints to victory in cobbled classic". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2013. "Lance's hopes 'finished' amid crashes". ESPN. Associated Press. 11 July 2010. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "Andy Schleck grabs Tour de France lead as Evans toils". BBC Sport. 13 July 2010. Retrieved 10 March 2013. Brendan, Gallagher (18 July 2010). "'I feel consistently mediocre' says Bradley Wiggins". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2013. Simon, Richardson (24 July 2010). "Wiggins and Thomas round off Tour with top-ten in the time trial". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 March 2013. "2010 Tour de France FINAL and Stage 20 results". VeloNews. 25 July 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2012. Wynn, Nigel (6 February 2012). "Contador banned for two years after clenbuterol positive". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 29 March 2013. Wiggins 2012b, p. 28. "Wiggins And Pooley Win British Time Trial Championships". BikeRadar. Future plc. 6 September 2010. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Howes, Nick (22 October 2010). "Quiet finish in Lombardy". Team Sky. BSkyB. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2013. Wiggins 2012b, p. 51. Farrand, Stephen (30 November 2010). "Wiggins talks about his Tour de France failure". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 10 March 2013. Sidwells, Chris; Reynolds, Hannah (18 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins's Tour de France training". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 10 March 2013. Vesty, Marc (20 February 2011). "British pursuit team power to gold at World Cup". BBC Sport. Retrieved 1 April 2013. MacMichael, Simon (11 March 2011). "Tony Martin powers into race lead, Bradley Wiggins up to third overall". road.cc. Farrelly Atkinson. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins finishes third in Paris–Nice race". BBC Sport. 13 March 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Wiggins 2012b, p. 52. Wynn, Wynn (1 May 2011). "Swift wins final Romandie stage as Evans wins overall". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 2 April 2013. Quénet, Jean-François (27 March 2011). "Schleck defends overall lead". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 28 November 2012. Wynn, Nigel (28 May 2011). "Wiggins wins Bayern TT as Thomas moves into lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 2 April 2013. Nigel Wynn (29 May 2011). "Geraint Thomas wins Bayern Rundfahrt overall". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (13 June 2011). "Bradley Wiggins to go to high altitude camp in Tour de France preparations". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins takes yellow jersey in Critérium du Dauphiné". BBC Sport. 8 June 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Fotheringham, Alasdair (13 June 2011). "Wiggins seals Dauphiné triumph". The Independent. Independent Print. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "Thomas, Kennaugh and Stannard all in the mix". Sky Sports. BSkyB. 26 June 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "Tour de France: Wiggins crashes out, Cavendish wins stage". BBC Sport. 8 July 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2011. "Wiggins raring to go". Team Sky. BSkyB. 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Fotheringham, Alasdair (27 July 2011). "Wiggins set to put Tour before Olympic hopes". The Independent. Independent Print. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "Sky struggle in first Spain stage". BBC Sport. 20 August 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Wynn, Nigel (27 August 2011). "Rodriguez wins again in Vuelta to take overall lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 13 March 2013. Gallagher, Brendan (28 August 2011). "Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome put themselves into overall contention". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2013. Lowe, Felix (31 August 2011). "Moncoutie on song as Wiggins takes red". Yahoo! Eurosport. TF1 Group. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "Team Sky's Bradley Wiggins takes the red jersey". The Daily Telegraph. 31 August 2011. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2013. MacLeary, John (3 September 2011). "Bradley Wiggins tightens grip on overall lead after Rein Taaramäe wins on mountain top". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Fotheringham, William (4 September 2011). "Bradley Wiggins of Team Sky loses lead on stage 15 of Vuelta a España". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Bull, Nick (11 September 2011). "Froome and Wiggins finish on Vuelta podium". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "'Better late than never': Chris Froome awarded 2011 Vuelta title after Cobo ban". The Guardian. 18 July 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2019. Williams, Ollie (21 September 2011). "Bradley Wiggins wins time trial silver". BBC Sport. Retrieved 20 March 2013. Williams, Ollie (25 September 2011). "Mark Cavendish and Britain win road race title". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 September 2011. Liew, Jonathan (25 September 2011). "Mark Cavendish sprints into history books with world title". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 3 April 2013. Fotheringham, William (2 December 2011). "Bradley Wiggins unlikely to defend team pursuit gold at London 2012". guardian.co.uk. Guardian Media Group. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Wiggins wins TT, Porte wins GC". Yahoo! Eurosport. TF1 Group. 19 February 2012. Retrieved 19 February 2012. "Bradley Wiggins second after opening stage of Paris–Nice race". BBC Sport. 4 March 2012. Retrieved 13 March 2013. MacMichael, Simon (5 March 2012). "Paris–Nice Stage 2: Tom Boonen takes win, Bradley Wiggins in overall lead as winds split peloton". road.cc. Farrelly Atkinson. Retrieved 24 February 2013. Wynn, Nigel (11 March 2012). "Bradley Wiggins wins Paris–Nice after blasting to final stage victory". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 18 March 2013. "Stage 7 – Nice > Col d'Éze". Paris–Nice 2013. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2015. "Bradley Wiggins wins stage and takes Tour de Romandie lead". BBC Sport. 25 April 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2012. Bull, Nick (28 April 2012). "Sanchez wins again to snatch Romandie yellow". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 30 April 2012. "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour de Romandie for Team Sky". BBC Sport. 29 April 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2012. Wynn, Nigel (3 June 2012). "Wiggins second behind Durbridge in Dauphine prologue". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 10 March 2013. Wynn, Nigel (4 June 2012). "Evans wins Dauphine stage one as Wiggins takes lead". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Bradley Wiggins wins Critérium du Dauphiné time trial". BBC Sport. 7 June 2012. Retrieved 7 June 2012. "Bradley Wiggins plays down Tour chances after Dauphine triumph". BBC Sport. 10 June 2012. Retrieved 14 June 2012. MacLeary, John (29 June 2012). "Bradley Wiggins is the 'outstanding favourite', says 1987 Triple Crown winner Stephen Roche". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Bradley Wiggins second to Cancellara in prologue". BBC Sport. 30 June 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Murphy, Austin (7 July 2012). "Wiggins, Froome strike a blow for British cycling in France". Sports Illustrated. Time Inc. Retrieved 19 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour de France time trial, extends lead". Newsday. Fred Groser. Associated Press. 9 July 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Brown, Gregor (11 July 2012). "Nibali hits out at Wiggins after Tour frustration". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Benson, Daniel (12 July 2012). "Wiggins relieved after La Toussuire mountain finish". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 16 July 2012. Ryan, Barry (12 July 2012). "Froome breaks from the script at La Toussuire". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 16 July 2012. "Bradley Wiggins halts stage 14 amid sabotage". BBC Sport. 15 July 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (15 July 2012). "Wiggins hailed as 'Le Gentleman' after race is attacked by saboteurs". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2012. Brown, Gregor (18 July 2012). "Froome: Nibali's attacks weren't going anywhere". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 19 July 2012. Gallaghen, Brendan (19 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins on the brink of becoming first Briton to win Tour but calls for respect". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins on verge of first British win". BBC Sport. 21 July 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012. Chadband, Ian (22 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour de France and helps Mark Cavendish take 20th stage in Paris". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Wiggins to return to racing at the Tour of Britain". Cyclingnews.com. 19 August 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Mark Cavendish hails the GB 'dream team'". BBC Sport. 26 July 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2012. Chadband, Ian (28 July 2012). "London 2012 Olympics: Bradley Wiggins shattered after failing to deliver gold for Mark Cavendish". Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2014. Wynn, Nigel (1 August 2012). "Wiggins wins gold in men's time trial, bronze for Froome". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 1 August 2012. Slater, Matt (7 August 2012). "Sir Chris Hoy wins sixth Olympic gold medal with keirin victory". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 December 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Bradley Wiggins sets world record with Olympic time-trial gold and Tour de France double". Guinness World Records. Jim Pattison Group. 1 August 2012. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2015. "Bradley Wiggins out of Tour of Britain as Tiernan-Locke leads". BBC Sport. 14 September 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2012. "Bradley Wiggins withdraws from World Championships time trial". BBC Sport. 3 September 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Bradley Wiggins' historic 2012 season is recognised with Velo d'Or award". Sky Sports. BSkyB. 29 October 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2012. "Tour de France winner back home after crash". BBC Sport. 8 November 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2012. "Bradley Wiggins wins BBC Sports Personality of the Year". BBC Sport. 16 December 2012. Retrieved 16 December 2012. "Bradley Wiggins knighted in 2013 New Year Honours List". BBC Sport. 29 December 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2012. "No. 60367". The London Gazette (Supplement). 29 December 2012. p. 2. "Sir Bradley Wiggins 'amused' by knighthood". BBC Sport. 29 December 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2013. "All I did was win a bike race': 'Inferior' Bradley Wiggins knighted by the Queen". Metro. metro.co.uk. 10 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. "Bolt, Ennis win top Laureus awards". Jamaica Gleaner. Gleaner Company. 12 March 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins wants to defend his Tour de France title". BBC Sport. 13 December 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2013. Fotheringham, William (8 February 2013). "Bradley Wiggins jousts with Chris Froome in Oman over Team Sky's No1". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 March 2013. "Sir Bradley Wiggins wants Tour de France and Giro d'Italia double". BBC Sport. 29 April 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2013. "Britain's Chris Froome wins Tour of Oman". BBC Sport. 16 February 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013. "Bradley Wiggins plays leading part in Volta a Catalunya opening stage". The Guardian. Press Association. 18 March 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013. Nicolson, Andy (24 March 2013). "Dan Martin holds off Joaquim Rodríguez to win the Volta a Catalunya". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Sir Bradley Wiggins more than six minutes off lead in Giro del Trentino". The Guardian. Press Association. 16 April 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. Wynn, Nigel (17 April 2013). "Kanstantsin Siutsou wins Giro del Trentino stage two". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 18 April 2013. Wynn, Nigel (19 April 2013). "Vincenzo Nibali wins Giro del Trentino as Bradley Wiggins suffers mechanical". Cycling Weekly. IPC media. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "The Favorites: Wiggins, Nibali top list of Giro contenders in 2013". VeloNews. 5 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. "Team Sky win team time trial". BBC Sport. 5 May 2013. Retrieved 6 May 2013. Fotheringham, William (7 May 2013). "Bradley Wiggins wobbles on the cobbles in Giro d'Italia stage four". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 May 2013. Ryan, Barry (10 May 2013). "Wiggins slides down the pecking order at Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 12 May 2013. Wynn, Nigel; Brown, Gregor (11 May 2013). "Alex Dowsett wins Giro d'Italia Stage 8 time trial". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Fotheringham, William (12 May 2013). "Bradley Wiggins' Giro d'Italia hopes go downhill on wet Florence stage". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Farrand, Stephen (17 May 2013). "Wiggins pulls out of the Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 17 May 2013. "Wiggins out of Tour de France". Team Sky. BSkyB. 31 May 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Fotheringham, William (21 June 2013). "Sir Bradley Wiggins suggests he may never ride Tour de France again". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 June 2013. Pryde, Kenny (3 August 2013). "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour of Poland time trial". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 4 August 2013. Chadband, Ian (17 September 2013). "Tour of Britain 2013, stage three: Sir Bradley Wiggins leads general classification after winning time trial". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2013. "Tour of Britain: Bradley Wiggins seals title as Cavendish wins stage". BBC Sport. 22 September 2013. Retrieved 17 October 2013. "Sir Bradley Wiggins wins silver in World Championships time trial". BBC Sport. 25 September 2013. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Chadband, Ian (29 September 2013). "Chris Froome pulls out of men's road race at World Championships after Sir Bradley Wiggins crashes in rain". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Brown, Gregor (14 March 2014). "Bradley Wiggins still aiming for Paris–Roubaix". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 31 March 2014. Retrieved 24 July 2014. Fotheringham, William (9 February 2014). "Sir Bradley Wiggins set to ride Vuelta in bid for world time trial title". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 July 2014. "Sir Bradley Wiggins 'has legs to challenge'". BBC Sport. 11 April 2014. Retrieved 14 April 2014. Lee, Aaron S. (14 April 2014). "Greg LeMond talks Paris–Roubaix". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 18 December 2014. Westby, Matt (13 April 2014). "Niki Terpstra wins as Bradley Wiggins and Geraint Thomas make top 10". Sky Sports. BSkyB. Retrieved 14 April 2014. "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour of California". USA Today. Associated Press. 19 May 2014. Retrieved 21 September 2014. Fotheringham, William (6 June 2014). "Bradley Wiggins: 'I won't be riding the Tour de France this year'". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 September 2014. "Bradley Wiggins says he wont participate in Tour de France again". news.biharprabha.com. IANS. 25 July 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Sir Bradley Wiggins – I will not ride Tour de France again". BBC Sport. 25 July 2014. Retrieved 24 September 2014. Fotheringham, William (14 September 2014). "Dylan van Baarle holds off Bradley Wiggins to win Tour of Britain". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 September 2014. "Sir Bradley Wiggins wins world time trial title". BBC Sport. 24 September 2014. Retrieved 24 September 2014. Fotheringham, William (8 January 2014). "Bradley Wiggins unveils new team to be sponsored by Sky". theguardian.com. Retrieved 8 January 2015. Cossins, Peter (13 March 2015). "Wiggins cleared to ride Tour de Yorkshire". cyclingnews.com. Immediate Media Company. Retrieved 13 March 2015. "Thomas solos away from Stybar to win E3 Harelbeke". Cyclingnews.com. 27 March 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Farrand, Stephen (8 April 2015). "Driedaagse De Panne-Koksijde 2015: Stage 3b Results". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 14 April 2015. Clarke, Stuart (13 April 2015). "Brailsford: Wiggins was exceptional in Paris–Roubaix". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 14 April 2015. "Wiggins to attempt Hour Record on June 7". Cyclingnews.com. 15 April 2015. Retrieved 15 April 2015. Joseph Doherty (3 May 2015). "Wiggins "happier" since leaving Sky". Cycling Quotes. CyclingQuotes.com 2013. Retrieved 3 May 2015. Fotheringham, William (7 June 2015). "Sir Bradley Wiggins smashes Alex Dowsett's Hour record". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 June 2015. "Bradley Wiggins breaks UCI Hour Record at Lea Valley VeloPark". BBC Sport. 7 June 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015. "Sir Bradley Wiggins & Mark Cavendish win madison for GB". BBC Sport. 16 August 2015. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Team pursuit victory hands Wiggins first European Track title". Cyclingnews.com. 16 October 2015. Retrieved 17 October 2015. Bull, Nick (3 March 2016). "'There's a bit of life left in me yet' says Bradley Wiggins after Track Worlds team pursuit silver". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 13 May 2016. Fotheringham, William (6 March 2016). "Bradley Wiggins and Mark Cavendish double act is something to savour". theguardian.com. Retrieved 13 May 2016. "Salzwedel: Wiggins and the team are breaking world records in training for Olympics". Cycling News. 4 August 2016. Retrieved 16 August 2016. "Bradley Wiggins – 2016". Pro Cycling Stats. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Gibson, Owen. "Mark Cavendish takes rightful Olympic podium place, but moodiness remains". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Wynn, Nigel. "Great Britain qualify fastest for Rio Olympics men's team pursuit". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Winn, Nigel (12 August 2016). "Great Britain set new world record in men's team pursuit to book place in Olympic final". Wynn, Nigel. "Great Britain pushed to limit to win gold in Olympic men's team pursui". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 16 August 2016. MacMichael, Simon (14 August 2016). "Sir Bradley Wiggins to retire after Six Days of Ghent in November". Road.cc. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Abraham, Bradley. "Bradley Wiggins plans women's Team Wiggins". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 16 August 2016. "Sir Bradley Wiggins edged out at Six Day London in 'final' British race". BBC Sport. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Ghent Six Day: Sir Bradley Wiggins unsure on future after win". BBC Sport. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "Bradley Wiggins announces retirement from all forms of professional cycling". The Guardian. Press Association. 28 December 2016. Retrieved 28 December 2016. Tom Cary, Cycling Correspondent, Drugs used by Sir Bradley Wiggins should be banned, says David Millar in The Telegraph, 19 September 2016, at telegraph.co.uk Owen Gibson, Bradley Wiggins faces a fight for his reputation in wake of Wada hack, in The Guardian, 18 September 2016 Mogan, Tony (15 September 2016). "What drugs have Sir Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome been permitted to use?". ibtimes.com. Retrieved 25 September 2016. "Former team doctor questions Wiggins' TUE". The Straits Times. 25 September 2016. Retrieved 25 September 2016. Bradley Wiggins under pressure as 'injections' controversy deepens, by Simon Collis, Cycling Weekly, 17 September 2016 at http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/bradley-wiggins-pressure-injections-controversy-deepens-284839 Cary, Tom (19 September 2016). "'A bunch of hypocrites': Team Sky attacked after Sir Bradley Wiggins TUE revelations". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Bradley Wiggins rubbishes links to controversial Belgian doctor". The Irish Times. 17 September 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2017. Bradley Wiggins rails at 'malicious witch-hunt' after package investigation, by Sean Ingle, The Guardian, Wed 15 Nov '17 16.45 GMT at [1] MPs miss cue on Team Sky TUEs but Sir Dave Brailsford makes open promise, by William Fotheringham, The Guardian, Mon 19 Dec '16 19.57 GMT, at [2] "Bradley Wiggins used banned performance enhancing corticosteroid in 2012 Tour de France, say MPs". The Independent. 5 March 2018. Retrieved 28 June 2023. Bradley Wiggins used banned performance enhancing corticosteroid in 2012 Tour de France, say MPs By Rob Harris; The Independent; 5 March 2018 A devastating blow to the reputations of some of the biggest names in British sport By Dan Roan – BBC Sport; 5 March 2018 Bradley Wiggins and Team Sky’s Tour de France win in question; By Martha Kelner; The Irish Times; Mar 5, 2018 Remarkable drugs report shatters Team Sky’s illusion of integrity By Martha Kelner; The Guardian; 5 March 2018 Combatting Doping in Sport report says Team Sky ‘crossed an ethical line’ with use of corticosteroid by Nigel Wynn, CyclingWeekly, 5 March 2018. Wiggins 2012a, p. 66. Collins, Ben (11 August 2023). "UCI Cycling World Championships 2023: Ben Wiggins, son of Sir Bradley, wins junior time trial silver". bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 12 August 2023. Horsburgh, Lynette (22 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: Eccleston celebrates Tour win". BBC News Online. BBC. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Harvey, Chris (18 June 2010). "Bradley Wiggins: how the Olympic cycling champion beat his demons". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2012. [3] The Times, 20 May 2020 Wiggins 2012a, p. 47. Wiggins 2012a, p. 48–50. Wiggins 2012a, p. 6–7. Wiggins 2012a, p. 11. Wiggins 2012a, p. 14. Wiggins 2012a, p. 50–53. Marks, Kathy (24 July 2012). "Australian relatives of Bradley Wiggins's estranged father launch campaign to solve mystery of his violent death". The Independent. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Bradley Wiggins: What is a mod?". BBC Sport. 23 July 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2012. Lewis, Tim (26 October 2008). "My obsessions: Bradley Wiggins". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Bradley Wiggins joins Paul Weller for rendition of The Jam's 'That's Entertainment'". NME. IPC Media. 20 December 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2013. "When Bradley Wiggins Met Paul Weller". BBC Radio 6 Music. BBC. 20 December 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Warren, Jane (18 December 2012). "The year that has wheely changed Bradley Wiggins". Daily Express. Northern & Shell. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Pearce, James (28 July 2012). "Blood Red: Liverpool F.C. fan and Tour de France winner Bradley Wiggins set to be given VIP treatment at Anfield". Liverpool Echo. Retrieved 5 April 2013. "Bradley Wiggins". Wigan Warriors. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013. "Wigan full-back Sam Tomkins named 2012 Man of Steel". BBC Sport. 2 October 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2013. "Bradley Wiggins for Fred Perry". Fred Perry. 11 April 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 16 July 2012. "Fred Perry X Bradley Wiggins clothing range unveiled". BikeRadar. Future plc. 16 July 2012. Retrieved 5 April 2013. "The Bradley Wiggins Interview". The Foot Down. 7 July 2012. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 5 April 2013. Scott, George (1 June 2012). "Bradley Wiggins Foundation launches with Ride with Brad Sportive". Road Cycling UK. Factory Media. Retrieved 26 September 2013. Woodman, Oli (26 January 2013). "Wiggle-Honda Women's Pro Cycling team launched". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "British Cycling great Sir Bradley Wiggins is hoping to help unearth cycling stars of the future after making a donation of £5,000 to five Go-Ride clubs". British Cycling. 16 February 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2015. Young, Kirsty (Presenter) (10 May 2015). "Desert Island Discs, Sir Bradley Wiggins". Desert Island Discs. BBC. BBC Radio 4. Retrieved 12 May 2015. "BBC Radio 4 – Today, 29/12/15". bbc.co.uk. 29 December 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2016. "My culture fix: Bradley Wiggins". The Times. 25 May 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Sir Bradley Wiggins: 2012 Tour de France winner to train as social worker". BBC Sport. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Bradley Wiggins: "I'm detached from cycling now"". The Big Issue. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. Fotheringham, William (22 July 2012). "Wiggins poised for triumph as French hail first British winner of the Tour". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Wiggins 2012a, p. 105. Hattenstone, Simon; Walker, Peter (2 November 2012). "Bradley Wiggins: please don't ask my wife to take a picture". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Wiggins Rings Olympic Bell To Kick Off London Games". Cyclingnews.com. 27 July 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012. Wiggins, Bradley (2013). In pursuit of glory. London: Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-4682-7. OCLC 857657923. Wiggins, Bradley (2010). Bradley Wiggins' tour. London: Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-3136-6. OCLC 655663434. "The Bradley Wiggins Opus". Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2021. Wiggins, Bradley (2012). My time. London: Yellow Jersey Press. ISBN 978-1-4481-6139-3. OCLC 806491442. Bradley Wiggins – My Story. 28 March 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2021. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) Wiggins, Bradley (2015). Bradley Wiggins : my hour. London: Yellow Jersey Press. ISBN 978-0-224-10046-5. OCLC 933281088. Wiggins, Bradley (2018). Icons : my inspiration. my motivation. my obsession. Place of publication not identified: HARPERCOLLINS Publishers. ISBN 978-0-00-830174-3. OCLC 1043141213. Gallagher, Brendan (1 August 2012). "Bradley Wiggins hopes cycling in a higher gear will help him to emulate hero in Olympic time-trial". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Lawson, Mark (21 March 2014). "Bradley Wiggins in The Archers Sport Relief special – review". theguardian.com. Retrieved 13 May 2015. Lang, Kirsty (18 March 2016). "Why Michael Crawford brought Frank Spencer out of retirement for Sport Relief 2016". Radio Times. Retrieved 13 May 2016. "Sir Bradley Wiggins Sculpture Unveiled at Former School". Good News Shared. 16 May 2014. "The Jump 2017 lineup confirmed: Who's doing the Channel 4 reality TV show?". tv.bt.com. Retrieved 10 January 2017. "Wiggins fractures leg while training for TV show". cyclingnews.com. 13 February 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. "Wiggins targeting 2020 Olympics in rowing". cyclingnews.com. 30 June 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017. "Bradley Wiggins finishes 21st on competitive rowing debut in London". bbc.co.uk. 9 December 2017. Retrieved 9 December 2017. "The Bradley Wiggins Show by Eurosport: Tour de France vodcast starts Monday". Eurosport. 1 July 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "The Bradley Wiggins Show returns for 2019: Spring Classics episodes start on Monday". Eurosport. 16 March 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. Ballinger, Alex (6 July 2019). "Sir Bradley Wiggins rejoins Tour de France peloton – on the back of a motorbike". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Bradley Wiggins to host new comedy sports challenge show". Chortle. 31 July 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Gods of the Game". UKGameshows.com. Retrieved 30 October 2020. "Pedaloing with Chris Hoy, anyone?: Gods of the Game is far from TV gold". theguardian.com. 12 March 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. Ingle, Sean (19 April 2022). "Bradley Wiggins alleges he was sexually groomed by a coach as a teenager". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 April 2022. Wiggins said he had been unable to confide in his stepfather as he used to beat him and criticise him for wearing cycling gear. Ellery, Ben (8 May 2023). "Sir Bradley Wiggins names coach who abused him as a child". The Times. Retrieved 8 May 2023. "Bradley Wiggins". ProCyclingStats. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Men's Team Pursuit First Round Results" (PDF). Rio2016.com. International Olympic Committee. 12 August 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 12 August 2016. "Men's Team Pursuit Final Results" (PDF). Rio2016.com. International Olympic Committee. 12 August 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 12 August 2016. Moodley, Kiran (5 September 2012). "Lifetime Achievement: Bradley Wiggins". GQ. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Richardson, Simon (7 December 2012). "Bradley Wiggins and Sarah Storey honoured by SJA". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "2012 Reader Poll: Wiggins voted Male Road Rider of the Year". Cyclingnews.com. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 8 April 2013. Blazin' Saddles (18 October 2013). "Horner treks into the wilderness as Flanders flatters Froome". Eurosport. Discovery Communications. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. "Recipients". The F. T. Bidlake Memorial Trust. Retrieved 20 April 2013. Elrington, C. R. (1989). A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume IX: Hampstead and Paddington Parishes. Victoria County History. Woodbridge, Suffolk: Boydell & Brewer. ISBN 978-0-19-722772-5. Wiggins, Bradley (2012a). In Pursuit of Glory. London: Orion Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4091-2913-4. Wiggins, Bradley (2012b). Bradley Wiggins: My Time. London: Yellow Jersey Press. ISBN 978-1-4481-6139-3. Deering, John (2012). Bradley Wiggins: Tour de Force. Edinburgh: Birlinn. ISBN 978-1-78027-103-3. Edworthy, Sarah; Brailsford, Dave (2012). 21 Days to Glory: The Official Team Sky Book of the 2012 Tour de France. London: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-750661-3. Friebe, Daniel (2012). Allez Wiggo!: How Bradley Wiggins Won the Tour De France and Olympic Gold in 2012. London: A & C Black. ISBN 978-1-4081-9069-2. Moore, Richard (2012). Sky's the Limit: Wiggins and Cavendish: British Cycling's Quest to Conquer the Tour De France. London: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-734183-2. Wiggins, Bradley (2010). On Tour. London: Orion Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4091-3136-6. Wiggins, Bradley (2015). Bradley Wiggins: My Hour. London: Yellow Jersey Press. ISBN 978-1-4735-2492-7. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bradley Wiggins. Team Wiggins at the Wayback Machine (archived 21 September 2017) Bradley Wiggins at UCI Bradley Wiggins at Cycling Archives Bradley Wiggins at ProCyclingStats