Curtis James Jackson III (born July 6, 1975), known professionally as 50 Cent, is an American rapper, actor, television producer, and businessman. Born in South Jamaica, a neighborhood of Queens, Jackson began pursuing a musical career in 1996. In 1999-2000, he recorded his "debut" album Power of the Dollar for Columbia Records, however he was struck by nine bullets during a shooting in May 2000, causing its release to be cancelled and Jackson to be dropped from the label. His 2002 mixtape, Guess Who's Back? was discovered by Detroit rapper Eminem, who signed Jackson to his label Shady Records, an imprint of Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment and Interscope Records that same year. His debut studio album, Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2003) was released to critical acclaim and commercial success, peaking atop the Billboard 200. It spawned the Billboard Hot 100-number one singles "In da Club" and "21 Questions" (featuring Nate Dogg), and received nonuple platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). That same year, he launched the record label G-Unit Records, namesake of a hip hop group he formed two years prior; the label's initial signees were its members, fellow East Coast rappers Lloyd Banks and Tony Yayo. His second album, The Massacre (2005) was met with similar success and supported by his third number-one single, "Candy Shop" (featuring Olivia). He adopted a lighter, further commercially-oriented approach for his third and fourth albums, Curtis (2007) and Before I Self Destruct (2009)—both were met with critical and commercial declines—and aimed for a return to his roots with his fifth album, Animal Ambition (2014). He has since focused on his career in television and media, having executive-produced and starred in the television series Power (2014–2020), as well as its numerous spin-offs under his company G-Unit Films and Television Inc. Jackson has sold over 30 million albums worldwide and won several awards, including a Grammy Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, thirteen Billboard Music Awards, six World Music Awards, three American Music Awards and four BET Awards. In his acting career, Jackson first starred in the semi-autobiographical film Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2005), which was critically panned. He was also cast in the war film Home of the Brave (2006), and the crime thriller Righteous Kill (2008). Billboard ranked Jackson as 17th on their "50 Greatest Rappers" list in 2023, and named him the sixth top artist of the 2000s decade. Rolling Stone ranked Get Rich or Die Tryin' and "In da Club" in its lists of the "100 Best Albums of the 2000s" and "100 Best Songs of the 2000s" at numbers 37 and 13, respectively. Jackson was born in the borough of Queens, New York City, and raised in its South Jamaica neighborhood by his mother Sabrina. Sabrina, a drug dealer, raised Jackson until she died in a fire when Jackson was eight years old. Jackson revealed in an interview that his mother was a lesbian. After his mother's death and his father's departure, Jackson was raised by his grandparents. He began boxing at about age 11, and when he was 14, a neighbor opened a boxing gym for local youth. "When I wasn't killing time in school, I was sparring in the gym or selling crack on the strip," Jackson remembered. He sold crack during primary school. "I was competitive in the ring and hip-hop is competitive too ... I think rappers condition themselves like boxers, so they all kind of feel like they're the champ." At age 12, Jackson began dealing narcotics when his grandparents thought he was in after-school programs, and brought guns and drug money to school. In the tenth grade, he was caught by metal detectors at Andrew Jackson High School: "I was embarrassed that I got arrested like that ... After I got arrested I stopped hiding it. I was telling my grandmother [openly], 'I sell drugs.'" On June 29, 1994, Jackson was arrested for selling four vials of cocaine to an undercover police officer. He was arrested again three weeks later, when police searched his home and found heroin, ten ounces of crack cocaine, and a starting pistol. Although Jackson was sentenced to three to nine years in prison, he served six months in a boot camp and earned his GED. He has said that he did not use cocaine himself. Jackson adopted the nickname "50 Cent" as a metaphor for change. The name was inspired by Kelvin Martin, a 1980s Brooklyn robber known as "50 Cent"; Jackson chose it "because it says everything I want it to say. I'm the same kind of person 50 Cent was. I provide for myself by any means." Jackson began rapping in a friend's basement, where he used turntables to record over instrumentals. In 1996, a friend introduced him to Jam Master Jay of Run-DMC, who was establishing Jam Master Jay Records. Jay taught him how to count bars, write choruses, structure songs, and make records. Jackson's first appearance was on "React" with Onyx, for their 1998 album Shut 'Em Down. He credited Jam Master Jay for improving his ability to write hooks, and Jay produced Jackson's first (unreleased) album. In 1999, after Jackson left Jam Master Jay, the platinum-selling producers Trackmasters signed him to Columbia Records. They sent him to an upstate New York studio, where he produced 36 songs in two weeks; 18 were included on his 2000 album, Power of the Dollar. Jackson founded Hollow Point Entertainment with former G-Unit member Bang 'Em Smurf. Jackson's popularity began to grow after the successful, controversial underground single "How to Rob", which he wrote in a half-hour car ride to a studio. The track comically describes how he would rob famous artists. Jackson explained the song's rationale: "There's a hundred artists on that label, you gotta separate yourself from that group and make yourself relevant." Rappers Jay-Z, Kurupt, Sticky Fingaz, Big Pun, DMX, Wyclef Jean, and the Wu-Tang Clan responded to the track, and Nas invited Jackson to join him on his Nastradamus tour. Although "How to Rob" was intended to be released with "Thug Love" (with Destiny's Child), two days before he was scheduled to film the "Thug Love" music video, Jackson was shot and hospitalized. On May 24, 2000, Jackson was attacked by a gunman outside his grandmother's former home in South Jamaica. After getting into a friend's car, he was asked to return to the house to get some jewelry; his son was in the house, and his grandmother was in the front yard.[citation needed] Jackson returned to the back seat of the car, and another car pulled up nearby; an assailant walked up and fired nine shots at close range with a 9mm handgun. Jackson was shot in the hand, arm, hip, both legs, chest, and left cheek. His facial wound resulted in a swollen tongue, the loss of a wisdom tooth and a slightly slurred voice; his friend was wounded in the hand. They were driven to a hospital, where Jackson spent 13 days. The alleged attacker, Darryl "Homicide" Baum, Mike Tyson's close friend and bodyguard, was killed three weeks later. Jackson recalled the shooting: "It happens so fast that you don't even get a chance to shoot back .... I was scared the whole time ... I was looking in the rear-view mirror like, 'Oh shit, somebody shot me in the face! It burns, burns, burns.'" In his autobiography, From Pieces to Weight: Once upon a Time in Southside Queens, he wrote: "After I got shot nine times at close range and didn't die, I started to think that I must have a purpose in life ... How much more damage could that shell have done? Give me an inch in this direction or that one, and I'm gone." Jackson used a walker for six weeks and fully recovered after five months. When he left the hospital, he stayed in the Poconos with his girlfriend and son, and his workout regime helped him develop a muscular physique. In the hospital, Jackson signed a publishing deal with Columbia Records before he was dropped from the label and blacklisted by the recording industry because of his song, "Ghetto Qu'ran". Unable to work in a U.S. studio, he went to Canada. With business partner Sha Money XL, Jackson recorded over thirty songs for mixtapes to build a reputation. In a HitQuarters interview, Marc Labelle of Shady Records A&R said that Jackson used the mixtape circuit to his advantage: "He took all the hottest beats from every artist and flipped them with better hooks. They then got into all the markets on the mixtapes and all the mixtape DJs were messing with them." Jackson's popularity increased, and in 2002 he released the mixtape Guess Who's Back?. He then released 50 Cent Is the Future backed by G-Unit, a mixtape revisiting material by Jay-Z and Raphael Saadiq. “One of the things that excited me about Tupac was even if he was rhymin’ the simplest words in the world, you felt like he meant it and it came from his heart. That’s the thing with 50. That same aura. That’s been missing since we lost Pac and Biggie. The authenticity, the realness behind it.” —Eminem about signing 50 Cent In 2002, Eminem heard Jackson's Guess Who's Back? album, received from Jackson's attorney (who was working with Eminem's manager, Paul Rosenberg). Impressed, Eminem invited Jackson to fly to Los Angeles and introduced him to Dr. Dre. After signing a $1 million record deal, Jackson released No Mercy, No Fear. The mixtape featured one new track, "Wanksta", which appeared on Eminem's 8 Mile soundtrack. Jackson was also signed by Violator Management and Sha Money XL's Money Management Group.[citation needed] 50 Cent released his debut album, Get Rich or Die Tryin' (described by AllMusic as "probably the most hyped debut album by a rap artist in about a decade"), in February 2003. Rolling Stone noted its "dark synth grooves, buzzy keyboards and a persistently funky bounce", with Jackson complementing the production in "an unflappable, laid-back flow". It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling 872,000 copies in its first four days. The lead single, "In da Club" (noted by The Source for its "blaring horns, funky organs, guitar riffs and sparse hand claps"), set a Billboard record as the most listened-to song in radio history within a week. Interscope began funding and distributing for Jackson's label, G-Unit Records, in 2003. He signed Lloyd Banks, Tony Yayo and Young Buck as members of G-Unit, and The Game was later signed in a joint venture with Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment. G-Unit Records replaced Jackson's previous imprint, Rotten Apple Entertainment. 50 Cent executive produced Lloyd Banks's June 2004 debut studio album, The Hunger for More, which achieved Platinum status in America. 50 Cent also contributed vocals to Lloyd Banks's hit single, "On Fire". In March 2005, 50 Cent's second commercial album, The Massacre, sold 1.14 million copies in its first four days (the highest in an abbreviated sales cycle) and was number one on the Billboard 200 for six weeks. He was the first solo artist with three singles in the Billboard top five in the same week with "Candy Shop", "Disco Inferno" and "How We Do". According to Rolling Stone, "50's secret weapon is his singing voice - the deceptively amateur-sounding tenor croon that he deploys on almost every chorus". 50 Cent's video game, 50 Cent: Bulletproof was released in November 2005. 50 Cent portrays himself and provides his likeness and voice in the video game, with the video game also featuring music from his first two studio albums. After The Game's departure Jackson signed Olivia and rap veterans Mobb Deep to G-Unit Records, with Spider Loc, M.O.P., 40 Glocc and Young Hot Rod later joining the label, who all eventually departed the label. Jackson expressed an interest in working with rappers other than G-Unit, such as Lil' Scrappy of BME, LL Cool J of Def Jam, Mase of Bad Boy and Freeway of Roc-A-Fella, and recorded with several. In September 2007, 50 Cent released his third album, Curtis, which was inspired by his life before Get Rich or Die Tryin'. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 691,000 copies during its first week. It sold behind Kanye West's Graduation, released the same day; the outcome of this highly-publicized sales battle between Jackson and West has been accredited to the commercial decline of the gangsta rap and "bling era" style that previously dominated mainstream hip-hop. On the September 10, 2008, episode of Total Request Live, Jackson said his fourth studio album, Before I Self Destruct, would be "done and released in November". He released "Ok, You're Right", produced by Dr. Dre for Before I Self Destruct, on May 18, 2009, and was scheduled to appear in a fall 2009 episode of VH1's Behind the Music. On September 3, 2009, Jackson posted a video for the Soundkillers' Phoenix- produced track, "Flight 187", introducing his mixtape and book (The 50th Law). The song, with lyrics inspiring speculation about tension between Jackson and Jay-Z, was a bonus track on the iTunes version of Before I Self Destruct. Before I Self Destruct was released on November 9, 2009 and debuted at number 5 on the Billboard 200, giving 50 Cent his fourth consecutive top 5 album in the US. In a Contactmusic.com interview, Jackson said he was working on a Eurodance album, Black Magic, inspired by European nightclubs: "First they played hip-hop which suddenly changed to uptempo songs, known as Eurodance". He later said he had changed his next album to The Return of the Heartless Monster after writing different material when he returned home from the Invitation Tour in 2010, shelving Black Magic. On September 3, Jackson supported Eminem on his and Jay-Z's The Home & Home Tour, performing "Crack A Bottle" with Eminem and Dr. Dre amid rumors of tension between Jackson and Dre. He "recorded 20 songs to a whole different album concept" before putting them aside, wanting his new album to have the "aggression" of Get Rich or Die Tryin'. Jackson tweeted that the album was "80 percent done" and fans could expect it in the summer of 2011. It was ultimately delayed a year due to disagreements with Interscope Records, with Jackson saying that he would release it in November 2011 with a different title than Black Magic. Eminem would appear on the album, and Jackson said he was working with new producers such as Boi-1da and Alex da Kid. Cardiak, who produced Lloyd Banks' "Start It Up", confirmed that he produced a song for the upcoming album. Jackson released a song, "Outlaw", from his fifth album on the Internet on June 16, 2011. The single, produced by Cardiak, was released on iTunes on July 19 (although Jackson tweeted that it was not the album's first single). The rapper planned to write a semi-autobiographical young-adult novel about bullying, different from his previous books which focused on his life and the rules of power. According to the book's publisher, the first-person novel (about a 13-year-old schoolyard bully "who finds redemption as he faces what he's done") was scheduled for publication in January 2012. In a series of tweets, Jackson said that the delay of his fifth album was due to disagreements with Interscope Records, later suggesting that it would be released in November 2011 with his headphone line (SMS by 50). He speculated to MTV News about not renewing his five-album contract with Interscope: "I don't know ... It will all be clear in the negotiations following me turning this actual album in. And, of course, the performance and how they actually treat the work will determine whether you still want to stay in that position or not." On June 20, 2011, Jackson announced the release of Before I Self Destruct II after his fifth album. Although he planned to shoot a music video for the fifth album's lead single, "I'm On It", on June 26 the video was never filmed. Jackson told Shade45, "I did four songs in Detroit with Eminem. I did two with Just Blaze, a Boi-1da joint, and I did something with Alex da Kid. We made two that are definite singles and the other two are the kinds of records that we been making, more aimed at my core audience, more aggressive, more of a different kind of energy to it." He released "Street King Energy Track #7" in September 2011 to promote Street King, his charity-based energy drink. An announcement that Jackson was shooting a music video for "Girls Go Wild", the fifth-album lead single featuring Jeremih, was made on September 28, 2011. Jackson's fifth album, Street King Immortal, was initially scheduled for a summer 2012 release and postponed until November 13. Disagreements with Interscope Records about its release and promotion led to its temporary cancellation. Its first promo single, "New Day" with Dr. Dre and Alicia Keys, was released on July 27. The song was produced by Dr. Dre, mixed by Eminem and written by 50 Cent, Alicia Keys, Royce da 5'9" and Dr. Dre. A solo version by Keys was leaked by her husband, Swizz Beatz. "My Life", the album's second promo single (with Eminem and Maroon 5 lead singer Adam Levine), was released on November 26, 2012. In January 2014, Jackson said he planned to release Animal Ambition in the first quarter of the year, followed by Street King Immortal. On February 20, he left Shady Records, Aftermath Entertainment, and Interscope, signing with Caroline and Capitol Music Group. According to Jackson, although he owed Interscope another album, he was released from his contract because of his friendship with Eminem and Dr. Dre: "I'm a special case and situation. It's also because of the leverage of having the strong relationships with Eminem and Dr. Dre. They don't want me to be uncomfortable. They value our friendship to the point that they would never want [to jeopardize] it over that little bit of money." That day, he announced that Animal Ambition would be released on June 3 and released its first track. The song, "Funeral", was released with a video on Forbes.com. Produced by Jake One, it is a continuation of "50 Bars" from a previous album; two more tracks were scheduled for release on March 18. At South by Southwest in Austin, Texas, Jackson performed "Hold On" from the new album. That song and "Don't Worry 'Bout It" were released with accompanying videos on March 18. According to Jackson, prosperity would be a theme of the album: "This project, I had to search for a concept, a really good concept, in my perspective, and that was prosperity. I outlined all the things that would be a part of prosperity, positive and negative [for Animal Ambition]." Animal Ambition debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200, giving 50 Cent his fifth consecutive top five album in the country, while also debuting at number one on Billboard's Independent Albums chart. On May 14, 2015, Jackson revealed in an interview that the first single from Street King Immortal, would be previewed Memorial Day weekend and would likely be released in June. Jackson released "Get Low" on May 20, 2015, as the intended first single from his sixth studio album, Street King Immortal. The song, produced by Remo the Hitmaker, features vocals from fellow American rappers 2 Chainz and T.I., as well as American singer Jeremih. He announced bankruptcy on July 13, 2015. On March 31, 2017, Interscope Records released 50 Cent's final album for the label, a greatest hits album titled Best Of. In 2020, Jackson led the executive-producer duties for late rapper Pop Smoke's debut album, Shoot for the Stars, Aim for the Moon, having been one of Pop Smoke's biggest inspirations. The album was released on July 3, 2020. Jackson curated the album, desiring to finish it after Pop had died. He contacted many of the artists involved, and also features on one of the album tracks, "The Woo". The Woo also features vocals from fellow American rapper Roddy Ricch. In 2020, it was reported that Jackson was producing two television series for Starz, an anthology about hip hop and a biographical drama about sports agent Nicole Lynn. In 2021, he became one of the headliners of the music festival Golden Sand in Riviera Maya. In May 2021, Curtis Jackson moved to Houston. This was thought to be for lower taxes, no income tax, and for the rapper scene, as well as other ventures such as writing new screenplays. Also, Jackson, Horizon United Group, and Houston Independent School District began a partnership on a project that would help high school students learn the business skills that define successful entrepreneurship. While living in Houston, Curtis Jackson was in the process of writing screenplays for new crime shows. In a July 2021 interview with The Independent, 50 Cent confirmed that he had officially decided to shelve his Street King Immortal album after it spent a decade in development hell. He even confirmed that he plans to release a completely new project. In August 2021, he was confirmed to be starring in the upcoming Expend4bles film. In the fall of 2021, Starz released "Black Mafia Family," a series based on two brothers in Detroit who ran a drug trafficking and money laundering operation from the mid-1980s until 2005. Jackson is the executive producer of the show, which is based on a true story. On February 13, 2022, 50 Cent was a surprise performer in the Super Bowl LVI halftime show, receiving a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live) in September for the performance. Jackson cites Boogie Down Productions, Big Daddy Kane, The Juice Crew, EPMD and KRS-One as his rapping influences, while citing LL Cool J as an inspiration behind his writing of "21 Questions". Jackson also states that he drew influences from Nas, Rakim and The Notorious B.I.G. while working on Animal Ambition. Jackson has had a highly successful business career. He is financially invested in a highly diversified variety of industries. Jackson is now involved in artist and talent management, record, television, and film production, footwear, apparel, fragrances, liquor, video games, mobile apps, book publishing, headphones, along with health drinks and dietary supplements. His broad business and investment portfolio contains investments in a variety of sectors including real estate, financial market investments, mining, boxing promotion, vodka, fragrances, consumer electronics and fashion. He established his own record label G-Unit Records in 2003 following his mainstream success. In November 2003, he signed a five-year deal with Reebok to distribute a G-Unit Sneakers line for his G-Unit Clothing Company. In an interview, Jackson said his businesses had a habit of doing well as he saw all of his ventures both past and present as revolving around his alter ego. Jackson has also started a book publishing imprint, G-Unit Books on January 4, 2007, at the Time Warner Building in New York. He has written a number of books including a memoir, From Pieces To Weight in 2005 where it sold 73,000 copies in hardcover and 14,000 copies in paperback; a crime novel and a book with Robert Greene titled The 50th Law, an urban take on The 48 Laws of Power. In November 2011, Jackson released 50 Cent's Playground, a young adult fiction novel about a bullied, violent boy and his gay mother. One of Jackson's first business ventures was a partnership with Glacéau to create an enhanced water drink called Formula 50. In October 2004, Jackson became a beverage investor when he was given a minority share in the company in exchange for becoming a spokesperson after learning that he was a fan of the beverage. The health conscious Jackson noted that he first learned of the product while at a gym in Los Angeles, and stated that "they do such a good job making water taste good". After becoming a minority shareholder and celebrity spokesperson, Jackson worked with the company to create a new grape flavored "Formula 50" variant of VitaminWater and mentioned the drinks in various songs and interviews. In 2007, Coca-Cola purchased Glacéau for $4.1 billion and, according to Forbes, Jackson, who was a minority shareholder, earned $100 million from the deal after taxes. Though he no longer has an equity stake in the company, Jackson continues to act as a spokesperson for VitaminWater, supporting the product including singing about it at the BET Awards and expressing his excitement over the company's continuing to allow his input on products. He joined Right Guard to introduce a body spray (Pure 50 RGX) and endorsed Magic Stick condoms, planning to donate part of their proceeds to increasing HIV awareness. Jackson signed a multi-year deal with Steiner Sports to sell his memorabilia, and announced plans for a dietary-supplement company in conjunction with his film Spectacular Regret in August 2007. Jackson has founded two film production companies: G-Unit Films in 2003 and Cheetah Vision in 2008. Cheetah Vision produces low budget action thrillers for foreign film markets across the world. When G-Unit Films folded, he focused on Cheetah Vision and the company obtained $200 million in funding in 2010. In 2010, Jackson revived G-Unit Films, renaming the company to G-Unit Films and Television Inc. The company has joint ventures with Will Packer's production company Will Packer Productions and Universal Television. In over 18 months, Jackson has sold projects to six different networks. Among them was Power, a STARZ drama in which he not only co-stars but also serves as co-creator and executive producer. Power debuted in June 2014 and was renewed for a second season after one episode. Jackson serves as a co-star, co-creator and executive television producer of the STARZ network drama where he signed a 2-year contract with representation coming from the Agency for the Performing Arts. Ratings have been a success for Starz. with the second-season premiere being the highest-ever season with 1.43 million people tuning in live. "Power" ended in 2020. Jackson is the executive producer of three of its spin-offs, "PowerBook II: Ghost," "PowerBook III: Raising Kanan," and "Powerbook IV: Force." In 2002, Jackson filed an application with the United States Patent and Trademark Office to register the term "50 Cent" as a trademark for clothing, sound recordings, and live performances. The application was published in 2003, and registration issued in 2004. He has since filed for additional trademark registrations. In July 2011, Jackson launched a philanthropic initiative to provide food for one billion starving people in Africa by 2016, joining Pure Growth Partners to introduce Street King. A portion of the proceeds from each Street King purchase would be used to provide a daily meal to an underprivileged child. The partnership coincides with Jackson's goal to feed a billion people in Africa during the next five years. "50 Cent and I share a common vision: to address the world's problems through smart and sustainable business models," said Chris Clarke, founder and CEO of Pure Growth Partners. "With the rampant starvation in Africa and hunger afflicting children worldwide, we need socially responsible businesses that affect real change now more than ever." Jackson said, "I'm inspired by Clarke's vision and innovative approaches to tackling serious issues. It's our mission with Street King to really change children's lives around the world." In 2011, he founded SMS Audio, a consumer-electronics company selling Street by 50 headphones, pledging to donate a portion of their sales to charity. In April 2015, SMS announced new co-branding deals with Reebok and Marvel. It added those to existing partnerships with Walt Disney Parks, Lucasfilm's Star Wars, and Intel. In 2014, Jackson became a minority shareholder in Effen Vodka, a brand of vodka produced in the Netherlands, when he invested undisclosed amount in the company Sire Spirits LLC. He currently[when?] endorses the product via his live concert performances and social media. The rapper was asked to take part in two promotional bottle signings, one in Oak Creek and another in Sun Prairie. Jackson made an appearance at Liquor Warehouse in Syracuse, New York on April 25, 2015, where he reportedly sold 1,400 bottles (277 gallons) of Jackson's signature liquor brand. Liquor Warehouse's owner George Angeloro reportedly stocked 300 cases (1,800 bottles or 357 gallons) of Effen Vodka, which sells for $30 a bottle, prior to the event. In December 2014, Jackson signed a $78 million deal with FRIGO Revolution Wear, a luxury underwear brand. The joint venture is partnered between Jackson, basketball player Carmelo Anthony, baseball player Derek Jeter and Mathias Ingvarsson, the former president of mattress company Tempur-Pedic. Jackson became the chief fashion designer for the brands single pair of Frigo boxers. In April 2015, Jackson mulled investing in Jamaica, exploring foreign investment opportunities on the island when he met with some local officials and had ongoing discussions on investment opportunities in the Montego Bay resort area. Over the years, Jackson invested his earnings from music and celebrity endorsements in an array of privately controlled companies, real estate, and stocks and bonds. A portion of his investments lost value during the 2008 recession. In December 2008, he told the Canadian press that he had been affected by the recession, losing several million dollars in the stock market. Unable to sell his Connecticut mansion, Jackson postponed Before I Self-Destruct due to the severity of the economic downturn. His Farmington mansion located on 50 Poplar Hill Drive that he tried to sell for years filed for bankruptcy in Connecticut in 2015 listed an asking price for that property in 2012 at $10 million but was valued at $8.3 million in 2015. He first tried to sell the house in 2007 for $18.5 million, and dropped the price several times in the next five years, when it was on and off the market. In January 2011, Jackson reportedly made $10 million after using Twitter to promote a marketing company which he was part shareholder of. His endorsements company G Unit Brands Inc. revealed through a public SEC filing controls 12.9 per cent of H&H Imports, which is a parent company of TV Goods – the firm responsible for marketing his range of headphones, Sleek by 50 Cent. Jackson bought stock in the company on November 30, 2010, a week after it offered buyers 180 million shares at 17 cents each. Jackson later made a stock recommendation on Twitter, causing its share value to rise from four cents to nearly 50 cents (32p) each, closing on Monday at 39 cents (25p). Jackson was later investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission for breaching securities laws following his tweet which may have constituted allegations of Insider trading via his Pump and dump stock investment strategy. In 2013, Jackson became a minority investor in Hang w/, a live video broadcasting mobile app used by dozens of celebrities to broadcast their daily activities and chat with fans. The app was downloaded more than 1 million times since its launch in March 2013 and had more than 1 million users as of February 2015[update]. Other minority celebrity investors include former NFL player Terrell Owens and record producer Timbaland. In 2008, Jackson visited a platinum, palladium and iridium mine shaft in South Africa, and met with South African billionaire Patrice Motsepe in talks of purchasing an equity stake in the mine. After his meeting with Motsepe, Jackson considered purchasing equity in the mine and launching his own line of 50 Cent branded platinum. On July 21, 2012, Jackson became a licensed boxing promoter when he formed his new company, TMT (The Money Team). Licensed to promote in New York, he was in the process of being licensed in Nevada (where most major fights are held in the U.S.). A former amateur boxer, Jackson signed gold medalist and former featherweight champion Yuriorkis Gamboa and middleweight Olympic medalist Andre Dirrell. On July 29, 2012, he and the boxer Floyd Mayweather, Jr., signed IBF featherweight champion Billy Dib. They unveiled plans to challenge the box-office dominance of mixed martial arts and change the landscape of boxing with TMT Promotions. Boxer Zab Judah also expressed interest in making a deal with Jackson. In December 2012, Mayweather and Jackson parted company, with Jackson taking over the promotion company and founding SMS Promotions with Gamboa, Dirrell, Dib, James Kirkland, Luis Olivares and Donte Strayhorn in his stable. On July 13, 2015, Jackson filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Connecticut with a debt of $32,509,549.91. On July 17, 2015, the Court issued an order allowing a creditor to proceed with the punitive damages phase of a trial against Jackson in a New York state court, in connection with the alleged release of a private video. His assets were listed as between $10 million and $50 million in his bankruptcy petition, though he testified under oath that he is worth $4.4 million. Citing between $10 million and $50 million in debt, and the same amount in assets. Later in the week, Jackson's bankruptcy lawyers elucidated the court documents that legal fees and judgments exceeding $20 million over the past year were the primary cause of the filing. His filings listed 32 entities that he has a stake in. The bankruptcy came days after a jury ordered him to pay $5 million to rapper Rick Ross's ex-girlfriend Lastonia Leviston for invading her privacy by posting online a sex tape of her and another man. In addition, Jackson lost a dispute over a failed business deal to come to fruition to his Sleek headphones, where Jackson invested more than $2 million. An ex-partner accused Jackson of later stealing the design of the "Sleek by 50" headphones, prompting a judge to award the partner more than $17.2 million. His Connecticut bankruptcy filing states that he owns seven cars valued at more than $500,000, including a 2010 Rolls-Royce and a 1966 Chevrolet Coupe. His expenses of $108,000 a month include $5,000 for gardening along with a monthly income of $185,000, mainly from royalties and income from his external businesses and investments. The court filing says he also owes money to his stylist, his barber, and his fitness coach. Other details in the bankruptcy documents included information about two deals that sold the right to collect royalties of on-air play of his music. Half the rights to his portfolio were sold to the British independent music publishing company Kobalt Music Group for $3 million and the other half for another $3 million with the sales of his albums allowing Jackson to own 100 percent of the rights to the master recordings while paying only for distribution. Zeisler & Zeisler, a Bridgeport law firm, represented 50 Cent in the bankruptcy, which later resulted in Jackson filing a $75 million lawsuit against his own lawyers. He stated that his lawyers did a terrible job of representing him, specifically citing the fallout of his failed venture with Sleek Audio headphones and accused Garvey Schubert Barer, a Wall Street law firm, of failing to "employ the requisite knowledge and skill necessary to confront the circumstances of the case". G-Unity Foundation Inc. – Founder SMS Audio – CEO, founder SK Energy – Founder SMS Promotions – CEO, founder Sire Spirits – Owner Effen Vodka – Former minority shareholder 50 Cent has said his life philosophy, following his shooting, is "When your time comes, you go. I think that comes from God. Despite having numerous songs that reference drug and alcohol usage and his ownership of Branson Cognac, Jackson remains teetotal, citing a bad experience with alcohol as his main reason. Forbes noted Jackson's wealth in 2007, ranking him second behind Jay-Z in the rap industry. He lived in a Farmington, Connecticut, mansion formerly owned by ex-boxer Mike Tyson. Jackson listed the mansion for sale in 2007 at $18.5 million to move closer to his son (who lived on Long Island at the time). In 2019, the mansion was sold for $2.9 million, with $1 million being donated to tax-deducted charities. The mayor of Bridgeport, Connecticut, declared October 12, 2007 "50 Cent Curtis Jackson Day", honoring the rapper with a proclamation and a key to the city. One of Jackson's New York homes, purchased in January 2007 for $2.4 million and the center of a lawsuit between Jackson and Shaniqua Tompkins, caught fire on May 31, 2008, while he was filming in Louisiana. In December 2008, he told the Canadian press that he had lost several million dollars in the stock market and, unable to sell his Connecticut mansion, had postponed Before I Self-Destruct because of the economic downturn. Jackson won a lawsuit in November 2009 against Taco Bell over the fast-food chain's use of his name without permission. On October 13, 1996, Jackson's girlfriend, Shaniqua Tompkins, gave birth to son Marquise. Tompkins later sued Jackson for $50 million in 2009, saying he promised to take care of her for life. The suit, with 15 causes of action, was dismissed by a judge who called it "an unfortunate tale of a love relationship gone sour". The two have bickered for years, and have even taken their feud to social media many times. Marquise's birth changed Jackson's outlook on life: "When my son came into my life, my priorities changed, because I wanted to have the relationship with him that I didn't have with my father." He credited his son for inspiring his career and being the "motivation to go in a different direction". Despite this, the two have endured a fractured relationship that began when Jackson and Tompkins separated in 2008. Their feud has been taken to social media numerous times, including in 2020 when Jackson disclosed that he "used to" love his son. Jackson has a tattoo "Marquise" with an axe on his right biceps ("The axe is 'cause I'm a warrior. I don't want him to be one, though"), and has "50", "Southside" and "Cold World" on his back: "I'm a product of that environment. It's on my back, though, so it's all behind me". In 2003, Jackson briefly dated actress Vivica A. Fox. He broke up with her only eight months later on the radio. Jackson dated model Daphne Joy and had his second son, Sire Jackson, with her, on September 1, 2012. At the age of two years, Sire modeled for Kidz Safe, a headphone brand for kids, earning $700,000 through his contract. In 2005, Jackson supported President George W. Bush after rapper Kanye West criticized Bush for a slow response to the victims of Hurricane Katrina. If his felony convictions did not prevent him from voting, he said that he would have voted for the president. Jackson later said that Bush "has less compassion than the average human. By all means, I don't aspire to be like George Bush." In September 2007, he told Time that although he would not endorse a candidate in 2008, he "liked Hillary [Clinton]". Six months later, the rapper told MTV News that he had switched his support to Barack Obama after hearing him speak, but had lost interest in politics. Asked his opinion of President Obama's May 9, 2012, endorsement of gay marriage, Jackson said, "I'm for it ... I've encouraged same-sex activities. I've engaged in fetish areas a couple times." He had been criticized for anti-gay comments in the past. Jackson endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election. He rejected an offer of $500,000 from the Trump campaign to make an appearance on the candidate's behalf. However, he endorsed Donald Trump in 2020, due to his dislike of Joe Biden's tax plans. A week later, he retracted his endorsement, saying on Twitter "Fu*k Donald Trump, I never liked him", and endorsed Biden. On June 29, 1994, Jackson was arrested for selling four vials of cocaine to an undercover police officer. He was arrested again three weeks later, when police searched his home and found heroin, ten ounces of crack cocaine and a starter's pistol. Although Jackson was sentenced to three to nine years in prison, he served six months in a boot camp (where he earned his high-school equivalency diploma). According to him, he did not use cocaine. Jackson and four members of his entourage were arrested shortly before 2 a.m. on December 31, 2002, when police found a .25-caliber handgun and a .45-caliber pistol in a parked car (which they searched due to its tinted windows) outside a Manhattan nightclub. The rapper was charged with two counts of criminal possession of a weapon. Jackson was sentenced to two years' probation on July 22, 2005, for a May 2004 incident, when he was charged with three counts of assault and battery after jumping into an audience when he was hit by a water bottle. Jackson filed a lawsuit against an advertising company, Traffix of Pearl River, New York, on July 21, 2007, for using his image in a promotion he said threatened his safety. He was alerted by a staff member to an Internet advertisement on a Myspace page. According to court documents, the advertisement had a cartoon image of the rapper with "Shoot the rapper and you will win $5000 or five ring tones guaranteed". Although the ad did not use his name, the image allegedly resembled him and suggested that he endorsed the product. The lawsuit, calling the ad a "vile, tasteless and despicable" use of Jackson's image which "quite literally call[ed] for violence against him", sought unspecified punitive damages and a permanent injunction against the use of his image without permission. In 2008, Jackson sued Taco Bell over an ad campaign in which it invited him to change his name for one day from 50 Cent to 79 Cent, 89 Cent, or 99 Cent, in line with pricing for some of its items, and they would donate $10,000 to the charity of his choice. The case was settled out of court. While walking through Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport in May 2016, Jackson harassed and insulted a janitor at the airport, accusing him of being under the influence. The janitor was a hearing-impaired, autistic teenager named Andrew Farrell. The parents of the janitor had seen the viral video as disrespect and wanted to sue Jackson for his action against their child. The lawsuit was originally over one million dollars, but the parents settled for a $100,000 donation to Autism Speaks and his apology. In 2016, a judge declared that Brandon Parrott gave Dr. Dre and 50 Cent the rights to "Bamba" for the song "P.I.M.P." One of his New York homes, purchased for $2.4 million in January 2007 and the center of a lawsuit between Jackson and Shaniqua Tompkins, caught fire on May 30, 2008, while he was filming in Louisiana. On August 5, 2013, Jackson pleaded not guilty to one count of domestic violence and four counts of vandalism in a Los Angeles County court. If convicted of all charges, he faced up to five years in prison and a $46,000 fine. Model-actress Daphne Joy accused Jackson of kicking her and ransacking her bedroom during an argument at her condominium in the Toluca Lake neighborhood of Los Angeles on June 23. He allegedly caused $7,100 in property damage, leaving the scene before police arrived. Judge Ann Nevins has ordered Jackson back to court because of Instagram messages he made over several months. She said Jackson was not fully clear about his funds and indicated posts of the rapper showing stacks of his money. In March 2016, Jackson claimed that he would no longer use Instagram, electing instead to have his profile page operated by someone else. In 2020, Jackson was a subject of controversy for his involvement in a viral video of him giving money to a Burger King restaurant in New York City on behalf of a local scammer who was later arrested and charged for Bitcoin scamming and for assaulting and kidnapping his victims on April 24, 2021. Before he signed with Interscope Records, Jackson engaged in a public dispute with rapper Ja Rule and his label, Murder Inc. Records, saying that a friend robbed jewelry from Ja Rule and the latter accused him of orchestrating the robbery. Ja Rule said that the conflict stemmed from a Queens video shoot, when Jackson did not like seeing him "getting so much love" from the neighborhood. At The Hit Factory in New York in March 2000, Jackson had an altercation with Murder Inc. associates and received three stitches for a stab wound. Rapper Black Child claimed responsibility for the stabbing, saying that he acted in self-defense when he thought someone reached for a gun. An affidavit by an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) agent suggested ties between Murder Inc. and Kenneth "Supreme" McGriff, a New York drug lord suspected of involvement in the murder of Jam Master Jay and Jackson's shooting. An excerpt read: The investigation has uncovered a conspiracy involving McGriff and others to murder a rap artist who has released songs containing lyrics regarding McGriff's criminal activities. The rap artist was shot in 2000, survived and thereafter refused to cooperate with law enforcement regarding the shooting. Messages transmitted over the Murder Inc. pager indicate that McGriff is involved in an ongoing plot to kill this rap artist, and that he communicates with Murder Inc. employees concerning the target. The end of the Jackson-Ja Rule feud was confirmed in May 2011. According to Ja Rule, "I'm cool. We ain't beefing no more. We'll never collaborate. That's just what it is. You don't have to be at war with somebody, but it's also kind of like U.S. and another country that they may not get along with. We don't gotta go to war, but we're not friends either. But we can coincide inside of a world. He's doing him, and he's not thinking about me, and I'm doing me and I'm not thinking about him." On August 7, 2015, the feud between the two rappers later reignited when Ja Rule gave a feedback to a social follower via Twitter over a similar feud between Meek Mill and Drake. Enraged, Jackson later responded with photos and comments via Instagram, only siding with Drake. The feud resurfaced three years later on January 19, 2018, when Ja Rule took to Twitter, calling out 50 Cent on social media. In 1999, with the release of the single "How to Rob", 50 Cent attacked his rap peers, including Jay-Z, who responded to the provocation with the single "It's Hot (Some Like It Hot)" in which he raps "Go against Jigga yo ass is dense/I'm about a dollar – what the f*ck is 50 Cents?". In a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone, 50 Cent accused Jay-Z and his record company Roc-A-Fella Records of being unfair to Beanie Sigel because "[Jay-Z] didn't have their interests in mind, he was just doing what he had to do for himself." The rapper also stated that "I don't know him personally, [...] I tried to collaborate with him on the Freeway project ... What I did was Freeway went out and found his publishing deal, and we started the album. [...] when it came time to put the record out, he didn't want to shoot his video. He has a god complex." 50 Cent also accused Jay-Z of changing in attitude and image since marrying Beyoncé. In 2017, 50 Cent described Jay-Z's thirteenth studio album 4:44 as "golf course music" in a Instagram post, elaborating: "I listened to Jay sh*t, that 4:44. [...] [It] was too smart. I felt like I was supposed to be wearing like glasses and shit and like a tie, a fucking sweater around my waist. It was like Ivy League. They don't wanna hear that shit. [...] They just wanna have a good time. You know what I'm saying? You can't be the best rapper at 47 because the new n****s is here. They coming with new [music] going on." In an interview on the Conan Show, 50 Cent spoke about the album, saying: "Hip-hop culture's connected to youth culture. The kids gonna bring new innovative stuff. He just had the maturity bleed off into the material. [...] But the kids, I don't see them actually listening to it". In an interview in 2022, 50 Cent reported that in a meeting between him and the couple in Los Angeles, the two rappers were having a heated argument. Beyoncé, seeing them, jumped from a ledge to come to her husband's defense. 50 Cent compared the singer to her sister Solange when she hit Jay-Z in the elevator, describing them as "two gangstas". In an interview for XXL Mag in 2023, 50 Cent claimed that Jay-Z's Grammy wins were due to his marriage to Beyoncé: "Even Jay-Z's career, you can look at that and say the association to Beyoncé is when he started to receive the 16, 17 Grammys, since he's been with Beyoncé. And you go, prior to that [he had] one. That came with the association." 50 Cent also pointed out that the couple's eldest child Blue Ivy Carter won a Grammy even though she does not sing or rap, accusing award ceremonies of giving accolades to the couple just to ensure their attendance during the show. The rapper also reported that his non-win at the Grammys was due to his music being "a little bit abrasive to conservatives; [...] It didn't matter to me in that time period. Don't give me the trophy. They didn't give me Best New Artist and I sold 13 million records", while the Carter-Knowles family is more politically agreeable to the music industry. Although Jackson was close to The Game before the latter released his debut album, The Documentary, they grew apart. After The Documentary's release, Jackson felt that The Game was disloyal for saying that he did not want to participate in G-Unit's feuds with other rappers (such as Nas, Jadakiss and Fat Joe) and his desire to work with artists with which G-Unit was feuding. He said that he wrote six songs for the album and did not receive proper credit, which The Game denied. Jackson later dismissed The Game from G-Unit on Hot 97. After the announcement, The Game (a guest earlier in the evening) tried to enter the building with his entourage. After they were denied entry, one of his associates was shot in the leg in a confrontation with a group of men leaving the building. When the situation escalated, the rappers held a joint press conference announcing their reconciliation, and fans were uncertain if the rappers had staged a publicity stunt to boost sales of their recently released albums. After the situation cooled, G-Unit criticized The Game's street credibility and announced that they would not appear on his albums. During a Summer Jam performance The Game announced a boycott of G-Unit, which he called "G-Unot". After the Summer Jam performance The Game recorded "300 Bars and Runnin'", an extended "diss" of G-Unit and Roc-A-Fella Records, for the mixtape You Know What It Is Vol. 3. Jackson responded with his "Piggy Bank" music video, with The Game as Mr. Potato Head and parodies of other rivals. They have continued attacking each other, with The Game releasing two more mixtapes: Ghost Unit and a mixtape-DVD, Stop Snitchin, Stop Lyin. Jackson superimposed The Game's head on the body of a male stripper for the cover of the Hate It or Love It (G-Unit Radio Part 21) mixtape in response to The Game's pictures of G-Unit dressed as the Village People. The Game, under contract to Aftermath Entertainment, signed with Geffen Records to terminate his contractual obligations with G-Unit (although it is claimed that Jackson pressured Dr. Dre to fire him). G-Unit member Spider Loc has insulted The Game in songs, and the latter released "240 Bars (Spider Joke)" and "100 Bars (The Funeral)" attacking G-Unit and Loc. Jackson's response was "Not Rich, Still Lyin'", mocking The Game. Lloyd Banks replied to the Game on a Rap City freestyle-booth segment, followed by a Game "diss" song ("SoundScan") ridiculing the 13-position drop of Banks' album Rotten Apple on the Billboard 200 chart and its disappointing second-week sales. Banks replied on his mixtape Mo' Money In The Bank Pt. 5: Gang Green Season Continues with "Showtime (The Game's Over)", said that Jackson wrote half of The Documentary and ridiculed The Game's suicidal thoughts.[citation needed] In October 2006, The Game made a peace overture (which was not immediately answered) to Jackson, but two days later he said on Power 106 that the peace offer was valid for only one day. In several songs on Doctor's Advocate, he implied that the feud was over. He said in July 2009 that the feud had ended with help from Michael Jackson and Diddy, and apologized for his actions. According to Tony Yayo, neither Jackson nor G-Unit accepted his apology and The Game has resumed his calls for a "G-Unot" boycott at concerts. Jackson released "So Disrespectful" on Before I Self Destruct, targeting Jay-Z, The Game and Young Buck. The Game responded with "Shake", poking fun at the music video for Jackson's "Candy Shop". On January 2, 2015, The Game claimed that he and 50 were "sworn enemies", promising never to reconcile with him anymore, but on August 1, 2016, they ended their twelve-year feud when the two were in the Ace of Diamonds strip club and The Game said "I love 50, man. What happened, that shit was 12 years ago." In January 2022, the feud reiterated after 50 critiqued Game's Drink Champs interview with N.O.R.E., where he claimed that 50's former competitor Kanye West did "more for me in two weeks than [Dr.] Dre did for me throughout my entire career". The Game responded, commenting that he enclosed the entirety of G-Unit as a group and clothing brand "in a casket", also expressing his likeliness in the Power television trilogy, but warning 50 to "leave [the past] alone or else... I'm outside #Numinati". Then, two months later, in March, 50 Cent published a video via Instagram of Game being shunned by former Interscope Records CEO Jimmy Iovine at a basketball game, poking fun of it while also commenting "50 wrote ya hits". The Game once again flamed 50 after the claims were brought back up and also bragged to "get [50's] girlfriend out of my DM's". This was believed to have been a consequential result of Game claiming on Drink Champs to be "the best and a better rapper" than Eminem, with whom 50 still remains close friends. Additionally, Game's manager, Wack 100, has subliminally called out or questioned 50 Cent's credibility, over the rapper's surprise appearance at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show and ghostwriting allegations. Jackson's issues with former The Diplomats member Cam'ron began in 2007, when they had a live argument on The Angie Martinez Show on Hot 97 radio. Jackson commented that he felt that the music division of Koch Entertainment (known today as MNRK Music Group) was a "graveyard", meaning major record labels would not work with their artists. Cam'ron then ridiculed the record sales of G-Unit members Lloyd Banks and Mobb Deep by pointing out that Dipset member Jim Jones outsold both of their albums despite not being signed to a major label, and also went on to clarify that his group, The Diplomats, had a distribution deal from several labels. Both rappers released diss songs with videos on YouTube. Jackson released "Funeral Music", and suggested in the song that Cam'ron is no longer able to lead The Diplomats and that Jim Jones should take his place. Cam'ron responded with "Curtis" and "Curtis Pt. II", in which he makes fun of not only Jackson's first name, but also his appearance, calling him "a gorilla, with rabbit teeth". Jackson responded by releasing "Hold On" with Young Buck. Since 2009, the feud slowly died down, and they eventually reconciled in 2016. Although Rick Ross began a feud with Jackson over an alleged incident at the 2008 BET Hip Hop Awards, Jackson told news sources he did not remember seeing Ross there. Later that month Ross' "Mafia Music" was leaked on the Internet, with lyrics apparently disparaging Jackson. Several days later, Jackson released "Officer Ricky (Go Head, Try Me)" in response to "Mafia Music". The following day, Ross appeared on Shade 45 (Eminem's Sirius channel) and told Jackson to come up with something better in 24 hours. Before leaving for Venezuela, Jackson uploaded a video ("Warning Shot") and the first of a series of "Officer Ricky" cartoons. In early February he uploaded a YouTube video in which he interviewed "Tia", the mother of one of Ross' children; according to her, Ross is in reality a correctional officer. On February 5, 2009, The Game phoned Seattle radio station KUBE. Asked about the dispute between Jackson and Ross, he sided with Jackson and offered to mediate: "Rick Ross, holla at your boy, man" and "50 eating you, boy." On his album Deeper Than Rap, Ross refers to Jackson in "In Cold Blood" and Jackson's mock funeral is part of the song's video. When the song was released, Ross said that he ended Jackson's career. "Rick Ross is Albert From CB4. You ever seen the movie? He's Albert," Jackson replied in an interview. "It never gets worse than this. You get a guy that was a correctional officer come out and base his entire career on writing material from a drug dealer's perspective such as "Freeway" Ricky Ross." Their feud rekindled at the 2012 BET Hip Hop Awards, where Jackson and G-Unit members Kidd Kidd, Mike Knox, Tony Yayo were seen on video attacking Gunplay (a member of Ross' Maybach Music Group). Gunplay's Maybach Music diamond necklace was stolen during the brawl, and several days later Jackson appeared at a Washington, D.C. bowling alley wearing Gunplay's chain. On January 30, 2013, Jackson tweeted that Ross' attempted drive-by shooting on his birthday three days earlier was "staged". Studio albums Get Rich or Die Tryin' (2003) The Massacre (2005) Curtis (2007) Before I Self Destruct (2009) Animal Ambition (2014) Collaborative albums Beg for Mercy (with G-Unit) (2003) T·O·S (Terminate on Sight) (with G-Unit) (2008) Jackson's stage name is lent to the female character, Isuzu Sento, in the Japanese light novel/manga/anime series, Amagi Brilliant Park. Sometimes abbreviated Fiddy, reflecting his own AAVE pronunciation of "50". On Late Night with Seth Meyers, he advised "white people who are trying to be cool" to pronounce "50" as "fifty" rather than "fiddy". Jason Birchmeier. "50 Cent". AllMusic. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved November 22, 2019. "50 Cent-produced TV series "The Oath" trailer debut". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved March 17, 2018. Birchmeier, Jason. "50 Cent Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016. A Public Service Announcement from Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson. Late Night with Seth Meyers. 2015 – via YouTube. "Why 50 Cent Is One Of The Greatest Of All Time". www.hotnewhiphop.com. March 28, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2020. "50 Cent". Biography. Retrieved September 28, 2020. "Starz announces it extended Curtis '50 Cent' Jackson's exclusive premium overall deal". August 1, 2016. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2016. "Five Reasons Before I Self Destruct Flopped". Vibe. November 26, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved January 16, 2014. "50 Greatest Rappers of All Time". Billboard. February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Artists of the Decade". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "100 Best Albums of the 2000s". Rolling Stone. July 18, 2011. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "100 Best Songs of the 2000s". Rolling Stone. June 17, 2011. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Samuels, Allison (February 21, 2007). "The Flip Side of 50 Cent". Newsweek via MSNBC. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2007. Tourã (April 3, 2003). "The Life of a Hunted Man". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2015. (online is excerpt only) "50 Cent denies accusations of homophobia – and explains why they 'sting'". Attitude.co.uk. July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. "50 Cent interview: 'Too rich? There's no such thing'". The Independent. July 19, 2021. Archived from the original on July 17, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. "50 Cent: Biography". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved September 8, 2010. Weiner, Jonah (August 2007). 33 Things You Should Know About 50 Cent Archived February 18, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Blender. Retrieved September 30, 2007. "Wegen Bidens Reichensteuer: 50 Cent unterstützt Donald Trump". FAZ.NET (in German). ISSN 0174-4909. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Reid, Shaheem (February 25, 2005). All Eyes on 50 Cent: The Sequel Archived November 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Accessed May 22, 2007. The Phenomenon '50 Cent' Revealed Archived March 24, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Female First (February 1, 2006). Accessed May 21, 2008. Reid, Shaheem; Calloway, Sway; Pak, SuChin; Parry, Heather; Waller, Curtis (February 12, 2003). "50 Cent: Money to Burn". MTV. Archived from the original on February 23, 2003. Retrieved May 22, 2007. The Smoking Gun: 50 Cent Archived March 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. The Smoking Gun (February 27, 2003). Accessed May 22, 2007. Dave (November 2, 2003). Jackson Interview on Howard Stern Show. Rap News Network. Accessed May 22, 2007. Interview w/ Jackson Archived February 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. AOL Music (August 1, 2003). Accessed May 22, 2007. Boots, Tone (August 3, 2005). Get Rich or Die Trying Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Stuff. Accessed May 22, 2007. "La Méthode Cauet" (2006). TF1. Youngs, Ian (December 23, 2002). 50 Cent: The $1m rapper Archived December 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Retrieved August 16, 2007. Tarek, Shams (May 16, 2003). Jamaica's 'Own Bad Guy' 50 Cent Making Good in the Music Biz Archived November 26, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Queens Press. Accessed May 22, 2007. Biography Archived November 24, 1999, at the Wayback Machine. 50cent.com. Accessed May 22, 2007. Chery, Carl (May 18, 2004). 50 Cent's a Fake, Says Ex-G-Unit Member, Bang Em Smurf Archived August 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. SOHH. Retrieved June 5, 2007. Williams, Houston (February 2004). Bang'em Smurf: Life after G-Unit. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. 50 Cent. From Pieces to Weight Part 5 Archived November 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Accessed May 22, 2007. Reid, Shaheem; Norris, John (November 7, 2005). "50 Cent: Return to Southside". MTV. Archived from the original on February 18, 2006. Retrieved May 22, 2007. Ninja (December 2002). 50 Cent Interview Archived May 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Dubcnn. Accessed May 22, 2007. Tyrangirl, Josh (February 17, 2003). Rap's Newest Target Archived May 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Time. Accessed May 22, 2007. Get Rich or Die Tryin': The Movie (2003) (bonus documentary DVD). Interscope Records. Cohen, Stefanie (June 13, 2008). "Tyson In Hit Bid: Witness". New York Post. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2010. Chery, Carl (October 24, 2005). 50 Cent Shot by "Hommo" Reveals Tell-All Book. SOHH. Accessed May 22, 2007. Archived October 25, 2005, at the Wayback Machine Jenkins, Sacha (July 9, 2007). I Was There Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. XXL. Retrieved July 31, 2007. Mace, Francis (September 6, 2005). Surveilling 50 Cent Archived February 6, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. The Smoking Gun. Accessed May 22, 2007. Weiner, Jonah (April 2005). Dear Superstar: 50 Cent Archived December 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Blender. Accessed May 22, 2007. "Interview With Marc Labelle". HitQuarters. November 28, 2005. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Touré (April 3, 2003). "50 Cent: The Life of a Hunted Man". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 30, 2024. Birchmeier, Jason. Get Rich or Die Tryin' Review. Allmusic. Accessed May 22, 2007. Hoard, Christian (March 6, 2003). Get Rich or Die Tryin' Review Archived April 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Rolling Stone. Accessed May 22, 2007. Gundersen, Edna (September 3, 2005). 'Massacre' sales top one million Archived May 24, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Accessed May 22, 2007. Rosario, Boo (March 2003). "Record Report". The Source, p. 192. Timeline Archived April 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Rock on the Net. Accessed May 22, 2007. Winston, Dallas (April 9, 2003). G-Unit Records Signs with Interscope. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. On Verge Of Blowing Up, 50 Cent Finds Value In His Street Cred Whitmire, Margo (April 15, 2005). 50's 'Massacre' Extends Chart Lead to 6th Week Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Billboard. Retrieved June 13, 2007. Montgomery, James (March 9, 2005). 50 Cent's The Massacre Makes Huge Chart Debut Archived December 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Accessed May 22, 2007. Brackett, Nathan (March 10, 2005). "The Massacre Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Reid, Shaheem (September 2, 2005). 50 and Mase: The Pastor Isn't Officially G-Unit Yet, But a Song Is Already out Archived January 2, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Accessed May 31, 2007. Chery, Carl (May 27, 2005). Pulse Report: M.O.P. Signs to G-Unit Archived March 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. SOHH. Retrieved June 22, 2007. Black, Bea (February 8, 2006). Roc-A-Fella Rapper Freeway Collaborating with G-Unit for New Album. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 22, 2007. Reid, Shaheem (April 27, 2007). 50 Cent Talks Timberlake Collabo, Star-Studded New LP Curtis Archived October 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Mayfield, Geoff (September 18, 2007). Kanye Crushes 50 Cent in Huge Album Sales Week Archived October 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Billboard. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Burney, Lawrence (September 11, 2017). "Kanye West's 'Graduation' Gave Birth to Rap's First Real Rock Star". Noisey. Vice Media. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017. "50 Cent – Flight 187". YouTube. September 3, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Behind The Boards: Producer Phoenix Interview". Champ Magazine. October 14, 2009. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Reid, Shaheem (September 4, 2009). "Did 50 Cent Throw A Jab At Jay-Z On 'Flight 187'?". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 26, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Caulfield, Keith (November 25, 2009). "John Mayer Snares No. 1 On Busy Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2009. Reid, Shaheem (March 19, 2010). "50 Cent Says Uptempo Black Magic LP Is 'Still Hip-Hop' – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "50 Cent Might Scrap Black Magic". Rap Radar. July 17, 2010. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2010. "50 Cent Gives Up Twitter To Work On Album". ThisIs50.com. September 2, 2010. Archived from the original on September 5, 2010. Retrieved September 8, 2010. "Eminem And Jay-Z: We're Live From Detroit!". Rapfix.mtv.com. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2010. "Dr Dre Says Holla At Me 50 Cent | Dr Dre". Rap Basement. September 2, 2010. Archived from the original on August 29, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2010. "50 Calls Next Album His "Detox" (Video) | 50 Cent". Rap Basement. November 22, 2010. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "50 Cent Wants New LP To Be "Aggressive" Like His Debut". Mtv.co.uk. January 19, 2011. Archived from the original on January 23, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "50 Cent Says New Album 80% Done". ThisIs50.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2016. Horowitz, Steven J. (June 19, 2011). "50 Cent Delays New Album Due To Label Disagreement, Plans For November". HipHop DX. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved June 25, 2011. "50 Cent Says Fans Can Expect Black Magic 'This Summer'". MTV. January 25, 2011. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "Cardiak reveals "Outlaw" – New Track He Produced For 50 Cent". ThisIs50.com. March 4, 2011. Archived from the original on March 10, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2011. "50 Cent "Outlaw" (New Single) | Aftermath Entertainment". Aftermathmusic.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved June 25, 2011. "Outlaw – Single by 50 Cent – Download Outlaw – Single on iTunes". iTunes. Apple Inc. January 2011. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2011. Jackson, Curtis (June 17, 2011). "Twitter / @50cent: Thanks its just a joint not da single RT @Ctech619: @50cent solid new track, great beat, sick flow, can't wait for the cd #releaseitthisyear". Twitter. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2011. Kaufman, Gil (June 20, 2011). "50 Cent To Write Book For Teens On Bullying – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved June 25, 2011. Markman, Rob (June 21, 2011). "Will 50 Cent Leave Interscope After Next Album? – Music, Celebrity, Artist News". MTV. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011. Retrieved June 25, 2011. Jacobs, Allen (June 20, 2011). "50 Cent Maintains He Still Plans To Record "Before I Self Destruct 2"". HipHop DX. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. 50 Cent Shooting Video For First Single 'I'm Honnored' | HipHop-N-More Archived October 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Hiphop-n-more.com (July 29, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. 50 Cent Talks 'I'm On It' & Album Delay | HipHop-N-More Archived November 25, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Hiphop-n-more.com (August 24, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. "50 Cent speaks on new album". Aftermathmusic.com. Archived from the original on July 9, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. 50 Cent "Street King Energy Track #7" | Aftermath Entertainment. Aftermathmusic.com (September 23, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. Archived December 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine 50 Cent Shoots Video For First Single 'Girls Go Wild' | HipHop-N-More Archived September 30, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Hiphop-n-more.com (September 28, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. Music Video News: IN PRODUCTION: 50 Cent f/ Jeremih – Colin Tilley Archived October 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Video Static (September 28, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. "50 Cent's Street King Immortal Due November 13". BET.com. July 31, 2012. Archived from the original on August 3, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2012. "50 Cent Sets July Release Date for New Album". Rap-Up.com. March 20, 2012. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved March 30, 2012. Langhorne, Cyrus (January 12, 2014). "50 Cent Still Has A Desire To Win, Defends Delaying "Street King Immortal"". Sohh.Com. Archived from the original on February 15, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2014. Balfour, Jay (January 9, 2014). "50 Cent Details "Animal Ambition" Release Plans". HipHop DX. Archived from the original on March 10, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2014. Caroline (July 28, 2010). "50 Cent And G-Unit Records Sign Exclusive Worldwide Distribution Agreement". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on March 3, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2015. "50 Cent Compares His New Deal To Birdman's Cash Money Records Deal". AllHipHop. February 22, 2014. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2014. Tardio, Andres. "50 Cent Animal Ambition Release Date". HipHop DX. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2014. "50 Cent – The Funeral (Official Music Video) – TI50". February 21, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2014. Kristobak, Ryan (March 14, 2014). "50 Cent Goes Real Smooth On New Song". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Whitney Phaneuf. "50 Cent drops two new videos: 'Don't Worry 'Bout It' and 'Hold On'". HitFix. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Tardio, Andres (March 22, 2014). "50 Cent Says 'Street King Immortal' Will Be 'Way More Personal' Than 'Animal Ambition'". HipHop DX. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 22, 2014. "50 Cent Says First Single Off "Street King Immortal" Is Coming In June". Hotnewhiphop.com. May 14, 2015. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015. "50 Cent Wants You To 'Get Low' To His New Song With Jeremih, 2 Chainz And T.I." MTV. May 20, 2015. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015. Stech, Katy (July 13, 2015). "Rapper 50 Cent Files for Bankruptcy". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2017. Centeno, Tony (March 2, 2020). "50 Cent Says He Will Finish, Executive Produce Pop Smoke's Debut Album". XXL. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Ketchum III, William E. (March 25, 2020). "50 Cent Recounts When He "Fell In Love" With Pop Smoke's Work Ethic". Vibe. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Porter, Rick (September 14, 2020). "50 Cent Developing Two More Dramas for Starz". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "50 Cent and Y2K Icons Headline Golden Sand in Riviera Maya". HYPEBEAST. September 7, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. "Mayor Turner Announces Unique Partnership Between Houston ISD and Rapper/Actor Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson". Stewart, Shelby (May 4, 2021). "Rapper 50 Cent moved to Houston, gives us a sneak peek into new crime show". Chron. "50 Cent Offers Update on Delayed Album 'Street King Immortal'". July 19, 2021. "New 'The Expendables' Movie Set to Star 50 Cent, Megan Fox, Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, and More". Complex. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Lipshutz, Jason (February 14, 2022). "50 Cent Makes Surprise 'In Da Club' Performance During 2022 Super Bowl Halftime Show". Billboard. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "50 Cent". Television Academy. Retrieved September 4, 2022. "50 Cent Talks Early Musical Influences, His Decision To Make An Impact Through Mixtapes, An LL Cool J Song Inspiring Him To Write '21 Questions' & More On Music Choice's 'Chronicles' [Video]". thisis50.com. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "Influences: 50 Cent". New York. July 12, 2007. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "50 Cent Says Nas, Rakim & The Notorious B.I.G. Influenced "Animal Ambition"". Vibe. March 9, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "50 Cent And G-Unit Records Sign Exclusive Worldwide Distribution Agreement" (Press release). PR Newswire. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Colin Stutz (August 21, 2015). "50 Cent & G-Unit Companies Sign With APA for Film & Touring". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. John R. Kennedy (July 13, 2015). "50 Cent files for bankruptcy". Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Winston, Dallas (April 9, 2003). "G-Unit Records Signs with Interscope". AllHipHop. Archived from the original on June 27, 2006. Retrieved July 20, 2007. Reebok and Jackson Announce the Successful Launch of New "G-Unit Collection by RBK" Footwear. Reebok (November 13, 2003). Accessed December 17, 2015. Leeds, Jeff (December 26, 2004). $50 Million for 50 Cent Archived May 28, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved June 9, 2007. Chris Morris (January 19, 2014). "Business lessons from rapper 50 Cent's playbook". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Julian Cordero (July 23, 2015). "How to Protect Your Assets | Business Lessons from 50 Cent". Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Launches G-Unit Books". Spin. January 3, 2007. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Kamelia Angelova; Hilary Lewis (September 16, 2009). "50 Cent's Massive Business Empire". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 9, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2016. Noah Cruickshank (January 28, 2013). "Yes, 50 Cent wrote a YA novel about a bullied, violent kid and his gay mom". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Goldman, Lea (September 30, 2007). Forbes and 50 Cent 'Get Money' Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Forbes. Retrieved September 30, 2007. Howard, Theresa (July 29, 2007). "50 Cent, Glaceau forge unique bond". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved January 17, 2009. kyte: The Official HNIC2 Channel: 01/10/2008 Archived December 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Kyte (January 10, 2008). Retrieved January 13, 2008. Mirchandani, Raakhee (January 5, 2007). The Merchant of Menace Archived December 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. New York Post. Accessed May 22, 2007. "50 Cent Inks Deal With Steiner Sports To Sell Memorabilia". Archived from the original on May 6, 2008. Retrieved July 31, 2016. "50 Cent to sell dietary supplements". Digital Spy. August 21, 2007. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Jokesta (August 21, 2007). 50 Cent launches dietary supplement company. Def Sounds. Retrieved August 21, 2007. Archived August 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Rock Steady Eddy (January 22, 2008).The Economics Behind 50 Cent's New Film Production Company. Woohah. Retrieved December 17, 2015. For The Record: Quick News on Eminem, Ciara, Ludacris, Ne-Yo, Slayer, Marilyn Manson, Nas, Public Enemy & More Archived April 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV (March 23, 2007). Accessed May 22, 2007. "50 Cent's Massive Business Empire". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 9, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2014. "50 Cent Will Star In 'Live Bet' Movie". June 9, 2007. Archived from the original on June 9, 2007. "50 Cent's Film Company Lands $200 Million In Funding". Allhiphop.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2011. Retrieved July 24, 2011. "G UNIT FILM & TELEVISION INC". Dun & Bradstreet. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "Breaking News – "Power" Returns June 6th on Starz | TheFutonCritic.com". thefutoncritic.com. Retrieved September 8, 2021. "Power: New Starz TV Series Debuts June 7th". canceled + renewed TV shows – TV Series Finale. April 8, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Whitney Friedlander. "'Power' Producer 50 Cent Signs Overall Deal with Starz". Variety. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Alicia Adejobi (December 2, 2015). "50 Cent: Power producer to rival Empire with new Fox comedy series My Friend 50". Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Danny Schwartz (December 1, 2015). "50 Cent To Executive Produce & Star In FOX Sitcom "My Friend 50". HNHH. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Victoria Hernandez (June 19, 2015). "50 Cent Explains How To Get His Investment". HiphopDX. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. USPTO TESS Record: Trademark Application Serial Number 76429651; Filing Date July 9, 2002; Published for Opposition July 1, 2003; Registration Number 2807302; Registration Date January 20, 2004. "50 Cent". Feeding America. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. 50 Cent Launches Street King Energy Drink to Benefit Famine Relief Archived October 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Popcrush.com (August 15, 2011). Retrieved on October 25, 2011. Langhorne, Cyrus. (August 13, 2011) 50 Cent On "Street King" Global Takeover, "I Need Your Support" Archived September 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Sohh.Com. Retrieved on October 25, 2011. Heintz, Nadine (February 2012). "Close Up: 50 Cent". Inc.: 22. ISSN 0162-8968. Roberts, Daniel (July 14, 2015). "50 Cent explains his business philosophy". Fortune. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Daniel Roberts (April 9, 2015). "50 Cent says he wants to be the Adidas of headphones". Fortune. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent's SMS Audio Teams With Disney". Twice. March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Katy Stech (July 22, 2015). "50 Cent Discloses Ownership in Adult Film Producer, Headphone Ventures". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Walker, Tim (July 13, 2015). "50 Cent bankruptcy: He's gone from super rich to broke – but will rapper have the last laugh?". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved November 17, 2015. Logan, Mia (April 26, 2015). "50 Cent Helps A Liquor Store Sell 1,400 Bottles Of Vodka Just By Showing Up". HiphopEarly. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Is Going to Attend a Vodka Bottle Signing". Inquistr. July 11, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Danielle Harling (December 17, 2014). "50 Cent Signs $78 Million Deal With Frigo RevolutionWear Underwear Brand". HiphopDX. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Dan Simon. "50 Cent Gets Into Underwear". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Balford Henry (April 22, 2015). "50 Cent mulls Jamaica investment". Jamaica Observer. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Admits to Losing Money Because of Failing Economy". Hiphopdx.com. December 1, 2008. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "Rapper 50 Cent Of Farmington Files For Bankruptcy". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Kamer, Foster (January 13, 2011). "Is 50 Cent a White-Collar Criminal?". Esquire. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent: Penny Stock Pump & Dump?". CBS Money Watch. January 11, 2011. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent's Twitter Penny Stock Scheme: Makes $8.7 Million On H&H Importing By Encouraging Fans To Invest". Huffington Post. May 25, 2011. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Amy DiPierro (July 14, 2015). "50 Cent Offers His Two Cents on Investing and Lingerie". The Street. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Invests In Hang W/ Live Streaming App". Webpro. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "1 million people now using the Hang w/ app for broadcasting live video". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Pham, Alex (March 3, 2014). "50 Cent Teams with Hang W/ App for Live Streamed SXSW Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "How Fiddy Cent got in the mining business". XXL. August 19, 2008. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2014. Zack O'Malley Greenburg. "The 50 Cent Machine". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved September 26, 2014. Shlomo Sprung (July 20, 2012). "50 Cent Is Now A Licensed Boxing Promoter". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "50 Cent & Floyd Mayweather Jr. Sign IBF Featherweight Champion Billy Dib. Plan To Challenge MMA For Box Office Dominance & Change The Landscape Of Boxing With TMT Promotions". ThisIs50.com. July 29, 2012. Archived from the original on August 2, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "Zab Judah nears deal with promoter 50 Cent". Espn.go.com. July 31, 2012. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "TMT Promotions is no more after Floyd Mayweather and Curtis '50 Cent' Jackson split". Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Stech, Katy (August 4, 2015). "50 Cent Bankruptcy: By The Numbers". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 6, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. McIntyre, Hugh (July 13, 2015). "Rapper 50 Cent Files For Bankruptcy Protection". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2015. In re Curtis James Jackson III, case no. 15-21233, U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Connecticut. Order Granting Relief from Stay, July 17, 2015, docket entry 20, In re Curtis James Jackson III, case no. 15-21233, U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Connecticut. Wolfe, Alexandra (July 17, 2015). "50 Cent's Business Sense". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Tobak, Steve (August 13, 2015). "50 Cent's Bankruptcy Is a Lesson in Valuing What You Earn". Entrepreneur. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Gleason, Stephanie (August 14, 2015). "50 Cent Aims to Keep Effen Vodka Deal Secret". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Gleason, Stephanie (October 7, 2015). "50 Cent Seeks $75 Million Over Headphones Fiasco". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "Federal Judge To 50 Cent: Pay Up $17 Million You Owe In Lawsuit". Radar Online. November 4, 2014. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Discloses Ownership in Adult Film Producer, Headphone Ventures". American Bsnkruptcy Institute. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Bankruptcy Filing Lists Seven Cars, $8.3 Million Home". NBC. August 4, 2015. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent's bankruptcy papers show 7 cars, businesses in red". The San Diego Tribune. August 4, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent's Bankruptcy Papers Show Seven Cars, Businesses in Red". The Hollywood Reporter. August 4, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Stephanie Gleason (August 5, 2015). "50 Cent Reveals Upcoming Album and Financial Details in Questioning". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Lee, Mara (July 13, 2015). "Rapper 50 Cent Of Farmington Files For Bankruptcy". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "Bankrupt 50 Cent is suing his old lawyers for $75 million". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Woods, Monesha (October 8, 2015). "50 Cent Hits Former Lawyers With $75 Million Lawsuit". Vibe. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Sues Former Lawyers For $75 Million". 96.3 Kiss FM. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent Files $75 Million Lawsuit Against Former Lawyers". Hip Hop Wired. October 8, 2015. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "50 Cent sues Garvey Schubert Barer". 360nobs.com. October 7, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Fuchs, Erin (October 7, 2015). "Bankrupt 50 Cent is suing his old lawyers for $75 million". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. SMS Audio. "SMS Audio – Welcome". Smsby50.com. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2013. "50 Cent Launches "SK Energy"". Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2011. "Powerful. Pure. Energy". SK Energy Shots. Archived from the original on February 6, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2013. "50 Cent Launches "SMS Promotions"". Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved November 16, 2012. "American rapper 50 Cent has launched his own brand of Champagne "for winners only" with a gold-plated cross on every bottle and a blanc de blancs costing $1,000". August 31, 2018. Archived from the original on February 24, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. "50 Cent: The $1m rapper". December 23, 2002. Retrieved March 30, 2024. "Stay Sober: Rappers Who Don't Smoke Or Drink". HNHH. April 14, 2014. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "50 Cent lied about smoking weed to sell records". rollingout.com. January 17, 2013. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Goldman, Lea (August 16, 2007). Hip-Hop Cash Kings Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Forbes. Retrieved August 20, 2007. Bernard, Sarah (August 22, 2005). How Would 50 Cent Spend $3.5 Million? Archived November 28, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. New York. Accessed May 22, 2007. Keil, Braden (May 4, 2007). For Sale: Fitty Swanksta Crib Archived October 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. New York Post. Accessed May 27, 2007. Flamer, Keith. "See Why 50 Cent's Notorious B.I.G. Mansion Sold For Only $2.9 Million". Forbes. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Berger, Sarah (April 7, 2019). "Inside the Connecticut mansion 50 Cent just sold for $2.9 million". CNBC. Retrieved January 26, 2024. O'Kane, Caitlin (April 3, 2019). "50 Cent sells Connecticut mansion: Rapper sells massive Farmington mansion for 84% less than asking price - CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Madonna Signs Live Nation Deal; Plus Foxy Brown, 50 Cent, Linkin Park, 'Hannah Montana' & More, in For the Record Archived October 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV October 16, 2007. Retrieved October 28, 2007. Chicago Tribune (May 31, 2008). 'Suspicious' blaze leaves 50 Cent home gutted Archived July 30, 2012, at archive.today. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved June 13, 2007. HipHopDX.com – 50 Cent Admits to Losing Money Because of Failing Economy Archived December 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. HipHopDX.com. Retrieved December 1, 2008. Ware, Holly Sanders (November 24, 2009). "Taco you very much, 50 Cent wins suit". New York Post. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved November 29, 2009. "50 Cent responds to his son, who wants to sit down and talk with him... but it's not the answer Marquise wanted". MARCA. October 21, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Oh, Eunice (February 5, 2009). "Judge Throws Out $50 Million Lawsuit Against 50 Cent". People. Meredith Corporation. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Serpe, Gina (February 5, 2009). "50 Cent's Baby Mama Denied $50 Million". E! Online. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2010. "Baby Mama Drama: 50 Cent Says Shaniqua Tompkins' Home Is In Foreclosure—But What Does His Son Marquise Think???". Bossip. October 18, 2016. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved October 1, 2017. Golding, Shenequa (May 25, 2017). "50 Cent And Shaniqua Tompkins Continue Their Feud On Social Media". Vibe. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved October 1, 2017. Williams, Kam. "50 Cent's 2 Cents on Shooting Scenes, Samuel L., and His Son". aalbc.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2007. 50 Cent chats to ilikemusic.com Archived March 21, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. I Like Music (2005). Accessed May 22, 2007. "Watch 50 Cent's Heartbreaking Interview About Fractured Relationship With His Son Marquise". BET. May 6, 2020. Adejobi, Alicia (May 6, 2020). "50 Cent opens up about 'sad' fallout with 'privileged' son Marquise after paying over '$1m in child support'". Metro. Jackson, Kourtnee (May 26, 2021). "Vivica A. Fox Explains Why She and 50 Cent Broke Up and How He Ended It". Showbiz Cheatsheet. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Rivera, Zayda (March 9, 2015). "50 Cent's 2-year-old son lands $700,000 modeling contract". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Retrieved March 10, 2015. "50 Cent Returns to The Breakfast Club Power 105.1 (5/30/2014)". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2015. "Birth Certificate" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on November 29, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. Kennedy, Gerrick (March 13, 2015). "50 Cent's 2-year-old son makes more money than all of us". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2015. Retrieved March 13, 2015. Lynskey, Dorian (January 20, 2006). 'I'm not trying to save the world' Archived July 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Accessed May 22, 2007. For the Record: Quick News on 50 Cent, Kanye West, Irv Gotti, Beyoncé, Zack de la Rocha, Alice in Chains & More Archived November 25, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. MTV (November 23, 2005). Accessed May 22, 2007. Williams, Ben (July 23, 2007). Influences: 50 Cent Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. New York. Retrieved August 1, 2007. Time Magazine, Monday September 10, "Ten Questions for 50 Cent." CNN Politics, "50 Cent no longer supports Clinton," March 31, 2008. MTV News, "50 cent Flip-flops: From Clinton to Obama," March 28, 2008 50 Cent On Gay Marriage: "I'm For It!" Archived May 30, 2012, at the Wayback Machine retrieved May 19, 2012 Tell 50 Cent Not to Take Out Frustrations with Perez Hilton on Entire Gay Community Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, GLAAD, September 9, 2010 Mariel Concepcion, GLAAD Calls Out 50 Cent For Anti-Gay Tweet Archived September 13, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Billboard, September 10, 2010 GLAAD to 50 Cent: Stop Antigay Tweets Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Advocate, September 10, 2010 Benedictus, Leo (February 1, 2016). "Backing bands: which musicians endorse which US presidential candidates?". The Guardian. London, England. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. "50 Cent Says Trump Campaign Offered Him $500,000 for Support". Time. Retrieved November 2, 2020. "50 Cent Endorses Donald Trump, Says He Doesn't Care If Trump Doesn't Like Black People!". Hot 97. October 19, 2020. Day, Nate (October 26, 2020). "50 Cent says 'F—k Donald Trump' one week after expressing support for president". Fox News. Retrieved October 27, 2020. "50 Cent Is 'Supporting Joe Biden' After Recanting Trump Endorsement, Chelsea Handler Says". The Steve Harvey Morning Show. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Time Waster. "50 Cent". The Smoking Gun. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "50 Cent Arrested For Gun Possession". MTV. December 31, 2002. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "50 Cent: Arrested for Selling Drugs". about.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2011. CBC Arts (July 21, 2007). "50 Cent says ad threatens his life, files lawsuit". Cbc.ca. Archived from the original on November 27, 2010. Retrieved December 8, 2012. 50 Cent Sues over 'Shoot the Rapper'. Fox News (July 20, 2007). Retrieved December 17, 2015. "50 Cent & Taco Bell Avoid Lawsuit and Settle for a Million Dollars". November 23, 2009. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Reuters (July 24, 2008). "Rapper 50 Cent Sues Taco Bell Over Ad Campaign". cnbc.com. Retrieved April 19, 2021. "Making Fun Of An Autistic Janitor Cost 50 Cent $100,000". May 5, 2016. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. "50 CENT MAKES FUN OF AUTISTIC TEEN". Hot1061.com. May 3, 2016. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. "50 Cent "insults" a kid with autism". Datalounge. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. "50 Cent Faces Backlash Over Offensive Autism Tweets". Huffington Post. July 5, 2012. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Brucculieri, Julia (May 5, 2016). "50 Cent Donates $100,000 To Autism Speaks After Mocking Teen". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2016. Schwadron, Eli (November 19, 2016). "Judge declares Brandon Parrott gave Dr. Dre and 50 Cent the rights to Bamba for 2003 hit". XXL. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Duke, Alan (August 5, 2013). "50 Cent pleads not guilty in domestic violence case". CNN. Archived from the original on September 14, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2013. Carver, Low (February 20, 2016). "50 Cent brought back to court for not being fully transparent". Hotnewhiphop. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2016. "50 Cent Says He's Quitting Instagram Amid Legal and Financial Troubles". Entertainment Tonight. March 11, 2016. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved March 12, 2016. Walters, Mike (September 9, 2020). "50 Cent & Jay Mazini Give $30,000 CASH To Workers In Burger King Drive-Through!". The Blast. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Clement, Saudu (March 25, 2021). "Instagram big boy Jay Mazini caught in Bitcoin scam web, steals over $2.5 million from unsuspecting victims". BTC Peers. Archived from the original on March 26, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Rapace, Amanda (May 11, 2021). "Instagram influencer incited to savagery". NJ Today. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Tannenbaum, Rob (April 2004). "Playboy Interview: 50 Cent". Playboy, p. 140. "Ja Rule on 50 Cent, God and Hip-Hop". Mtv.com. March 9, 2006. Archived from the original on August 20, 2007. Retrieved December 8, 2012. Smith, Dominic (July 2005). 50 Cent Interview. FHM. Retrieved July 11, 2007. Archived September 26, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Reid, Shaheem (April 25, 2003). DJ Tells 50 Cent, Ja Rule: One More Dis Record, Then Quit It Archived May 1, 2003, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved June 5, 2007. Ja Rule; 50 Cent Squash Beef (May 30, 2011). "Ja Rule and 50 Cent Squash Beef". Inquisitr.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Natalie Weiner. "50 Cent & Ja Rule Beef Reignited by Drake & Meek Mill Feud". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015. Micah Peters (January 19, 2018). "Ja Rule Takes to Twitter to Reignite Early-2000s Beef With 50 Cent". The Ringer. Archived from the original on January 20, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Bustard, Andy (April 4, 2023). "50 Cent & JAY-Z's Long-Running Rivalry Explained: A Deep Dive". HipHopDX. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Serpick, Evan (December 2, 2009). "50 Cent's Path of Destruction Bears Down on Jay-Z". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Trendell, Andrew (July 6, 2017). "50 Cent slams Jay Z's new album '4:44' as 'golf course music'". NME. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Maher, Natalie (January 17, 2018). "50 Cent Says Listening to JAY-Z's '4:44' Makes Him Feel Like Carlton Banks". Billboard. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Berry, Peter (January 17, 2018). "50 Cent on Why Jay-Z's '4:44' Album Is Carlton Banks Music – XXL". XXL Mag. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Shakhnazarova, Nika (August 15, 2022). "50 Cent says Beyoncé 'was ready' to fight him over Jay-Z feud". The New York Post. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Bustard, Andy (August 12, 2022). "Beyoncé Was Ready To Fight 50 Cent During JAY-Z Beef: 'I Didn't Know How To Respond'". HipHopDX. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Ech, Joey (July 19, 2023). "50 Cent Interview – Get Rich or Die Tryin' Album 20th Anniversary, The Final Lap Tour, Friendship With Eminem and More". XXL Mag. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Callas, Brad (July 22, 2023). "50 Cent Suggests Jay-Z Started Winning Grammys Once He Began Relationship With Beyoncé". Complex. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Hawkins, Ruth (July 22, 2023). "50 Cent Implies Majority Of JAY-Z's Grammys Were Won Because He's Married To Beyoncé". HipHopDX. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Bras Nevares, Gabriel (July 23, 2023). "50 Cent Hints At Belief That Jay-Z's Many Grammys Are Due To Beyonce Relationship". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Reid, Shaheem (March 1, 2005). 50 Cent and The Game - Doomed from the Very Beginning? Archived May 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Accessed May 25, 2007. Reid, Shaheem (February 28, 2005). 50 Drops Game from G-Unit; Shots Fired at Radio Station Archived June 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved June 2, 2007. Hope, Clover (March 2, 2005). 50 Cent Cancels New York Appearance amid Shooting Inquiry Archived November 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. Fresh, Remmie (March 9, 2005). The Game and 50 Hold Press Conference Today to End Dispute. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. Rodriguez, Jayson (March 1, 2005). Update: Man Shot Not with 50 Cent; Violator Offices Shot Up. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. Williams, Houston (May 9, 2005). Game: Winds of Change Archived November 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. Rodriguez, Jason (June 6, 2005). The Game Taunts 50 Cent, Jay-Z Returns at Hot 97's Summer Jam. AllHipHop. Retrieved July 20, 2007. A-Plus (August 5, 2005). "50 Strikes Back in "Piggy Bank" Video". Hip Hop DX. Archived from the original on February 28, 2007. Retrieved January 29, 2007. Reid, Shaheem (July 10, 2006). Mixtape Monday: 50 Cent Strips Down The Game Archived October 2, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. MTV. Retrieved June 15, 2007. Petipas, Jolene (August 1, 2006). Update: The Game Officially Leaves Aftermath. SOHH. Retrieved June 9, 2007. Archived March 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Chery, Carl (February 3, 2006). The Game takes on Spider Loc, 50 Cent strikes back, SOHH. Retrieved July 23, 2007. Archived January 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Fresh, Remmie (September 30, 2006). The Game Extends Peace Treaty to 50 Cent Archived November 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Allhiphop. Retrieved June 23, 2007. Audio of the conversation on Power 106 URL The Black Wall Street Forum Archived December 17, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. The Black Wall Street. Retrieved October 11, 2006. Michael Jackson Tried To End Beef Between 50 Cent/The Game. Archived September 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Hip-Hop DX. The Game Apologizes To 50 Cent, Interscope. Archived March 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Hip-Hop DX. Tony Yayo Says G-Unit Isn't Accepting Game's Apology. Archived July 19, 2009, at the Wayback Machine MTV News. 50 Disses Game, Young Buck On BISD Snippet. Archived July 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine All Hip-Hop. "Game Says He's "Sworn Enemies" With 50 Cent; Shuts Down Possible Reunion". HipHopDX. January 4, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Mench, Chris (August 1, 2016). "The Game ends 12 year beef with 50 Cent". Complex. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "50 Cent Reacts to The Game Saying Kanye Has Done More for His Career Than Dr. Dre, Game Claps Back (UPDATE)". Complex. Retrieved April 9, 2022. II, C. Vernon Coleman IIC Vernon Coleman (March 6, 2022). "The Game Calls Out 50 Cent After Fif Questions Game Saying Kanye West Has Done More for His Career Than Dr. Dre". XXL Mag. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "50 Cent Comments On Jimmy Iovine Ignoring The Game; Game Responds "Your Rap Career Died"". HipHop-N-More. March 25, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "50 Cent Revives Beef With The Game Following Jimmy Iovine Snub". iHeart. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "The Game says he's a better rapper than Eminem". NME. March 5, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "The Game Speaks Further on Thinking He's a Better Rapper Than Eminem, Proposes Idea to Prove It". Complex. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Sha Money XL Calls Cap After Wack 100 Claims Game Wrote 50 Cent's "What Up Gangsta"". HotNewHipHop. March 4, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Brown, Preezy (March 4, 2022). "Wack 100 Claims The Game Wrote "What Up Gangsta" For 50 Cent". VIBE.com. Retrieved April 9, 2022. "Wack 100 calls 50 Cent a rat on Clubhouse and claims Fat Joe is a bigger gangsta! | Ghostarchive". ghostarchive.org. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Yuriy Andriyashchuk (February 20, 2022). "The Game denies being angry about not performing at Super Bowl". Hip Hop Vibe. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Sanneh, Kelefa (February 27, 2007). Rappers Find That a Small Label Can Have Its Uses. The New York Times. Accessed May 22, 2007. "50 Cent on Instagram: "I said Cam I would talk to you like you ain't got money, if I didn't see them big ass knot's in ya pockets."". Instagram. Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2019. "How feud Started Rick Ross and 50 Cent". Vide.com. February 7, 2009. Archived from the original on March 21, 2009. Retrieved March 16, 2009. "– 50 Cent – Interviews Rick Ross' Baby Mama". Hiphopdx.com. February 2, 2009. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved December 8, 2012. Roberts, Steven (February 5, 2009). "Game Takes Sides In 50 Cent/ Rick Ross Beef". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 23, 2009. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Reid, Shaheem (April 20, 2009). "Rick Ross Buries 50 Cent In 'Cold Blood' Video". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 21, 2009. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "50 Cent Says Rick Ross Is 'Gusto From CB4', Laughs Off Ross' Sales Predictions". BallerStatus.com. March 3, 2009. Archived from the original on June 19, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Langhorne, Cyrus (October 10, 2012). "50 Cent Flaunts Gunplay's Maybach Music Group Chain [Video]". Sohh.Com. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Sieczkowski, Cavan (January 30, 2013). "50 Cent Claims Rick Ross Shooting Was 'Staged'". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 9, 2013. Retrieved March 17, 2013. "'The Prince': movie review". New York Daily News. August 22, 2014. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2016. "First look at Megan Fox in The Expendables 4". Digital Spy. Retrieved October 20, 2021. "50 Cent". IMDb. Archived from the original on January 29, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2020. Wiseman, Andreas; D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 16, 2023). "Mel Gibson & Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson Pic 'Boneyard' Heads To Cannes Market With Lionsgate". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "50 Cent To Executive Produce Starz TV Show "Power"". HipHop DX. Cheri Media Group. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2013. "50 Cent to be appearing in Modern Warfare 2". Destructoid. March 16, 2006. Archived from the original on May 5, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "50 Cent Visits Infinity Ward (Creators of Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2)". ThisIs50.com. August 7, 2009. Archived from the original on February 2, 2012. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Amagi Brilliant Park (TV)". www.animenewsnetwork.com. 50 Cent at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website 50 Cent at AllMusic 50 Cent at IMDb 