Shenzhen is a city and special economic zone on the east bank of the Pearl River estuary on the central coast of the southern Chinese province of Guangdong, bordering Hong Kong to the south, Dongguan to the north, and Huizhou to the northeast. With a population of 17.56 million in 2020, Shenzhen is the third most populous city by urban population in China after Shanghai and Beijing. Shenzhen is a global center in technology, research, manufacturing, business and economics, finance, tourism and transportation, and the Port of Shenzhen is the world's fourth busiest container port. Shenzhen roughly follows the administrative boundaries of Bao'an County, which was established in imperial times. The southern portion of Bao'an County became part of British Hong Kong after the Opium Wars, while the village of Shenzhen was on the border. Shenzhen railway station was the last stop on the Mainland Chinese section of the Kowloon–Canton Railway, and Shenzhen's economy grew and it became a city by 1979. In the early 1980s, economic reforms introduced by Deng Xiaoping resulted in the city becoming the first special economic zone of China due to its close proximity to Hong Kong, attracting foreign direct investment and migrants searching for opportunities. In thirty years, the city's economy and population boomed and has since emerged as a hub for technology, international trade, and finance. It is the home to the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, one of the largest stock exchanges in the world by market capitalization and the Guangdong Free-Trade Zone. Shenzhen is ranked as an Alpha- (global first-tier) city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Its nominal GDP has surpassed those of its neighboring cities of Guangzhou and Hong Kong and is now among those of the cities with the ten largest economies in the world. Shenzhen also has the eighth most competitive and largest financial center in the world, the seventh-most Fortune Global 500 headquarters of any city in the world, fifth-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world, the second largest number of skyscrapers of any city in the world, the 19th largest scientific research output of any city in the world, and several notable educational institutions, such as Shenzhen University, Southern University of Science and Technology, and Shenzhen Technology University. The city is a leading global technology hub. In the media Shenzhen is sometimes called China's Silicon Valley. The city's entrepreneurial, innovative, and competitive-based culture has resulted in the city being home to numerous small manufacturers and software companies. Several of these firms have become large technology corporations, such as Huawei, Tencent, and DJI. As an important international city, Shenzhen hosts numerous national and international events every year, such as the 2011 Summer Universiade and the China Hi-Tech Fair. The residents of Shenzhen are made up of immigrants from all over China, possessing the youngest population structure in the country and an anti-discrimination urban culture. The earliest known recorded mention of the name chen could date from 1410, during the Ming Dynasty. Locals call the drains in paddy fields "Zhen" (Chinese: 圳; lit. 'ditch', 'drain'). Shenzhen was named after a deep (Chinese: 深; lit. 'deep') drain that was located within the area." The oldest evidence of humans in the area on which Shenzhen was established dates back during the mid-Neolithic period. Since then, this area has seen human activity from more than 6,700 years ago, with Shenzhen's historic counties first established 1,700 years ago, and the historic towns of Nantou and Dapeng, which was built on the area that is now Shenzhen, established more than 600 years ago. The Hakka people also have a history in Shenzhen since 300 years ago when they first immigrated. In 214 BC, when Emperor Qin Shi Huang unified China under the Qin Dynasty, the area went under the jurisdiction of the established Nanhai Commandery, one of the three commanderies that were set up in Lingnan, and was assimilated into Zhongyuan culture. In 331 AD, the Eastern Jin administration split up Nanhai and established a new Dongguan Commandery [zh] (东官郡). The seat of both the commandery and Bao'an County, one of its six counties, was located around the modern town of Nantou. In 590, the Sui administration merged the region back into Nanhai. In 757, the Tang administration renamed the county Dongguan, and moved its seat to what is now Dongguan city, although a military garrison remained. During the Song Dynasty, Nantou and the surrounding area became an important trade hub for salt and spices in the South China Sea. The area then became known for producing pearls during the Yuan Dynasty. In the early Ming era, Chinese sailors of a fleet would go to a Mazu temple in Chiwan (in present-day Nanshan District) to pray as they go to Nanyang (Southeast Asia). The Battle of Tunmen, when the Ming won a naval battle against invading Portuguese, was fought south of Nantou. To prevent a rebellion from Ming loyalists under Zheng Chenggong, better known as Koxinga, on the Chinese coast, the recently established Qing administration resettled coastal residents inland and re-organized coastal counties. As a result, Bao'an County lost two-thirds of its territory to the neighboring Dongguan and was incorporated into Dongguan in 1669. After the Qing dynasty was defeated by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in the First Opium War and the Second Opium Wars, Hong Kong Island and the Kowloon Peninsula were ceded to the British in the Treaty of Nanking and the Convention of Peking. On 21 April 1898 the Qing government signed a "Special Article for the Exhibition of Hong Kong's Borders" with the United Kingdom, and leased the New Territories from Xin'an to the United Kingdom for 99 years. Xin'an was briefly occupied by a British force under the command of Henry Arthur Blake, the governor of Hong Kong, for half a year in 1899. From the 3,076 square kilometres (1,188 sq mi) of territory that Xin'an held before the treaties, 1,055.61 square kilometres (407.57 sq mi) of the county was ceded to the British. In response to the Wuchang Uprising in 1911, Xin'an residents rebelled against the local Qing administration and successfully overthrew them. In the same year the Chinese section of the Kowloon–Canton Railway (KCR) was opened to the public. The last stop on the Chinese side was Shenzhen railway station, helping the town's economy and opened Shenzhen up to the world. In 1913, the Republic of China administration renamed Xin'an County back to Bao'an County to prevent confusion from another county of the same name in Henan Province. During the Canton–Hong Kong strike, the All-China Federation of Trade Unions set up a reception station for strike workers in Hong Kong in Shenzhen. Strike workers were also given pickets and armored vehicles by the strike committee to create a blockade around Hong Kong. In 1931 Chen Jitang and his family established several casinos in Shenzhen, the largest of which being Shumchun Casino. During World War II, the Japanese occupied Shenzhen and Nantou, forcing the Bao'an County government to relocate to the neighboring Dongguan County. In 1941, the Japanese army tried to cross into Hong Kong through the Lo Wu Bridge in Shenzhen, though this was detonated by the British, preventing the Japanese from entering Hong Kong. In 1953, four years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the Bao'an County government decided to move to Shenzhen, since the town was closer to the KCR and had a larger economy than Nantou. From the 1950s to the end of the 1970s, Shenzhen and the rest of Bao'an County oversaw a huge influx of refugees trying to escape to Hong Kong from the upheavals that were occurring in mainland China, and a range from 100,000 to 560,000 refugees resided in the county. In January 1978, a Central Inspection Team sent by the State Council investigated and established the issue of creating a foreign trade port in Bao'an County. In May, the investigation team wrote the "Hong Kong and Macao Economic Investigation Report" and proposed to turn Bao'an County and Zhuhai into commodity export bases. In August 1978, the Huiyang District Committee reported to the Provincial Committee on the "Report on the Request for the Change of Bao'an County to Shenzhen". On 18 October, the Standing Committee of the Guangdong Provincial Party Committee decided to change Bao'an County into Bao'an City and to turn it into a medium-level prefecture-level city with a foreign trade base. The Huiyang District Committee and the Bao'an County Committee, however, defended the change to rename Bao'an County to Shenzhen, claiming that people in the world know more about Shenzhen and its port than they know about Bao'an County. On 23 January 1979, the Guangdong provincial administration and the district of Huiyang announced their proposal to rename Bao'an County to Shenzhen and was approved and put into effect by the State Council on March 5 of that year. Also, the city would establish six districts: Luohu, Nantou, Songgang, Longhua, Longgang and Kuiyong. On 31 January 1979, the Central Committee of the Communist Party approved a plan to establish the Shekou Industrial Zone in Shenzhen with the purpose "to lead domestic, overseas, and diversified operations, industrial and commercial integration, and trading" based on the systems of that of Hong Kong and Macau. The Shekou Industrial Zone project was led by Hong Kong-based China Merchants Group under Yuan Geng's leadership and was to become the first export processing industrial zone in mainland China. At the beginning of April 1979, the Standing Committee of Guangdong Province discussed and proposed to the Central Committee to set up a "trade cooperation zone" in Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and Shantou. In the same month, the Central Working Conference decided on the "Regulations on Vigorously Developing Foreign Trade to Increase Foreign Exchange Income" and agreed to pilot the first special economic zones (SEZ) in Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen. In November, Shenzhen was elevated to the status of prefecture-level city at the regional level by the Guangdong provincial administration. In May 1980 the Central Committee designated Shenzhen as the first SEZ in China, which was promoted by then-paramount leader Deng Xiaoping as part of China's "reform and opening-up" reforms which were set up a year previously. Its objective is to be an experimental ground for the practice of market capitalism within a community guided by the ideals of socialism with Chinese characteristics. On 26 August, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) approved the "Regulations of the Guangdong Special Economic Zone." In March 1981 Shenzhen was promoted to a sub-provincial division. There were plans for Shenzhen to develop its currency, but the plans were shelved due to the risk and the disagreement that a country should not be operating with two currencies. To enforce law and order in the city, the Shenzhen government erected barbed wire and checkpoints between the land borders of the main sections of the SEZ and the SEZ outskirts, as well as the rest of China, in 1983, which was known as the second line border. In December 1990, under the authority of the China Securities Regulatory Commission, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange was established to provide a platform for centralized securities trading. In February 1992, the Standing Committee of the NPC granted the government of Shenzhen the power to make local laws and regulations. In 1996 and early 1997, the Shenzhen Guesthouse Hotel in Shenzhen was home to the Provisional Legislative Council and Provisional Executive Council of Hong Kong in preparation for the handover of Hong Kong in 1997. By 2001, as a result of Shenzhen's increasing economic prospects, increasing numbers of migrants from mainland China chose to go to Shenzhen and stay there instead of trying to illegally cross into Hong Kong. There were 9,000 captured border-crossers in 2000, while the same figure was 16,000 in 1991. Around the same time, Shenzhen hosted the second Senior Officials' Meeting of APEC China 2001 on 26 May 2001 in its southern manufacturing center and port. In May 2008, the State Council approved the Shenzhen SEZ to promote Shenzhen's administrative management system, economic system, social field, independent innovation system and mechanism, system and mechanism for opening up and regional cooperation, and resource conservation and environmental friendliness. On 1 July 2010 the State Council dissolved the "second line," and expanded the Shenzhen SEZ to include all districts, a five-fold increase over its pre-expansion size. On 26 August 2010, on the 30th anniversary of the establishment of the Shenzhen SEZ, the State Council approved the "Overall Development Plan for Qianhai Shenzhen-Hong Kong Modern Service Industry Cooperation Zone." In August 2011, the city hosted the 26th Universiade, an international multi-sport event organized for university athletes. In April 2015, the Shekou Industrial Zone and the Qianhai Zone were integrated within the newly established Guangdong Free-Trade Zone. On 18 August 2019 the central government in Beijing unveiled reform plans covering economic, social, and political sectors of Shenzhen, labeling Shenzhen a pilot demonstration zone for socialism with Chinese characteristics.: 58  Shenzhen roughly follows the administrative boundaries of the historical Bao'an County. The southern portion of Bao'an County became part of British Hong Kong after the Opium Wars, while the village of Shenzhen was on the border. Shenzhen railway station was the last stop on the Mainland Chinese section of the Kowloon–Canton Railway, and Shenzhen's economy grew and it became a city by 1979. Shenzhen is located within the Pearl River Delta, bordering Hong Kong to the south, Huizhou to the north and northeast, Dongguan to the north and northwest. Lingdingyang and Pearl River to the west and Mirs Bay to the east and roughly 100 kilometres (62 mi) southeast of the provincial capital of Guangzhou. As of the end of 2017, the resident population of Shenzhen was 12,528,300, of which the registered population was 4,472,200, the actual administrative population was over 20 million. It makes up part of the Pearl River Delta built-up area with 44,738,513 inhabitants, spread over 9 municipalities (including Macau). The city is elongated measuring 81.4 kilometers from east to west while the shortest section from north to south is 10.8 kilometers. Over 160 rivers or channels flow through Shenzhen. There are 24 reservoirs within the city limits with a total capacity of 525 million tonnes. Notable rivers in Shenzhen include the Shenzhen River, Maozhou River and Longgang River. Although Shenzhen is situated about a degree south of the Tropic of Cancer, due to the Siberian anticyclone it has a warm, monsoon-influenced, humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa) though it is fairly close to a Tropical one. Winters are mild and relatively dry, due in part to the influence of the South China Sea, and frost is very rare; it begins dry but becomes progressively more humid and overcast. However, fog is most frequent in winter and spring, with 106 days per year reporting some fog. Early spring is the cloudiest time of year, and rainfall begins to dramatically increase in April; the rainy season lasts until late September to early October. With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 27 percent in March to 53 percent in October, the city receives 1,853 hours of bright sunshine annually. The monsoon reaches its peak intensity in the summer months, when the city also experiences very humid and hot conditions. Despite this, extreme heat is rare, there are only 2.4 days of 35 °C (95 °F)+ temperatures. The region is prone to torrential rain as well, with 9.7 days that have 50 mm (1.97 in) or more of rain, and 2.2 days of at least 100 mm (3.94 in). The latter portion of autumn is dry. The annual precipitation averages at around 1,933 mm (76 in), some of which is delivered in typhoons that strike from the east during summer and early autumn. Extreme temperatures have ranged from 0.2 °C (32 °F) on 11 February 1957 to 38.7 °C (102 °F) on 10 July 1980. Like all governing institutions in mainland China, Shenzhen has a parallel party-government system, in which the CCP Committee Secretary, officially termed the Chinese Communist Party Shenzhen Municipal Committee Secretary, outranks the Mayor. The CCP committee acts as the top policy-formulation body, and is typically composed of 12 members (including the secretary). Despite being a sub-provincial city, Shenzhen as a SEZ still wields a lot of autonomy from the central government. In addition to being promoted to a sub-provincial city, the National People's Congress (NPC) in 1981 granted legislative powers to Shenzhen and other Special Economic Zones, giving the city the privilege to make its own laws and regulations. The Standing Committee of the NPC also granted Shenzhen voted and passed the "Decision on Authorizing the Shenzhen Municipal People's Congress and its Standing Committee and the Shenzhen Municipal People's Government to respectively formulate laws and regulations for implementation in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone" in order to give fully strengthen Shenzhen's legislative powers without interference from the central government. There were several cases of high-ranking Shenzhen officials that were arrested on charges relating to corruption. In December 2002, the Shenzhen People's Intermediate Court sentenced Zhao Yucun, former Commissioner of Shenzhen Customs, to life imprisonment for taking bribes of 9 million RMB. In November 2003, the Guangzhou People's Intermediate Court charged former Shenzhen Deputy Mayor Wang Ju with bribery and abuse of power and sentenced him to 20 years in prison. In June 2005, the Shenzhen People's Intermediate Court charged sentenced Luohu District Public Security Director An Huijun to 15 years in prison for accepting bribes. In May 2011, the Zhengzhou Intermediate Court sentenced former mayor Xu Zongheng to the death penalty with a two-year reprieve for accepting bribes up to US$5.4 million. Shenzhen has direct jurisdiction over nine administrative Districts and one New District: Shenzhen was originally Bao'an County. On 5 March 1979, the State Council of the People's Republic of China dissolved the county and set up the city of Shenzhen in its place initially with six districts: Luohu (罗湖), Nantou (南头), Songgang (松岗), Longhua (龙华), Longgang (龙岗), and Kuiyong (葵涌), with the seat based in Luohu. In October 1981, Bao'an County was re-established, with its region now based outside Shenzhen. In June 1983, the districts were dissolved and re-established instead as five management areas (管理区): Shekou (蛇口; south-west Shenzhen), Nantou (南头; west Shenzhen), Shangbu (上步; central Shenzhen), Luohu (罗湖; east-central Shenzhen), and Shatoujiao (沙头角; far-east Shenzhen). To enforce law and order in the city, the Shenzhen government erected a border known as the second line (Chinese: 二线关), which consisted of barbed wire and checkpoints between the city and the rest of China. Initially, the border control was relatively strict, requiring non-Shenzhen citizens to obtain special permissions for entering. Over the years, border controls have gradually weakened, and permission requirement has been abandoned. In January 1990, the city merged Shekou Management Area and Nantou Management Area to form the Nanshan District, renamed Shangbu Management Area to the Futian District, and merged Luohu Management Area and Shatoujiao Management Area to form the Luohu District. In December 1992, Bao'an County was dissolved again, with its area taken by Shenzhen and split into two new districts: Bao'an District and Longgang District, though economic privileges within special economics zones did not pertain to them as they were outside the second line border. At this point, Shenzhen has five districts: Luohu, Futian, Nanshan, Bao'an, and Longgang. In March 1998, Shenzhen's government created the Yantian District from the eastern portions of the Luohu District (the original area of the Shatoujiao Management District), and within the second line border. Yantian, Luohu, Futian, and Nanshan together as the special economic districts within the second line border are referred to as guannei (关内; 'within the border') while districts that are outside the second line and do not have special economic privileges such as Bao'an and Longgang are referred to as guanwai (关外; 'outside the border'). The Shenzhen government later established two new districts as part of the guanwai: Guangming New District in August 2007 and Pingshan New District in June 2009. On 1 July 2010, the second line border was dissolved, and the Shenzhen SEZ was expanded to cover the entire city. Therefore, the four guanwai districts Bao'an District, Longgang District, Guangming New District, and Pingshan New District, would be given special economic privileges like the guannei districts. The area of the Shenzhen SEZ also increased from 396 square kilometres (153 sq mi) to 1,953 square kilometres (754 sq mi). Since June 2015, the existing unused border structures have been demolished and are being transformed into urban greenspaces and parks. On 15 January 2018, the State Council approved the removal of the barbed wire fence set up to mark the boundary of the SEZ. In early 2011, the provincial government of Guangdong approved the establishment of the Shenzhen-Shantou Special Cooperation Zone in the city and SEZ of Shantou, Guangdong that will last until 2040 with the purpose of economic development. The zone would be managed by Shenzhen and another Cantonese city, Shanwei. The zone is under the jurisdiction of Shenzhen instead of Shantou, with residents living there considered to be permanent residents of Shenzhen. The Shenzhen government later established two new districts on 27 October 2011, Longhua New District and Dapeng New District. With approval of the State Council, Shenzhen re-organized Longhua New District as Longhua District and Pingshan New District as Pingshan District on 11 October 2016 and Guangming New District as Guangming District on 24 May 2018, therefore becoming their own jurisdictions. Shenzhen was the first of the Special Economic Zones (SEZ) to be established by then paramount leader Deng Xiaoping. Back to Apr 1979, Shenzhen was reformed as a Special Export Zone to create a favorable investment environment and introduce advanced technology and management experience, later renamed to Special Economic Zone in May 1980. As of 2022, Shenzhen has a nominal GDP of 3.24 trillion RMB (HK$2.87 trillion), which surpassed neighboring Hong Kong's GDP of HK$2.11 trillion and Guangzhou's GDP of 2.88 trillion RMB (HK$2.68 trillion), making the economic output of Shenzhen the third largest out of Chinese cities, trailing behind Shanghai and Beijing. In addition, Shenzhen's GDP growth between 2016 and 2017 of 8.8% surpassed that of Hong Kong and Singapore, with 3.7% and 2.5% respectively. With a market capitalization of US$2.5 trillion as of 30 November 2018, the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE) is the 8th largest exchange in the world. In the 2021 Global Financial Centres Index, Shenzhen was ranked as having the 8th most competitive and largest financial center in the world and 6th in Asia & Oceania region (after Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore, Beijing, and Tokyo). As of 2020, Shenzhen is ranked as an Alpha- (global first-tier) city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. According to Forbes, Shenzhen has the fifth-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world. Shenzhen's nominal GDP is projected to be among the world top 10 largest cities in 2035 (together with Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou in China) according to a study by Oxford Economics and its nominal GDP per capita will reach above US$57,000 (ranking first in mainland China) in 2030, which is comparable to Tokyo and Seoul. Shenzhen is part of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast south to the tip of India via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean, there to the Upper Adriatic region to the northern Italian hub of Trieste with its rail connections to Central Europe and the North Sea. As of August 2023, Shenzhen has the seventh-most Fortune Global 500 headquarters of any city in the world and the third-most in China after (Beijing and Shanghai) within its city limits. Shenzhen's industry is described by its Municipal Bureau of Statistics to be upheld by its four-pillar industries: high tech, finance, logistics, and culture. Shenzhen is a large hub of the Chinese and global technology industry and home to a large startup ecosystem. As of 2020 the city was ranked as the 4th Fintech powerhouse in the world. Shenzhen is primarily known for its high-tech industry, which has a value of 585.491 billion RMB (US$82.9 billion) in 2015, a 13 percent increase compared to last year. Out of the nominal GDP of 1,750.299 billion RMB in 2015 the high-tech industry generated 33.4 percent. Shenzhen is home to a number of prominent tech firms, such as Huawei, Tencent, DJI, and ZTE. Other tech firms include personal computer manufacturer Hasee, Hytera, OnePlus, and BYD Company. Shenzhen annually holds the China International High-tech Achievements Fair, which showcases high-tech products and provides for dialogue and investment for high-tech. As a result, Shenzhen is dubbed by media outlets as "China's Silicon Valley" or the "Silicon Valley of Hardware" for the world. Shenzhen is home to a number of large financial institutions, such as China Merchants Bank and Ping An Insurance and its subsidiary Ping An Bank. Since the city's establishment as a SEZ, a number of foreign banks had established offices in the city, including Citibank, HSBC, Standard Chartered, and Bank of East Asia. In total, the financial industry accounts for 14.5% of the city's nominal GDP in 2015 (254.282 billion RMB), which was a 15.9% increase over the previous year. By the end of 2016, the total assets of the financial industry amounted to 12.7 trillion RMB (banking industry assets were 7.85 trillion RMB, security companies assets were 1.25 trillion RMB, and insurance industry assets were 3.6 trillion RMB), making Shenzhen's financial industry the third largest in China. Shenzhen is one of the world's top ten financial centers as of 2019, jumping five places to ninth place as determined by "variety of areas of competitiveness, including business environment, human capital, infrastructure, financial sector development and reputation." SF Express and China International Marine Containers (CIMC) have their headquarters in Shenzhen. The Port of Shenzhen comprises the Yantian International Container Terminals, the Chiwan Container Terminals, the container terminals of the Shekou Industrial Zone, the China Merchants Port, and Shenzhen Haixing. The Port of Shenzhen is therefore capable of handled a record volume of containerization. With rising trade increased cargo shipments in 2005, the container port was ranked as the world's fourth-busiest container port. High port traffic levels combined with a high urban population make Shenzhen a large port megacity. The logistics industry accounts for around 10.1 percent (178.27 billion RMB) of the city's nominal GDP in 2015, which was an increase of 9.4 percent. Shenzhen Port's first foreign trade blockchain cargo release platform was launched recently. Shenzhen had prioritized the cultural industry in according to the 13th Five-Year Plan, establishing the Shenzhen Fashion Creative Industry Association (深圳市时尚文化创意协会) and planning the 4.6 square-kilometer Dalang Fashion Valley (大浪时尚创意城). On 7 December 2008, UNESCO approved Shenzhen's entrance into the Creative Cities Network, and awarded the Shenzhen the title of "United Nations Design Capital." Altogether, the cultural industry in turn contributes to 5.8 percent (102.116 billion RMB) of Shenzhen's economy in 2015. In addition to the four pillar industries that were listed by the municipal government, Shenzhen also has a relatively notable real-estate industry. The real-estate industry altogether contributes to 9.2 percent (162.777 billion RMB) of Shenzhen's economy in 2015, which was an increase of 16.8 percent compared to the previous year. Real estate developers such as the Evergrande Group, Vanke, and China Resources Land are headquartered within the city. In 1996, the State Council approved and established the 11.5 km2 (4.4 sq mi) Shenzhen High-tech Industrial Development Zone, helping to develop Shenzhen's high-tech industry in areas such as electronics and information technology. In accordance to the National Plan in 2001, the Shenzhen Software Park, integrated within the High-tech Industrial Development Zone, was established for software production and assists in the development of the city's software industry. On 26 August 2010, the State Council approved the "Overall Development Plan for Qianhai Shenzhen-Hong Kong Modern Service Industry Cooperation Zone" to solidify ties between Hong Kong and Shenzhen. Tourism is gradually growing as an important industry for Shenzhen. Shenzhen has been ranked second on the list of 'top 10 cities to visit in 2019' by Lonely Planet. The Shenzhen administration in its "12th Five-Year Plan for Tourism Development of Shenzhen" had focused on turning the city into an international tourist hub, with emphasis on the city's scientific, fashion, and industrial elements. The Shenzhen tourist industry is claimed by the local administration in having a strong development advantage, due to the city being one of the tier-one cities in China, as well as being known for its coastal resources, climate environment, capitalist economy, and technological innovation. In 2015 the tourism industry's total revenue was 124.48 billion RMB (US$17.6 billion), a 98.1 percent increase from 2010. Out of the total revenue, 28 percent (35 billion RMB or US$4.968 billion) came from international tourists, an increase of 56.2 percent from 2010. In addition, in that year, Shenzhen received 11.63 million tourists, a 51 percent increase from 2010. Shenzhen has numerous tourist destinations, ranging from recreational areas such as theme parks and public parks to tall buildings. Most of the tourist attractions are part of Overseas Chinese Town (OCT), a colloquial name for parks owned by OCT Enterprises and is classified as an AAAAA scenic area by the China National Tourism Administration. These include the Window of the World, the Splendid China Folk Village, Happy Valley (欢乐谷), OCT East, and OCT Harbour. Other theme parks include Shekou Sea World (海上世界), Xiaomeisha Sea World, and the now-closed Minsk World. Shenzhen also has a number of popular public parks and beaches, such as People's Park, Lianhuashan Park, Lizhi Park, Zhongshan Park, Wutongshan Park, Dameisha (大梅沙) and Xiaomeisha [zh] (小梅沙). The city is also home to tall buildings such as the Ping An Finance Centre, KK100, and the Shun Hing Square (also known as Di Wang Tower). There are 314 star-rated hotels in Shenzhen as of Q3 2022. International luxury brands including Mandarin Oriental, Park Hyatt, Raffles and Conrad; upper-upscale brands including Sheraton Hotels, Marriott Hotels, and Hilton Hotels. Select-service chains including Holiday Inn, and Courtyard by Marriott all have presence in the city amongst local chains, offering both urban hotels in key business districts and beach resorts in Dameisha, Xiaomeisha and Jinshawan (Golden Bay). Notably, the St. Regis Hotels & Resorts occupies the top portion of the KK100 skyscraper. Shenzhen's tourism industry is recently expanding under the "13th Five-Year Plan for Tourism Development of Shenzhen" as promoted under the Shenzhen local government. In this plan, the tourist industry plans to exceed 200 billion RMB and receive 150 million domestic and foreign tourists by 2020. In 2023 an increasing numbers of Hong Kong residents began visiting Shenzhen during weekends, which in turn caused Hong Kong service establishments to face a decline in business. Retail is an important pillar of Shenzhen's tertiary sector. Out of the added value of Shenzhen's tertiary sector of 1.42 trillion RMB (US$201 billion) in 2018, retail contributed 43% (616.89 billion RMB) of this amount, a 7.6 percent increase compared to last year (601.62 billion RMB). In addition, 10.9% of Shenzhen's FDI is directed towards the wholesale and retail sector. Huaqiang North (华强北) is one of Shenzhen's notable retail areas, being known for having one of the largest electronics markets in the world. Luohu Commercial City, a commercial complex located adjacent to Shenzhen Railway Station, is noted for having a variety of products that ranges from electronics and counterfeit goods to tailored suits and curtains. In addition to Huaqiang North and Luohu Commercial City, Shenzhen has numerous shopping malls and commercial areas, including COCO Park and its branches COCO City and Longgang COCO Park, Uniworld (壹方天地), Uniwalk (壹方场), and Coastal City(海岸城). Shenzhen is also home to drugstore chain China Nepstar. "Smart retail", which uses technologies such as artificial intelligence and big data in production, circulation, and sales of consumer goods, has been growing popular within enterprises in Shenzhen. Businesses in Shenzhen are encouraged to use the Internet to develop the consumer market and new retail projects would be assisted with the use of technology. In addition, the Shenzhen administration is setting up a new retail industry development fund to promote the use of "smart retail", with the intention of stimulating the economy of Shenzhen and to turn the city into a "new retail" hub. As of 2020, Shenzhen had a total permanent population of 17,560,000, with 5,874,000 (33.4 percent) of them hukou holders (registered locally). As Shenzhen is a young city, senior citizens above 60 years old took up only 5.36 percent of the city's total population. Despite this, the life expectancy in Shenzhen is 81.25 in 2018, ranking among the top twenty cities in China. The male to female ratio in Shenzhen is 130 to 100, making the city having the highest sex disparity in comparison to other cities in Guangdong. Shenzhen also has a high birth rate compared to other Chinese cities with 21.7 babies for every 10,000 of its 13.44 million population in 2019. Based on the population of its total administrative area, Shenzhen is the fifth most populous city proper in China. Shenzhen is part of the Pearl River Delta Metropolitan Region (covering cities such as Guangzhou, Dongguan, Foshan, Zhongshan, Zhuhai, Huizhou, Hong Kong, and Macau), the world's largest urban area according to the World Bank, which has a population of 78 million according to the 2020 Census. Before Shenzhen's establishment as a SEZ in 1980, the area was composed mainly of Hakka and Cantonese people. When the SEZ was established, the city attracted migrants from all around Guangdong, including Hakka, Cantonese, and Teochew, as well as migrants from Southern and Central Chinese provinces such as Hunan, Guangxi, Jiangxi, Sichuan, and Henan. Most of these migrants live in urban villages called chengzhongcun (城中村; 'village in the city') such as Baishizhou in the Nanshan District. Shenzhen also has a notable Korean minority based in the Nanshan District and the Futian District originating from migrants moving to Shenzhen to work for South Korean companies that had branched out into the city when China had opened up. Due to Shenzhen's population overshooting the 14.8 million population target for 2016 to 2020, the Shenzhen justice bureau on 25 May 2021 announced it would make it harder to earn a hukou to live in the city. In regards to the registered population (hukou), Shenzhen experienced an increase of 2.178 million (58.9 percent) registered residents in the city from 2015 to 2020. The city's permanent population increased by 7,136,088 (68.46 percent) from 2010 to 2020, for an average annual growth rate of 5.35%. According to the Department of Religious Affairs of the Shenzhen Municipal People's Government, the two main religions present in Shenzhen are Buddhism and Taoism. Every district also has Protestant and Catholic churches, as well as mosques. According to a 2010 survey held by the University of Southern California, approximately 37 percent of Shenzhen's residents were practitioners of Chinese folk religions, 26 percent were Buddhist, 18 percent Taoist, 2 percent Christian, and 2 percent Muslim. 15 percent were unaffiliated to any religion. Most new migrants to Shenzhen rely upon the common spiritual heritage drawn from Chinese folk religion. Shenzhen also hosts the headquarters of the Holy Confucian Church, established in 2009. Prior to the establishment of Special Economic Zone, the indigenous local communities could be divided into Cantonese and Hakka speakers, which were two cultural and linguistic sub-ethnic groups vernacular to Guangdong province. Two Cantonese varieties were spoken locally. One was a fairly standard version, known as standard Cantonese. The other, spoken by several villages south of Fuhua Road was called Weitou dialect. Two or three Hong Kong villages south of the Shenzhen River also speak this dialect. This is consistent with the area settled by people who accompanied the Southern Song court to the south in the late 13th century. The influx of migrants from other parts of the country has drastically altered the city's linguistic landscape, as Shenzhen has undergone a language shift towards Mandarin, which was both promoted by the Chinese Central Government as a national lingua franca and natively spoken by most of the out-of-province immigrants and their descendants. However, in recent years multilingualism has been on the rise as descendants of immigrants of out-of-province Mandarin native speakers have begun to assimilate into the local culture through friends, television and other media. Despite the ubiquity of Mandarin Chinese, according to the SCMP, some Shenzhen residents, Cantonese and non-Cantonese alike, have attempted to revive the Cantonese language as part of Shenzhen's culture. In 2019, Shenzhen has been dubbed by The Guardian as "the world leader completing new skyscrapers." The city is ranked the second in the world in terms of the number of buildings above 150 meters, with 297 of them completed as of July 2021, after neighboring Hong Kong. There were more skyscrapers completed in Shenzhen in the year 2016 than in the whole of the US and Australia combined. The construction boom continues today with over 85 skyscrapers under construction across the city as of 2021, the most in the world. Most of the skyscrapers in Shenzhen were built by either Hong Kong or foreign-based architects, utilizing a modern style, though functionalism was a dominant form of architecture in the city's skyscrapers in the late 20th century. Among the most prominent examples are the 160 metres (525 ft) high Guomao Building, the 384 metres (1,260 ft) high Shun Hing Square, the 441.8 metres (1,449 ft) high KK100, the 392 metres (1,286 ft) high China Resources Headquarters, and the 599 metres (1,965 ft) high Ping An Finance Centre, which is also the second tallest in China and the fifth tallest building in the world. Built in 2015, the skyscraper is to be unique and elegant among its surroundings to represent the history and achievements of the main tenant: Ping An Insurance. Shenzhen also has several historical buildings based in traditional Chinese architecture. There are Hakka walled villages located in the city such as Crane Lake and Gangeng in the Longgang District. Like typical Hakka walled villages, the architecture of Crane Lake and Gangeng are based around large thick grey walls, narrow alleyways, and courtyards. Nantou (or Xin'an) is a historic town located in the present-day Nanshan District and has some buildings that date back to the Ming Dynasty such as the Guandi Temple, though most of these traditional buildings have been replaced by modern ones. Chiwan, located in the Nanshan District, also has several historical buildings, such as the tomb to the last emperor of the Southern Song, Zhao Bing and Tianhou Temple which was built by Zheng He as an offering to Mazu to protect the Ming treasure fleet. There are also several historical forts that had defended the coastline located within the city, such as Dapeng Fortress and Chiwan Left Fort. Before the 1980s, Shenzhen's education system was primarily based on primary and limited secondary schooling, with no residents admitted to a university. Since Shenzhen's establishment as a SEZ in the 1980s, migrants poured into the city, and jobs requiring a university education grew. Shenzhen started implementing policies that will help develop a more high-quality education system, borrowing teachers from the best schools in the country with promises of higher pay and benefits. In addition, the city started building new schools and renovating the infrastructure of its existing schools to give teachers a more comfortable environment to teach. In the mid-1980s, as upper secondary education became popular, there was a need for higher education institutions in the city. Opened in 1983, Shenzhen Normal School, later upgraded to Shenzhen Normal College, trained students to become primary school teachers. Approved by the State Council in the same year, Shenzhen University became Shenzhen's first comprehensive full-time higher educational institution. In 1999, the Shenzhen Municipal Government set up the Shenzhen Virtual University Park in the Science and Technology Park, where teachers from China's top universities taught graduate students. In 2011, the innovative Southern University of Science and Technology was established followed in 2018 by the Shenzhen Technology University. Other universities have established campuses in the city, including Tsinghua University, Peking University, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, the Harbin Institute of Technology, and Moscow State University. As of 2023, Shenzhen also has the 19th largest scientific research output of any city in the world. The 9-year compulsory education in Shenzhen is free. Secondary schools such as Shenzhen Middle School, Shenzhen Experimental School, Shenzhen Foreign Languages School, and Shenzhen High School, all of which have an on-line rate of over 90%, are dubbed as "Shenzhen's four famous schools." As of 2015, Shenzhen has 12 higher educational institutions, 335 general secondary schools, 334 primary schools, and 1,489 preschools. According to Laurie Chen of the South China Morning Post, Shenzhen, which had 15 million people as of 2019, had not built as many primary and secondary schools for its populace as it should have, compared to similarly developed cities in China. Laurie Chen cited the acceptance rate of Shenzhen secondary schools in 2018: 35,000 slots were available for almost 80,000 applicants. She also cited how Guangzhou had 961 primary schools while Shenzhen had only 344 primary schools, as well as how Guangzhou's count of primary school teachers exceeded that of Shenzhen's by 17,000; Chen argued that Guangzhou and Shenzhen have similar populations. In response Shenzhen schools began increasing salaries for prospective teachers. Shenzhen is the second largest transportation hub in Guangdong and South China, trailing behind the provincial capital of Guangzhou. Shenzhen has a developed extensive public transportation system, covering rapid transit, buses and taxis, most of which can be accessed by either using a Shenzhen Tong card or using QR codes generated by WeChat mini programs. Shenzhen is noted for being the first major city worldwide to only use electric buses and taxis. Regarding air transport, Shenzhen is served by its own Shenzhen Bao'an International Airport and the neighboring Hong Kong International Airport (HKIA). Located 35 kilometres (22 miles) from the center of the city, Shenzhen Bao'an International Airport serves as the main hub for passenger airlines Shenzhen Airlines and Donghai Airlines and a main hub for cargo airlines Jade Cargo International, SF Airlines, and UPS Airlines. Together, Shenzhen Bao'an International Airport handled 49,348,950 passengers, 355,907 aircraft, and 1,218,502.2 cargo in 2018, making it the 5th busiest airport in China in terms of passenger traffic and the 4th busiest airport in the country in terms of aircraft and cargo traffic. In addition to flying through Bao'an International Airport, ticketed passengers can also take ferries from the Shekou Cruise Centre and the Fuyong Ferry Terminal to the Skypier at Hong Kong International Airport. There are also coach bus services connecting Shenzhen with HKIA. The Shenzhen Metro serves as the city's rapid transit system. The system in 2022 reaches 419 kilometres (260 miles) of route operating on 12 lines with 290 stations. By 2030 the network is planned to be 8 express and 24 non-express lines totalling 1142 kilometres of trackage. The average daily metro ridership in 2021 is 5.99 million passengers. The metro also operates a tram system in the Longhua District. Shenzhen is served by seven inter-city railway stations: Futian, Guangmingcheng, Pingshan, Shenzhen (also known as Luohu Railway Station) Shenzhen East, Shenzhen North, and Shenzhen West. High-speed rail (HSR) lines that go through the city are the Guangzhou–Shenzhen–Hong Kong Express Rail Link, the Beijing–Guangzhou high-speed railway, and the Xiamen–Shenzhen railway (forms part of the Hangzhou–Fuzhou–Shenzhen passenger railway). Non-HSR lines that go through Shenzhen are the Guangzhou-Shenzhen Railway (forms part of the Kowloon–Canton railway) and the Beijing-Kowloon Railway. As of August 2019, the city's bus system encompasses over 900 lines, with a total of over 16,000 electric vehicles, the largest of its kind in the world. The system is operated by multiple companies. As at January 2019 conversion of Shenzhen's taxi fleet to electric vehicles reached 99%. Electric taxis have a blue and white colour scheme. Petroleum fuelled taxis are coloured either green or red. Shenzhen serves as a fabric to China's expressway system. Expressways within the city include the Meiguan Expressway (part of the G94 Pearl River Delta Ring Expressway), the Jihe Expressway (part of the G15 Shenhai Expressway), the Yanba Expressway (part of the S30 Huishen Coastal Expressway), the S28 Shuiguan Expressway, the Yanpai Expressway (part of the G25 Changshen Expressway and the S27 Renshen Expressway), and the S33 Nanguang Expressway. In response to being rejected from being a part of the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge, Shenzhen is constructing a bridge across the Pearl River Delta to connect the city of Zhongshan. Shenzhen is connected with Hong Kong (city and airport), Zhuhai and Macau through ferries that leave from and arrive at the Shekou Cruise Center. The Fuyong Passenger Terminal in the Bao'an District provide services to and from Hong Kong (Hong Kong International Airport) and Macau (Taipa Temporary Ferry Terminal and Outer Harbour Ferry Terminal). The Port of Shenzhen is the third busiest container port in the world, handling 27.7 million TEUs in 2018. Due to its proximity to Hong Kong, Shenzhen has the largest number of entry and exit ports, the largest number of entry and exit personnel, and the largest traffic volume in China. Shenzhen is busiest in China when it comes to border crossings, with people entering and exiting the country through the city and Hong Kong reaching 239 million in 2015. In the same year, a total of 15.5 million vehicles crossed the border in Shenzhen, a 0.4% increase of last year. Border crossing ports include the Shenzhen Bay Port, Futian Port, Huanggang Port, Man Kam To Port, and Luohu Port. Multiple ports on the part of the coastline of Shenzhen constitute the Shenzhen Port. In 2019, Shenzhen had 211 international container routes, and the container throughput of the entire Shenzhen port reached nearly 25.77 million boxes in 2019, ranking fourth in the world. Yantian Port is the busiest port among Shenzhen ports and the main foreign trade channel in South China in the mid-term. As Shenzhen is located in Guangdong, the city historically has a Cantonese culture before its transition to a SEZ. The competitive culture that the city promotes among the youth have also used the term "Shenzhen speed", which resulted from the fast construction of the tallest building in Shenzhen. The term also describes a period of constant competition, quick changes, and high-efficiency. In 2003 the municipal government announced plans to turned Shenzhen into a cultural city by promoting design, animation, and library construction. The municipal government also intends to develop the city's cultural industry in accordance to the 13th Five-Year Plan [zh], establishing the Shenzhen Fashion Creative Industry Association [zh] and the 4.6-square-kilometre (1.8 sq mi) Dalang Fashion Valley [zh]. Shenzhen's cultural industry specializes in being one of the largest handicraft manufacturers in China, and is also an industry center for oil painting in bases such as Dafen Village. Shenzhen also hosts the Shenzhen International Cultural Fair which specializes as an expo for the world's cultural industries, with the first expo being in November 2004. As a result of these developments, Shenzhen was awarded by UNESCO the title of "United Nations Design Capital" and was accepted entry into the Creative Cities Network on 7 December 2008. As part of turning Shenzhen into a cultural city, the municipal government established the "Library City" (图书馆之城) concept in 2003. The plan would create a library network within the city through library construction, service improvement, and create a comfortable reading environment. By the end of 2015, Shenzhen has 620 public libraries, including 3 city-level public libraries, 8 district-level public libraries, and 609 grassroots libraries. Notable libraries include the Shenzhen Library and the Shenzhen Children's Library. Shenzhen also has bookstores, with the most notable being Shenzhen Book City in the Futian District. With an operating area of 42,000 square metres (450,000 sq ft), it claimed to be the largest bookstore of Asia at the time of its opening. Shenzhen has a number of museums and art galleries, such as the Shenzhen Museum, the Shenzhen Art Museum, the Shekou Maritime Museum, the Longgang Museum of Hakka Culture, the Shenzhen Museum of Contemporary Art, and the He Xiangning Art Museum. Shenzhen also has a few theaters, notably the Shenzhen Concert Hall, the Shenzhen Grand Theater, and the Shenzhen Poly Theater. The main cuisine of Shenzhen is Cantonese. Due to the recent growth of migrants to the city, Shenzhen also hosts a diverse array of cuisines, including Teochew cuisine, Hakka cuisine, Sichuan cuisine, Shanghai cuisine, and Hunan cuisine. The Yantian District is known for its Teochew-based and Hakka-based seafood, with restaurants lined up along the coastline. Street food such as Xinjiang cuisine, and black sesame soups, can be found in Xijie Street and the urban village of Baishizhou. Shenzhen also has its own tea culture. In regards to food chains, first McDonald's restaurant in mainland China opened for business in Shenzhen on 8 October 1990 providing the city American fast food. Shenzhen is home to the Hey Tea chain of tea shops, which provides a variety of cheese and fruit teas. Shenzhen has a prominent nightlife culture, with most of the activity centered in the entertainment complexes of COCO Park and Shekou, with the former being referred by the South China Morning Post (SCMP) as "Shenzhen's answer to Lan Kwai Fong." There are many bars and clubs in the city, mostly unregulated, that stay open till the morning. Tunnel raves, referred by the SCMP as "a Shenzhen nightlife staple", have earned a reputation in the world, though they are often cracked down by police. Police has also cracked down on prostitution and pornography, which were elements of nightlife entertainment in Shenzhen, with one of the most prominent operations being centered in Shazui (沙嘴村) in the Futian District in the mid-2000s, resulting in closures of entertainment businesses and a decrease of foreign tourists in that area of the city. Shenzhen is home to several professional sports teams, including the Shenzhen Leopards of the Chinese Basketball Association and Shenzhen Peng City F.C. of the Chinese Super League. Other professional sports teams include Shenzhen Ledman F.C. of China League Two until the club was disbanded in 2018 and the Shenzhen KRS Vanke Rays of the Zhenskaya Hockey League. Shenzhen is the host of several international sports events. In August 2011, the city has hosted the 26th Summer Universiade, a multi-sporting event for university students. In 2018, Shenzhen hosted a pre-season National Hockey League game between the Calgary Flames and Boston Bruins. From 2019 to 2028, Shenzhen is hosting the WTA Finals tennis tournament, which is the season-ending championship for women's tennis. Shenzhen is also one of the host cities of the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup. Shenzhen is also a popular destination for skateboarders from all over the world, due to the architecture of the city and its lax skate laws. Shenzhen has several multi-purpose sports venues. Shenzhen Stadium, located in the Futian District, was the home of Shenzhen F.C. until the club got dissolved in 2024. For the 2011 Summer Universiade, Shenzhen has constructed several sports venues, such as the Shenzhen Bay Sports Center in the Nanshan District and the Shenzhen Universiade Sports Centre in the Longgang District. One of the most significant sporting events unique to Shenzhen is RoboMaster, an annual intercollegiate robot competition founded and hosted by DJI based on autonomous moving target shooting. Started in 2015, the competition introduced a 5-on-5 MOBA-style robot combat between university students around China and later the world. Rewards to the competition include a prize pool of 3,750,000 RMB and a job landing at DJI. Shenzhen has an extensive three-level public park system that was established in 2006, which categorizes parks as natural parks, urban parks, and community parks. By 2019, the city had 1,090 parks covering about 39,320 hectares, including 33 natural parks, 152 urban parks and 905 community parks. According to state-owned news outlet Xinhua, Shenzhen plans to build and renovate over 40 parks per year, bringing the number of parks in the city to 1,500 by 2035. Lianhuashan Park is located on the territory of 150 hectares in the Futian District. At the top of the mountain is a large bronze statue of Deng Xiaoping. Wutongshan National Park is spread around the mountain of the same name in the Luohu District. From the observation deck, there is a view of the Shenzhen skyline as well as Hong Kong and the surrounding bay, and on the next peak there is a transmission tower of a local television station. Shenzhen Bay Park, located along the city's coastline along Shenzhen Bay, opened in 2011, which included the nearby Mangrove Park. There are several thematic recreation areas and attractions, and along the 9-kilometer-long coastal strip there is an embankment. The Mangrove Ecopark was established in 2000 in the Futian District and at that time was the smallest national park in China. A large group of birds migrate to the ecopark in the mangroves on an area of 20.6 hectares in a 9-kilometer coastal zone of the Shenzhen Bay. Shenzhen Bay Park is connected to the Dashahe Park (大沙河公园, 'big sand river'), located in Nanshan District, it follows the Dashahe River. Other notable parks in Shenzhen include the Shenzhen Garden Flower Exposition Center, Shenzhen Safari Park, Xili Lake Resort, and Yangtai Mountain Fountain Park. Shenzhen also has several beaches: Dameisha (大梅沙; 'big mesa') and Xiaomeisha [zh] (小梅沙; 'small mesa') in the Yantian District, and Jinshawan (金沙湾; 'golden sands bay'), Nan'ao (南澳; 'southern inlet'), and Xichong (西冲) in Dapeng Peninsula (in the vicinity of Dapeng New District, which is administered by the Longgang District). During the COVID-19 pandemic, Shenzhen achieved an average air quality index (AQI) score of 44.8 µg/m³ and daily AQI score of 19 µg/m³. Out of ten Chinese mega-cities, Shenzhen recorded the lowest in average PM2.5 concentration (22.5 µg/m³), average PM10 concentration (37.7 µg/m³), average carbon monoxide concentration (0.6 µg/m³), and average nitrogen dioxide concentration (21.9 µg/m³). Swiss environmental technology company IQAir attributed most of the pollution in Shenzhen to stem from the engineering industry, continued use of coal, and traffic. In 2014, Shenzhen experienced severe water pollution in the city's rivers and waterways, with 173 of the 310 rivers considered to be in "critical" condition and four rivers: the Maozhou, Guanlan, Longgang and Pingshan Rivers, to be the most polluted out of all rivers in the Pearl River Delta. The pollutants in the river consisted mainly of ammonia, phosphorus, and nitrogen. In response, the city conducted a campaign to restore the city's rivers by building more water pipes and sewage treatment plants. From 2000 to 2014, Shenzhen spent 30 billion RMB to restore the city's rivers from water pollution, which some were considered at the time to be the most polluted in the Pearl River Delta. The city had constructed 33 sewage treatment plants and laid almost 4,300 kilometres (2,700 mi) of sewage pipes. By 2020, the city laid an additional 3,274 kilometres (2,034 mi) of water pipelines and completed 13,793 pipeline renovation projects in urban villages and housing estates. In 2009, Shenzhen was chosen as one of thirteen cities to pilot a national new-energy vehicle program. In 2017, Shenzhen offered 3.3 billion RMB in subsidies in electric buses and the construction of charging facilities. In mid-2018, the city made major headlines for being the first city to roll an all-electric public bus fleet. In the same year, more than half of the city's taxi fleet are electric, with the goal to turn the fleet all-electric. By early 2019, Shenzhen rolled out an all-electric taxi fleet, with 99% of taxis now electric-powered. In late 2019, Shenzhen launched a garbage classification program in which waste is to be sorted in four categories: recyclables, kitchen waste, hazardous waste, and other waste. Residents who follow the guidelines will be given cash while those who do not would be fined by the government. In Shenzhen there are 14 newspapers, one comprehensive publishing house, three video-audio products publishing houses, 88 bureaus of inland and Hong Kong media organizations, 40 periodicals, and about 200 kinds of in-house publications of which the majority belong to enterprises. The most prominent media companies in Shenzhen are the Shenzhen Media Group, the Shenzhen Press Group, China Entertainment Television (CETV), and Phoenix Television branch iFeng. Shenzhen News [zh] (深圳晚报, sznews.com) is a Chinese-language newspaper owned by the Shenzhen Press Group that serves as Shenzhen's main online news source. Shenzhen Daily is an English-language news outlet for Shenzhen covering local, national and international news. That's Shenzhen is the Shenzhen edition of That's PRD, an English-language media company with an online, print and social footprint. ShekouDaily.com is an online media outlet providing news and resources focusing on the Shekou sub-district in Nanshan District of Shenzhen. The area encompassed by Shenzhen and Hong Kong formerly belonged to Bao'an County in imperial times. After the Qing defeat in the Second Opium War, the United Kingdom seized Hong Kong Island and was leased the New Territories, forming the modern-day boundaries between Hong Kong and Shenzhen (the successor to Bao'an). The two cities are separated by two bays: Shenzhen Bay and Mirs Bay, and a river: Sham Chun River. According to then-Executive Council member Leung Chun-ying, the two cities' close relationship can be due to the close distance between the two, similar economic systems, differences in wages and price levels, and that the two cities have different systems compared to other Chinese cities, with Hong Kong embracing the one country, two systems principle while Shenzhen is a SEZ. From the establishment of Shenzhen as a SEZ in 1980 to 2007, Hong Kong has been Shenzhen's largest trade partner, with exports to Hong Kong accounted for 46.6% of Shenzhen's total exports. In 2015, the total import and export volume of Shenzhen Port to Hong Kong was 1.1 trillion RMB. Both cities had established the Qianhai Shenzhen-Hong Kong Modern Service Industries Cooperation Zone within the Nanshan District which is a free-trade zone that mirrors the economic policies of both cities and to bring Hong Kong closer to Mainland China. Tencent estimated that by 2020, Qianhai is expected to create a total output value of 150 billion RMB, with an output of 10 billion RMB per square kilometer. As of 23 February 2021, Qianhai has a total of 11,325 firms from Hong Kong. As of September 2016, there are nine crossing points on the boundary between Shenzhen and Hong Kong, among which six are land connections. From west to east these include the Shenzhen Bay Port, Futian Port, Huanggang Port, Man Kam To Port, Luohu Port and Shatoujiao Port. On either sides of each of these ports of entry are road and/or rail transportation. Shenzhen has been very active in cultivating sister city relationships. In October 1989, Shenzhen Mayor Li Hao and a delegation travelled to Houston to attend the signing ceremony establishing a sister city relationship between Houston and Shenzhen. Houston became the first sister city of Shenzhen. As of 2015, Shenzhen has established sister city relationship with 25 cities in the world. As of May 2021[update], Shenzhen is twinned with the following regions, cities, and counties: Houston, United States, March 1986 Plovdiv, Bulgaria, November 2013 Brescia, Italy, November 1991 Brisbane, Australia, June 1992 Poznań, Poland, July 1993 Kingston, Jamaica, March 1995 Lomé, Togo, June 1996 Nuremberg, Germany, May 1997 Walloon Brabant, Belgium, October 2003 Tsukuba, Japan, June 2004 Gwangyang, South Korea, October 2004 Johor Bahru, Malaysia, July 2006 Perm, Russia, 2006 Turin, Italy, January 2007 Timișoara, Romania, February 2007 Hull, United Kingdom Rotherham, United Kingdom, November 2007 Luxor, Egypt, 6 September 2007 Reno, Nevada, United States, 30 April 2008 Samara, Russia, 19 December 2008 Montevideo, Uruguay February 2009 Kalocsa, Hungary, 2011 Haifa, Israel, 2012 Barcelona, Spain, July 2012 Apia, Samoa, August 2015 Edinburgh, United Kingdom, June 2019 The Shenzhen Port is twinned and has collaboration agreements with: The Port of Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Canary Islands June 2013. China portal Index of Shenzhen-related articles Administrative divisions of the People's Republic of China Economy of China List of twin towns and sister cities in China Pearl River (China) Puxin Biogas /ˌʃɛnˈdʒɛn/; /ʃɛnˈʒɛn/; Chinese: 深圳; pinyin: Shēnzhèn; Mandarin pronunciation: [ʂə́n.ʈʂə̂n] ; Jyutping: sam1 zan3; Hong Kong Romanisation: Sham Chun "Qin Weizhong appointed". szdaily.com. Retrieved 29 April 2021. 2017年深圳经济有质量稳定发展 [In 2017, Shenzhen economy will have stable quality and development] (in Simplified Chinese). Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2018. Cox, W (2021). Demographia World Urban Areas. 17th Annual Edition (PDF). St. Louis: Demographia. p. 22. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 29 June 2021. OECD Urban Policy Reviews: China 2015, OECD READ edition. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 18 April 2015. p. 37. doi:10.1787/9789264230040-en. ISBN 9789264230033. ISSN 2306-9341. "深圳市2022年国民经济和社会发展统计公报". "Shenzhen Government Online — Overview". Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Longman, J.C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3 ed.). Pearson Education ESL. ISBN 978-1405881173. "Shenzhen". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 9 June 2021. "Top 10 Chinese cities by urban resident population". investinchina.chinadaily.com.cn. Retrieved 26 November 2022. Roberts, Toby; Williams, Ian; Preston, John (2021). "The Southampton system: A new universal standard approach for port-city classification". Maritime Policy & Management. 48 (4): 530–542. doi:10.1080/03088839.2020.1802785. S2CID 225502755. Whitwell, Tom (13 June 2014). "Inside Shenzhen: China's Silicon Valley". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 August 2019. Compare: "Shenzhen is a hothouse of innovation". The Economist. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Welcome to Silicon Delta 深圳地名网 (27 May 2010). 深圳地名. Shenzhen People's Government. Archived from the original on 4 October 2011. Retrieved 14 November 2011. 深圳概貌. Shenzhen People's Government. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 央视国际 (7 August 2003). 深圳历史沿革. CCTV. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 深圳概貌. Shenzhen People's Government. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 深圳的前身并不是"小渔村". Archived from the original on 17 October 2018. Retrieved 17 October 2018. 深圳概貌. Shenzhen People's Government. 26 August 2016. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2016. 深圳历史沿革. China Central Television. 7 August 2003. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2011. Brief History of Shenzhen Archived April 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Shenzhen Government official website. Rule, Ted and Karen, "Shenzhen, the Book", Hong Kong 2014 Wills, John E. (2011), China and Maritime Europe, 1500–1800: Trade, Settlement, Diplomacy, and Missions, Cambridge University Press, p. 28 深圳旧事 | 英国两千军队占领深圳长达半年，这是怎么回事？. sohu.com. Retrieved 5 August 2019. 龙华革命烈士卓凤康. 宝安日报. 18 February 2012. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2014. "百年深圳铁路". news.ifeng.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2019. 深圳地区的革命史迹_查查吧. chachaba.com. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "The Kowloon Canton Railway (British Section) Part 4 – The Early Years (1910 to 1940) – The Industrial History of Hong Kong Group". industrialhistoryhk.org. Retrieved 5 August 2019. 秦志勇 (24 June 2003). 台盟深圳市委筹委会呼吁缅怀三洲田起义丰功. 中国政协新闻. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 惠州三洲田起义. 今日惠州. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 李南玲 (21 August 2003). 百年罗湖桥走进历史. Xinhua. Archived from the original on 27 June 2004. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 中国青年报 (8 December 2010). "学者记录深圳30年大逃港 百万内地人曾越境香港". 新浪新闻. Archived from the original on 11 December 2010. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 武汉晨报 (8 December 2010). ""大逃港"催生深圳经济特区". 网易新闻. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 深圳特区建立过程中惠阳地区的历史作用. 中共惠州市委党史研究室课题组. 7 December 2015. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. 1月31日，中央决定成立招商局蛇口工业区. 深圳特区报. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2019. 1979年4月邓小平第一次正式提出办特区的主张. Beijing Daily. 16 September 2008. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2019. Fish, Isaac Stone (25 September 2010). "A New Shenzhen". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 29 April 2014. "Shenzhen Continues to lead China's reform and opening-up". Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2016. Stoltenberg, Clyde D. (1984). "China's Special Economic Zones: Their Development and Prospects". Asian Survey. 24 (6): 637–654. doi:10.2307/2644396. ISSN 0004-4687. JSTOR 2644396. Holmes, Frank (21 April 2017). "China's New Special Economic Zone Evokes Memories Of Shenzhen". Forbes. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "The spirit of enterprise fades: Capitalism in China". The Economist. Vol. 394, no. 8666. 23 January 2010. p. 61. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 28 January 2010. 深圳经济特区. 广东省情网. 5 May 2011. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "2006年1月". mjlsh.usc.cuhk.edu.hk. Retrieved 5 August 2019. 二线关 将说真正的再见. Southern Metropolis Daily. 23 December 2014. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2015. 交通动态 (8 June 2010). 深圳二线关是怎么来的. 深圳本地宝. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 关于本所. Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 22 October 2011. Singh, Harminder (2 September 2016). "Explained:how Hong Kong's Legislative Council has evolved". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2019. "Legislative Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region – History of the Legislature". Archived from the original on 9 December 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Perry, Alex (7 May 2001). "Crossing The Line". Time Asia. Vol. 157, no. 18. Archived from the original on 3 June 2001. Retrieved 15 November 2018. "2001APEC". china.org.cn. Retrieved 4 June 2020. 《深圳市综合配套改革总体方案》获国务院批准. 新华网. 26 May 2009. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. 郑小红 (2 July 2010). 深圳特区范围1日起扩至全市 解决"一市两法". 中国新闻网. Archived from the original on 4 February 2014. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 国务院批复"前海深港现代服务业合作区发展规划". 新华社. 27 August 2010. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Universiade Shenzhen 2011". Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2016. 总体概况. 广东自贸试验区前海蛇口片区. 6 April 2016. Archived from the original on 27 October 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "China unveils detailed reform plan to make Shenzhen model city for world". South China Morning Post. 18 August 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019. Hu, Richard (2023). Reinventing the Chinese City. Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231211017. 深圳概貌 [Shenzhen overview]. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 25 September 2018. 市情概貌. Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2016. 深圳310条河流 173条黑脏臭 径流小是先天的硬伤. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2016. [气候统计] 深圳市气候资料（来源：深圳市气象局） (in Simplified Chinese). Shenzhen Meteorological Bureau. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Extreme Temperatures Around the World". Archived from the original on 4 August 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2014. "Experience Template" CMA台站气候标准值(1991-2020) (in Chinese). China Meteorological Administration. Retrieved 11 April 2023. 王伟中 简历. 人民网地方领导资料库. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. 深圳新一届市人大常委会主任、副主任、秘书长名单和简历. 中国经济网. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. "Qin Weizhong-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 7 June 2021. 戴北方当选深圳市政协主席. 中国经济网. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Lawrence, Susan; Martin, Michael (20 March 2013). "Understanding China's Political System" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. Congressional Research Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2019. 党委书记权力究竟有多大？ [How much power does a Party Secretary really have?]. 人民论坛 (in Chinese (China)). People's Daily Press. 23 January 2007. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 29 April 2018. "Qin Weizhong-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 1 May 2021. Qin, Zhen (14 April 2009). "经济特区授权立法有关情况综述". 中国人大网. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2021. Bin, Zhuanghao (25 November 2009). "全国人大授予深圳特区立法权". 深圳新闻网. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2021. Song, Fangcun (14 December 2002). "受贿900万 深圳海关原关长赵玉存一审被判无期". 中国新闻网. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "深圳前副市长王炬被判刑20年". 哈尔滨日报. 1 December 2003. Archived from the original on 11 June 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "深圳查实涉嫌接受性贿赂的女公安局长受贿31万_新闻中心_新浪网". news.sina.com.cn. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Shenzhen mayor spared execution". South China Morning Post. 10 May 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2021. 中华人民共和国县以上行政区划代码. Ministry of Civil Affairs. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. Shenzhen Bureau of Statistics. 《深圳统计年鉴2014》. China Statistics Print. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. "Shēnzhèn Shì (Sub-provincial City, China) - Population Statistics, Charts, Map and Location". "深圳市宝安区历史变迁". 宝安在线. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 7 June 2021. 深圳规划合并关内关外取消区级政府. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2016. "光明新区分设6个办事处". 深圳商报. 1 September 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "深圳市坪山新区正式成立". 新华网. 1 July 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Official PRC announcement". gov.cn. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 9 January 2011. 二线关景观改造方案出炉 涉及8个主要的二线关口 [The plans for the ErXianGuan landscape reconstruction have been announced, involving 8 major former border passages]. 深圳本地宝 (sz.bendibao.com). 2 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016. Copyright@中国时刻网、深圳广播电影电视集团. 政协论坛 二线关：将说真正的再见（下） 2015-11-29_政协论坛_电视_CUTV深圳台. sztv.CUTV.com. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. 二线关将说真正的再见 检查站物理设施将全部清除. sznews.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. "Shenzhen to remove outdated boundary around economic zone - Chinadaily.com.cn". chinadaily.com.cn. Archived from the original on 16 January 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2018. 国务院关于同意撤销深圳经济特区管理线的批复（国函〔2018〕3号）_政府信息公开专栏. gov.cn. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2018. "概况简介 深汕特别合作区 —— 创新引领发展，实干再造新城！". 深汕特别合作区. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "重磅！汕尾海丰深汕合作区正式划入深圳市（附规划）". sohu.com. 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2021. Zhao, Ruixi (27 October 2011). "深圳筹划增设两个功能新区". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "龙华、坪山调整为行政区". 深圳新闻网. 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "国务院批复深圳成立光明行政区". 澎湃新闻. 25 May 2018. Archived from the original on 26 May 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2021. Wei Ge (1999). "Chapter 4: The Performance of Special Economic Zones". Special Economic Zones and the Economic Transition in China. World Scientific Publishing Co Pte Ltd. pp. 67–108. ISBN 978-9810237905. "Preparation, creation and development of a special economic zone".[permanent dead link] "will-2018-be-year-shenzhen-and-guangzhou-finally-overtake-hong". South China Morning Post. 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. "Hong Kong economy surpassed by neighbour Shenzhen for first time". South China Morning Post. 27 February 2019. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "Shenzhen named biggest economy in China's Guangdong province". South China Morning Post. 6 December 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2019. The gdp and gdp per capita data for Hong kong and Macau SAR, according to IMF World Economic Outlook (IMF WEO) Database "Download WEO Data: April 2019 Edition". International Monetary Fund (Press release). 9 April 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2019. The gdp and gdp per capita data of four direct-administered municipalities, according to China NBS national data ("China NBS national data". National Bureau of Statistics of China (Press release). 1 April 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2019.) The average exchange rate is 6.7518 Chinese yuan per US dollar in 2017 "China Statistical Yearbook (Annual Data)". National Bureau of Statistics of China (Press release). Retrieved 8 May 2019. "Shenzhen economic expansion dwarfs growth in Hong Kong and Singapore". South China Morning Post. 15 January 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "Statistics". The World Federation of Exchanges. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "The Global Financial Centres Index 29" (PDF). Long Finance. March 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC - Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Hyatt, John. "Beijing Overtakes New York City As City With Most Billionaires: Forbes 2021 List". Forbes. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "These will be the most important cities by 2035". World Economic Forum. 31 October 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Emerging cities, sinking cities in Asia by 2030". Japan Center for Economic Research (JCER). 5 December 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2020. Can the New Silk Road Compete with the Maritime Silk Road? Marcus Hernig: Die Renaissance der Seidenstraße (2018). Wolf D. Hartmann, Wolfgang Maennig, Run Wang: Chinas neue Seidenstraße. (2017). China's maritime Silk Road plan starts a wave of bandwagon jumping at home The Maritime Silk Road in South-East Asia. "Fortune 500". Fortune. Retrieved 9 August 2023. 2015年深圳国民经济和社会发展统计公报. Shenzhen Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. "Global Financial Centres Index 29" (PDF). Z/Yen Group. March 2021. p. 3. Retrieved 5 October 2021. "A rare look insider Huawei, China's tech giant". CNN. 21 May 2019. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019. "Tencent Shows Off High Tech Shenzhen Headquarters". Mingtiandi. 23 January 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "World's top drone seller DJI made $2.7 billion in 2017". TechNode. 3 January 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "ZTE's new management vows to uphold compliance as a top priority". South China Morning Post. 10 July 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "Inside Shenzhen: China's Silicon Valley". The Guardian. 13 June 2014. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Barboza, David (1 August 2008). "In China, Low-End Industries Give Way to High-Tech". The New York Times. p. 2. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Hytera – Innovate for a safer world". hytera.com. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Privacy Policy". OnePlus. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. Cheng, Evelyn (1 March 2021). "Warren Buffett owns more of a Chinese electric car company than General Motors". CNBC. Retrieved 23 July 2021. 高交会简介. 中国国际高新技术成果交易会. Archived from the original on 7 June 2015. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Compare: "The next Silicon Valley? It could be here". Das Netz. 11 July 2017. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Rivers, Matt (23 November 2018). "Inside China's Silicon Valley: From copycats to innovation". CNN. Retrieved 9 August 2019. Reynolds, Matt (7 June 2016). "Inside Shenzhen: The Silicon Valley of hardware". Wired UK. ISSN 1357-0978. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "This Chinese City Is Becoming The Silicon Valley Of Hardware". HuffPost Canada. 6 November 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Annual Report 2018" (PDF). China Merchants Bank Company Limited. 22 March 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2019. Group, Ping An. "Ping An Ranked 29th in Fortune's 2019 Global 500, Top 4 in Financial Sector". prnewswire.com (Press release). Retrieved 9 August 2019. 关于银行-平安银行. bank.pingan.com. Retrieved 9 August 2019. 深圳特区报 (12 March 2007). 外资银行加速抢滩深圳市场. 深圳证券交易所. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 November 2011 – via Sohu. 2016年深圳金融业发展基本情况. Office of Financial Development Services, Shenzhen People's Government (深圳市人民政府金融发展服务办公室). Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2017. "Shenzhen, Hong Kong among top 10 global financial centres". South China Morning Post. 20 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "Quanfeng Express hits private investment road". usa.chinadaily.com.cn. Retrieved 10 August 2019. 中集英文. cimc.com. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "Top 50 World Container Ports". World Shipping Council. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "One Hundred Ports 2020". Lloyd's List. Retrieved 23 July 2021. 深圳港港口介绍. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2016. Roberts, Toby; Williams, Ian; Preston, John (2020). "The Southampton system: A new universal standard approach for port-city classification". Maritime Policy & Management. 48 (4): 530–542. doi:10.1080/03088839.2020.1802785. "Blockchain cargo release platform launched". Shenzhen Government Online. 9 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. 名师大腕奉献时尚文化盛宴---宝安日报多媒体数字报刊平台. 30 October 2016. Archived from the original on 30 October 2016. 龙华新区创建全国时尚服饰产业知名品牌示范区纪. cqn.com. 28 September 2016. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 10 August 2019. 設計之都. shenzhendesign.org. Archived from the original on 24 March 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2019. 四大支柱产业. InvestShenzhen (深圳市投资推广署). Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 29 November 2017. "Evergrande draws eight strategic investors for Shenzhen listing". South China Morning Post. 2 January 2017. "Vanke". vanke.com. Archived from the original on 10 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "CR LAND". en.crland.com.hk. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "Shenzhen High-tech Industrial Development Zone". Hong Kong Means Business. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "Shenzhen Software Park". Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Fung, Anita. "Qianhai Taking RMB Internationalisation to the Next Level". New Zealand China Trade Association. Archived from the original on 22 January 2015. Retrieved 11 June 2014. "Lonely Planet names Shenzhen as a top city to visit in 2019". Archived from the original on 23 October 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. 深圳市旅游业发展"十三五"规划-深圳市文化广电旅游体育局. sz.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. 深圳市旅游业、体育发展"十三五"规划公布--政务动态. sz.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "AAAAA Scenic Areas_National Tourism Administration of The People's Republic of China". 4 April 2014. Archived from the original on 4 April 2014. Retrieved 8 December 2018. "Window of the World". Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2018. "Window of the World, Shenzhen, Guangdong, Theme Park". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Splendid China - Folk Culture Villages, Shenzhen". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Splendid China folk culture village". Archived from the original on 24 March 2010. Retrieved 2 December 2018. 欢乐谷官方网站. happyvalley.cn (in Chinese (China)). Archived from the original on 11 June 2004. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Shenzhen Happy Valley, Theme Park: Ticket Price, Get There". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. "Buzz on the waterfront". TTGmice. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. "Welcome to OCT Harbour". oct.ieant.com. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "About us". Szseaworld.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2010. 小梅沙海洋世界官方网站｜深圳小梅沙海洋公园官网｜深圳海洋世界官网｜深圳市特发小梅沙旅游发展有限公司. szxms.com.cn. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2018. "Xiaomeisha Sea World, Shenzhen, Guangdong". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2018. "The Standard - Business as usual at sunk Minsk World - China Section". 10 February 2012. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2018. "Aircraft carrier used as Chinese theme park sets sail for new home". South China Morning Post. 4 April 2016. Archived from the original on 5 December 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2018. The City Parks of Shenzhen Archived 16 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine The City Parks of Shenzhen ~ Retrieved 2 February 2010 Karacs, Sarah (6 February 2017). "The Most Beautiful Beaches in Shenzhen". Culture Trip. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2018. Springer, Kate (4 January 2018). "Shenzhen: Add it to your China travel list". CNN Travel. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "KK100 - The Skyscraper Center". skyscrapercenter.com. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Tourism in Shenzhen, China". traveltips.usatoday.com. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Yiu, Pak (9 December 2023). "Weekends in Shenzhen: Hong Kong economy hit by neighbor's growing allure". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Shenzhen (Guangdong) City Information | HKTDC". china-trade-research.hktdc.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2019. Tocha (28 September 2018). "Huaqiangbei, the biggest electronics market in the world — Shenzhen, China". Medium. Retrieved 21 August 2019. "Mega mall opens in Longhua". szdaily.com. Retrieved 21 August 2019. "Longgang COCO Park opens its doors". Shenzhen Daily. 3 September 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2018. 深圳体验式商业综合体—壹方天地. uniworld-sz.com.cn. Retrieved 21 August 2019. 壹方中心. en.unicenter.com.cn. Retrieved 21 August 2019. 公司简介_关于海岸城_海岸城. coastalcity.cn. Retrieved 21 August 2019. "Contact Us Archived 2019-03-06 at the Wayback Machine." China Nepstar. Retrieved on November 19, 2012. "China Nepstar Chain Drugstore Ltd. Floor 6, Block B, Xinnengyuan Building, Nanhai Road, Nanshan District, Shenzhen, CHINA (518054)" - Map Archived 6 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine - Address in Chinese Archived 8 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine: "地址：深圳市南山区南海大道新能源大厦 B 座 6 楼 (518054)" - Chinese Map Archived 30 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine 新零售：激发深圳经济增长新动能 _ 东方财富网. finance.eastmoney.com. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 21 August 2019. 3-2 户数、人口、出生、死亡及自然增长. Shenzhen Statistical Yearbook 2020 [Households, Population, Birth, Death and Natural Growth] (PDF) (in Chinese and English). p. 55. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2021. - Web version - See column "年末常住人 口数 (万人) Year-end Permanent Population (10 000 persons)". The original source expresses figures in ten thousands. Here the numbers are converted to the ordinary format. "Seventh National Population Census Communique of Shenzhen, No. 1" 深圳市第七次全国人口普查公报[1]（第一号）. Shenzhen Statistics Bureau (in Chinese). Retrieved 25 July 2021. "City population stands at 17.56 million_Latest News-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "China's Shenzhen to tighten residency rules to curb population boom". msn.com. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "户籍人口5年新增200多万！深圳要收紧落户了？". finance.ifeng.com. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Shenzhen". U.S. Commercial Service. 2007. Archived from the original on 12 April 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2008. "Shenzhen shows challenge of reversing China's demographic decline despite high birth rate". The Straits Times. 10 May 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. 2017年深圳经济有质量稳定发展 [In 2017, Shenzhen economy will have stable quality and development] (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2018. Mead, Nick Van (28 January 2015). "China's Pearl River Delta overtakes Tokyo as world's largest megacity". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 August 2019. 深圳客家文化的历史追问. 深圳新闻网. 22 June 2003. Archived from the original on 6 June 2012. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 网易 (26 August 2020). "深圳人口图鉴：86%的人在打拼 外省人中湖南占比最多". 163.com. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Migrant workers forced out as 'urban village' faces wrecking ball". South China Morning Post. 22 July 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "South Koreans find new home in Donghai". Shenzhen Daily. 1 July 2014. Retrieved 3 May 2019. "ShenZhen, Koreans' second hometown". Shenzhen Daily at China.org.cn. 28 September 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 3 May 2019. 中共深圳市委统战部（市民族宗教事务局、市侨务办公室、市侨联）. tzb.sz.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 23 February 2017. Retrieved 27 May 2017. Fan, Lizhu; Whitehead, James D. (2011). "Spirituality in a Modern Chinese Metropolis Archived 22 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine". In Palmer, David A.; Shive, Glenn; Wickeri, Philip L. Chinese Religious Life. Oxford University Press ISBN 9780199731381 Lizhu, Fan; Whitehead, James D. (2004). "Fate and Fortune: Popular Religion and Moral Capital in Shenzhen". Journal of Chinese Religions. 32: 83–100. doi:10.1179/073776904804759969. Payette, Alex. "Shenzhen's Kongshengtang: Religious Confucianism and Local Moral Governance Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine". Role of Religion in Political Life, Panel RC43, 23rd World Congress of Political Science, 19–24 July 2014. 深圳客家人的來歷和客家民居 [Hakka Origins and Settlements in Shenzhen]. 中國國際廣播電臺國際線上. Archived from the original on 21 December 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 圍頭話 Weitou dialect. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. Rule, Ted; Rule, Karen (2015). Shenzhen: The Book. ShenzhenParty.com. ASIN B00S8H2KUA. 秦 CHUN, 炳煜 Bing Yuk (7 July 2006). 深圳成粵語圈中普通話區 Shenzhen becomes the Mandarin area in a Cantonese region. 文匯報 Wenweipo. Archived from the original on 11 July 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 深圳將粵語精髓融入普通話 Shenzhen Incorporates Cantonese Essence into Mandarin. 南方網. 15 February 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 16 April 2012. 中华人民共和国国家通用语言文字法 The National Lingua Franca and Orthography Act-- People's Republic of China. Standing Committee of the National People's Congress. Archived from the original on 18 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. He, Huifeng. "Trendy Shenzhen teenagers spearhead Cantonese revival". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "Hong Kong or Seoul – which is the world's most vertical city?". South China Morning Post. 20 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2019. Holland, Oscar (12 December 2018). "China built more skyscrapers in 2018 than ever before". CNN Style. Retrieved 24 August 2019. "Number of 150m+ Completed Buildings - The Skyscraper Center". skyscrapercenter.com. Retrieved 24 August 2019. Robinson, Melia (17 January 2017). "One Chinese city built more skyscrapers in 2016 than the US and Australia combined". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2018. "Shenzhen - The Skyscraper Center". skyscrapercenter.com. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Sun, Kong; Xue, Charles (2020). "Shennan Road and the modernization of Shenzhen architecture". Frontiers of Architectural Research. 9 (2): 437–449. doi:10.1016/j.foar.2019.11.002. S2CID 213829804. 深圳30年：深圳国贸大厦. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2016. "Shun Hing Square (Diwang/Di Wang Commercial Center)". 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 20 October 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2016. 深圳摩天大楼列表，深圳第一高楼. top.gaoloumi.com. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2016. "KK100 – The Skyscraper Center". CTBUH. Archived from the original on 20 August 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2013. "Ping An Finance Center - The Skyscraper Center". SkyscraperCenter.com. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Poon, Dennis C.K.; Gottlebe, Torsten G. (December 2017). "Sky High in Shenzhen". Civil Engineering. 87 (12). Reston, Virginia: American Society of Civil Engineers: 48–53. Archived from the original on 17 December 2017. Macpherson, Joe (2 July 2020). "Hakka history in Shenzhen". Now Shenzhen. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Gangeng Hakka Small Town Shenzhen Longgang District". Now Shenzhen. 27 October 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Historical and Cultural Nantou Ancient Town in Shenzhen". Now Shenzhen. 19 November 2020. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Ancient City of Nantou (Xin'an)". chinaexpeditiontours.com. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Xin'an Ancient City". Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Last emperor: is Shenzhen the resting place of final Song ruler?". South China Morning Post. 7 November 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Shenzhen, China: a new city built on old foundations". South China Morning Post. 24 February 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Dapeng Fortress | Sightseeing | Shenzhen, Shekou Entertainment, Food and Lodging". shenzhenparty.com. 10 February 2013. Archived from the original on 1 January 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Chiwan Left Fort". szdaily.com. Retrieved 21 June 2021. Xiao, Jin (January 1998). "Education Expansion in Shenzhen, China: Its Interface with Economic Development". International Journal of Educational Development. 18: 3–19. doi:10.1016/S0738-0593(97)00025-4. 深圳大学——特区大学、窗口大学、实验大学. Shenzhen University. Archived from the original on 28 October 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 深圳大学. szu.edu.cn. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. 吴俊 (9 June 2007). 深圳虚拟大学园吸引境内外48所名校入驻. 人民网. Archived from the original on 22 September 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 深圳新闻网 (18 January 2010). 深圳市教育事业概况. QQ News. Archived from the original on 18 September 2010. Retrieved 25 October 2011. "Shenzhen Technology University" 深圳技术大学. english.sztu.edu.cn. 19 January 2024. Archived from the original on 3 October 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2024. 深圳又批一所中外合作办学高校：深圳北理莫斯科大学. 羊城晚报. 16 September 2015. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2015. "Leading 200 science cities | Nature Index 2023 Science Cities | Supplements | Nature Index". www.nature.com. Retrieved 22 November 2023. 深圳义务教育将免课本费杂费 34万外来学生受益. 深圳新闻网. 1 September 2008. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 胡谋 (25 February 2010). 深圳全面取消义务教育"借读费". 人民网教育专栏. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 25 October 2011. 深圳四大名校学位房单价最高逼近十万，家长称"咬牙也要买". 羊城晚报. 30 June 2016. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2016. "2015年深圳国民经济和社会发展统计公报". 深圳市统计局. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. Chen, Laurie (20 September 2019). "South China city eyes top teachers with offer of US$39,500 a year". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 22 September 2019. 深圳市政府新闻办 (12 July 2011). 广东省交通概况(组图). 玩家旅游网. Archived from the original on 16 April 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 深圳市交通运输委员会; 深圳市城市交通规划设计研究中心. 《2016年深圳市综合交通年度评估报告》 (PDF) (in Chinese (China)). p. 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 September 2017. Retrieved 16 January 2017.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) 康岩慧、吴燕云 (4 December 2010). 无人售票公交车. Sohu News. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 22 October 2011. "Shenzhen Metro Now Supports QR Code Payment, Here's How it Works". That's Online. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2019. "How to Pay Bus Fare with Your Phone in Shenzhen". That's Online. Archived from the original on 25 March 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2019. Shih, Gerry. "With state subsidies and a firm hand, China races ahead with electric transport". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Contact Us Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine." Shenzhen Airlines. Retrieved on 9 September 2009. 联系我们. Shenzhen Donghai Airlines. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2014. Address:Shenzhen Bao'an International Airport, Shenzhen Airlines. Post code：518128" – Chinese address: "地址：深圳市宝安区宝安国际机场航站四路3009号东海航空基地 邮政编码:518128 "Contact Us Archived 11 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine." Jade Cargo International. Retrieved on 11 July 2010. "Contact Us Archived 7 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine." SF Airlines. Retrieved on 24 February 2014. "SF Airlines Co., Ltd. Address: No.1 Freight Depot, International Shipping Center of Bao'an International Airport, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, 518128, P.R.C." – Chinese address Archived 1 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine: "地 址：中国广东省深圳市宝安国际机场国际货运中心1号货站 邮 编：518128" "UPS Launches Shenzhen Flights". Ups.com. 8 February 2010. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. 2018年民航机场生产统计公报 (in Chinese). Civil Aviation Administration of China. 5 March 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Ferry Transfer Archived 8 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine." Hong Kong International Airport. Retrieved on May 8, 2018. "Mainland Coaches Archived 8 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine." Hong Kong International Airport. Retrieved on May 8, 2018. "Shenzhen to Open 3 New Metro Lines by 2020". That's Online. Retrieved 1 November 2019. 约起！深圳地铁5号线二期9月28日开通_深圳新闻网. sznews.com. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "ExploreShenzhen | Shenzhen Metro map | ExploreShenzhen". shenzhen.exploremetro.com. Retrieved 1 November 2019. 龙华有轨电车正式开通（图） - 出行提醒 - 深圳市交通运输局（深圳市港务管理局）. sz.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. SmartRail World Staff. "Asia's largest underground railway station opens for business". smartrailworld.com. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 深圳光明城高铁站在哪里？地址+公交+地铁指南 - 深圳本地宝. jt.sz.bendibao.com. Retrieved 10 December 2019. "厦深铁路坪山站明日正式启用" (Pingshan Station Opens Tomorrow). sz.news.fang.com. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "KCRC". kcrc.com. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 深圳火车站为什么没有"站"字？很多老深圳人都不知道.... sohu.com. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Buji Station renamed Shenzhen East ---szdaily多媒体数字报刊平台". Archived from the original on 13 January 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Shenzhen New Railway Station to Be Built, Shortens Trip to Guangzhou Archived 11 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Zong, Chuanling (宗传苓); Tan, Guowei (谭国威); Zhang, Xiaochun (张晓春) (2011). 基于城市发展战略的深圳高铁枢纽规划研究——以深圳北站和福田站为例[J]. 规划师. 27 (10): 23–29. "Upgrades sought for old West Railway Station ---szdaily多媒体数字报刊平台". 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Hong Kong's first high-speed train makes maiden trip across border". South China Morning Post. 22 September 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Rappler.com (27 September 2018). "Travel from Hong Kong to China with its 1st high-speed railway". Rappler. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Xiamen-Shenzhen High-speed railway to open to traffic in 2011 - What's On Xiamen". whatsonxiamen.com. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 深圳站7月将开行第一对跨线动车组列车(深圳到肇庆怀集) - 深圳本地宝. jt.sz.bendibao.com. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 京九铁路线路图_京九铁路时刻表_京九高铁_【高铁网】_京九铁路动车_京九铁路全长. gaotie.cn. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 深圳市公交线路、站点一览表（2019年9月） - 公交服务 - 深圳市交通运输局（深圳市港务管理局）. jtys.sz.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. Coren, Michael J. (2 January 2018). "One city in China has more electric buses than all of America's biggest cities have buses". Quartz. Retrieved 1 November 2019. 广东省深圳市人民政府关于印发《深圳市公交行业特许经营改革工作方案》的通知. chinalawedu.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2018. PST, Adnan Farooqui on 01/06/2019 08:15. "Shenzhen's Taxi Fleet Goes Fully Electric As Well". Ubergizmo. Archived from the original on 8 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) 深圳"红绿的"5日起统一收费（图）--部门动态. sz.gov.cn (in Chinese (China)). Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 8 June 2018. "How to Get to and from the Airport from Shenzhen". That's Online. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Meiguan Expressway". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Jihe East". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 16 February 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Jihe West". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Yanba Expressway". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Shuiguan Expressway". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 16 February 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Yanpai Expressway". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 16 February 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Nanguang Expressway". sz-expressway.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Shenzhen-Zhongshan bridge back on agenda". South China Morning Post. 25 January 2011. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Link spanning Pearl River Delta from Shenzhen to Zhongshan approved". South China Morning Post. 8 November 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "[SZ] Cruise terminal operational in Nov". Guangdong news. 17 August 2016. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. 2013年最新深圳福永码头时刻表-深圳福永码头去澳门-深圳福永码头到香港-福永口岸通关时间_深圳指南_深圳热线. life.szonline.net. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. "Top 50 World Container Ports | World Shipping Council". worldshipping.org. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "One Hundred Container Ports 2019". Lloyd's List. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. 深圳市政府新闻办 (20 July 2007). "口岸运输". 深圳政府在线. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 深圳各口岸2015年出入境人数突破2.3亿人次. 新华社. 6 January 2016. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. "Shenzhen Port_Ports-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 25 November 2021. "Trendy Shenzhen teenagers spearhead Cantonese revival". South China Morning Post. 6 October 2009. Retrieved 3 November 2019. Geromel, Ricardo. "Meet Makeblock, A Sequoia-backed Chinese Startup Teaching Coding And Robotics To Kids Worldwide". Forbes. Retrieved 10 November 2019. 中漫. 2011-12欧冠球星卡桌游视频欣赏. 中漫网. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 名师大腕奉献时尚文化盛宴---宝安日报多媒体数字报刊平台. 30 October 2016. Archived from the original on 30 October 2016. 深圳工艺美术：领先全国_收藏滚动新闻_新浪财经_新浪网. finance.sina.com.cn. Retrieved 9 November 2019. 深圳商报 (14 October 2011). 大芬油画村成首批国家级文化产业基地. 深圳新闻网 [Shenzhen News]. Archived from the original on 24 October 2011. Retrieved 22 October 2011. 陈谷川. 首届深圳国际文博会. 南方网. Retrieved 26 October 2011. 文博会概况. 中国（深圳）国际文化产业博览交易会 [Shenzhen International Cultural Fair]. Retrieved 26 October 2011 – via southcn.com. "Introduction to Library City". National Cultural Information Resources Sharing Project Shenzhen Center. 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. "Libraries across Shenzhen-Libraries-Shenzhen Government Online". english.sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 25 April 2020. Fu, Yu (7 November 2006). "Shenzhen Book City Center City opened to bring 300,000 titles into Asia 's largest single bookstore". Nanfang Daily. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. "Museums in Shenzhen-Museums-Shenzhen Government Online". english.sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 25 April 2020. "Galleries-Galleries-Shenzhen Government Online". english.sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 25 April 2020. "Theatres - Shenzhen Government Online". english.sz.gov.cn. 27 September 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2020. 美食. travel.sohu.com. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 14 December 2018. Lanyon, Charley (21 May 2014). "There's a lot more to Hong Kong neighbour Shenzhen than cheap suits and massages". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 26 April 2020. 感受深圳的饮食文化. 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2018. "Chinese state gets taste for McDonald's as symbolic power fades". South China Morning Post. 12 August 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2020. 喜茶HEYTEA--唯一官网. heytea.com. Retrieved 28 November 2019. Li, Tao (28 August 2018). "How Chinese tea-drink brand Heytea saves millions in marketing costs thanks to its millennial customers". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 8 February 2019. Kwok, Ben (12 October 2007). "Lai See". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Bird, Thomas (31 August 2016). "Shenzhen's craft beer brewing scene takes off". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "zh:深圳沙嘴查封百家休闲中心 数千按摩女上访(图)-搜狐新闻". news.sohu.com. Retrieved 26 April 2020. 球队简介——深圳红钻队. 163.com Sports. 25 March 2010. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2013. 网易 (27 October 2019). "起航！领航者举行出征仪式 要为深圳带来更高荣耀". 163.com. Retrieved 23 June 2021. 中乙深圳人人俱乐部宣布解散，球员已收解约函. Dongqiudi (in Chinese). 1 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2019. Jay, Michelle (25 July 2019). "KRS Vanke Rays officially joining the Russian Women's Hockey League". The Ice Garden. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "2011 Summer Universiade". International University Sports Federation. Archived from the original on 20 September 2010. Retrieved 20 September 2010. "Monahan's marker among positives for Flames in shootout loss in China". calgarysun. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "Shenzhen, China to host WTA Finals starting in 2019". 18 January 2018. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. The Official website of the 2019 FIBA Basketball World Cup Archived 27 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, FIBA.com, Retrieved 9 March 2016. "China's Skateboarding Revolution". vice.com. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "球场". sportspress.cn. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "Shenzhen Bay Sports Center – StadiumDB.com". stadiumdb.com. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "深圳大运中心体育馆-中国建筑东北设计研究院有限公司深圳分公司-深圳建设网企业作品展示". szjs.com.cn. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 5 July 2021. Popper, Ben (27 September 2016). "We went to China's Silicon Valley to see the front lines of the robot wars". The Verge. Retrieved 5 July 2021. Horwitz, Josh (30 July 2018). "DJI is turning robot battles into the next college sport—advantage China". Quartz. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "市属公园名录". apps.szgm.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 23 July 2021. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Shenzhen establishes over 1,000 parks to improve ecological environment - Xinhua | English.news.cn". xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 26 September 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Wutong Mountains". Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Shenzhen Bay Park". Archived from the original on 9 September 2011. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Shenzhen Mangrove Seaside Ecology Park". Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2018. Ren, Hai; Wu, Xiaoming; Ning, Tianzhu; Huang, Gu; Wang, Jun; Jian, Shuguang; Lu, Hongfang (1 July 2011). "Wetland changes and mangrove restoration planning in Shenzhen Bay, Southern China". Landscape and Ecological Engineering. 7 (2): 241–250. doi:10.1007/s11355-010-0126-z. ISSN 1860-188X. S2CID 44054426. "Shenzhen Safari Park, Wildlife Zoo, Guangdong". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Xili Lake Holiday Resort, Shenzhen, Guangdong". travelchinaguide.com. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. Ethan, Crystal Jane; Mokoena, Kingsley Katleho; Yu, Yan (19 March 2021). "Air Pollution Status in 10 Mega-Cities in China during the Initial Phase of the COVID-19 Outbreak". International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 18 (6): 3172. doi:10.3390/ijerph18063172. ISSN 1661-7827. PMC 8003380. PMID 33808577. "Shenzhen Air Quality Index (AQI) and China Air Pollution | AirVisual". iqair.com. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Shenzhen is losing its fight against pollution in main rivers". South China Morning Post. 20 September 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "SZ creates miracle in water treatment_Latest News-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Shenzhen's green quest leaves Hong Kong miles behind". South China Morning Post. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Giving up gas: China's Shenzhen switches to electric taxis". ABC News. 7 January 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2021. Crothers, Brooke. "This Chinese City Has 16,000 Electric Buses And 22,000 Electric Taxis". Forbes. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "First buses, now Shenzhen has turned its taxis electric in green push". TechCrunch. 4 January 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2021.[permanent dead link] "Hi-tech Shenzhen charges ahead with all-electric taxi fleet". South China Morning Post. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Shenzhen Releases New Garbage Sorting Guidelines". That's Online. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Reward: Shenzhen offers cash for top trash sorters". South China Morning Post. 18 October 2019. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Residents who resist garbage sorting to face punishment_Latest News-Shenzhen Government Online". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 23 July 2021. "Mass Media". Universiade Shenzhen 2011. 29 June 2007. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2021. 深圳广播电影电视集团. szmg.com.cn. Archived from the original on 14 November 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "Mass Media". webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "华娱卫视". webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2018. 凤凰网. ifeng.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2018. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "深圳新闻网". webcitation.org. Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2018. "Shenzhen Daily". Shenzhen Daily. Archived from the original on 4 April 2013. Retrieved 17 December 2018. "That's Shenzhen – News, Gossip, Reviews, Photos, Events, Dining, Nightlife, Arts, Lifestyle and more in Shenzhen". thatsmags.com. Retrieved 23 July 2021. Daily, Shekou. "ShekouDaily: Bringing you the best of Shekou, Sea World, Shenzhen, China". ShekouDaily.com. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Leung, Chun-ying (7 September 2010). "深港关系30年变迁的启示". Xinhua. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2021. 钟坚陶青 (August 2007). "深港经济关系的回顾与前瞻" (PDF). 深圳大学. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "2015年经深圳口岸对香港进出口小幅下降". Shenzhen Customs of the People's Republic of China. 21 June 2021. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2021. Tse, Constant. "State Council Approves Preferential Policies for Qianhai Shenzhen-Hong Kong Modern Service Industry Cooperation Zone". Deloitte. 169. "Wealth management connect to bring more Hong Kong finance firms to Qianhai". South China Morning Post. 23 February 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "从受惠到互惠——深港一体化的国际大都会梦想". 新华网. 腾讯网. 30 June 2012. Archived from the original on 25 October 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2021. 深圳九大口岸通关攻略. Archived from the original on 5 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2016. HKG Monthly Digest of Statistics "HSSCA". HSSCA. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. "Sister Cities". sz.gov.cn. Retrieved 1 May 2021. Nürnberg International - Informationen zu den Auslandsbeziehungen der Stadt Nürnberg El puerto de Santa Cruz y el de Shenzhen, en China, hermanados Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shenzhen. Wikiquote has quotations related to Shenzhen. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Shenzhen. Shenzhen Government Online ShekouDaily: English Language News and Resources Geographic data related to Shenzhen at OpenStreetMap