Robert Sylvester Kelly (born January 8, 1967) is an American singer, songwriter, record producer and convicted felon. He is credited with prolific commercial success in R&B, hip hop, and pop music recordings, earning nicknames such as "the King of R&B", "the King of Pop-Soul", and "the Pied Piper of R&B". Despite this, his illustrious career has been overshadowed by convictions involving the sexual abuse of minors, including federal racketeering and sex trafficking charges in 2021 and 2022, for which he is currently serving a 31-year prison sentence. Kelly has released 18 studio albums which yielded a number of hit singles, including "I Believe I Can Fly", "Bump N' Grind", "Your Body's Callin'", "Fiesta (Remix)", "Ignition (Remix)", "Step in the Name of Love (Remix)", "If I Could Turn Back the Hands of Time", "The World's Greatest", "I'm a Flirt (Remix)", and the hip hopera Trapped in the Closet. In 1998, he won three Grammy Awards for "I Believe I Can Fly". In addition to his own recordings, Kelly's extensive songwriting and production work for other artists include credits for Michael Jackson, Britney Spears, Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Celine Dion, The Isley Brothers, Aaliyah, Toni Braxton, Luther Vandross, Mary J. Blige, Trisha Yearwood, and B2K, among others. Kelly received a Grammy Award nomination for his songwriting and production on Jackson's 1996 single, "You Are Not Alone", which also earned a Guinness World Record as the first song to debut atop the Billboard Hot 100 in the chart's history. Kelly's 1998 collaboration with Dion, "I'm Your Angel" did so once more. Kelly has sold over 75 million albums and singles worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time, and the most successful R&B male artist of the 1990s. The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) has recognized Kelly as one of the best-selling music artists in the United States with 40 million albums sold. In March 2011, Kelly was named the most successful R&B artist of the last 25 years by Billboard. Throughout his career, Kelly has been awarded Grammy Awards, BET Awards, Soul Train Music Awards, Billboard Music Awards, NAACP Image Awards, and American Music Awards. Following leaked video recordings, Kelly was prosecuted on child pornography charges in 2002, leading to a controversial trial that ended with his acquittal in 2008 on all charges. Renewed interest in the allegations resulted in additional investigations by law enforcement beginning in 2019, which led to multiple convictions and Kelly's arrest. In 2021 and 2022, Kelly was convicted on multiple charges involving child sexual abuse. As of 2023, Kelly is serving a 31-year combined sentence at FCI Butner Medium I. Robert Sylvester Kelly was born on the South Side of Chicago, Illinois, on January 8, 1967, at Chicago Lying-In Hospital (now University of Chicago Medical Center) in the city's Hyde Park neighborhood. He has five siblings (three of whom are half), two older sisters and brother, along with a younger brother and sister. His mother, Joanne, was a schoolteacher and devout Baptist. She was born in Arkansas. The identity of his father, who was absent from Kelly's life and later raised two children, is not known. His family lived in the Ida B. Wells Homes public housing project in the Black Metropolis–Bronzeville District of Chicago's Douglas neighborhood, also on the city's south side. Around the time he was five years old, Kelly's mother married his stepfather, Lucious, who reportedly worked for an airline. Kelly began singing in the church choir at age eight. Kelly described having a girlfriend, Lulu, at age eight, in his autobiography. He stated that their last play date turned tragic when, after fighting with older children over a play area by a creek, she was pushed into the water, swept downstream by a fast-moving current, and drowned. Kelly called Lulu his first musical inspiration. Kelly said members of his household would act differently when his mother and grandparents were not home. This included highly provocative dress and behavior. Kelly stated that when he was eight, an adult woman in the household coerced him into photographing her while having intercourse with an adult male partner. From age 8 to 14, he was often sexually abused by an older female family member. Kelly's younger brother, Carey, stated that he suffered from years of sexual abuse at the hands of his older sister, Theresa, who was entrusted with babysitting her siblings. Carey stated that although their older brother, Bruce, was spared and allowed to play outside, both he and Kelly were punished at separate times indoors by Theresa, who refused to acknowledge the abuse when confronted years later. Explaining why he never told anyone, Kelly's 2012 autobiography, Soulacoaster: The Diary of Me, explained that he was "too afraid and too ashamed". Around age 10, Kelly was also sexually abused by an older male who was a friend of the family. In his autobiography, Kelly describes being shot in the shoulder at age 13 by boys who were attempting to steal his bike, although a family friend claims his mother disputed this, stating that the gunshot was self-inflicted during a suicide attempt. In September 1980, Kelly entered Kenwood Academy in the city's Hyde Park-Kenwood district, where he met music teacher Lena McLin, who encouraged Kelly to perform Stevie Wonder's "Ribbon in the Sky" in the high school talent show. A shy Kelly put on sunglasses, was escorted onto the stage, performed the song, and was awarded first prize. McLin encouraged Kelly to leave the high school basketball team and concentrate on music. She said he was furious at first, but after his performance in the talent show, he changed his mind. Kelly was diagnosed with dyslexia, which left him unable to read or write. Kelly dropped out of high school after attending Kenwood Academy for one year. He began performing in the subway under the Chicago "L" tracks. He regularly busked at the "L" stop on the Red Line's Jackson station in the Loop. In his youth, Kelly played basketball with Illinois state champion basketball player Ben Wilson and later sang "It's So Hard to Say Goodbye to Yesterday" at Wilson's funeral. During his recording career, Kelly sold over 75 million records worldwide, making him the most commercially successful male R&B artist of the 1990s and one of the world's best-selling music artists. He won three Grammys for his song "I Believe I Can Fly", and was also nominated for his song "You Are Not Alone" recorded by Michael Jackson. Critics dubbed him "the King of R&B" while he billed himself the "Pied Piper of R&B". MGM (Musically Gifted Men or Mentally Gifted Men) was formed in 1989 with Robert Kelly, Marc McWilliams, Vincent Walker and Shawn Brooks. In 1990, MGM were offered a contract with an independent label, Tavdash Records. Shortly after, they recorded and released one single, "Why You Wanna Play Me." Kelly gained national recognition when MGM participated on the talent TV show Big Break, hosted by Natalie Cole. MGM performed "All My Love", which would become a demo for Kelly's song "She's Got That Vibe." The group went on to win the $100,000 grand prize in 1991 before they disbanded. In 1991, Kelly signed with Jive Records. Kelly's debut album, Born into the 90's, was released in early 1992 (credited as R. Kelly and Public Announcement). The album, released during the new jack swing period of the early 1990s, yielded the R&B hits "She's Got That Vibe", "Honey Love", "Dedicated", and "Slow Dance (Hey Mr. DJ)", with Kelly singing lead vocals. During late 1992, Kelly and Public Announcement embarked on a tour entitled "60653" after the zip code of their Chicago neighborhood. This would be the only album co-credited with Public Announcement. Kelly separated from the group in 1993. "When I create a song for myself or another artist, I see the entire thing— what the song should be like, how it should be produced, how the video should look, the image of the artist for the single— it's a package deal." — R. Kelly (1994) Kelly's first solo album, 12 Play, was released on November 9, 1993, and yielded the singer's first number-one hit, "Bump N' Grind", which spent a record-breaking 12 weeks at number one on the Billboard Hot R&B Singles chart. Subsequent hit singles: "Your Body's Callin'" (U.S. Hot 100: #13, U.S. R&B: #2) and "Sex Me" (U.S. Hot 100: #20, U.S. R&B: #8). Both singles sold 500,000 copies in the United States and were certified Gold by the RIAA. In 1994, 12 Play was certified Gold by the RIAA, eventually going six times platinum. In 1994, Kelly established himself as a leading producer by producing songs for various artists, including Aaliyah, Janet Jackson, and Changing Faces. He co-headlined a tour with Salt-N-Pepa and headlined the Budweiser Superfest tour. In 1995, Kelly garnered his first Grammy nominations; two for writing, producing, and composing Michael Jackson's last number-one hit, "You Are Not Alone". Kelly's success continued with the November 14, 1995, release of R. Kelly, his eponymous second studio album. Critics praised him for his departure from salacious bedroom songs to embracing vulnerability. New York Times contributor Stephen Holden described Kelly as "The reigning king of pop-soul sex talks a lot tougher than Barry White, the father of such fluffed-up pillow talks and along with Marvin Gaye and Donny Hathaway, [both] major influences for Kelly." In December 1995, Professor Michael Eric Dyson critiqued Kelly's self-titled album "R. Kelly" for VIBE. Dyson described Kelly's growth from the 12 Play album: "Kelly reshapes his personal turmoil to artistic benefit" and noted that Kelly is "reborn before our very own ears". The album reached number one on the Billboard 200 chart, becoming Kelly's first number one album on the chart, and reached number one on the R&B album charts; his second. The R. Kelly album spawned three platinum hit singles: "You Remind Me of Something" (U.S. Hot 100: #4, U.S. R&B: #1), "I Can't Sleep Baby (If I)" (U.S. Hot 100: #5, U.S. R&B: #1), and "Down Low (Nobody Has To Know)" (U.S. Hot 100: #4, U.S. R&B: #1); a duet with Ronald Isley. Kelly's self-titled album sold four million copies, receiving 4× platinum certification from the RIAA. He promoted the album with a 50-city "Down Low Top Secret Tour" with LL Cool J, Xscape, and Solo. On November 26, 1996, Kelly released "I Believe I Can Fly", an inspirational song originally released on the soundtrack for the film Space Jam. "I Believe I Can Fly" reached No. 2 on the Billboard Hot 100, and No. 1 on the UK charts for three weeks and won three Grammy Awards in 1998. In that same year, he contributed to "Freak Tonight" for the A Thin Line Between Love and Hate soundtrack. In 1997, Kelly signed a contract to play professional basketball with the Atlantic City Seagulls of the USBL. He wore the number 12 in honor of his album 12 Play. Kelly said "I love basketball enough to not totally let go of my music, but just put it to the side for a minute and fulfill some dreams of mine that I've had for a long time." Kelly's USBL contract contained a clause that would allow him to fulfill a music obligation when necessary. "If Whitney Houston needs a song written", said Ken Gross, the Seagulls owner who signed Kelly, "he would be able to leave the team to do that and come back". "It wasn't a gimmick", Gross continued, "he's a ballplayer. He can play." In the same year, Kelly collaborated with American rapper The Notorious B.I.G. for the song "Fuck You Tonight" on the posthumous album Life After Death. In 1998, he launched his own label, Rockland Records, in a distribution deal with Jimmy Iovine's Interscope Records. The label's roster included artists Sparkle, Boo & Gotti, Talent, Vegas Cats, Lady, Frankie, Secret Weapon, and Rebecca F. That May, Sparkle, Rockland's first signed artist, released her eponymous debut album. In addition to producing and writing the project, Kelly made vocal contribution to the hit duet "Be Careful", which became a serious factor as to why the album was certified platinum in December 2000. On November 17, 1998, Kelly released his fourth studio and first double album, R. Musically, the album spans different genres from pop (Celine Dion), street rap (Nas and Jay-Z) to Blues ("Suicide"). Dave Hoekstra of the Los Angeles Times described the album as "easily the most ambitious project of his career". In the summer of 1999, he wrote and produced a majority of the soundtrack to the Martin Lawrence and Eddie Murphy film, Life, which features tracks from K-Ci & JoJo, Maxwell, Mýa, and Destiny's Child, among others. The soundtrack was also released on the Rockland imprint. In early 2000, Kelly received multiple awards reflecting his status as an established R&B superstar. In January 2000, he won Favorite Male Soul/R&B Artist at the American Music Awards and, in February, was nominated for several Grammy Awards, including Best Male R&B Vocal Performance ("When a Woman's Fed Up"), Best R&B Album (R.), and Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group ("Satisfy You") with P. Diddy. On November 7, 2000, he released his fifth studio album, TP-2.com, a project aligned with his breakthrough album, 12 Play. Unlike R., all songs on TP-2.com were written, arranged, and produced by Kelly. AllMusic's Jason Birchmeier gave TP-2.com 4 stars and stated: "Kelly knows how to take proven formulas and funnel them through his own stylistic aesthetic, which usually means slowing down the tempo, laying on lush choruses of strings and background vocals, taming down the lyrics for radio, and catering his pitch primarily to wistful women. In 2001, Kelly won the Outstanding Achievement Award at the Music of Black Origin or MOBO Awards and Billboard magazine ranked TP-2.com number 94 on the magazine's Top 200 Albums of the Decade. Kelly's song, "The World's Greatest", from the soundtrack to the 2001 autobiographical film, Ali, was a hit. On January 24, 2002, at a press conference announcing the completion of Kelly and Jay-Z's first collaborative album, The Best of Both Worlds, celebrities such as Johnnie Cochran, Russell Simmons, Luther Vandross, and Sean Combs praised the album, with Jay-Z stating that he hoped the collaboration represents "more unity for black people on a whole". MTV's Shaheem Reid wrote: "And if Jay and Kelly can put their egos to the side long enough to wrap up and promote their album, then their labels—Def Jam and Jive, respectively—can surely figure out a way to join forces and make cheddar together." On February 8, 2002, Kelly performed at the closing ceremony of the 2002 Winter Olympics, a week after a news scandal broke of a sex tape that appeared to show Kelly with an underage girl. Following a leak of the joint album on February 22, 2002, Roc-A-Fella and Jive moved the release date one week earlier in an effort to curtail piracy. Jay-Z expressed frustration about the album leak to MTV News, describing the event as both a "gift" and a "curse." Upon release on March 19, 2002, The Best of Both Worlds sold 285,000 copies in its opening week and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. It was a critical and commercial disappointment. In May 2002, six months prior to the scheduled release of Kelly's sixth studio album, Loveland, a bootleg copy containing 15 tracks had been leaked. In response, Kelly began work on the album now known as Chocolate Factory, opting to release Loveland as a deluxe edition bonus disc. In October of that year, Kelly released "Ignition (Remix)", the lead single from his upcoming album. It would spend 42 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number two. On February 18, 2003, Kelly released Chocolate Factory, which debuted as the number one album on the Billboard 200. It sold 532,000 copies in its first week. The album was met with critical acclaim, and supported by two more singles. "Snake", the albums second single, was followed by "Step in the Name of Love (Remix)", which charted for 70 weeks, reaching number one on the R&B/Hip-hop airplay charts. Later that year, in September, Kelly's first greatest hits album, The R. in R&B Collection, Vol. 1, was released which included "Thoia Thoing" and two other previously unreleased songs. Between mid-2003 and early 2004, Kelly began work on a double CD album, one with "happy" tracks and another with "inspirational" tracks. The double album, Happy People/U Saved Me, was released on August 24, 2004. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, with first week sales of 264,000 copies. Both of the album's titled tracks respectively performed underwhelmingly; "Happy People" charted at number twenty-nine on the Adult R&B song chart while "U Saved Me" peaked at number fifty-two on the Billboard Hot 100. Two months later, Kelly and Jay-Z reunited to release their second collaborative album, Unfinished Business. The album received criticism and, as with the pair's previous collaboration, it was also a commercial failure, despite debuting at number one on the Billboard 200. Album promotion and its Best of Both Worlds tour were both plagued by tension between the stars, with Kelly reportedly showing up late or not at all to gigs. Kelly complained that the touring lights were not directed towards him and allegedly assaulted the tour's lighting director. Jay-Z eventually removed Kelly halfway through the tour, after a member of Jay-Z's entourage pepper sprayed Kelly on October 29, 2004. Tyran "Ty Ty" Smith was charged with assault, but took a plea deal for disorderly conduct. Kelly bounced back commercially after appearing on Ja Rule's single, "Wonderful" alongside Ashanti. The song charted at number five on the Billboard Hot 100, topped the UK Singles Chart and went platinum in the summer of 2005. After finishing Happy People/U Saved Me and Unfinished Business in 2004, Kelly released TP.3 Reloaded in July 2005. It became Kelly's fifth consecutive number-one album in his career. TP.3 Reloaded was heavily cross-promoted alongside the first five chapters of Kelly's musical serial, the "hip hopera" Trapped in the Closet. In December 2006, Kelly built momentum for his eighth solo studio album, Double Up, after guest-appearing on Bow Wow's "I'm a Flirt". Three months later, Kelly's remix of "I'm a Flirt" was released, but instead of Bow Wow, it featured T.I. and T-Pain. On May 29, 2007, the album was released. It became Kelly's sixth and final album in his career to chart at number one on the Billboard 200. Kelly's other singles from Double Up titled "Same Girl" was a duet of Kelly and Usher, while "Rise Up" was a tribute to the victims of the Virginia Tech shooting that occurred earlier that year in April, a month before the album was released. The song was previously released as a digital download on May 15, 2007. Proceeds were donated to the Hokie Spirit Memorial Fund to help family members of the victims of the shootings. Kelly began his Double Up tour with Ne-Yo, Keyshia Cole and J. Holiday opening for him. One week into the tour, promoter Leonard Rowe had Ne-Yo removed from the tour because of a contract dispute. However, Ne-Yo alleges that the reason for the dropout was because Ne-Yo believes he received a better response from critics and fans. Ne-Yo won a lawsuit that he filed against Rowe Entertainment in 2008. Kelly was not mentioned in the lawsuit. In December 2007, Kelly failed to appear at another preliminary court hearing on his case due to his tour bus being held up in Utah. The judge threatened to revoke Kelly's bond, but eventually decided against it. In 2008, Kelly released a rap track titled "I'm a Beast" in which he coarsely attacked his detractors, yet did not name the subjects of the song. In 2008, before and after being acquitted on charges of producing child sexual abuse material, Billboard reported that Kelly had plans to release his newest album titled 12 Play: Fourth Quarter in the summer of that year but the album was postponed. Billboard named Kelly among the most successful artists ever for its 50th Anniversary List. In the spring, the promotional single "Hair Braider", peaked at No. 56 on Billboard's R&B chart. On July 28, the entire album leaked online, causing the title to be scrapped. In February 2009, Kelly announced that he was working on a new album called Untitled with a projected release date of September 29, but it had been delayed to December. In June 2009, he released his first mixtape, The "Demo" Tape, presented by DJ Skee and DJ Drama. Kelly headlined the Arise African Fashion Awards in Johannesburg, South Africa, on June 20, 2009. He performed in Cape Town, followed by Nigeria as part of the annual ThisDay music and fashion festival in July. That same month, he released "Number One", featuring singer-songwriter Keri Hilson. Then, on December 1, Kelly's untitled ninth solo album was released. It charted on the Billboard 200 at number four. More singles from the album include "Echo", "Supaman High" and "Be My #2". In January 2010, Kelly performed in Kampala, Uganda. "I'm very excited about my first visit to Africa, I've dreamed about this for a long time and it's finally here", Kelly said in a statement. "It will be one of the highlights of not only my career but my life. I can't wait to perform in front of my fans in Africa—who have been some of the best in the world." Kelly performed at the 2010 FIFA World Cup opening ceremony on June 11, 2010. In an interview in the September 2010 issue of XXL magazine, Kelly said he was working on three new albums (Epic, Love Letter, and Zodiac) which he described as "remixing himself". Epic, a compilation filled with powerful ballads including "The World's Greatest" and "Sign of a Victory", only saw a European release on September 21, 2010. However, it is also available for streaming worldwide. In November 2010, Kelly collaborated with several African musicians forming a supergroup known as One8. The group featured 2Face from Nigeria, Ali Kiba from Tanzania, Congolese singer Fally Ipupa, 4X4 from Ghana, hip-hop artist Movaizhaleine from Gabon, Zambia's JK, Ugandan hip-hop star Navio and Kenya's Amani, the only female in the group. The first release from the group was "Hands Across the World" written and produced by Kelly. Kelly's tenth album Love Letter, released on December 14, 2010, included 15 songs, one of which was Kelly singing "You Are Not Alone", a track Kelly originally wrote for Michael Jackson. The first single "When a Woman Loves" was nominated for a Grammy for Best Traditional R&B Vocal Performance at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards. At the 2011 Pre-Grammy Gala in Los Angeles, Kelly performed a medley of hits, and, in March 2011, Kelly was named the No. 1 R&B artist of the last 25 years by Billboard. On July 19, 2011, Kelly was admitted to the Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago to undergo emergency throat surgery to drain an abscess on one of his tonsils, and was released on July 21, 2011. He canceled his performance at the Reggae Sumfest in Jamaica that was scheduled for the following Friday. Johnny Gourzong, Sumfest Productions executive director, commented, "We are truly going to miss his presence on the festival." On September 23, 2011, Variety confirmed that Kelly had signed on to write original music for the Sparkle soundtrack. In 2011, Kelly worked with writer David Ritz on an autobiography entitled Soulacoaster: The Diary of Me, which was later released in the summer of 2012. On October 7, 2011, after Sony's RCA Music Group announced the consolidation of Jive, Arista and J Records into RCA Records, Kelly was set to release music under the RCA brand. Following his throat surgery, Kelly released "Shut Up" to generally favorable reviews: Spin magazine said, "Kelly taking aim at the haters who said "he's washed up, he's lost it." He hasn't. Dude's voice is in prime smooth R&B form". On December 21, 2011, Kelly made a live appearance on The X Factor and gave his first performance after the surgery. Kelly revealed to Rolling Stone that he felt like he was "just starting out" and how the performance was a "wake up call" for him. In 2012, Kelly made a series of announcements including a follow-up to the Love Letter album titled Write Me Back, which was released on June 26 to little fanfare, as well as a third installment of Trapped in the Closet and The Single Ladies Tour featuring R&B singer, Tamia. In February 2012, Kelly performed "I Look to You", a song he wrote for Whitney Houston, at Houston's homegoing. During 2013, Kelly continued his "The Single Ladies Tour". He performed at music festivals across North America, including Bonnaroo, Pitchfork, and Macy's Music Festival. On June 30, 2013, R. Kelly performed live at BET Awards Show singing hits as well as his new track "My Story" featuring Atlanta rapper 2 Chainz. The song was the lead single for Kelly's twelfth studio album Black Panties. released on December 10, 2013. Writing for New York magazine, David Marchese stated that Black Panties "was like a dare to the world: After all that he'd been accused of, after avoiding conviction, could R. Kelly still get away with making sex-obsessed music?" In 2013, Kelly collaborated with several artists including Celine Dion, Mariah Carey, Mary J. Blige, and Jennifer Hudson. In an interview with Global Grind in November, he described follow up work with Celine Dion after their number one single "I'm Your Angel" from 1998. Kelly worked with singer Mariah Carey for her album "The Art of Letting Go". Kelly co-wrote and sang on Lady Gaga's song "Do What U Want" from her 2013 album Artpop, performing the duet with her on Saturday Night Live on November 16, 2013, and at the 2013 American Music Awards. "Do What U Want" had since been removed from streaming services and re-releases of Gaga's Artpop album following sexual misconduct allegations against Kelly in early 2019. He also collaborated with Birdman and Lil Wayne on "We Been On", a single from the Cash Money Records compilation, Rich Gang. He also appeared on Twista's first single on his new album "Dark Horse". On November 17, 2013, Kelly and Justin Bieber debuted a collaboration entitled "PYD". Kelly was featured on the soundtrack album of the film The Best Man Holiday with his song "Christmas, I'll Be Steppin'". Kelly stated his intention to tour with R&B singer Mary J. Blige on "The King & Queen Tour" prior to the Black Panties Tour while continuing to create segments of the hip hopera Trapped in the Closet. In July 2014, Kelly announced that he was working on a house music album. In November 2015, Kelly released "Switch Up" featuring fellow Chicagoan Jeremih and Lil Wayne, followed by "Wake Up Everybody", "Marching Band" and "Backyard Party". The following month, the album containing those singles, The Buffet, was released. It charted poorly on the Billboard 200 at number sixteen with first-week sales of 39,000 album-equivalent copies. During November 2015, R. Kelly released a song with Ty Dolla $ign called "Actress" off the album Free TC. The following year, after a two-and-a-half-year delay, Kelly presented his only Christmas album, also his fourteenth and final studio album in his career thus far, 12 Nights of Christmas, which was released on October 21, 2016. On March 17, Pitbull released the song "Dedicated" off his album Climate Change and features guest appearances from American singers R. Kelly and Austin Mahone. Kelly released the 19-minute-long "I Admit" on SoundCloud on July 23, 2018, as a response to his accusers. The song does not contain any criminal admissions despite its title and chorus, which repeats the lyric "I admit it, I did it". In "I Admit", Kelly denies allegations of domestic violence and pedophilia, asserting that they are matters of opinion. Kelly also denounces Jim DeRogatis and repudiates his investigative report's claim of Kelly operating a "sex cult". Addressing the Mute R. Kelly social media campaign, Kelly sings, "only God can mute me". The song was criticized by reviewers, who described it as an act of trolling. Many outlets compared the song to that of his "Heaven I Need a Hug" extended version, Trapped in the Closet opera, "I Believe I Can Fly" concert remix, and O. J. Simpson's autobiographical novel If I Did It. Andrea Kelly and Carey Killa Kelly (R. Kelly's ex-wife and brother, respectively) responded to "I Admit" with songs that contain additional allegations against R. Kelly. An album credited to Kelly titled I Admit It after and including the 19-minute song from 2018 was released on streaming services on December 9, 2022, but was taken down after it was not approved by Sony or R. Kelly's team. The album was credited to Sony's Legacy Recordings but actually uploaded by Real Talk Entertainment, who had released the album through a sub-label also named Legacy Recordings. This resulted in the credited distributor, Universal Music Group–owned Ingrooves, cutting ties with Real Talk Entertainment. Kelly's music took root in R&B, hip hop and soul. He was influenced by listening to his mother, Joanne Kelly, sing. She played records by Stevie Wonder, Donny Hathaway and Marvin Gaye, inspirations for Kelly. In reference to Hathaway, Kelly stated: "A guy like Donny Hathaway had a focused, sexual texture in his voice that I always wanted in mine. He had smooth, soulful tones, but he was spiritual at the same time. In his autobiography, Kelly stated that he was heavily influenced by Marvin Gaye's R&B Lothario image. "I had to make a 'baby-makin'' album. If Marvin Gaye did it, I wanted to do it", Kelly said. While Kelly created a smooth, professional mixture of hip-hop beats, soulman crooning and funk, the most distinctive element of his music is its explicit sensuality. "Sex Me", "Bump n' Grind", "Your Body's Callin'", and "Feelin' on Yo Booty" are considered to be examples, as their productions were seductive enough to sell such blatant come-ons. Kelly's crossover appeal was also sustained by his development of a flair for pop balladry. Writing for the New York Daily News in 1997, Nunyo Demasio stated "With a voice that easily shifts from booming baritone to seductive alto, Kelly has gained international celebrity by combining streetwise rhythms with sexually explicit lyrics." Love and sex are the topics of the majority of Kelly's lyrical content, although he has written about a wide variety of themes such as inspiration and spirituality. Chicago Sun-Times reporters Jim DeRogatis and Abdon Pallasch observed about the contrasting themes: "... the image he liked to project was that of the "R&B Thug"... bringing the streetwise persona of the gangsta rapper into the more polite world of R&B." Kelly expressed that he writes from everyday experiences and prides himself on being versatile. Larry Khan, senior vice president of Jive's urban marketing and promotion, said that Kelly's musical compass is second to none. DeRogatis and Pallasch reported that at concerts where Kelly would go from singing "Like a Real Freak" to "I Wish": "Many fans found these abrupt shifts between the transcendent and the venal, the inspirational and the X-rated jarring." Kelly is considered to be one of the most successful R&B artists since the mid-1980s. He is also one of the bestselling music artists in the United States, with over 30 million albums sold, as well as only the fifth black artist to enter the top 50 of the same list. Rolling Stone magazine called him "arguably the most important R&B figure of the 1990s and 2000s". Music executive Barry Weiss described Kelly as "the modern-day Prince, although there's a bit of Marvin Gaye in him, and a bit of Irving Berlin". R. Kelly has also been compared to artists like Sam Cooke and Bobby Brown. In addition to his solo and collaboration success, Kelly has also written and produced several hit songs, such as "Age Ain't Nothing but a Number" for Aaliyah, "Fortunate" for Maxwell, "You Are Not Alone" for Michael Jackson, "G.H.E.T.T.O.U.T." for Changing Faces, "Bump, Bump, Bump" for B2K, and many more. Kelly has received and been nominated for multiple awards, as a songwriter, producer, and singer. He won three Grammy Awards for his song "I Believe I Can Fly": Best Male R&B Vocal Performance, Best Rhythm and Blues Song, and Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television. After Kelly's federal conviction in New York, The Recording Academy stated in 2021 they wouldn't strip Kelly of his awards despite his "disturbing" actions. Kelly was given a key to the city of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, in 2013 as "an artist whose music brings generations together". On September 30, 2021, following his New York conviction of multiple sex crimes, the key was rescinded. Kelly has repeatedly faced allegations of sexual abuse that have resulted in multiple civil suits and criminal trials, activities culminating in a 2021 conviction for violations of the Mann Act and Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. Defenders of Kelly maintained that he was merely a "playboy" and a "sex symbol." Judge Ann Donnelly, who presided over Kelly's 2021 trial, summarized Kelly's actions as having "[used] his fame and organization to lure young people into abusive sexual relationships—a racketeering enterprise that the government alleged spanned about 25 years." A civil suit filed in 1996 by Tiffany Hawkins alleged that, starting in 1991 when she was age 15, Kelly, aged 24, had sexual relations with her, and encouraged her to entice underaged friends. Hawkins' allegations included attempts by Kelly to coerce her into engaging in group sex with her friends. In 1998, Kelly settled the lawsuit with Hawkins for $250,000. In December 2000, the Chicago Sun-Times first reported that police had made two investigations that Kelly was having sex with an underage female but had to drop the investigations due to lack of cooperation by the accusers. In 1991, Barry Hankerson introduced his niece Aaliyah to Kelly when she was 12 years old. "I saw her as a star the minute I heard her sing and dance," Kelly said. A witness later testified that Kelly had sexual contact with Aaliyah starting when she was "13 or 14 years old." Kelly wrote and produced Aaliyah's debut album, Age Ain't Nothing but a Number, which was released in May 1994. On August 31, 1994, Kelly, then 27, married Aaliyah, then 15, in a secret ceremony at Sheraton Gateway Suites in Rosemont, Illinois. Reportedly, Kelly married Aaliyah after he found out she was pregnant. Their marriage certificate was published in the Dec. 1994 / Jan. 1995 issue of Vibe magazine. Their marriage was annulled in February 1995 at the behest of Aaliyah's family by a Michigan judge. In May 1997, Aaliyah filed a lawsuit in Cook County to have the marriage record expunged, stating that she was underage at the time of marriage, had lied by signing the marriage certificate as an 18-year-old, and that she could not legally enter into marriage without parental consent. Kelly and Aaliyah both denied that their relationship had moved beyond friendship. In 2016, Kelly told GQ magazine: "Well, because of Aaliyah's passing ... I will never have that conversation with anyone. Out of respect for Aaliyah, and her mother and father who has asked me not to personally. But I can tell you I loved her, I can tell you she loved me, we was very close. We were, you know, best best best best friends." In 2019, federal prosecutors in the state of New York charged Kelly with bribery related to the 1994 purchase of a fake identification card for Aaliyah in order to obtain a marriage license. Kelly's former tour manager, Demetrius Smith, testified that he facilitated the wedding by obtaining falsified identification for Aaliyah, which listed her as 18 years old. Kelly, through his lawyers, admitted in 2021 to having had "underage sexual contact" with Aaliyah. On February 3, 2002, a video began circulating allegedly depicting Kelly's sexual abuse of a girl known to be underage. The abuse included Kelly urinating on her. The video was released by an unknown source and sent to the Chicago Sun-Times. The publisher broke the story on February 8, 2002, the same day Kelly performed at the opening ceremony of the 2002 Winter Olympics. Kelly has said in interviews that he was not the man in the video. In June 2002, Kelly was indicted in Chicago on 21 counts of child pornography. That same month on June 5, 2002, Kelly was arrested by the Miami Police Department on a Chicago arrest warrant at his Florida vacation home. He was released after one night in jail, the following day after posting bail of $750,000. While investigating the photographs reported in the Chicago Sun-Times, Polk County Sheriff's Office conducted a search of Kelly's residence in Davenport, Florida. During the search, officers recovered 12 images of an alleged underage girl on a digital camera – wrapped in a towel in a duffel bag – which allegedly depicted Kelly "involved in sexual conduct with the female minor". According to the Chicago Sun-Times, the girl in the images obtained from Kelly's Florida home also appears in the videotape; which got Kelly indicted in Chicago. Police investigators from Polk County and Miami-Dade County arrested Kelly on January 22, 2003, at Miami's Wyndham Grand Bay Hotel for 12 counts of possession of child pornography. Kelly posted bail of $12,000 bond and was released three hours later from Miami-Dade county jail. In March 2004, these charges were dropped due to a lack of probable cause for the search warrants. The alleged victim refused to testify at the trial, and a Chicago jury found Kelly not guilty on all 14 counts of child pornography in June 2008. Kelly's own defense lawyer, Ed Genson, later questioned the acquittal and Kelly's public proclamations of innocence. In a divorce court filing unsealed in 2020, Kelly's ex-wife Andrea Lee claimed Kelly was accused of molesting a preteen girl in 2009. In December 2015, Kelly appeared on Huffington Post Live in an interview with journalist Caroline Modarressy-Tehrani. The interview was conducted so that he could promote the release of his thirteenth solo album, The Buffet. During the interview, Modarressy-Tehrani quizzed Kelly about the sexual abuse allegations being leveled against him and wanted to gauge his reaction. This resulted in Kelly repeatedly refusing to answer and walking out of the interview. Following Kelly's New York conviction in late-September 2021, Modarressy-Tehrani tweeted: "Now, with this verdict, hopefully, his survivors get some peace and feel this justice." Jim DeRogatis reported for BuzzFeed News on July 17, 2017, that Kelly was accused by three sets of parents of holding their daughters in an "abusive cult". Kelly and the alleged victims denied the allegations. In March 2018, BBC World Service aired a documentary entitled R Kelly: Sex, Girls and Videotapes presented by reporter Ben Zand that explored the 2017 allegations. This was followed up in May with the BBC Three documentary R Kelly: The Sex Scandal Continues, which included interviews with the Savage family. Kelly was again accused of misconduct on April 17, 2018, by a former partner of his who claimed that Kelly "intentionally" infected her with a sexually transmitted infection. A representative for Kelly stated that he "categorically denies all claims and allegations". In a January 2019 BBC News article, a woman named Asante McGee whom Kelly had met in 2014 and taken to live with him some months later, said that she lived with not only Kelly alone, but with other women. She said: "He controlled every aspect of my life, while I lived with him." McGee later moved out on her own accord. In May 2018, the Women of Color branch of the Time's Up movement called for a boycott of Kelly's music and performances over the many allegations against him. The boycott was accompanied by a social media campaign called Mute R. Kelly. In response, his management said that Kelly supports the movement in principle, but targeting him was "the attempted lynching of a black man who has made extraordinary contributions to our culture". Music streaming service Spotify announced on May 10, 2018, that it was going to stop promoting or recommending music by Kelly and XXXTentacion, stating, "We don't censor content because of an artist's or creator's behavior, but we want our editorial decisions—what we choose to program—to reflect our values." Two days later, Apple Music and Pandora also announced that they would cease to feature or promote Kelly's music. Spotify was criticized by members of the music industry with concerns the decision would create a "slippery slope" of muting artists accused of criminal activity. Spotify ultimately reversed this decision, following initial backlash including that of Top Dawg Entertainment, which threatened to remove its musical catalog from the streaming service. In early-January 2019, Kelly was dropped from RCA Records following the airing of Surviving R. Kelly, which detailed numerous sexual assault allegations against the singer for decades. A number of musicians who collaborated with Kelly expressed regret for working with him, including Celine Dion ("I'm Your Angel"), Nick Cannon ("Gigolo"), Chance the Rapper ("Somewhere in Paradise"), Lady Gaga ("Do What U Want"), and Jennifer Hudson ("It's Your World"). Some went the extent of having streaming services remove their own songs that feature his vocals or credit him for songwriting or production. As of October 2021, following his New York conviction, Kelly's YouTube channel was terminated, but his catalog remained available on YouTube Music. In May 2018, The Washington Post reporter Geoff Edgers wrote "The Star Treatment", a lengthy article alleging music industry executives' willful blindness to Kelly's sexually abusive behavior toward underage girls. Edgers reported that as early as 1994, Kelly's tour manager urged Jive Records founder Clive Calder to tell Kelly he would not release the singer's records if he continued to have "incidents" with young women and minors after every concert he gave. Calder told the Post that he regretted not having done more at the time, saying "Clearly, we missed something." Former Jive president Barry Weiss told the newspaper that during twenty years with the label he never concerned himself with Kelly's private life and was unaware of two lawsuits filed against Kelly and the label by young women alleging sexual misconduct while they were minors. Jive Records had, in fact, successfully argued it was not liable. Larry Khan, another Jive executive who worked closely with the singer even after viewing the sex tape, likewise implied it was not the label's responsibility, and pointed to Chuck Berry and Jerry Lee Lewis as musicians whose labels continued to release and promote their records despite public awareness that they were involved with underage girls. According to the Post, executives at Epic Records also took a similarly relaxed attitude towards allegations of Kelly's sexual misconduct. In 2002, after Kelly signed with the label, executive David McPherson allegedly avoided viewing a copy of a tape purportedly showing the singer having sex with an underage girl; he simultaneously warned Kelly's assistant that if it turned out to be Kelly on that tape, the label would drop him. McPherson did not respond to the Post's requests for comment. An intern with the label whose work suffered after she began a relationship with Kelly, ultimately costing her the position, settled with Epic for $250,000. Cathy Carroll, the executive she worked for, regularly rebuked her former subordinate for having an affair with a married man whenever the two met at social functions for years afterwards, and the damage to the woman's reputation led her to abandon her career in the music industry. Carroll told the newspaper the woman was "starstruck ... A lot of times it's not really the men." The Washington Post also suggested the labels were complicit in the sex-cult allegations from the previous summer's BuzzFeed piece. Employees at the studios where Kelly recorded were required to sign non-disclosure agreements and not enter certain rooms, which they said they believed were where Kelly made the young women and underage girls stay while he worked. Despite the agreements, the newspaper was able to publish screenshots of text exchanges where young women and underage girls in the rooms asked Kelly's assistants to let them out so they could go to the bathroom or get food. The newspaper also published pictures taken after Kelly had concluded a six-week session at a Los Angeles studio, paid for by his former record label, RCA Records, showing a cup of urine sitting on a piano and urine stains on the wooden floor of another room. In January 2019, Lifetime began airing a six-part documentary series titled Surviving R. Kelly detailing sexual abuse and misconduct allegations against Kelly. Writing for the Los Angeles Times, Loraine Ali observed that the series covered a range of in-depth interviews that "paint a picture of a predator whose behavior was consistently overlooked by the industry, his peers and the public while his spiritual hit was sung in churches and schools." Within two weeks, Kelly launched a Facebook page where he sought to discredit the accusers who appeared in the docuseries. Facebook removed the page for violating their standards as it appeared to contain personal contact information for his accusers. The second season titled Surviving R. Kelly Part II: The Reckoning premiered on January 2, 2020. Between January 2–3, 2023, the third and final season of Surviving R. Kelly (subtitled The Final Chapter) aired. It was confirmed on a December 14, 2022 trailer uploaded on Lifetime's YouTube account. Following airing of the Surviving R. Kelly documentary, Kelly was listed in Guinness World Records as the most searched for male musician on Google in 2019. He ranked 8th overall on Google's list of the 10 most search for people for the year. On March 6, 2019, Gayle King interviewed Kelly on CBS This Morning. Kelly insisted on his innocence and blamed social media for the allegations. During the interview, Kelly had an emotional outburst where he stood up, pounded his chest, and yelled. Asked by King about John Legend and Lady Gaga denouncing him, Kelly called them "not professional". The CBS This Morning segment also included two women whose parents claimed were brainwashed captives of Kelly. They described themselves as "girlfriends" of Kelly, defending and declaring their love for him, while also denouncing their parents. Afterward, King would debrief with colleagues on the recording on the segment. She recalled that a condition for recording the segment with the "girlfriends" was that Kelly would not be in the room with them. Kelly had nevertheless stayed nearby during the recording and, according to King, Kelly would "cough really loudly" to remind the women of his presence. On February 22, 2019, the Cook County State's Attorney's Office in Illinois charged Kelly with 10 counts of aggravated criminal sexual abuse. The charges allege that from 1998 to 2010, Kelly sexually abused four females, three of whom were teen minors at the time, with evidence including a video provided by Michael Avenatti of an alleged new crime. After Kelly turned himself in the day the charges were announced, he was arrested by the Chicago Police Department and taken into custody. The judge set bond at $1 million and ordered Kelly to have no contact with any minor under 18 or alleged victim. Kelly pleaded not guilty to all charges, which he called lies. He was released on bail after three nights at Cook County Jail. On January 30, 2023, the Cook County District Attorney's office announced that several Illinois-specific charges against Kelly had been dropped, due to "him already being served justice in extensive federal sentences", preventing him from facing more prison time for state-related charges. The first grand jury indictment from the Eastern District of New York was handed down June 20, 2019. On July 11, 2019, Kelly was arrested on federal charges alleging sex crimes and obstruction of justice by U.S. Homeland Security investigators and NYPD detectives in Chicago. A day later, following his re-arrest, federal prosecutors from New York and Chicago indicted Kelly on 18 charges, including child sexual exploitation, child pornography production, sex trafficking, kidnapping, forced labor, racketeering, and obstruction of justice. Following his re-arrest on the first superseding indictment, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York filed a letter in support of a permanent order of detention that previewed its case against Kelly, concluding that "preponderance of the evidence that the defendant's release poses a both a risk of flight and a risk of obstruction of justice". Kelly's first arraignment on the Eastern District case took place before a United States Magistrate Judge Steven Tiscione on August 2, 2019, where he pleaded not guilty. Judge Tiscione denied bail, on grounds of both dangerousness and flight risk. Kelly's lawyers made a request for pre-trial release October 2019 and were denied. His lawyers tried again to secure pre-trial release in 2020, citing the COVID-19 pandemic; the request was denied. Superseding indictments were filed in Chicago on February 13, 2020, and in New York on March 13, 2020, raising the total number of charges to 22. He was incarcerated at Metropolitan Correctional Center, Chicago from July 11, 2019, to June 23, 2021, when he was transferred to Metropolitan Detention Center, Brooklyn. On August 5, 2019, the State's Attorney Office in Hennepin County, Minnesota charged Kelly with soliciting a minor and prostitution. Prosecutors alleged that in July 2001, following a concert in Minneapolis, Kelly had invited a girl up to his hotel room and paid her $200 to remove her clothing and dance with him. The charges were however dropped on May 16, 2023, citing Kelly's federal convictions. Wikisource has original text related to this article: Superseding Indictment, United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly The United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York was the first federal court to indict Kelly; at the time, it was the only jurisdiction to take Kelly to trial following the charges filed in the wake of Surviving R. Kelly. Investigations continued with Kelly indicted, jailed and awaiting trial. Before trial, prosecutors previewed a growing body of evidence including evidence of bribes and recordings of threats. It was a month before trial that prosecutors first accused Kelly of abusing a male victim, an underaged boy he met at McDonald's, as pattern evidence in his trial. With Judge Ann Donnelly presiding, voir dire in United States v. Robert Sylvester Kelly was held August 9, 2021. The same day, Kelly's lawyers filed a last-second motion to dismiss charges related to his transmission of genital herpes to several of his victims; that Kelly knew of his infection and non-disclosure to his sexual partners is a criminal act under the Public Health Law of New York and was presented as a predicate act for the charge of racketeering as well as the violations of the Mann Act. Judge Donnelly denied the motion, releasing a written decision after the trial. The federal jury trial began on August 18, 2021, with opening statements by prosecution and defense lawyers. The first witness called was Jerhonda Pace, one of the subjects of Surviving R. Kelly whose identity is widely known. She was the first of any of Kelly's accusers to have ever testified against him in court. Pace testified that Kelly's abuse included slapping, choking, and raping her. On cross examination, Pace was asked about signing a statement that she had deceived Kelly about her age and replied that it was a condition of a settlement. In all, eleven witnesses at Kelly's trial accused him of abuse either sexual or physical, with some accusing him of both. Two accusers were men alleging Kelly had sexually abused them at ages 16 and 17; one ("Louis") had recruited the other ("Alex") and testified as a cooperating witness. In addition, eight employees of Kelly's staff testified, corroborating details of Kelly's modus operandi. Toward the end of the testimony on September 15, 2021, video corroborating accusers' accounts of abuse was shown to the jury, but not the public nor media. The videos were alluded to in later closing arguments as depicting Kelly delivering a painful spanking to one accuser, and a lengthy recording in which Kelly demanded acts of coprophagia and urophagia to humiliate another accuser. As the jury deliberated, the press were allowed to listen to the audio portions to fulfill obligations of access to evidence; accounts confirm that Kelly and his victim's voices are heard narrating the graphic acts of abuse of the latter recording. Months after the verdict, prosecutors disclosed that, following Kelly's orders, "[a]t least three women made videos of themselves eating feces and rubbing it over their bodies." After a six-week trial including two days of deliberations, on September 27, 2021, the jury returned a verdict of guilty on all nine counts of the verdict sheet. They include: One count of Racketeering (18 U.S.C. § 1962(c)). Eight Mann Act violations: Three counts of transportation across state lines for illegal sexual activity (18 U.S.C. § 2421(a)) Four counts coercion and enticement (18 U.S.C. § 2422(a)) One count of transportation of a minor (18 U.S.C. § 2423(a)). As described in a release by the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, the racketeering charge against Kelly specified the following predicate acts: Racketeering Act One – Bribery Kelly bribed a state employee to create an identification card for Jane Doe #1, then 15 years old, so that Kelly could marry Jane Doe #1 because he believed she was pregnant and therefore the marriage could keep him out of jail. Racketeering Acts Two, Seven and Ten – Sexual Exploitation of a Child – Jane Doe #2, Jane Doe #4 and Jane Doe #5 Kelly coerced Jane Doe #2, Jane Doe #4 and Jane Doe #5 to engage in sexually explicit conduct for the purpose of producing video recordings. Over the course of decades, he made these recordings, and other recordings of sexually explicit conduct, using VHS video cameras, Canon camcorders, iPhones and iPads. Racketeering Acts Six, Eleven and Thirteen – Forced Labor – Jane Doe #4, Jane Doe #5 and Jane Doe #6 Kelly used the threat of physical harm and physical restraint to ensure that his victims, including Jane Doe #4, Jane Doe #5 and Jane Doe #6, performed sexually at his command. As to Jane Doe #4, he slapped her, choked her and spat on her, before demanding she give him oral sex. As to Jane Doe #5, over a period of years, he spanked her, viciously assaulted her, confined her for periods of days and otherwise manipulated her, to ensure that she would perform for him sexually, including with other women and a man. As to Jane Doe #6, he forced her to give him oral sex. When he did that, there was a gun within Kelly's reach. Racketeering Acts Five and Nine – Mann Act Violations – Jane Doe #4 and Jane Doe #5 Between May 2009 and January 2010, Kelly regularly spoke with Jane Doe #4 over the telephone to arrange for Jane Doe #4 to come to his residence in Olympia Fields for the purpose of illegal sexual activity, which was illegal because Jane Doe #4 was too young to consent to sex in Illinois. Similarly, between September 2015 and October 2015, Kelly transported Jane Doe #5, who was then 17 years old, from New York City to Oakland, California for the purpose of illegal sexual activity, as she was too young to consent to sex in California. Racketeering Acts Eight, Thirteen and Fourteen – Mann Act Violations – Jane Doe #5 and Jane Doe #6 In April 2015, Kelly arranged for Jane Doe #5 to fly from her home in Orlando, Florida, to Los Angeles, California, for the purpose of illegal sexual activity, which was illegal because Kelly knew he had an incurable sexually transmitted disease ("STD") and did not inform Jane Doe #5 about the STD prior to engaging in sexual intercourse with her. In May of 2017 and again in February of 2018, Kelly arranged for Jane Doe #6 to fly from her home in San Antonio, Texas, to La Guardia Airport in Queens, New York, for the purpose of illegal sexual activity, which again was illegal because Kelly failed to disclose that he had an incurable STD and obtain Jane Doe #6's consent to engage in sexual intercourse under those circumstances. — United States Department of Justice, United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, "R. Kelly" Convicted of All Counts by a Federal Jury in Brooklyn United States District Judge Ann Donnelly ordered Kelly to be kept in custody at the Metropolitan Detention Center, Brooklyn to await sentencing. Kelly faced a sentencing range of 10 years to life in prison, and on June 29, 2022, was sentenced to spend 30 years behind bars. After the jury delivered their verdict, women's rights attorney Gloria Allred, who represented several victims, stated that Kelly was the worst sexual predator she had pursued in her 47-year career of practicing law. Writing for The New Yorker, longtime Kelly critic Jim DeRogatis asked, "how many more victims are there who we don't know about? This case involved twenty women and two men, but there are likely many more." DeRogatis noted that before the trial, prosecutors had told the judge they would call Susan E. Loggans, a Chicago attorney who had negotiated settlements on behalf of several accusers who testified in the criminal case. Loggans was never actually called to the stand. On October 29, 2021, Kelly retained the services of Jennifer Ann Bonjean, who has helped overturn rape convictions for Bill Cosby and a victim of Jon Burge. Kelly fired his other lawyers in January 2022. Kelly appealed the verdict for this case in April 2023. The sentencing process in the Eastern District of New York began with the presentation of the sealed Presentence Report (PSR) by the Office of Probation to the court on April 5, 2022. Kelly's defense lawyer Jennifer Bonjean lodged several objections to the report's description of Kelly's conduct. The opposing sides differed sharply in assessments of applicable sentence. Bonjean filed a defense sentencing memorandum arguing that the applicable sentence according to United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines would be 168–210 months imprisonment, and that Kelly should receive less prison time. Arguing for leniency, Bonjean also wrote that a minor victim of Kelly was "a sophisticated 16-year-old". In its own sentencing memorandum, prosecutors supported the application of several enhancements under Sentencing Guidelines, adding up to a sentence of 25 years-to-life imprisonment, and that "[g]iven the need for specific deterrence and incapacitation, the government respectfully submits that a shorter sentence would be insufficient to adequately protect the public." Kelly's defense submitted several exhibits of their own attesting to mitigating factors in a supplement to the sentencing memorandum. The exhibits were filed under seal. Following an unsealing and redaction process, the court revealed that factors Kelly's defense cited were his history of adverse childhood experiences, including sexual abuse by his sister and his illiteracy. Defense experts diagnosed Kelly with hypersexuality. In the first half of Kelly's sentencing date of June 29, 2022, seven women were permitted to address court with their victim impact statements. According to Rolling Stone journalists, Kelly refused to look at them. Judge Donnelly ended the day reportedly sentencing Kelly to 30 years imprisonment, admonishing his criminality as "calculated and carefully planned and regularly executed for almost 25 years". In her written judgment, Donnelly's sentence was apportioned as 30 years for the top charge of racketeering; 20 year sentences for three acts of Mann Act coercion and enticement; a 20-year sentence for one violation of the Mann Act transportation of a minor; and 10 years for three counts of Mann Act transportation across state lines for illegal sexual activity. These prison sentences will be served concurrently. Following Kelly's completing a prison sentence, Judge Donnelly ordered Kelly to serve 5 years of supervised release with conditions typical for sex offenders. In addition to prison time, Judge Donnelly levied a $100,000 fine plus a statutory $40,000 penalty under the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015. Contesting the assessments, attorney Jennifer Bonjean claimed that Kelly has lost his income and is indigent. Prosecutors countered that Kelly has secretly sold rights to his composition and lyrics royalties for $5 million. On September 28, 2022, Kelly was ordered to pay restitution of $300,000 to one of his victims, with potential for tens of thousands of dollars more to pay for another victim. According to Bonjean, Kelly was "devastated" by his sentence but would appeal. Following his sentencing, the Federal Bureau of Prisons placed Kelly under suicide watch. His legal team argued that the measures were unnecessary, punitive and cruel, because he was never suicidal nor had he ever even thought about suicide. However, prosecutors defended the placement, claiming it was for his own safety. On July 4, 2022, authorities removed Kelly from suicide watch. On July 13, 2022, Kelly transferred out of Metropolitan Detention Center, Brooklyn to Metropolitan Correctional Center, Chicago in anticipation of a trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. Parallel to Eastern District of New York prosecution, the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois in Chicago indicted Kelly alongside two alleged co-conspirators: his manager Derrel McDavid and his personal assistant Milton "June" Brown. All pled "not guilty". The case was tried before Judge Harry Leinenweber, and commenced on August 17, 2022. The final superseding indictment of Kelly and his co-conspirators charged him with the following: Counts One through Four: Production of child pornography (18 U.S.C. § 2251(a)) for four videos filmed with "Minor 1" between 1998 and 1999. Count Five: Conspiracy to defraud the United States (18 U.S.C. § 371) for various illegal acts from 2001 until 2015 to cover up offenses in the 2002 Cook County case. Counts Six through Eight: Receipt of child pornography (18 USC § 2252A(a)(2) and § 2252A(b)(1)) conspiracies to obtain videos of child sexual abuse to conceal them. Counts Nine through Thirteen: Child sex trafficking through coercion and enticement (18 U.S.C. § 2422(b)) of five unnamed victims (listed as Minors 1, 3, 4, 5, 6), for acts committed in the time span of 1996 through 2001. Jury selection began August 15, 2022. Over 100 potential jurors were interviewed over two days. The regular jury of twelve persons consisted of four white women, four black women, two white men, and two black men. On the first day of testimony, the jury heard from a witness who is allegedly depicted in the child sexual abuse material revealed in 2002. Now 37, the alleged victim was allowed by the court to testify under the pseudonym "Jane". She testified that Kelly groomed her for sexual abuse starting when she was 13 years of age, presenting himself as a benevolent "godfather". Jane also told the jury that Kelly induced her to recruit other girls for abuse. Speaking to efforts to thwart law enforcement, Jane told the court that Kelly sent her to travel to the Bahamas and Cancun to keep her away from law enforcement, and coaxed her to lie to a grand jury. Also testifying was an individual who purchased a home previously owned by Kelly. The interior was alleged to match the 2002 video. The individual noted that after his purchase, he discovered a bedroom contained a camera disguised as a smoke detector and a secured door requiring a button to be pressed to leave. On September 14, the jury found Kelly guilty on three of thirteen charges of production of child pornography and three charges of enticing a child, but acquitted him and his alleged co-conspirators of trial fixing related to his 2008 state child pornography trial. Stating a case for leniency in a sentencing memorandum, Kelly's attorneys made a number of technical arguments about the Chicago federal case, but concedes repeated sexual encounters with the testifying victims when they were underage. Arguing for mitigation, the memorandum includes a passage written by expert witness Dr. Renee Sorrentino arguing that Kelly is not a pedophile: I considered the diagnosis of Pedophilia given Mr. Kelly's alleged history of sexual contact with minors. The diagnosis of Pedophilia is used to refer to individuals who experience recurrent, intense, sexually arousing fantasies or sexual urges involving sexual activity with prepubescent child or children (generally age 13 years of younger). I rejected the diagnosis because Mr. Kelly does not report a history of sexual arousal to prepubescent individual and his sexual behavior has never involved prepubescent individuals. Dr. Sorrentino is co-author of a paper arguing for a distinction between pedophilia and ephebophilia, and using the term "minor-attracted person". The paper also cites research by the organization Virtuous Pedophiles. Use of the term in a criminal justice context is controversial. In their own sentencing memorandum, prosecutors requested a 300-month prison sentence, to be served consecutively to the sentence from the Eastern District of New York (in effect life imprisonment). Arguing that Kelly's criminal conduct in Illinois is separate from the conduct of his previous conviction in New York and severe, the memorandum states in its opening paragraph: Robert Kelly is a serial sexual predator who, over the course of many years, specifically targeted young girls and went to great lengths to conceal his abuse of Jane and other minor victims. To this day, and even following the jury verdict against him, Kelly refuses to accept responsibility for his crimes. To the contrary, Kelly brazenly blames his victims and argues that his abuse of 14, 15, and 16 year-old girls was justified because some of his victims as minors "wanted to pursue a romantic and sexual connection" with him and others remained in contact with him as adults. At the age of 56 years old, Kelly's lack of remorse and failure to grasp the gravity of his criminal conduct against children demonstrates that he poses a serious danger to society. Kelly goes so far as to insinuate that he—and not the young girls he abused—is the victim, because the federal government elected to prosecute him for egregious conduct that occurred throughout the United States for over 20 years. Kelly was sentenced in Chicago federal court on February 23, 2023. Judge Harry Leinenweber sentenced Kelly to 20 years: 19 concurrent to the 30-year sentence from New York and 1 year consecutively, effectively bringing his sentence to 31 years. On April 24, 2023, Kelly was transferred from the Metropolitan Correctional Center, Chicago to the Federal Correctional Complex, Butner in Butner, North Carolina. Other than the federal sex abuse cases, Kelly has been involved in several high-profile criminal cases and lawsuits. August 13, 1997: Kelly was found guilty of battery and placed on unsupervised probation for one year in Lafayette, Louisiana as a result of a July 1996 brawl which involved the singer and his entourage. One of the victims needed a total of 110 facial stitches. April 8, 1998: Kelly was arrested in Chicago on three misdemeanor charges of disorderly conduct, including one charge of violating noise ordinance for playing his music extremely loud from his car, during a test run. He was allegedly confrontational as he was arrested and placed into custody. The vehicle he was testing audio in was impounded and placed on a $500 daily recovery fee. Prosecutors from the district attorney's office dropped the first two charges on May 7, and the noise charge on July 22 that year. March 6, 2019: Kelly was taken to the Cook County Jail after failing to pay child support in the amount of $161,633 to his former wife, Andrea. Three days later, he was released after someone, whose identity was withheld, paid off the child support on his behalf. His lawyer says he could not discuss the payment due to a gag order. November 1, 2004: Kelly launched a $75 million lawsuit against former friend Jay-Z and several concert organizers and/or promoters for removing him from the Best of Both Worlds tour. The lawsuit for breach of contract, which sought $75 million in damages ($60 million in punitive damages and $15 million for lost income) was a result of not being able to tour. January 2005: Jay-Z countersued the singer, claiming Kelly showed erratic behavior including being late or absent attendances, vacating deadlines, and continued demands or requests that led to several cancellations and resulted in loss of gross. Kelly's lawyers challenged it as "inaccurate smears of [Mr. Kelly] that are utterly irrelevant to the issues of the case" but confirmed the rapper's refusal to continue work with Kelly after the Madison Square Garden incident and thus broke the contract. Jay-Z's counter suit was dismissed by a judge that May. November 2005: Kelly sued Jay-Z again, claiming that now Roc Nation executive Tyran "Ty Ty" Smith was awarded with the position of vice president at the artist and repertoire department of Def Jam Recordings (which Jay was president of at the time), as a result of the latter pepper-spraying Kelly on October 29, 2004. Kelly's mother, Joanne, died from cancer in 1993. He has given conflicting accounts of where he was during his mother's passing. His oldest daughter, JoAnn (b. 1998), was named after the singer's mother, but is also known as Buku Abi. In 1996, Kelly married Andrea Kelly (née Lee), his former backup dancer and mother of his three children, the aforementioned JoAnn, as well as Jaah (b. 2000), and Robert, Jr. (b. 2002). Andrea filed a restraining order against Kelly in September 2005 after a physical altercation, ultimately filing for divorce in 2006. In January 2009, their divorce was finalized after 13 years of marriage. In later years, Andrea accused Kelly of physical, verbal, and mental abuse, including in Surviving R. Kelly (2019). Kelly reportedly had a long relationship with gospel singer Deleon Richards in the 1990s. In 2005, a Chicago man was charged for attempting to extort Richards' husband, Gary Sheffield, by allegedly threatening to release a sex tape of Richards with an ex-boyfriend, reportedly Kelly. In January 2006, the man was sentenced to 27 months in prison. In April 2007, Kelly released the song "Rise Up" for Virginia Tech after the 2007 school shooting and donated the net proceeds to the families of the victims. In 2010, Kelly penned the song "Sign of a Victory" for the FIFA World Cup, with all proceeds benefiting African charities. On April 6, 2011, he performed at a charity event in Chicago benefiting Clara's House, a facility designed to build employment, housing, health care, and education in the projects of Chicago. In 2016, Kelly donated cases of water to the Flint water crisis. Studio albums 12 Play (1993) R. Kelly (1995) R. (1998) TP-2.com (2000) Chocolate Factory (2003) Happy People/U Saved Me (2004) TP.3 Reloaded (2005) Double Up (2007) Untitled (2009) Love Letter (2010) Write Me Back (2012) Black Panties (2013) The Buffet (2015) 12 Nights of Christmas (2016) Collaborative albums Born into the 90's (with Public Announcement) (1992) The Best of Both Worlds (with Jay-Z) (2002) Unfinished Business (with Jay-Z) (2004) Kelly toured extensively as a live musician. His concert tours included: 60653 Tour (w/ Public Announcement) (1993) The Very Necessary 12 Play Tour (with Salt-N-Pepa) (1994) The Down Low Top Secret Tour (with LL Cool J and Xscape) (1996) The Get Up on a Room Tour (with Kelly Price, Nas, Foxy Brown, and Deborah Cox) (1999) The TP-2.com Tour (with Sunshine Anderson and Syleena Johnson) (2001) The Key in the Ignition Tour (with Ashanti) (2003) The Best Of Both Worlds Tour (with Jay-Z) (2004) The Light It Up Tour (2006) The Double Up Tour (with J. Holiday and Keyshia Cole) (2007) The Ladies Make Some Noise Tour (with K. Michelle) (2009) Love Letter Tour (with Keyshia Cole and Marsha Ambrosius) (2011) The Single Ladies Tour (with Tamia) (2012–13) Black Panties Tour (2014–16) The Buffet Tour (2016) Soulacoaster: The Diary of Me (2012, autobiography) List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of Billboard number-one singles List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of songs recorded by R. Kelly List of songs written and produced by R. Kelly List of unreleased songs recorded by R. Kelly Shaggy defense Ian Watkins "R. Kelly convicted of racketeering and sex trafficking by a federal jury in New York". CNN. September 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. "R. Kelly, already serving 30 years for sex trafficking, sentenced to 20 years in federal child porn case". CNN. February 23, 2023. "U.S. prosecutors ask for 25 more years in prison for R. Kelly". NPR. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Jet. Johnson Publishing Company. December 28, 1998 – January 4, 1999. p. 56. Retrieved October 27, 2014 – via Google Books. Holden, Stephen (December 17, 1995). "Pop Briefs". The New York Times. Retrieved December 11, 2015. "Who Is The Pied Piper? The Mysterious Fairytale That Inspired R. Kelly". Oxygen Official Site. January 11, 2019. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Savage, Mark (February 24, 2023). "R. Kelly: The history of his crimes and allegations against him". bbc.com. BBC. Retrieved February 6, 2024. "R. Kelly". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Spotify joins the growing chorus to #MuteRKelly". Asia Pacific Daily. May 11, 2018. Archived from the original on May 15, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2018. "Top 90's R&B/Hip-Hop Artists". December 25, 1999 – January 1, 2000. Retrieved January 25, 2012. "Top Selling Artists - September 10, 2012". RIAA. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Date: November 18, 2010 9:19:22 PM (November 18, 2010). "Billboard Names R. Kelly The #1 R&B Artist Of Past 25 Years". Singersroom.com. Retrieved February 20, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "The Juice Presents Top 50 R&B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years — The Juice". Billboard.com. Retrieved February 20, 2011. "Music — News — R Kelly named best-selling R&B artist". Digital Spy. November 19, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2011. "R. Kelly". Cook County Clerk. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. "R. Kelly: Singer, Songwriter (1967–)". Biography.com. A&E Networks. January 4, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2019. DeRogatis, Jim (June 4, 2019). Soulless: The Case Against R. Kelly. New York City: Abrams Books. ISBN 9781683357629. "R Kelly's sisters from his father's side believe he was treated unfairly in sexual abuse trial". uk.style.yahoo.com. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Timeline of R. Kelly's life and career". Associated Press News. July 11, 2019. Archived from the original on March 16, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020. "'It's hard, it's hurtful': R. Kelly's sisters speak out amid sex-trafficking trial". PIX11. August 25, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. DeRogatis, Jim. "Timeline: The Life And Career Of R. Kelly". WBEZ. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Layne, Anni (April 9, 1998). "R. Kelly Arrested In Chicago | Music News". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. Ofori-Atta, Akoto (June 28, 2012). "10 Things Revealed in R. Kelly's Memoir". theroot.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2015. Soulacoaster: The Diary of Me. Hay House, Inc. 2012. ISBN 9781401931773. Retrieved October 13, 2014. "10 Things Revealed in R. Kelly's Memoir". The Root. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Heath, Chris (January 20, 2016). "The Confessions Of R. Kelly". GQ. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "R. Kelly's Brother Says He and Singer Were Molested by Older Sister". Ebony. January 9, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2021. Biswas, Shuvrajit Das (January 3, 2020). "Who Is Theresa Kelly? Where Is She Now?". The Cinemaholic. Retrieved October 24, 2021. Levin, Josh (June 13, 2008). "Long Live the Little Man Defense!". Slate. San Francisco. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "Kelly, R." eNotes.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Hoekstra, Dave (November 29, 1998). "The Righteous Brother: R. Kelly's ambitious album of genre-spanning songs finds influence from R&B predecessors such as Al Green and Donny Hathaway". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2011. Boucher, Geoff (June 15, 2002). "Chicago's Blues for R. Kelly". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 16, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020. McKinney, Jessica (July 23, 2018). "R. Kelly Opens Up About Sex Cult, Illiteracy And More On 19-Minute Track". Vibe. Retrieved October 24, 2021. Marchese, David (January 7, 2016). "The R. Kelly Problem". New York. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2021. He grew up poor and functionally illiterate — owing to dyslexia — on Chicago's South Side, raised mostly by his mother DeRogatis, Jim (June 3, 2019). "R. Kelly and the Damage Done". The New Yorker. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "30 for 30: Benji - Summary". Paley Center. Retrieved September 27, 2021. "Top 90's R&B/Hip-Hop Artists". Billboard. December 25, 1999 – January 1, 2000. Retrieved January 25, 2012. "R. Kelly". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "R. Kelly". Grammy.com. National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "R. Kelly Reveals". Jet. December 28, 1998 – January 4, 1999. p. 56. Retrieved October 27, 2014 – via Google Books. "BBC World News - R Kelly: Sex, Girls & Videotapes". BBC. 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Recognised as one of the most acclaimed RnB artists in the world, R Kelly has sold over 60 million albums globally and has been dubbed the "King of RnB". Despite his musical success there are multiple underlying rumours and accusations about the artist which paint a much darker picture. Ogunnaike, Lola (May 2002). "Caught in the Act". Vibe.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. . . . news broke of a self-made sex tape with a minor. Can the King of R&B withstand the heat? Heath, Chris (February 3, 2016). "Why R. Kelly Calls Himself "the Pied Piper of R&B"". GQ. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Music Stars Who Started in Groups You Never Heard Of". BET. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Brown, Jake (2004). Your Body's Calling Me: Music, Love, Sex & Money : the Life & Times of "Robert" R. Kelly. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 9780972751957. Smith, Danyel (January 4, 2019). "Revisit R. Kelly's Dec 1994/Jan 1995 Cover Story: SUPERFREAK". Vibe Magazine. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Klages, Karen E. (April 10, 1991). "THE $100,000 MEN". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. "Big Break Winners". Jet. March 25, 1991. p. 35. Smith, Danyel (December 1994). Superfreak. Vol. 2. Vibe Magazine. pp. 52–56. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "R. Kelly Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Reynolds, J.R. (December 10, 1994). "Career Milestones Keep Coming For Jive's Kelly". Billboard. Retrieved January 24, 2012. "RIAA –old & Platinum –. Kelly (album search results)". RIAA. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2009. "Terri Rossi's Rhythm Section". Billboard. June 11, 1994. p. 20. Macdonald, Patrick (September 30, 1994). "Hip-Hoppin' In The Dome -- R. Kelly Headlines A Star-Studded Card". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 11, 2023. "R. Kelly: What's next for the Grammy Award-winning Superstar". Johnson Publishing Company. June 8, 1998. Holden, Stephen (December 17, 1995). "Pop Briefs". The New York Times. New York. "R. Kelly (album) Review". December 1995. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Pareles, Jon (April 13, 1996). "MUSIC REVIEW;Invitations to Passion of a Certain Kind". The New York Times. New York. "R. Kelly Signs Pro Basketball Deal". MTV. May 19, 2000. Archived from the original on May 19, 2000. Retrieved June 29, 2022. "R. Kelly to Play Pro Basketball". E!. April 25, 1997. Retrieved February 20, 2011. Demasio, Nunyo (May 30, 1997). "A Shooting Star: R. Kelly Lights Up USBL's Seagulls." Archived July 23, 2013, at the Wayback Machine New York Daily News. Retrieved October 29, 2013. Hoekstra, Dave (November 29, 1998). "The Righteous Brother: R. Kelly's ambitious album of genre- spanning songs finds him updating the spiritually grounded R&B of such greats as Al Green and Donny Hathaway". Los Angeles Times. Chicago. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2012. Life After Death - The Notorious B.I.G. | Credits | AllMusic, retrieved March 16, 2023 Saidman, Sorelle. "R. Kelly's Secret Weapon Set To Debut". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 11, 2000. Retrieved October 27, 2014. Billboard. September 19, 1998. Retrieved October 27, 2014. "RIAA - Gold & Platinum Searchable Database - October 27, 2014". Riaa.com. Retrieved October 27, 2014. Hoekstra, Dave (November 29, 1998). "The Righteous Brother: R. Kelly's ambitious album of genre-spanning songs finds him updating the spiritually grounded R&B of such greats as Al Green and Donny Hathaway". Los Angeles Times. Chicago. "Feature: R. Kelly". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 29, 2000. Retrieved October 27, 2014. Brown, Jake (August 13, 2004). Your Body's Calling Me: Music, Love, Sex & Money : the Life & Times of "Robert" R. Kelly. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 9780972751957. Archived from the original on December 12, 2013 – via Google Books. Bogdanov, Vladimir (2003). All Music Guide to Soul: The Definitive Guide to R&B and Soul. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 9780879307448. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "Billboard - Music Charts, Music News, Artist Photo Gallery & Free Video". Billboard. Retrieved October 27, 2014. "R. Kelly Delivers His World Cup Anthem, Blows Minds". MTV. May 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Reid, Shaheem (January 24, 2002). "Jay-Z, R. Kelly Hype Joint LP With Hash Browns, Johnnie Cochran And A Pimp". MTV. Archived from the original on February 10, 2002. Retrieved July 20, 2017. DeRogatis, Jim (May 2002). "Tale of the Tape". Spin. pp. 86–88. Retrieved October 26, 2021. "Chicago Police investigate R. Kelly in sex tape". Chicago Sun-Times. February 8, 2002. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Reid, Shaheem (March 6, 2002). "Jay-Z Shoots New Video, Unsure If Clip With R. Kelly Will Come". MTV. Archived from the original on April 9, 2002. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Brown, Preezy (March 28, 2017). "How Good Was Jay-Z & R. Kelly's 'Best Of Both Worlds' Album?". VIBE.com. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Hochman, Steve (February 3, 2002). "'Best of Both Worlds' Is One Album Title That May Not Be Hyperbole". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Reid, Shaheem (May 21, 2002). "R. Kelly Vows To Clamp Down As New Bootleg Hits Streets". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2002. Bogdanov, Vladimir (2003). All Music Guide to Soul: The Definitive Guide to R&B and Soul. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 386. ISBN 978-0-87930-744-8. "The Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Boucher, Geoff (December 4, 2002). "R. Kelly's new album out next month". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Dansby, Andrew (February 26, 2003). "R. Kelly Bounces 50 Cent". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 3, 2022. "R. Kelly timeline". Chicago Tribune. March 18, 2004. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Miller, Liza (February 18, 2003). "R. Kelly's Chocolate Factory is Ten Years Old: A Look At Its Seminal "Ignition (Remix)"". River Front Times. Retrieved February 16, 2024. "R. Kelly Chart history". Billboard. March 30, 2004. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Henderson, Alex. "The R. in R&B Collection, Vol. 1 Review by Alex Henderson". AllMusic. Retrieved January 3, 2022. "McGraw's 'Live' Powers To No. 1". Billboard. September 1, 2004. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "22 Aug 2004, Page 66 - The Los Angeles Times at Newspapers.com". Newspapers.com. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "R Kelly - Happy People". Uncut. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Stewart, Allison (January 2, 2014). "Jay Z and R. Kelly: Chronicles of a feud". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 3, 2021. McDermott, Maeve (June 4, 2019). "'Soulless: The Case Against R. Kelly' reveals singer's abuse, ugly relationship with Jay-Z". USA Today. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Harris, Chris (April 25, 2006). "Jay-Z Associate Pleads Guilty In R. Kelly Pepper-Spray Case". MTV News. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Ja Rule Featuring R. Kelly & Ashanti - Wonderful". Critic Jonni. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Pareles, Jon (September 2, 2004). "Happy People/U Saved Me". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Hoard, Christian (July 18, 2005). "Tp.3 Reloaded". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "R. Kelly: TP.3 Reloaded, PopMatters". PopMatters. July 26, 2005. Retrieved February 11, 2023. "Who's That 'Flirt?': Bow Wow, And R. Kelly, Too". Billboard. February 23, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Hasty, Katie (June 6, 2007). "R. Kelly Flirts His Way To No. 1 Album Chart Debut". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Now Is Not a Good Time for R. Kelly and Usher to Have a Song Called 'Same Girl'". BET. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "R. Kelly Writes Song For Virginia Tech". CBS News. May 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Lamb, Bill (May 4, 2007). "R. Kelly Records "Rise Up" –n Anthem for Healing in Aftermath of Virginia Tech Shootings". About.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved May 9, 2007. Concepcion, Mariel (November 20, 2007). "Ne-Yo Dropped From R. Kelly Tour". Billboard. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Vena, Jocelyn (September 8, 2008). "Ne-Yo Wins $700,000 In Lawsuit Against R. Kelly Tour Promoter". MTV. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Orzeck, Kurt (December 19, 2007). "R. Kelly Arrest Warrant Issued Over Missed Court Date". MTV. Archived from the original on December 21, 2007. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Reid, Shaheem (March 4, 2008). "R. Kelly's New Dis Track: Is He Lashing Out At Jay-Z, Ne-Yo Or Young Jeezy?". MTV. Archived from the original on March 5, 2008. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "Billboard Hot 100 Chart 50th Anniversary". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "Entire R Kelly album leaks online". NME. July 29, 2008. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Reid, Shaheem (February 10, 2009). "R. Kelly Reveals New Album Will Be Called Untitled". MTV. Archived from the original on July 17, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Singersroom.com (June 11, 2009). "R Kelly Eying Busy September For 'Untitled' Album ?". Singersroom.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Reid, Shaheem (June 2, 2009). "R. Kelly Remixes Lil Wayne, The-Dream, Drake For His First Mixtape". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "R. Kelly To Make African Debut – Contactmusic News". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "R. Kelly: Untitled". Pitchfork. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Caulfield, Keith (December 9, 2009). "Boyle's 'Dream' Continues At No. 1 On Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Kaufman, Gil. "Susan Boyle's Dream Holds On To Billboard #1". MTV News. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "R. Kelly in the Motherland: Singer due in Johannesburg this week for Fashion Awards gig; will kick off international string of concert dates". EURweb.com. June 15, 2009. Archived from the original on July 21, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2009. R. Kelly (September 14, 2009). "R. Kelly Kicks Off World Cup In South Africa". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2010. "R.Kelly On Being Happy With Current State Of R&B: "In Some Ways Yes And In Some Ways No"". youheardthatnew. January 13, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "R. Kelly: Epic". Tower Records. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Epic, September 10, 2010, retrieved December 27, 2021 "Hands Across The World Video — ONE8 w R. Kelly". Rnbmusicblog.com. November 19, 2010. Archived from the original on November 26, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2011. "R. Kelly Backs African Supergroup". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2011. Celebs turn out for Pre-Grammy Gala. USA Today "R. Kelly Released From Hospital After Throat Surgery". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "R. Kelly grounded – Artiste's no-show sends Sumfest organisers on global search for replacement". Jamaica-gleaner.com. July 21, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "R. Kelly Undergoes Emergency Throat Surgery". Artistdirect.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Cee-Lo Green joins 'Sparkle' cast. Variety (magazine) Chandler, D. L. "R. Kelly's 'Soula Coaster' Memoir Delayed Until Spring". MTV News. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Nation, Urban Radio. "RCA shuts down the famous Jive, J Records and Arista Imprints". Urban Radio Nation | R&B, Hip Hop, Black Radio, Media, Sports, Podcasts Information Format News. Archived from the original on December 27, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Halperin, Shirley (October 7, 2011). "RCA Execs Confirm Jive and Arista Labels Shut Down". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Christman, Ed. (August 23, 2011) RCA's New Executive Team Named Under CEO Peter Edge Amid Layoffs (Update) "Radio Industry News, Music Industry Updates, Arbitron Ratings, Music News and more!". FMQB. Archived from the original on November 8, 2011. Retrieved September 10, 2012. R. Kelly Croons About Tonsil Surgery in New Track Archived April 5, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Spin R. Kelly: 'There Is No End' to 'Trapped in the Closet' Archived June 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Rolling Stone (magazine) Write Me Back by R. Kelly, retrieved December 27, 2021 Kelly, R.; Swaffield, Jim (November 22, 2012), Trapped in the Closet: Chapters 23-33 (Comedy, Crime, Drama), Fuzzy Bunny Films (I), RCA Records, Sylvester Films, retrieved December 27, 2021 "To All Of The Single Ladies!". R-Kelly. August 31, 2012. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2015. New R. Kelly interview with JoJo of V101.5 . R. Kelly News[dead link] "Coming Soon to IFC: R. Kelly's "Trapped in the Closet: The Next Installment"". IFC. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2015. Kleinman, Jacob (February 18, 2012). "Whitney Houston Funeral: R. Kelly Sings Soulful Rendition of 'I Look To You'". International Business Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2012. "R. Kelly Announces New Single With 2 Chainz, Reveals Artwork". Hotnewhiphop.com. July 26, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "Lots of Black Panties On R. Kelly's 'Black Panties' Cover + Tracklist". Vibe. November 19, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "Mariah Carey records duet with R Kelly - Music News". Digital Spy. September 30, 2012. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "Exclusive: Mary J.Blige Set To Duet With R.Kelly On Next Album". Ratedrnb.com. October 24, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Lewis, Brittany (November 15, 2013). "The Night I Received Black Panties From R. Kelly by Brittany Lewis". Global Grind. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Lewis, Brittany (November 15, 2013). "R. Kelly Discusses The "Ignition (Remix)" National Anthem Petition, His Childhood, & New Collaboration With Celine Dion (VIDEO)". Global Grind. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "Lady Gaga and R. Kelly Perform 'Do What U Want' on 'SNL'". Rap-Up. Rap-Up, LLC. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (November 12, 2013). "Lady Gaga, R. Kelly To Perform 'Do What U Want' At American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2013. "Lady Gaga removes R. Kelly collaboration "Do What U Want" from ARTPOP reissue". Consequence. October 15, 2019. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Trepany, Charles. "Lady Gaga removes R. Kelly song from 'Artpop,' will reportedly release new vinyl copies". USA Today. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Caulfield, Keith (January 11, 2019). "Lady Gaga's 'Do What U Want' Featuring R. Kelly Removed from Apple Music, iTunes, Spotify". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Boardman, Madeline (September 4, 2013). "'We Been On' Video Has Rich Gang Getting Down With Lil Wayne And R. Kelly". HuffPost. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "New Music: Twista f/ R. Kelly – 'Throwin My Money'". Rap-Up.com. April 23, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "Justin Bieber Reveals Cover Art For R. Kelly Collaboration, 'PYD'". Vibe. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2013. "RapUp TV: R. Kelly Talks Justin Bieber, Lady Gaga, & Bruno Mars". Rap-Up.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2014. "'The Best Man Holiday' Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. October 4, 2013. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2013. Kory Grow (December 4, 2013). "R. Kelly Continues 'Trapped in the Closet' With New Chapters | Music News". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2014. "R. Kelly to Release House Music Album". Rolling Stone. July 15, 2014. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2014. "Hip Hop Album Sales: August Alsina, R. Kelly & Rick Ross". HipHopDX. December 21, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Ivey, Justin (October 21, 2016). "Listen to R. Kelly's New Album '12 Nights of Christmas'". XXL Mag. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Sodomsky, Sam; Strauss, Matthew (July 23, 2018). "R. Kelly Addresses Sex Cult Allegations, Spotify Policy in 19-Minute New Song". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "R Kelly: 'I Admit' released against sex allegations". BBC. July 23, 2018. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Gajanan, Mahita (July 23, 2018). "A Defense Attorney Listened to R. Kelly's 19-Minute Song 'I Admit.' This Is What She Thinks". Time. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Ettachfini, Leila; Burke, Sarah (July 24, 2018). "R. Kelly's Victimhood Doesn't Excuse His Alleged Sexual Misconduct". Broadly. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Snapes, Laura (July 23, 2018). "R Kelly denies sexual abuse allegations in 19-minute song I Admit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Ellefson, Lindsey (July 23, 2018). "R. Kelly answers his critics with a 19-minute song, 'I Admit'". CNN. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Johnson, Kevin C. (August 12, 2018). "Muting R. Kelly: Our music critic is finished with the Pied Piper of R&B". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Williams, Stereo (July 23, 2018). "R. Kelly's Delusional Response to Sex Cult Allegations in 'I Admit': I'm the Victim Here". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "In R. Kelly's New Song, He Admits to Nothing". Vogue. July 23, 2018. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Lockett, Dee (July 23, 2018). "The 8 Worst Lines on R. Kelly's 19-Minute New Song 'I Admit'". Vulture. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Scott, Katie (July 25, 2018). "R. Kelly's ex-wife responds to song 'I Admit' with her own remix". Globalnews.ca. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Grant, Shawn (August 8, 2018). "R. Kelly's Brother Blasts Singer in New 'I Confess' Single". The Source. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Mamo, Heran (December 9, 2022). "Here's How a New R. Kelly Album Got Uploaded to Streaming Services". Billboard. Retrieved December 10, 2022. Hoekstra, David (November 29, 1998). "The Righteous Brother : R. Kelly's ambitious album of genre- spanning songs finds him updating the spiritually grounded R&B; of such greats as Al Green and Donny Hathaway". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Larman, Alexander (July 2022). "The rise and fall of R Kelly". www.spectator.co.uk. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "Timeline Of R. Kelly's Life And Career". cbsnews.com. August 18, 2021. DeRogatis, Jim; Pallasch, Abdon (June 9, 2002). "Inspirational singer or perverted swinger?". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2002. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Cohen, Jonathan (May 16, 2008), "Hot Beats of Summer", Billboard, vol. 120, no. 20, p. 20, retrieved November 2, 2014 "R. Kelly: Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Sanneh, Kelefa (November 6, 2003). "Tarnished but Still Platinum; R. Kelly Is Popular Despite Pornography Charges". The New York Times. Retrieved August 2, 2012. "If R. Kelly fought Bobby Brown in the '90s". Chicago Tribune. October 23, 2013. "R. Kelly's three Grammys will not be rescinded — for now — Recording Academy CEO says". Chicago Sun-Times. October 26, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2022. "R.Kelly Receives Key to the City and Inspires Local Musicians at Concert". Cameron James' Mind. February 18, 2013. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved May 22, 2022. "R. Kelly's key to the city of Baton Rouge has been rescinded". NME. October 1, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2022. "Baton Rouge takes back R. Kelly's key to the city". REVOLT. Retrieved May 16, 2022. "R. Kelly, the top-selling R&B star who dodged sex allegations for years". France 24. June 29, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Memorandum Decision and Order" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 318, E.D.N.Y., June 29, 2022, retrieved August 2, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "R. Kelly timeline: Chicago upbringing, rapid rise to stardom and years of sexual abuse charges, suits and rumors, conviction". The Chicago Tribune. October 20, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Corry, Kristin (January 6, 2020). "The Six Most Disturbing Revelations From Lifetime's 'Surviving R. Kelly' Sequel". Vice. Retrieved October 31, 2021. "R. Kelly settles one sex suit". canoe.com. April 9, 2002. Archived from the original on November 21, 2002. Retrieved May 25, 2020. DeRogatis, Jim; Pallasch, Abdon (December 21, 2000). "Kelly accused of sex with teenage girls". The Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Iandoli, Kathy (2022). Baby Girl: Better Known as Aaliyah. Simon and Schuster. p. 11. ISBN 978-1-9821-5685-5. Closson, Troy; Palmer, Emily (September 13, 2021). "R. Kelly Sexually Abused Aaliyah When She Was 13 or 14, Witness Says". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Savage, Mark (September 14, 2021). "R. Kelly abused Aaliyah when she was 13 or 14, court hears". BBC News. Retrieved October 4, 2021. "R. Kelly's life, from troubled talent to trafficking trial". AP News. September 27, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Melendez, Pilar (September 1, 2021). "Inside R. Kelly's Secret Marriage to 15-Year-Old Aaliyah". The Daily Beast. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Finley, Taryn (August 24, 2021). "R. Kelly Admitted To Marrying Aaliyah So She Could Get An Abortion, 'Jane Doe' Testifies". HuffPost. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Rouhani, Neena (August 20, 2021). "R. Kelly Believed Aaliyah Was Pregnant Before They Married, Tour Manager Testifies". Billboard. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Smith, Danyel (January 4, 2019). "Revisit R. Kelly's Dec 1994/Jan 1995 Cover Story: SUPERFREAK". VIBE.com. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Reid, Shaheem (January 9, 2009). "R. Kelly's Divorce Finalized". MTV. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved September 12, 2014. Aaliyah: More Than A Woman. Google, Christopher John Farley. January 26, 2002. ISBN 9780743455664. Retrieved September 14, 2014. Hong, Nicole (December 5, 2019). "R. Kelly Married Aaliyah at Age 15 by Using Bribes, Charges Allege". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2019. Edgers, Geoff (May 4, 2018). "The Star Treatment". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved May 9, 2018. White, Adam (August 4, 2021). "R Kelly finally admits to 'underage sexual contact' with Aaliyah". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2021. DeRogates, Jim; Pallasch, Abdon M. (February 8, 2002). "City police investigate R&B singer R. Kelly in sex tape". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on February 12, 2002. Pallasch, Abdon M.; DeRogatis, Jim; Fusco, Chris (February 9, 2002). "Kelly denies underage sex charge". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on February 12, 2002. Norris, John (May 13, 2002). "R. Kelly: In His Own Words (page 2)". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 20, 2002. Retrieved February 18, 2007. Fountain, John W. (June 6, 2002). "R. Kelly, R & B Star, Is Indicted on Child Sex Charges". The New York Times. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "R. Kelly arrested on 21 porn charges". Chicago Tribune. June 6, 2002. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "R. Kelly Out On Bail". CBS News. Associated Press. June 26, 2002. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Hira, Nadira (March 11, 2004). "Judge Rules R. Kelly Photos Seized In Florida Can't Be Used To Try Him". MTV. Archived from the original on March 17, 2004. Retrieved August 17, 2013. Sadovi, Carlos; DeRogates, Jim; Pallasch, Abdon M. (January 28, 2003). "Girl in Kelly tape linked to Florida photos". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved September 23, 2014. "R. Kelly is arrested on porn charges...again". Entertainment Weekly. January 23, 2003. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "R. Kelly Arrested Again". Rolling Stone. January 22, 2003. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "R. Kelly again charged with child pornography". January 22, 2003. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "R. Kelly's Florida Child Porn Charges Dropped". MTV. March 17, 2004. Archived from the original on April 22, 2004. Retrieved September 15, 2009. Time Waster. "R. Kelly Florida Porn Charges Dropped". The Smoking Gun. Retrieved September 10, 2012. Harris, Elizabeth A.; Chiarito, Robert (February 25, 2019). "R. Kelly Released From Jail After Making Bail on Sexual Abuse Charges". The New York Times. Grossberg, Josh (June 13, 2008). "R. Kelly Found Not Guilty!". E!. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2009. "R. Kelly was 'guilty as hell,' singer's prominent lawyer from first trial says". Chicago Sun-Times. March 7, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Smith, Patrick (October 1, 2020). "Divorce Court Filing Reveals Allegation That R. Kelly Molested A Preteen Girl In 2009". WBEZ. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2020. "R Kelly Walks Out Of Huff Post Live Interview When Questioned About Sexual Assault Accusations". December 22, 2015. "On R. Kelly…". Twitter. Retrieved August 2, 2022. DeRogatis, Jim (July 17, 2017). "Parents Told Police Their Daughter Is Being Held Against Her Will In R. Kelly's "Cult"". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2018. "R Kelly denies holding several women in 'abusive cult'". BBC News. July 18, 2017. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2017. Aswad, Jem (July 17, 2017). "Parents Accusing R. Kelly of Holding Daughters in Abusive 'Cult' to Hold Press Conference, Writer Says". Variety. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2017. "BBC World News - R Kelly: Sex, Girls & Videotapes". BBC. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "BBC Three - R Kelly: The Sex Scandal Continues". BBC. May 26, 2018. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "R Kelly faces fresh sexual misconduct allegation". BBC News. April 17, 2018. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2018. "R. Kelly insisted I have a sex trainer". BBC News. January 23, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 24, 2019. Snapes, Laura (May 1, 2018). "R Kelly: Time's Up campaign against me is 'attempted lynching of a black man'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2019. Lockett, Dee (May 11, 2018). "What Spotify Removing R. Kelly and XXXTentacion From Its Playlists Means". Vulture. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Coscarelli, Joe (May 10, 2018). "Spotify Pulls R. Kelly and XXXTentacion From Playlists, Stirring a Debate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2018. "Apple and Pandora stop promoting R. Kelly's music, too". Consequence of Sound. May 11, 2018. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2018. "R. Kelly and XXXTentacion camps react to Spotify removing their music from playlists". Los Angeles Times. May 10, 2018. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Schneider, Marc (January 21, 2019). "Spotify Makes It Easy to Mute R. Kelly (Or Any Other Artist)". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2019. "Kendrick Lamar Threatens To Pull His Music Off Of Spotify". Genius. Retrieved May 16, 2022. ago, Music-4 years (May 25, 2018). "Kendrick Lamar Reportedly Threatened To Remove Music From Spotify Following XXXTentacion Ban". Okayplayer. Retrieved May 16, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "R. Kelly Has Been Dropped By RCA Records, 'Billboard' Reports". NPR. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Lockett, Dee; Rothstein, Katie (February 1, 2019). "All the Artists Who've Denounced R. Kelly". Vulture. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Brandle, Lars (October 6, 2021). "R. Kelly's YouTube Channels Are Terminated". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "R. Kelly Channels Removed From YouTube, but Songs Can Remain". Pitchfork. October 6, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Fortin, Jacey (January 4, 2019). "'Surviving R. Kelly' Documentary on Lifetime Details Sex Abuse Accusations". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Ali, Lorraine (January 5, 2019). "Review: 'Surviving R. Kelly' explores decades of alleged sexual abuse by the singer and an industry's complicity". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Reilly, Nick (January 7, 2019). "R. Kelly plans to "sue everybody" involved in 'Surviving R. Kelly' series and launch website to "expose" accusers". NME. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "The Explosive Story Continues - "Surviving R. Kelly Part II: The Reckoning" Debuts as a Three-Night Event Beginning January 2 on Lifetime". The Futon Critic. December 11, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Garcia, Thania (December 14, 2022). "Lifetime Unveils Trailer for 'Surviving R. Kelly: The Final Chapter,' Set for January Release". Variety. Retrieved December 22, 2022. Cordero, Rosy (December 14, 2022). "'Surviving R. Kelly: The Final Chapter': Lifetime Reveals Premiere Date & Trailer". Deadline. Retrieved December 22, 2022. "Most searched-for musician on the internet (male, 2019)". Guinness World Records. 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2021. King, Gayle (March 9, 2019). "The Gayle King Interview with R. Kelly". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2019. "What we know about the allegations against R. Kelly". CNN. March 6, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Sands, Nicole (March 6, 2019). "Gayle King Commended for Leading a 'Master Class in Poise' During Raucous R. Kelly Interview". People. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Y'all killing me with this shit!" Kelly continued emotionally, standing up. "I gave you 30 years of my fucking career! Post, Chantilly (March 6, 2019). "R. Kelly Calls John Legend & Lady Gaga Unprofessional For Speaking Out Against Him". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on March 7, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Lincoln, Ross A. (March 5, 2019). "R Kelly Says Lady Gaga Was 'Not Professional' When She Apologized for Working With Him (Video)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on March 6, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Coscarelli, Joe (March 7, 2019). "2 Women Living With R. Kelly Denounce Their Parents and Deny Being Brainwashed". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Meyer, Ken (March 7, 2019). "Gayle King: R Kelly Was Coughing 'Very Loudly'". Mediaite. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Li, David K.; Fitzpatrick, Sarah; Fieldstadt, Elisha (February 22, 2019). "R. Kelley charged with multiple counts of sexual abuse of a minor". NBC News. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2019. "R Kelly: Singer charged with sexual abuse in Chicago". BBC. February 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 23, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2019. "R. Kelly arrested by Chicago police after being indicted on sexual abuse charges". FOX 59. Associated Press. February 22, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Dwyer, Colin; Tsioulcas, Anastasia (February 23, 2019). "R. Kelly Bond Set At $1 Million After Arrest On Charges Of Aggravated Sexual Abuse". NPR. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Harris, Elizabeth A.; Chiarito, Robert (February 25, 2019). "R. Kelly Released From Jail After Making Bail on Sexual Abuse Charges". The New York Times. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Jacobs, Julia (January 31, 2023). "Prosecutors in Chicago Will Drop Abuse Charges Against R. Kelly". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Razek, Raja (January 31, 2023). "Illinois prosecutors drop pending criminal cases against R. Kelly, who remains imprisoned on federal convictions". CNN. Retrieved February 8, 2023. "Indictment" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 1, Attachment 0, E.D.N.Y., June 20, 2019, retrieved May 10, 2020 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Meisner, Jason; Buckley, Madeline; Crepeau, Megan. (July 11, 2019) "R. Kelly arrested in Chicago after being indicted by federal grand jury on new sex crime charges", Chicago Tribune, July 11, 2019. Arcand, Rob (July 11, 2019). "R. Kelly Arrested on Federal Sex Trafficking Charges". Spin. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Rojas, Rick; Zaveri, Mihir; Gold, Michael (July 12, 2019). "U.S. Prosecutors File New Charges, Including Child Pornography, Against R. Kelly". The New York Times. Retrieved March 28, 2021. "'R. Kelly' charged with racketeering, including predicate acts of coercing and transporting minor girls to engage in sex". U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement. Department of Homeland Security. July 12, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Dienst, Jonathan (July 12, 2019). "R. Kelly Arrested on Fed Child Porn Charges, Indicted in NYC". WNBC. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Meisner, Jason (July 17, 2019). "'We're talking seventh and eighth grade girls,' prosecutors say as R. Kelly held without bond on sex charges". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2019. "Letter in support of a permanent order of detention as to Robert Sylvester Kelly" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 5, Attachment 0_1, E.D.N.Y., July 12, 2019, retrieved May 10, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "Minute Entry for proceedings held before Magistrate Judge Steven Tiscione:Arraignment as to Robert Sylvester Kelly" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 18, E.D.N.Y., August 2, 2019, retrieved May 10, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Simon, Darran; Moghe, Sonia; Andone, Dakin (August 2, 2019). "R. Kelly pleads not guilty to federal charges of kidnapping and sexual exploitation of a child in New York". CNN. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Burnett, Sara; Rousseau, Caryn (July 13, 2019). "Feds bring new sex-crime charges against singer R. Kelly". Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Wells, Jason; Nashrulla, Tasneem (July 16, 2019). "R. Kelly Was Denied Bond After Being Charged With Federal Sex Crimes". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2019. "R. Kelly Denied Early Prison Release After Claiming Fear Of Coronavirus". www.forbes.com. April 7, 2020. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Tye, Chris (February 14, 2020). "R. Kelly Faces New Federal Indictment In Chicago; Adding New Victim, But Removing Another". WBBM-TV. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Luperon, Alberto (March 13, 2020). "R. Kelly Faces Yet Another Criminal Indictment in Brooklyn Federal Court". Law & Crime. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "R. Kelly transferred to NYC jail ahead of sex-trafficking trial". USA Today. June 23, 2021. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Seidel, Jon (October 16, 2020). "R. Kelly's lawyers say no one 'raised a finger' to prevent MCC attack". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Haas, Mariah (August 5, 2019). "R. Kelly charged with soliciting a minor in Minnesota". Fox News. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Aswad, Jem (August 5, 2019). "R. Kelly Charged With Prostitution in Minnesota". Variety. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Rose, Andy (May 16, 2023). "R. Kelly: Prostitution charges involving a minor dropped in Minnesota". CNN. Retrieved August 26, 2023. "Superseding Indictment 1" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 3, E.D.N.Y., July 10, 2019, retrieved May 10, 2020 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Moghe, Sonia. "As R. Kelly trial approaches, prosecutors want to include alleged evidence of bribes and recordings of threats". CNN. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2021. Leight, Elias (August 10, 2021). "R. Kelly Racketeering Trial Opens as Judge Questions Prospective Jurors". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "Memorandum of Law in Support of Robert S. Kelly's Motion to Dismiss" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 159, E.D.N.Y., August 9, 2021, retrieved May 10, 2020 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Kalmbacher, Colin (August 12, 2021). "R. Kelly Wants Witness Testimony About His Alleged Herpes Status Tossed Because the Women Are Not Medical Experts". Law & Crime. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "Memorandum Decision and Order" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 252, E.D.N.Y., October 26, 2021, retrieved May 10, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Ehrlich, Brenna (August 18, 2021). "The 'Singing Boss': Opening Statements in R. Kelly Trial Clash Over Racketeering Charge". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Closson, Troy; Palmer, Emily (August 18, 2021). "R. Kelly Trial Opens With an Accuser's Searing Testimony". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Shamsian, Jacob; Orecchio-Egresitz, Haven. "R. Kelly accuser details how he 'trained' her in searing testimony on the first day of his sex crimes trial". Insider. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Hays, Tom (August 19, 2021). "Woman weeps while testifying against R. Kelly about assault". KVII. Associated Press. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "R. Kelly accused of abusing teenage boy he met in McDonald's". BBC News. July 24, 2021. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2021. Bekiempis, Victoria (September 17, 2021). "The Worst Things That Happened at the R. Kelly Trial This Week". Vulture. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Bekiempis, Victoria (September 22, 2021). "R. Kelly's Sex-Crimes Trial Comes to a Messy Close". Vulture. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "R. Kelly trial: First male accuser testifies to sexual abuse". BBC News. August 31, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Melendez, Pilar (September 27, 2021). "Audio Released From Horrific Videos Seen by Jurors in R. Kelly Case". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Sonia Moghe (September 26, 2021). "What we were not allowed to see at R. Kelly's trial". CNN. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "Sentencing Memorandum" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 304, E.D.N.Y., June 8, 2022, retrieved June 8, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "Jury Verdict" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 238, E.D.N.Y., September 27, 2021, retrieved May 9, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Trepany, Charlies (September 27, 2021). "R. Kelly's sex-trafficking trial: Everything that happened, up to the guilty verdict". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. "R Kelly found guilty on racketeering and sex trafficking charges". The Guardian. September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. ""R. Kelly" Convicted of All Counts by a Federal Jury in Brooklyn". www.justice.gov. September 27, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Puente, Maria. "R. Kelly convicted on child pornography charges in second federal trial verdict". USA Today. Retrieved September 15, 2022. "R. Kelly sentencing in New York postponed, but not for the reason his lawyer requested". The Chicago Tribune. April 5, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Blistein, Jon; Kreps, Daniel; Bekiempis, Victoria (June 29, 2022). "R. Kelly Sentenced to 30 Years in Prison on Racketeering, Sex Trafficking Charges". Rolling Stone. "R. Kelly Found Guilty of Racketeering in Sex Trafficking Trial". The Hollywood Reporter. September 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Roberts, Nigel (September 28, 2021). "Attorney Gloria Allred Breaks Down Why R. Kelly Is The Worst Sexual Predator She's Ever Pursued". BET. Retrieved October 3, 2021. "Attorney Gloria Allred says R Kelly is 'the worst' predator she has ever pursued – video". The Guardian. September 28, 2021. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Petri, Alexandra E.; Palmer, Emily (September 27, 2021). "Gloria Allred, lawyer for survivors, says 'justice has been done.'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2021. DeRogatis, Jim (September 27, 2021). "R. Kelly Is Found Guilty on All Counts, Twenty-five Years Too Late". The New Yorker. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "Convicted singer R. Kelly to get appeal aid from high-profile New York attorney who helped Bill Cosby". Chicago Tribune. October 29, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Donahue, Bill (February 1, 2022). "R. Kelly Catches COVID and Fires Legal Team, Delaying Conviction Appeal". Billboard. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "R. Kelly Files Appeal Over Federal Sex Crimes Case in New York". TMZ. Donnelly, Ann (April 5, 2022). "Order granting in part and denying in part 279 Motion to Continue Sentencing as to Robert Sylvester Kelly". CourtListener. Retrieved May 10, 2022. The Court denies the application to adjourn the sentence until after the completion of the trial in the Northern District of Illinois, but because the Presentence Report was filed today, grants an adjournment until 6/16/2022 at 10:30 a.m. "Defendant Robert Kelly's Objections to the Presentence Report" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 292, E.D.N.Y., April 21, 2022, retrieved May 10, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "Sentencing Memorandum by Robert Sylvester Kelly" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 301, E.D.N.Y., May 27, 2022, retrieved June 8, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Frehse, Rob (June 9, 2022). "Federal prosecutors recommend R. Kelly be sentenced to more than 25 years in prison". CNN. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "Feds ask New York judge to sentence R. Kelly to more than 25 years in prison". Chicago Sun-Times. June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "'He Lured Young Girls and Boys into His Orbit': Feds Want R. Kelly to Serve in 'Excess of 25 Years' for Racketeering and Child Exploitation Crimes". Law & Crime. June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Lawyer for R. Kelly asks for mandatory minimum 10-year sentence on New York racketeering conviction". Chicago Tribune. June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Orecchio-Egresitz, Haven. "R. Kelly's attorney says the 'musical genius' doesn't deserve 25 years in prison for his crimes because he was sexually abused as a child". Insider. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Bekiempis, Victoria; Roundtree, Cheyenne (June 29, 2022). "'I Don't Know If I'll Ever Be Whole': R. Kelly's Survivors Confront Singer at Sentencing. He Refused to Look at Them". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 29, 2022. Blistein, Jon; Kreps, Daniel; Bekiempis, Victoria (June 29, 2022). "R. Kelly Sentenced to 30 Years in Prison on Racketeering, Sex Trafficking Charges". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 29, 2022. "Judgment as to Robert Sylvester Kelly" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00286, Docket 319, E.D.N.Y., June 30, 2022, retrieved July 10, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "R Kelly ordered to pay restitution of $300,000 to his victim". The Guardian. September 28, 2022. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "R&B singer R. Kelly sentenced to 30 years in prison in sex case". The Straits Times. Singapore. June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Bustard, Andy (October 21, 2021). "R. Kelly Placed On Suicide Watch Following Guilty Verdict As Chicago Sex Trial Gets Date". HipHopDX. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "R Kelly remains on suicide watch 'for his own safety', authorities say". news.yahoo.com. July 4, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "R. Kelly Was Reportedly Placed on Suicide Watch Following Guilty Verdict". Complex. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "R. Kelly Remains on Suicide Watch in Prison, Lawyer Claims It's 'Unnecessary and Punitive'". WFAA-TV. July 3, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Moghe, Sonia; Elassar, Alaa (July 1, 2022). "R. Kelly placed on suicide watch after being sentenced to 30 years in prison, his lawyer says". CNN. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Watkins, Ali (July 3, 2022). "Prosecutors Defend Decision to Place R. Kelly on Suicide Watch". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "R. Kelly taken off suicide watch at Brooklyn federal jail". New York Daily News. July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Donahue, Bill (July 5, 2022). "R. Kelly Removed From Suicide Watch Following Decades-Long Sentence". Billboard. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "R. Kelly transferred to Chicago prison ahead of trial". WLS-TV. July 13, 2022. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Derrel McDavid and Milton "June" Brown: Fast Facts About R. Kelly Associates Indicted In Singer's Federal Sex Crime Case". CBS News. July 12, 2019. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "Order" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00567, Docket 102, N.D.I.L., March 5, 2020, retrieved June 30, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) DeRogatis, Jim (September 22, 2021). "Why Is R. Kelly Standing Trial Alone?". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "R. Kelly co-defendant Milton Brown pleads not guilty to child porn charge". Chicago Sun-Times. July 19, 2019. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "R. Kelly trial: Singer has dark side hidden from public - prosecutor". BBC News. August 17, 2022. "Minute Entry" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00567, Docket 217, N.D.I.L., June 21, 2022, retrieved June 30, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "Superseding Indictment" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00567, Docket 93, N.D.I.L., February 13, 2020, retrieved June 30, 2022 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) "Jury selection set to begin Monday in R. Kelly child pornography trial". WGN-TV. August 12, 2022. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Meisner, Jason; Crepeau, Megan (August 16, 2022). "Jury in R. Kelly's Chicago federal case selected; opening statements set for Wednesday". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Meisner, Jason; Crepeau, Megan (August 18, 2022). "R. Kelly's former goddaughter breaks down at his federal trial in Chicago, telling jury he filmed them having sex while she was a minor". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Melendez, Pilar (August 18, 2022). "Teen From Notorious R. Kelly Urination Tape Speaks Out". The Daily Beast. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "R. Kelly convicted on many counts, acquitted of trial fixing". AP NEWS. September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022. "Sentencing Memorandum (Defense)" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00567, Docket 410, N.D.I.L., February 10, 2023, retrieved February 17, 2023 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Sorrentino, Renée (July 1, 2021). "Minor-attracted persons: A neglected population". Current Psychiatry. 20 (7). doi:10.12788/cp.0149. S2CID 246886997. DeJesus, Ivey (August 12, 2022). "Prison sex therapist defends pedophiles as 'minor-attracted persons,' outraging victim advocates". pennlive. Retrieved February 17, 2023. "Sentencing Memorandum (Prosecution)" (PDF), United States of America v. Robert Sylvester Kelly (Court Filing), no. 1:19-cr-00567, Docket 418, N.D.I.L., February 16, 2023, retrieved February 17, 2023 – via Recap (PACER current docket view) Chiarito, Robert; Jacobs, Julia (February 23, 2023). "R. Kelly Sentenced to 20 Years for Child Sex Crimes". The New York Times. Retrieved February 23, 2023. "R. Kelly judge shoots down request for $850,000 in attorneys' fees from singer's acquitted ex-manager". Chicago Sun-Times. January 23, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023. "R. Kelly Sentenced to 1 Additional Year in Prison, 19 Concurrent Years, Following Child Pornography and Enticement Convictions". WTTW News. Retrieved February 23, 2023. "Singer R. Kelly moved to North Carolina prison from Chicago". Associated Press. April 24, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. "R. Kelly Reaches Settlement In Lawsuit". MTV News. August 13, 1997. Archived from the original on August 30, 2001. Retrieved July 14, 2009. "R Kelly Busted For Blasting Car Stereo". MTV News. May 7, 1998. Archived from the original on May 19, 2000. Retrieved July 14, 2009. "R. Kelly Gets Mixed Legal News In Court Date". MTV News. May 7, 1998. Archived from the original on May 25, 2000. Retrieved July 14, 2009. "R. Kelly Free To Kick Out The Car Jams". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 25, 2000. Retrieved July 14, 2009. Babwin, Don; Crawford, Teresa (March 10, 2019). "R. Kelly: 'We're going to straighten all this stuff out'". Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 24, 2019. Devenish, Colin (November 2, 2004). "R. Kelly Sues Jay-Z". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "R. Kelly Files $75 Million Lawsuit Against Jay-Z". Billboard. November 2, 2004. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Mar, Alex (February 3, 2005). "Jay-Z Countersues R. Kelly". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Harris, Chris (November 7, 2005). "R. Kelly Sues Jay-Z — Again". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 28, 2005. Retrieved July 12, 2009. Archive-Brandee-J-Tecson. "Jay-Z's Countersuit Against R. Kelly Thrown Out". MTV News. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Archive-Chris-Harris. "R. Kelly Sues Jay-Z — Again". MTV News. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "R. Kelly and his mother, 1993 - Photos - The troubled life and times of R. Kelly". Daily News. New York. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "R. Kelly's Daughter Opens Up About Family Life in Rare Interview". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. September 4, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Pallasch, Abdon M. (May 2007). "Unfinished Business". Vibe Magazine. Retrieved March 11, 2015.[permanent dead link] Kellaway, Mitch (July 8, 2014). "R. Kelly's Ex, Jay Kelly's Mom, On Loving Their Trans Son". Advocate. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. "R. Kelly's Wife Speak Out: Notes On A Scandal". Essence. December 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Lewis, Debra. "R. Kelly & Wife Finalize Divorce - Divorced, R. Kelly". People. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "Andrea Kelly Has A Message For Those Looking To 'Expose' Her". Essence. October 23, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "R. Kelly's Ex-Wife Andrea Kelly's Interview In 'Surviving R. Kelly' Is Not The First Time She's Spoken About Her Experience". Bustle. January 4, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Iasimone, Ashley (October 7, 2018). "R. Kelly's Ex-Wife Details Alleged Abuse: 'I Thought I Was Gonna Die'". Billboard. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Oberfield, Gabriel S. (February 18, 2005). "'Activist' pleads not guilty in extortion case". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Medill News Service. Retrieved April 8, 2023. "Man Sentenced in Sheffield Case". Clarion-Ledger. January 19, 2006. p. 24. Retrieved April 9, 2023. "R. Kelly Releases VA Tech Tribute". dallasblack.com. Associated Press. May 2, 2007. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016. "R. Kelly Pens New Single for Charity". Us Weekly. May 21, 2010. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2015. "R Kelly's Private Performance for Clara's House". theurbandaily.com. April 6, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2016. "Local drive replenishes Flint water supply". daily-journal.com. February 22, 2016. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2016. Tharp, Robert (May 24, 1994). "R. Kelly, Salt 'n' Pepa Impress with Sexiness". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. pp. Section E, Page 3. Hinckley, David (May 27, 1994). "Whatta Band: Salt-n-Pepa at Radio City". Daily News. p. 55. Devenish, Colin (November 1, 2004). "Jay-Z Boots R. Kelly". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "Exclusive Book Excerpt: R. Kelly's 'Soulacoaster: The Diary of Me'". Rolling Stone. June 26, 2012. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2015. Wikimedia Commons has media related to R. Kelly. "R. Kelly's official website". Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. R. Kelly at AllMusic R. Kelly at IMDb  R. Kelly: Sex, Girls and Videotapes, BBC documentary, March 28, 2018 Portals:  R&B and Soul Music  Biography  Music