The 1983 Ice Hockey World Championships took place in West Germany from 16 April to 2 May. The games were played in Munich, Dortmund and Düsseldorf. Eight teams took part, with each playing each other once. The four best teams then play each other once more with no results carrying over this time, and the other four teams played each other again to determine ranking and relegation. This was the 49th World Championships, and also the 60th European Championships. The Soviet Union became world champions for the 19th time, tying Canada, and won their 22nd European title. Promotion and relegation was effective for 1985 as the IIHF did not run a championship in Olympic years at this time. Nations that did not participate in the Sarajevo Olympics were invited to compete in the Thayer Tutt Trophy. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Italy was relegated to Group B. Played in Tokyo 21–31 March. Source:[citation needed] The United States was promoted to Group A, and both Romania and Yugoslavia were relegated to Group C. Additionally, the USA, Poland and Austria earned berths in the Olympics. Fourth place Norway had to play off against the Group C winner (the Netherlands) to fill the final Olympic spot. Played in Budapest 11–20 March. The champion earned the right to playoff against Group B fourth place for a berth in the Olympics. Source:[citation needed] The Netherlands and Hungary were both promoted to Group B, Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Vladislav Tretiak Best Defenceman: Alexei Kasatonov Best Forward: Jiří Lála Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Vladislav Tretiak Defence: Viacheslav Fetisov, Alexei Kasatonov Forwards: Vladimir Krutov, Igor Larionov, Sergei Makarov The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European championships according to IIHF: List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. Summary Olympic Qualification details Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 149–50.