The 1989 Ice Hockey World Championships took place in Sweden from 15 April – 1 May. The games were played in Södertälje and Stockholm, in the newly built arena Globen. Eight teams took part, and each team played each other once. The four best teams then played each other again. This was the 53rd World Championships, and also the 64th European Championships. The Soviet Union became world champions for the 21st time, and also European champions for the 26th time. The tournament was marred by positive drug tests. Only the goal totals of the Americans were affected in the end. Their losses against the Czechoslovaks and the Canadians were ruled as shutouts because of Corey Millen's high testosterone levels. Canadian Randy Carlyle also came under suspicion, but his A and B samples did not match, and he was cleared of wrongdoing. The Soviet team won all ten of their games. At the end of the tournament, Soviet star Alexander Mogilny defected to the United States by getting on a plane with two Buffalo Sabres executives. The Sabres had drafted Mogilny the year before. He joined the team and went on to score 1032 points in his NHL career. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Poland was relegated to Group B. Played in Oslo and Lillehammer 30 March to 9 April. The 5 April game between Norway and Austria was officially adjusted to 8-0 for Norway because of Siegfried Haberl's positive drug test. Standard procedure, since 1969, had been for Group B and Group C to exchange two teams, but that stopped this year. Source:[citation needed] Norway was promoted to Group A and Denmark was relegated to Group C. Played in Sydney 18–27 March. Source:[citation needed] The Netherlands were promoted to Group B, and Australia was relegated to Group D. Played in Geel and Heist-op-den-Berg 16–21 March. Positive drug tests wiped out the results of the first day: both games were officially rendered scoreless, and were counted as losses for all four teams. Source:[citation needed] Both Belgium and Romania were promoted to Group C. Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Dominik Hašek Best Defenceman: Viacheslav Fetisov Best Forward: Brian Bellows Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Dominik Hašek Defence: Anders Eldebrink, Viacheslav Fetisov Forwards: Vyacheslav Bykov, Sergei Makarov, Steve Yzerman The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European Championship were determined by the points earned in games played solely between European teams. List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. Source: [1] Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played 50% of their team's minutes are included in this list. Source: [2] Duplacey page 508 1989 Summary at Passionhockey.com Greenberg, Alan (22 October 1989). "Mogilny Makes Way into NHL at Tender Age of 20". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Malolepszy, Tomasz (2013). European Ice Hockey Championship Results Since 1910. Scarecrow Press. p. 1. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. p. 153.