Rio de Janeiro (Brazilian Portuguese: [ˈʁi.u d(ʒi) ʒɐˈne(j)ɾu] ), or simply Rio, is the capital of the state of Rio de Janeiro. It is the second-most-populous city in Brazil (after São Paulo) and the sixth-most-populous city in the Americas. Founded in 1565 by the Portuguese, the city was initially the seat of the Captaincy of Rio de Janeiro, a domain of the Portuguese Empire. In 1763, it became the capital of the State of Brazil, a state of the Portuguese Empire. In 1808, when the Portuguese Royal Court moved to Brazil, Rio de Janeiro became the seat of the court of Queen Maria I of Portugal. She subsequently, under the leadership of her son the prince regent John VI of Portugal, raised Brazil to the dignity of a kingdom, within the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and Algarves. Rio remained as the capital of the pluricontinental monarchy until 1822, when the Brazilian War of Independence began. This is one of the few instances in history that the capital of a colonizing country officially shifted to a city in one of its colonies. Rio de Janeiro subsequently served as the capital of the independent monarchy, the Empire of Brazil, until 1889, and then the capital of a republican Brazil until 1960 when the capital was transferred to Brasília. Rio de Janeiro has the second largest municipal GDP in the country, and 30th-largest in the world in 2008. This is estimated at R$343 billion. In the city are the headquarters of Brazilian oil, mining, and telecommunications companies, including two of the country's major corporations, Petrobras and Vale, and Latin America's largest telemedia conglomerate, Grupo Globo. The home of many universities and institutes, it is the second-largest center of research and development in Brazil, accounting for 17 percent of national scientific output according to 2005 data. Despite the high perception of crime, the city actually has a lower incidence of crime than most state capitals in Brazil. Rio de Janeiro is one of the most visited cities in the Southern Hemisphere and is known for its natural settings, carnival, samba, bossa nova, and balneario beaches such as Barra da Tijuca, Copacabana, Ipanema, and Leblon. In addition to the beaches, landmarks include the giant statue of Christ the Redeemer atop Corcovado mountain, named one of the New Seven Wonders of the World; Sugarloaf Mountain with its cable car; the Sambódromo (Sambadrome), a permanent grandstand-lined parade avenue which is used during Carnival; and Maracanã Stadium, one of the world's largest football stadiums. Rio de Janeiro was the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics and the 2016 Summer Paralympics, making the city the first South American and Portuguese-speaking city to ever host the events, and the third time the Olympics were held in a Southern Hemisphere city. The Maracanã Stadium held the finals of the 1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cups, the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, and the XV Pan American Games. In 2024, the city will host the G20 summit. Historical affiliations Portuguese Empire 1565–1815 United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves 1815–1822  Empire of Brazil 1822–1889 Republic of Brazil 1889–present The region of Rio was inhabited by the Tupi, Puri, Botocudo and Maxakalí peoples. Europeans first encountered Guanabara Bay on 1 January 1502 (hence Rio de Janeiro, "January River"), during a Portuguese expedition under explorer Gaspar de Lemos, captain of a ship in Pedro Álvares Cabral's fleet, or under Gonçalo Coelho. Allegedly the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci participated as observer at the invitation of King Manuel I in the same expedition. In 1555, one of the islands of Guanabara Bay, now called Villegagnon Island, was occupied by 500 French colonists under the French admiral Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon. Consequently, Villegagnon built Fort Coligny on the island when attempting to establish the France Antarctique colony. Eventually this French settlement became too much of a threat to the established Portuguese colony and in 1560 the order was made to get rid of them. A years-long military aggression was then initiated by the new Governor General of Brazil Mem De Sa, and later continued by his nephew Estacio De Sa. On 20 January 1567, a final defeat was imposed on the French forces and they were decisively expelled from Brazil for good. The city of Rio de Janeiro proper was founded on 1 March 1565 by the Portuguese, led by Estácio de Sá, including Antônio de Mariz [pt]. It was named São Sebastião do Rio de Janeiro, in honor of St. Sebastian, the saint who was the namesake and patron of the Portuguese then-monarch Sebastião. Rio de Janeiro was the name of Guanabara Bay. Until early in the 18th century, the city was threatened or invaded by several mostly French pirates and buccaneers, such as Jean-François Duclerc and René Duguay-Trouin. In the late 17th century, still during the Sugar Era, the Bandeirantes discovered gold and diamonds in the neighboring captaincy of Minas Gerais, thus Rio de Janeiro became a much more practical port for exporting wealth (gold, precious stones, besides the sugar) than Salvador, Bahia, much farther northeast. On 27 January 1763, the colonial administration in Portuguese America was moved from Salvador to Rio de Janeiro. The city remained primarily a colonial capital until 1808, when the Portuguese royal family and most of the associated Lisbon nobles, fleeing from Napoleon's invasion of Portugal, moved to Rio de Janeiro. The kingdom's capital was transferred to the city, which, thus, became the only European capital outside of Europe. As there was no physical space or urban structure to accommodate hundreds of noblemen who arrived suddenly, many inhabitants were simply evicted from their homes. In the first decade, several educational establishments were created, such as the Military Academy, the Royal School of Sciences, Arts and Crafts and the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, as well as the National Library of Brazil – with the largest collection in Latin America – and The Botanical Garden. The first printed newspaper in Brazil, the Gazeta do Rio de Janeiro, came into circulation during this period. When Brazil was elevated to Kingdom in 1815, it became the capital of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves until the return of the Portuguese Royal Family to Lisbon in 1821, but remained as capital of the Kingdom of Brazil. From the colonial period until the first independent era, Rio de Janeiro was a city of slaves. There was a large influx of African slaves to Rio de Janeiro: in 1819, there were 145,000 slaves in the captaincy. In 1840, the number of slaves reached 220,000 people. Between 1811 and 1831, 500,000 to a million slaves arrived in Rio de Janeiro through Valongo Wharf, which is now a World Heritage Site. The Port of Rio de Janeiro was the largest port of slaves in America. When Prince Pedro proclaimed the independence of Brazil in 1822, he decided to keep Rio de Janeiro as the capital of his new empire while the place was enriched with sugar cane agriculture in the Campos region and, especially, with the new coffee cultivation in the Paraíba Valley. In order to separate the province from the capital of the Empire, the city was converted in Neutral Municipality in 1834, passing the province of Rio de Janeiro to have Niterói as capital. As a political center of the country, Rio concentrated the political-partisan life of the Empire. It was the main stage of the abolitionist and republican movements in the last half of the 19th century. At that time the number of slaves was drastically reduced and the city was developed, with modern drains, animal trams, train stations crossing the city, gas and electric lighting, telephone and telegraph wiring, water and river plumbing. Rio continued as the capital of Brazil after 1889, when the monarchy was replaced by a republic. On 6 February 1889 the Bangu Textile Factory was founded, with the name of Industrial Progress Company of Brazil (Companhia Progresso Industrial do Brasil). The factory was officially opened on 8 March 1893, in a complex with varying architectural styles like Italianate, Neo-Gothic and a tower in Mansard Roof style. After the opening in 1893, workers from Great Britain arrived in Bangu to work in the textile factory. The old farms became worker villages with red-bricks houses, and a neo-gothic church was created, which still exists as the Saint Sebastian and Saint Cecilia Parish Church. Street cinemas and cultural buildings also appeared. In May 1894, Thomas Donohoe, a British worker from Busby, Scotland, arrived in Bangu. Donohoe was amazed to discover that there was absolutely no knowledge of football among Brazilians. So he wrote to his wife, Elizabeth, asking her to bring a football when she joined him. And shortly after her arrival, in September 1894, the first football match in Brazil took place in the field beside the textile factory. It was a five-a-side match between British workers, and took place six months before the first game organized by Charles Miller in São Paulo. However, the Bangu Football Club was not formally created until 1904. At the time Brazil's Old Republic was established, the city lacked urban planning and sanitation, which helped spread several diseases, such as yellow fever, dysentery, variola, tuberculosis and even black death. Pereira Passos, who was named mayor in 1902, imposed reforms to modernize the city, demolishing the cortiços where most of the poor population lived. These people, mostly descendants of slaves, then moved to live in the city's hills, creating the first favelas. Inspired by the city of Paris, Passos built the Municipal Theatre, the National Museum of Fine Arts and the National Library in the city's center; brought electric power to Rio and created larger avenues to adapt the city to automobiles. Passos also named Oswaldo Cruz as Director General of Public Health. Cruz's plans to clean the city of diseases included compulsory vaccination of the entire population and forced entry into houses to kill mosquitoes and rats. The people of the city rebelled against Cruz's policy, in what would be known as the Vaccine Revolt. In 1910, Rio saw the Revolt of the Lash, where Afro-Brazilian crew members in the Brazilian Navy mutinied against the heavy use of corporal punishment, which was similar to the punishment slaves received. The mutineers took control of the battleship Minas Geraes and threatened to fire on the city. Another military revolt occurred in 1922, the 18 of the Copacabana Fort revolt, a march against the Old Republic's coronelism and café com leite politics. This revolt marked the beginning of Tenentism, a movement that resulted in the Brazilian Revolution of 1930 that started the Vargas Era. Until the early years of the 20th century, the city was largely limited to the neighborhood now known as the historic city center (see below), on the mouth of Guanabara Bay. The city's center of gravity began to shift south and west to the so-called Zona Sul (South Zone) in the early part of the 20th century, when the first tunnel was built under the mountains between Botafogo and the neighborhood that is now known as Copacabana. Expansion of the city to the north and south was facilitated by the consolidation and electrification of Rio's streetcar transit system after 1905. Botafogos natural environment, combined with the fame of the Copacabana Palace Hotel, the luxury hotel of the Americas in the 1930s, helped Rio to gain the reputation it still holds today as a beach party town. This reputation has been somewhat tarnished in recent years by favela violence resulting from the narcotics trade and militias. Plans for moving the nation's capital city from Rio de Janeiro to the center of Brazil had been occasionally discussed, and when Juscelino Kubitschek was elected president in 1955, it was partially on the strength of promises to build a new capital. Though many thought that it was just campaign rhetoric, Kubitschek managed to have Brasília and a new Federal District built, at great cost, by 1960. On 21 April of that year, the capital of Brazil was officially moved to Brasília. The territory of the former Federal District became its own state, Guanabara, after the bay that borders it to the east, encompassing just the city of Rio de Janeiro. After the 1964 coup d'état that installed a military dictatorship, the city-state was the only state left in Brazil to oppose the military. Then, in 1975, a presidential decree known as "The Fusion" removed the city's federative status and merged it with the State of Rio de Janeiro, with the city of Rio de Janeiro replacing Niterói as the state's capital, and establishing the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region. In 1992, Rio hosted the Earth Summit, a United Nations conference to fight environmental degradation. Twenty years later, in 2012, the city hosted another conference on sustainable development, named United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The city hosted the World Youth Day in 2013, the second World Youth Day in South America and first in Brazil. In the sports field, Rio de Janeiro was the host of the 2007 Pan American Games and the 2014 FIFA World Cup Final. On 2 October 2009, the International Olympic Committee announced that Rio de Janeiro would host the 2016 Olympic Games and the 2016 Paralympic Games, beating competitors Chicago, Tokyo, and Madrid. The city became the first South American city to host the event and the second Latin American city (after Mexico City in 1968) to host the Games. Since the early 2010s, Rio de Janeiro has been inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site for its arts, urban culture and designed landscapes set around a natural environment. Rio de Janeiro is near the west end of a strip (from Cabo Frio to just east of Ilha Grande) of Brazil's Atlantic coast close to the Tropic of Capricorn where the shoreline is oriented east and west; the city thus faces largely south. It was founded at the entrance to an inlet, Guanabara Bay (Baía de Guanabara), which is marked by a point of land called Sugar Loaf (Pão de Açúcar) – a "calling card" of the city. The population of the city of Rio de Janeiro, occupying an area of 1,182.3 km2 (456.5 sq mi), is about 6,000,000. The population of the greater metropolitan area is estimated at 11–13.5 million. Residents of the city are known as cariocas. The official song of Rio is "Cidade Maravilhosa", by composer André Filho. The city has parks and ecological reserves such as the Tijuca National Park, the world's first urban forest and UNESCO Environmental Heritage and Biosphere Reserve; Pedra Branca State Park, which houses the highest point of Rio de Janeiro, the peak of Pedra Branca; the Quinta da Boa Vista complex; the Botanical Garden; Rio's Zoo; Parque Lage; and the Passeio Público, the first public park in the Americas. In addition the Flamengo Park is the largest landfill in the city, extending from the center to the south zone, and containing museums and monuments, in addition to much vegetation. Since 1961, the Tijuca National Park (Parque Nacional da Tijuca), the largest city-surrounded urban forest and the second largest urban forest in the world, has been a National Park. The largest urban forest in the world is the Floresta da Pedra Branca (White Rock Forest), which is located in the West Zone of Rio de Janeiro. Due to the high concentration of industries in the metropolitan region, the city has faced serious problems of environmental pollution. The Guanabara Bay has lost mangrove areas and suffers from residues from domestic and industrial sewage, oils and heavy metals. Although its waters renew when they reach the sea, the bay is the final receiver of all the tributaries generated along its banks and in the basins of the many rivers and streams that flow into it. The levels of particulate matter in the air are twice as high as that recommended by the World Health Organization, in part because of the large numbers of vehicles in circulation. The waters of Sepetiba Bay are slowly following the path traced by Guanabara Bay, with sewage generated by a population of the order of 1.29 million inhabitants being released without treatment in streams or rivers. With regard to industrial pollution, highly toxic wastes, with high concentrations of heavy metals – mainly zinc and cadmium – have been dumped over the years by factories in the industrial districts of Santa Cruz, Itaguaí and Nova Iguaçu, constructed under the supervision of State policies. The Marapendi lagoon and the Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon have suffered with the leniency of the authorities and the growth in the number of apartment buildings close by. The illegal discharge of sewage and the consequent deaths of algae diminished the oxygenation of the waters, causing fish mortality. There are, on the other hand, signs of decontamination in the lagoon made through a public-private partnership established in 2008 to ensure that the lagoon waters will eventually be suitable for bathing. The decontamination actions involve the transfer of sludge to large craters present in the lagoon itself, and the creation of a new direct and underground connection with the sea, which will contribute to increase the daily water exchange between the two environments. However, during the Olympics the lagoon hosted the rowing competitions and there were numerous concerns about potential infection resulting from human sewage. Rio has a tropical savanna climate (Aw) that closely borders a tropical monsoon climate (Am) according to the Köppen climate classification, and is often characterized by long periods of heavy rain between December and March. The city experiences hot, humid summers, and warm, sunny winters. In inland areas of the city, temperatures above 40 °C (104 °F) are common during the summer, though rarely for long periods, while maximum temperatures above 27 °C (81 °F) can occur on a monthly basis. Along the coast, the breeze, blowing onshore and offshore, moderates the temperature. Because of its geographic situation, the city is often reached by cold fronts advancing from Antarctica, especially during autumn and winter, causing frequent weather changes. In summer there can be strong rains, which have, on some occasions, provoked catastrophic floods and landslides. The mountainous areas register greater rainfall since they constitute a barrier to the humid wind that comes from the Atlantic. The city has had rare frosts in the past. Some areas within Rio de Janeiro state occasionally have falls of snow grains and ice pellets (popularly called granizo) and hail. Drought is very rare, albeit bound to happen occasionally given the city's strongly seasonal tropical climate. The Brazilian drought of 2014–2015, most severe in the Southeast Region and the worst in decades, affected the entire metropolitan region's water supply (a diversion from the Paraíba do Sul River to the Guandu River is a major source for the state's most populous mesoregion). There were plans to divert the Paraíba do Sul to the Sistema Cantareira (Cantareira system) during the water crisis of 2014 in order to help the critically drought-stricken Greater São Paulo area. However, availability of sufficient rainfall to supply tap water to both metropolitan areas in the future is merely speculative. Roughly in the same suburbs (Nova Iguaçu and surrounding areas, including parts of Campo Grande and Bangu) that correspond to the location of the March 2012, February–March 2013 and January 2015 pseudo-hail (granizo) falls, there was a tornado-like phenomenon in January 2011, for the first time in the region's recorded history, causing structural damage and long-lasting blackouts, but no fatalities. The World Meteorological Organization has advised that Brazil, especially its southeastern region, must be prepared for increasingly severe weather occurrences in the near future, since events such as the catastrophic January 2011 Rio de Janeiro floods and mudslides are not an isolated phenomenon. In early May 2013, winds registering above 90 km/h (56 mph) caused blackouts in 15 neighborhoods of the city and three surrounding municipalities, and killed one person. Rio saw similarly high winds (about 100 km/h (62 mph)) in January 2015. The average annual minimum temperature is 21 °C (70 °F), the average annual maximum temperature is 27 °C (81 °F), and the average annual temperature is 24 °C (75 °F). The average yearly precipitation is 1,069 mm (42.1 in). Temperature also varies according to elevation, distance from the coast, and type of vegetation or land use. During the winter, cold fronts and dawn/morning sea breezes bring mild temperatures; cold fronts, the Intertropical Convergence Zone (in the form of winds from the Amazon Forest), the strongest sea-borne winds (often from an extratropical cyclone) and summer evapotranspiration bring showers or storms. Thus the monsoon-like climate has dry and mild winters and springs, and very wet and warm summers and autumns. As a result, temperatures over 40 °C (104 °F), that may happen about year-round but are much more common during the summer, often mean the actual "feels-like" temperature is over 50 °C (122 °F), when there is little wind and the relative humidity percentage is high. Between 1961 and 1990, at the INMET (Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology) conventional station in the neighborhood of Saúde, the lowest temperature recorded was 10.1 °C (50.2 °F) in October 1977, and the highest temperature recorded was 39 °C (102.2 °F) in December 1963. The highest accumulated rainfall in 24 hours was 167.4 mm (6.6 in) in January 1962. However, the absolute minimum temperature ever recorded at the INMET Jacarepaguá station was 3.8 °C (38.8 °F) in July 1974, while the absolute maximum was 43.2 °C (110 °F) on 26 December 2012 in the neighborhood of the Santa Cruz station. The highest accumulated rainfall in 24 hours, 186.2 mm (7.3 in), was recorded at the Santa Teresa station in April 1967. The lowest temperature ever registered in the 21st century was 8.1 °C (46.6 °F) in Vila Militar, July 2011. According to the 2010 IBGE Census, there were 5,940,224 people residing in the city of Rio de Janeiro. In 2010, the city of Rio de Janeiro was the second-most populous city in Brazil, after São Paulo. The 2022 census revealed the following numbers: White Brazilian (45.4% or 2,821,619); Mixed (38.7% or 2,403,895); Black (15.6% or 968,428); Asian (10,514 or 0.2%); Indigenous (6,531 or 0.1%). The population of Rio de Janeiro was 53.2% female and 46.8% male. The black community was formed by residents whose ancestors had been brought as slaves, mostly from Angola and Mozambique, as well by people of Angolan, Mozambican and West African descent who moved to Rio from other parts of Brazil. Nearly half of the city's population is by phenotype mixed or black. White in Brazil is defined more by having a European-looking phenotype rather than ancestry, and two full siblings can be of different "racial" categories in a skin color and phenotype continuum from pálido (branco) or fair-skinned, through branco moreno or swarthy Caucasian, mestiço claro or lighter skinned multiracial, pardo (mixed race) to negro or black. Pardo, for example, in popular usage includes those who are caboclos (mestizos), mulatos (mulattoes), cafuzos (zambos), juçaras (archaic term for tri-racials) and westernized Amerindians (which are called caboclos as well), being more of a skin color rather than a racial group in particular. Different ethnic groups contributed to the formation of the population of Rio de Janeiro. Before European colonization, there were at least seven different indigenous peoples speaking 20 languages in the region. A part of them joined the Portuguese and the other the French. Those who joined the French were then exterminated by the Portuguese, while the other part was assimilated. Rio de Janeiro is home to the largest Portuguese population outside of Lisbon in Portugal. After independence from Portugal, Rio de Janeiro became a destination for hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Portugal, mainly in the early 20th century. The immigrants were mostly poor peasants who subsequently found prosperity in Rio as city workers and small traders. The Portuguese cultural influence is still seen in many parts of the city (and many other parts of the state of Rio de Janeiro), including architecture and language. Most Brazilians with some cultural contact with Rio know how to easily differentiate between the local dialect, fluminense, and other Brazilian dialects. People of Portuguese ancestry predominate in most of the state. The Brazilian census of 1920 showed that 39.7% of the Portuguese who lived in Brazil lived in Rio de Janeiro. Including all of the Rio de Janeiro, the proportion raised to 46.3% of the Portuguese who lived in Brazil. The numerical presence of the Portuguese was extremely high, accounting for 72% of the foreigners who lived in the capital. Portuguese born people accounted for 20.4% of the population of Rio, and those with a Portuguese father or a Portuguese mother accounted for 30.8%. In other words, native born Portuguese and their children accounted for 51.2% of the inhabitants of Rio, or a total of 267,664 people in 1890. As a result of the influx of immigrants to Brazil from the late 19th to the early 20th century, also found in Rio de Janeiro and its metropolitan area are communities of Levantine Arabs who are mostly Christian or Irreligious, Spaniards, Italians, Germans, Japanese, Jews, and people from other parts of Brazil. The main waves of internal migration came from people of African, mixed or older Portuguese (as descendants of early settlers) descent from Minas Gerais and people of Eastern European, Swiss, Italian, German, Portuguese and older Portuguese-Brazilian heritage from Espírito Santo in the early and mid-20th century, together with people with origins in Northeastern Brazil, in the mid-to-late and late 20th century, as well some in the early 21st century (the latter more directed to peripheries than the city's core). According to an autosomal DNA study from 2009, conducted on a school in the poor suburb of Rio de Janeiro, the "pardos" there were found to be on average about 80% European, and the "whites" (who thought of themselves as "very mixed") were found to carry very little Amerindian and/or African admixtures. The results of the tests of genomic ancestry are quite different from the self made estimates of European ancestry. In general, the test results showed that European ancestry is far more important than the students thought it would be. The "pardos" for example thought of themselves as 1⁄3 European, 1⁄3 African and 1⁄3 Amerindian before the tests, and yet their ancestry on average reached 80% European. Other studies showed similar results Religion in Rio de Janeiro is diverse, with Catholic Christianity being the majority religion. According to data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), in 2010 the population of Rio de Janeiro had 3,229,192 Roman Catholics (51.1%), 1,477,021 Protestants (23.4%), 372.851 Spiritists (5.9%), 37,974 Jehovah's Witnesses (0.6%), 75,075 Buddhists (0.2%), 52,213 Umbanda (0.8%), 21,800 Jews (0.3%), 25,743 Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church (0.4%), 16,776 new eastern religious (0.2%), 28,843 Candomblé (0.4%), 3,853 Mormons (<0.1%), 5,751 Eastern Orthodox Christians (<0.1%), 7,394 spiritualists (0.1%), 964 Muslims (<0.1%), 5,662 esoteric (<0.1%) and 802 Hindus (<0.1%). 858,704 had no religion (13.5%), and 113,530 followed other forms of Christianity (1.8%). Rio de Janeiro has had a rich and influential Catholic tradition. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of São Sebastião do Rio de Janeiro is the second largest archdiocese in Brazil after São Paulo. The Rio de Janeiro Cathedral was inaugurated in 1979, in the central region of the city. Its installations have a collection of great historical and religious value: the Archdiocesan Museum of Sacred Art and the Archdiocesan Archive. In a Contemporary architecture, it has a conical shape, with 96 meters of internal diameter and capacity to receive up to 20 thousand faithful. The splendor of the building, with straight and sober lines, is due to the changing stained glass windows carved on the walls up to the dome. Its design and execution was coordinated by Monsignor Ivo Antônio Calliari (1918–2005). Saint Sebastian is recognized as the city's patron saint, which is why it received the canonical name of "Saint Sebastian of Rio de Janeiro." Many Protestant creeds coexist in the city, Presbyterian, Congregational, Lutheran and Anglican Churches. In addition to evangelical churches such as the Baptist, Methodist, Seventh-day Adventist and Pentecostal churches, such as the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assembly of God, Christian Congregation in Brazil and The Foursquare Church. Afro-Brazilian religions such as Umbanda and Candomblé find support in various social segments, although professed by less than 2% of the population, many Cariocas simultaneously observe those practices with Roman Catholicism. The Portuguese language is the official and national language, and thus the primary language taught in schools. English and Spanish are also part of the official curriculum. There are also international schools, such as the American School of Rio de Janeiro, Our Lady of Mercy School, SIS Swiss International School, the Corcovado German School, the Lycée Français and the British School of Rio de Janeiro. The city has several universities and research institutes. The Ministry of Education has certified approximately 99 upper-learning institutions in Rio. The most prestigious university is the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. It is the fifth-best in Latin America; the second-best in Brazil, second only to the University of São Paulo; and the best in Latin America, according to the QS World University Rankings. Some notable higher education institutions are Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ); Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO); Rio de Janeiro State University (UERJ); Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ, often nicknamed Rural); Fluminense Federal University (UFF); Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio); Getúlio Vargas Foundation (FGV); Military Institute of Engineering (IME); Superior Institute of Technology in Computer Science of Rio de Janeiro (IST-Rio); College of Publicity and Marketing (ESPM); The Brazilian Center for Research in Physics (CBPF); National Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics (IMPA); Superior institute of Education of Rio de Janeiro (ISERJ) and Federal Center of Technological Education Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ). There are more than 137 upper-learning institutions in whole Rio de Janeiro state. The Rio de Janeiro State University (public), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (public), Brazilian Institute of Capital Markets (private) and Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (private) are among the country's top institutions of higher education. Other institutes of higher learning include the Colégio Regina Coeli in Usina, notable for having its own 3 ft (914 mm) narrow gauge funicular railway on its grounds. Primary schools are largely under municipal administration, while the state plays a more significant role in the extensive network of secondary schools. There are also a small number of schools under federal administration, as is the case of Pedro II School, Colégio de Aplicação da UFRJ and the Centro Federal de Educação Tecnológica of Rio de Janeiro (CEFET-RJ). In addition, Rio has an ample offering of private schools that provide education at all levels. Rio is home to many colleges and universities. The literacy rate for cariocas aged 10 and older is nearly 95 percent, well above the national average. In Rio, there were 1,033 primary schools with 25,594 teachers and 667,788 students in 1995. There are 370 secondary schools with 9,699 teachers and 227,892 students. There are 53 University-preparatory schools with 14,864 teachers and 154,447 students. The city has six major universities and 47 private schools of higher learning. There are significant disparities between the rich and the poor in Rio de Janeiro, and different socioeconomic groups are largely segregated into different neighborhoods. Although the city clearly ranks among the world's major metropolises, large numbers live in slums known as favelas, where 95% of the population are poor, compared to 40% in the general population. There have been a number of government initiatives to counter this problem, from the removal of the population from favelas to housing projects such as Cidade de Deus to the more recent approach of improving conditions in the favelas and bringing them up to par with the rest of the city, as was the focus of the "Favela Bairro" program and deployment of Pacifying Police Units. Rio has more people living in slums than any other city in Brazil, according to the 2010 Census. More than 1,500,000 people live in its 763 favelas, 22% of Rio's total population. São Paulo, the largest city in Brazil, has more favelas (1,020), but proportionally has fewer people living in favelas than Rio. Rio also has a large proportion of state-sanctioned violence, with about 20% of all killings committed by state security. In 2019, police killed an average of five people each day in the state of Rio de Janeiro, with a total of 1,810 killed in the year. This was more police killings than any year since official records started in 1998. In Rio de Janeiro, the executive power is represented by the mayor and the cabinet of secretaries, in accordance with the model proposed by the Federal Constitution. The Organic Law of the Municipality and the current Master Plan, however, stipulate that the public administration must provide the population with effective tools for the exercise of participatory democracy. In this way, the city is divided into subprefectures, each of which is headed by a sub-mandatory appointed directly by the mayor. Legislative power is constituted by the municipal council, composed of 51 councilors elected for four-year terms (in compliance with the provisions of article 29 of the Constitution, which disciplines a minimum number of 42 and a maximum of 55 for municipalities with more than five million inhabitants). It is up to the House to prepare and vote on fundamental laws for the administration and the Executive, especially the participatory budget (Lei de Diretrizes Orçamentárias). Although the veto power is granted to the mayor, the process of voting on the laws that oppose him usually generates conflicts between the Executive and the Legislative. There are also municipal councils, which complement the legislative process and the work engendered in the secretariats. Compulsorily formed by representatives of various sectors of organized civil society, they are on different fronts — although their effective representation is sometimes questioned. The following are currently in operation: Municipal Council for the Protection of Cultural Heritage (CMPC), Defense of the Environment (CONDEMAM), Health (CMS), the Rights of Children and Adolescents (CMDCA), Education (CME), Social Assistance (CMAS) and Anti-Drugs. As the capital of the homonymous state, the city is the seat of the state government. The Guanabara Palace (formerly known as Paço Isabel) is located in the Laranjeiras neighborhood, in the south zone, and is the official seat of the Rio de Janeiro executive power. Not to be confused with Palácio Laranjeiras, situated in the same neighborhood, which is the official residence of the governor of Rio de Janeiro. The Legislative Assembly of Rio de Janeiro (ALERJ) is the state legislative body and is headquartered at Tiradentes Palace, where the Chamber of Deputies of Brazil previously functioned. The Court of Justice of the State of Rio de Janeiro (TJRJ) is the highest body of the judiciary in the state. Its central court is located in downtown Rio de Janeiro, but, from 2013 to July 2018, some of the courts of this court were moved to Cidade Nova. The city of Rio de Janeiro was successively the capital of the Portuguese colony of the State of Brazil (1621–1815), after the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves (1815–1822), the Empire of Brazil (1822–1889) and from the Republic of the United States of Brazil (1889–1968) until 1960, when the seat of government was definitively transferred to the then newly built Brasília. Despite the change in the federal capital, 59% of civil servants in the Executive Branch of federal agencies and public companies remained in the city. Rio de Janeiro is also the only Brazilian state where the number of federal employees exceeds the number of state employees. About a third of all federal public bodies and companies remain in the former capital, with 50 public offices, including agencies, autarchies, foundations and public companies, such as the National Library, the National Nuclear Energy Commission, Fiocruz, BNDES, Petrobras, Eletrobras, IBGE, Casa da Moeda, the National Archives, among others. The city is commonly divided into the historic center (Centro); the tourist-friendly wealthier South Zone (Zona Sul); the residential less wealthy North Zone (Zona Norte); peripheries in the West Zone (Zona Oeste), among them Santa Cruz, Campo Grande and the wealthy newer Barra da Tijuca district. Rio de Janeiro is administratively divided into 33 distritos (districts) named Regiões Administrativas ("Administrative Regions") and 164 bairros (neighborhoods). Subprefectures are officially grouped into four regions (or "zones"), taking into account geographic position and occupation history; however these do not have any administrative or political power over the municipality. The official political division of the municipality takes into account historical-cultural characteristics to divide the neighborhoods. Most of its population is concentrated in the neighborhoods of Campo Grande, Santa Cruz, Bangu, Tijuca, Realengo, Jacarepaguá, Copacabana, Barra da Tijuca, Maré, Guaratiba and Taquara together, these eleven neighborhoods concentrate a population of 1.5 million inhabitants, according to the 2010 census. Centro or Downtown is the historic core of the city, as well as its financial center. Sites of interest include the Paço Imperial, built during colonial times to serve as a residence for the Portuguese governors of Brazil; many historic churches, such as the Candelária Church (the former cathedral), São Jose, Santa Lucia, Nossa Senhora do Carmo, Santa Rita, São Francisco de Paula, and the monasteries of Santo Antônio and São Bento. The Centro also houses the modern concrete Rio de Janeiro Cathedral. Around the Cinelândia square, there are several landmarks of the Belle Époque of Rio, such as the Municipal Theatre and the National Library building. Among its several museums, the Museu Nacional de Belas Artes (National Museum of Fine Arts) and the Museu Histórico Nacional (National Historical Museum) are the most important. The South Zone (Zona Sul) is composed of several districts, among which are São Conrado, Leblon, Ipanema, Arpoador, Copacabana, and Leme, which compose Rio's Atlantic beach coastline. The neighborhood of Copacabana beach hosts one of the world's most spectacular New Year's Eve parties ("Reveillon"), as more than two million revelers crowd onto the sands to watch the fireworks display. From 2001, the fireworks have been launched from boats, to improve the safety of the event. The North Zone (Zona Norte) begins at Grande Tijuca (the middle class residential and commercial bairro of Tijuca), just west of the city center, and sprawls for miles inland until Baixada Fluminense and the city's Northwest. This region is home to the Maracanã (located in Grande Tijuca), once the world's highest capacity football venue, able to hold nearly 199,854 people, as it did for the World Cup final of 1950. This region is also home to most of the samba schools of Rio de Janeiro such as Mangueira, Salgueiro, Império Serrano, Unidos da Tijuca, Imperatriz Leopoldinense, among others. Some of the main neighborhoods of Rio's North Zone are Alto da Boa Vista which shares the Tijuca Rainforest with the South and Southwest Zones; Tijuca, Vila Isabel, Méier, São Cristovão, Madureira, Penha, Manguinhos, Fundão, Olaria among others. Many of Rio de Janeiro's slums (favelas), are located in the North Zone. West Zone (Zona Oeste) of Rio de Janeiro is a vaguely defined area that covers some 50% of the city's entire area, including Barra da Tijuca and Recreio dos Bandeirantes neighborhoods. The West Side of Rio has many historic sites because of the old "Royal Road of Santa Cruz" that crossed the territory in the regions of Realengo, Bangu, and Campo Grande, finishing at the Royal Palace of Santa Cruz in the Santa Cruz region. The highest peak of the city of Rio de Janeiro is the Pedra Branca Peak (Pico da Pedra Branca) inside the Pedra Branca State Park. It has an altitude of 1024m. The Pedra Branca State Park (Parque Estadual da Pedra Branca) is the biggest urban state park in the world comprising 17 neighborhoods in the west side, being a "giant lung" in the city with trails, waterfalls and historic constructions like an old aqueduct in the Colônia Juliano Moreira in the neighborhood of Taquara and a dam in Camorim. Santa Cruz and Campo Grande Region have exhibited economic growth, mainly in the Campo Grande neighborhood. Industrial enterprises are being built in lower and lower middle class residential Santa Cruz, one of the largest and most populous of Rio de Janeiro's neighborhoods, most notably Ternium Brasil, a new steel mill with its own private docks on Sepetiba Bay, which is planned to be South America's largest steel works. A tunnel called Túnel da Grota Funda, opened in 2012, creating a public transit facility between Barra da Tijuca and Santa Cruz, lessening travel time to the region from other areas of Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro is twinned with: Arganil, Portugal Atlanta, United States Baku, Azerbaijan Barcelona, Spain Beijing, China Beirut, Lebanon Braga, Portugal Buenos Aires, Argentina Busan, South Korea Cape Town, South Africa Tangier, Morocco Cologne, Germany Guimarães, Portugal Guiyang, China Istanbul, Turkey Kyiv, Ukraine Kobe, Japan Lahore, Pakistan Lisbon, Portugal Liverpool, United Kingdom Luanda, Angola M'banza Congo, Angola Madrid, Spain Montpellier, France Nice, France Nairobi, Kenya Oklahoma City, United States Olhão, Portugal Ramat Gan, Israel Saint Petersburg, Russia Samarkand, Uzbekistan Santa Comba, Spain Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain Viana do Castelo, Portugal Viseu, Portugal Warsaw, Poland Rio de Janeiro has the following partner/friendship cities: Berlin, Germany Kansas City, United States Moscow, Russia New York, United States Paris, France Philadelphia, United States Tokyo, Japan Toronto, Canada Yerevan, Armenia Rio de Janeiro is a part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities. Rio de Janeiro has the second-largest GDP of any city in Brazil, surpassed only by São Paulo. According to the IBGE, it was approximately US$201 billion in 2008, equivalent to 5.1% of the national total. Taking into consideration the network of influence exerted by the urban metropolis (which covers 11.3% of the population), this share in GDP rises to 14.4%, according to a study released in October 2008 by the IBGE. Greater Rio de Janeiro, as perceived by the IBGE, has a GDP of US$187 billion, constituting the second largest hub of national wealth. Per capita GDP is US$11,786. It concentrates 68% of the state's economic strength and 7.9% of all goods and services produced in the country. The services sector comprises the largest portion of GDP (65.5%), followed by commerce (23.4%), industrial activities (11.1%) and agriculture (0.1%). Benefiting from the federal capital position it had for a long period (1763–1960), the city became a dynamic administrative, financial, commercial and cultural center. Rio de Janeiro became an attractive place for companies to locate when it was the capital of Brazil, as important sectors of society and of the government were present in the city. The city was chosen as headquarters for state-owned companies such as Petrobras, Eletrobras, Caixa Econômica Federal, National Economic and Social Development Bank and Vale (which was privatized in the 1990s). The Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange (BVRJ), which currently trades only government securities, was the first stock exchange founded in Brazil in 1845. The off-shore oil exploration in the Campos Basin began in 1968 and became the main site for oil production of Brazil. This caused many oil and gas companies to be based in Rio de Janeiro, such as the Brazilian branches of Shell, EBX and Esso. For many years Rio was the second largest industrial hub of Brazil, with oil refineries, shipbuilding industries, steel, metallurgy, petrochemicals, cement, pharmaceutical, textile, processed foods and furniture industries. Major international pharmaceutical companies have their Brazilian headquarters in Rio such as: Merck, Roche, Arrow, Darrow, Baxter, Mayne, and Mappel. Recent decades have seen a sharp transformation in its economic profile, which is becoming more and more one of a major national hub of services and businesses. The city is the headquarters of large telecom companies, such as Intelig, Oi and Embratel. Major Brazilian entertainment and media organizations are based in Rio de Janeiro like Organizações Globo and also some of Brazil's major newspapers: Jornal do Brasil, O Dia, and Business Rio. Tourism and entertainment are other key aspects of the city's economic life. The city is the nation's top tourist attraction for both Brazilians and foreigners. In Greater Rio, which has one of the highest per capita incomes in Brazil, retail trade is substantial. Many of the most important retail stores are located in the center, but others are scattered throughout the commercial areas of the other districts, where shopping centers, supermarkets, and other retail businesses handle a large volume of consumer trade. Rio de Janeiro is (as of 2014[update]) the second largest exporting municipality in Brazil. Annually, Rio exported a total of $7.49B (USD) worth of goods. The top three goods exported by the municipality were crude petroleum (40%), semi finished iron product (16%), and semi finished steel products (11%). Material categories of mineral products (42%) and metals (29%) make up 71% of all exports from Rio. Compared to other cities, Rio de Janeiro's economy is the second-largest in Brazil, behind São Paulo, and the 30th largest in the world with a GDP of R$ 201,9 billion in 2010. The per capita income for the city was R$22,903 in 2007 (around US$14,630). Largely because of the strength of Brazil's currency at the time, Mercer's city rankings of cost of living for expatriate employees, reported that Rio de Janeiro ranked 12th among the most expensive cities in the world in 2011, up from the 29th position in 2010, just behind São Paulo (ranked 10th), and ahead of London, Paris, Milan, and New York. Rio also had the most expensive hotel rates in Brazil, and the daily rate of its five star hotels were the second most expensive in the world after only New York. Rio de Janeiro is Brazil's primary tourist attraction and resort. It receives the most visitors per year of any city in South America with 2.82 million international tourists a year. Attractions in the city include approximately 80 kilometers of beaches, Corcovado and Sugarloaf mountains, and the Maracanã Stadium. While the city had in past had a thriving tourism sector, the industry entered a decline in the last quarter of the 20th century. Annual international airport arrivals dropped from 621,000 to 378,000 and average hotel occupancy dropped to 50% between 1985 and 1993. The fact that Brasília replaced Rio de Janeiro as the Brazilian capital in 1960 and that São Paulo replaced Rio as the country's commercial, financial and main cultural center during the mid-20th century, has also been cited as a leading cause of the decline. Rio de Janeiro's government has since undertaken to modernize the city's economy, reduce its chronic social inequalities, and improve its commercial standing as part of an initiative for the regeneration of the tourism industry. Rio de Janeiro is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight. The city is an important global LGBT destination, 1 million LGBT tourists visiting each year. The Farme de Amoedo Street "Rua Farme de Amoedo" is located in Ipanema, a neighborhood in the South Zone of the city. The street and the nearby beach are popular in the LGBT community.[citation needed] The city of Rio de Janeiro is served by the following airports for use: Galeão–Antônio Carlos Jobim International Airport: used for all international and most of the domestic flights. The airport is connected to the express bus service. Santos Dumont Airport: used mainly by the services to São Paulo, some short and medium-haul domestic flights, and general aviation. The passenger terminal has undergone extensive renovation and expansion, which increased its capacity to 9,9 million users a year. The airport is connected to the city light rail system (Rio de Janeiro Light Rail), which connects several transport systems to downtown.[citation needed] Jacarepaguá-Roberto Marinho Airport: used by general aviation and home to the Aeroclube do Brasil (Brasil Flying club).[citation needed] The airport is located in the district of Baixada de Jacarepaguá. Military airports include: Galeão Air Force Base: A Brazilian Air Force airbase, sharing some facilities with Galeão - Antônio Carlos Jobim International Airport; Santa Cruz Air Force Base: A Brazilian Air Force airbase. Formerly called Bartolomeu de Gusmão Airport, it was built by the Luftschiffbau Zeppelin. Today it is one of the most important Air Force Bases in Brazil; Afonsos Air Force Base: One of the historical Brazilian Air Force airbases. It is also the location of the University of the Air Force (Universidade da Força Aérea), the Museu Aeroespacial, and where air shows take place. The Port of Rio de Janeiro is Brazil's third busiest port in terms of cargo volume, and it is the center for cruise vessels. Located on the west coast of the Guanabara Bay, it serves the States of Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Espírito Santo. The port is managed by Companhia Docas di Rio de Janeiro. The Port of Rio de Janeiro covers territory from the Mauá Pier in the east to the Wharf of the Cashew in the north. The Port of Rio de Janeiro contains almost seven×10^3 m (23×10^3 ft) of continuous wharf and an 883 m (2,897 ft) pier. The Companhia Docas di Rio de Janeiro administers directly the Wharf of the Gamboa general cargo terminal; the wheat terminal with two warehouses capable of moving 300 tons of grains; General Load Terminal 2 with warehouses covering over 20×10^3 m2 (215×10^3 sq ft); and the Wharves of Are Cristovao with terminals for wheat and liquid bulk. At the Wharf of Gamboa, leaseholders operate terminals for sugar, paper, iron and steel products. Leaseholders at the Wharf of the Cashew operate terminals for roll-on/roll-off cargoes, containers, and liquid bulk. In 2004, the Port of Rio de Janeiro handled over seven million tons of cargo on almost 1700 vessels. In 2004, the Port of Rio de Janeiro handled over two million tons of containerized cargo in almost 171 thousand TEUs. The port handled 852 thousand tons of wheat, more than 1.8 million tons of iron and steel, over a million tons of liquid bulk cargo, almost 830 thousand tons of dry bulk, over five thousand tons of paper goods, and over 78 thousand vehicles. In 2003, over 91 thousand passengers moved through the Port of Rio Janeiro on 83 cruise vessels. In Rio de Janeiro, buses are the main form of public transportation. There are nearly 440 municipal bus lines serving over four million passengers every day, in addition to intercity lines. Although cheap and frequent, Rio's transportation policy has been moving towards trains and subway in order to reduce surface congestion and increase carrier capacity. Rio's public transportation service has been a target of many critics and the motive of the 2013's protests and manifestations that started in São Paulo and spread through the entire country. According to the people, the raise in the bus and subway fares are invalid, seeing that the amount charged is too high for the low quality of the services. The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Rio de Janeiro, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 95 min. 32% of public transit riders, ride for more than two hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 19 min, while 35% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 12.3 km (8 mi), while 37% travel for over 12 km (7 mi) in a single direction. The Rio de Janeiro Metro has three subway lines with 58 km (36 mi) and 41 stations plus several commuter rail lines. The Metro is Rio's safest and cleanest form of public transport in the city. The first line runs from General Osório in Ipanema to Uruguai Station in Tijuca; the second runs from Botafogo terminating at Pavuna in northern Rio; and the third line General Osório to Jardim Oceânico Station, in Barra da Tijuca neighborhood. Integration with buses are possible in several forms. The city also has a commuter rail system operated by SuperVia that connects the city of Rio with other locations in Greater Rio de Janeiro with surface trains. It has 8 lines and 270 km (168 mi), with 102 stations. It carries around 750,000 passengers a day on a railroad network comprising 104 stations in 12 cities: Rio de Janeiro, Duque de Caxias, Guapimirim, Nova Iguaçu, Nilópolis, Mesquita, Queimados, São João de Meriti, Belford Roxo, Japeri, Paracambi and Magé. The Rio de Janeiro Light Rail is a modern light rail system serving with 28 km (17 mi), 42 stations, distributed in 3 lines. The trams are the first in the world to use a combination of ground-level power supply (APS) and on-board supercapacitor energy storage (SRS), in order to eliminate overhead lines along the entire route. The network uses 32 Alstom Citadis 402 low-floor trams carrying 420 passengers each. They are bi-directional, air-conditioned, have seven sections, and eight doors per side. The Santa Teresa Tram is the oldest operating electric tramway in Latin America, commenced electric operation in 1896, replacing horse-drawn trams and extending the route. At this time the gauge was altered to 1,100 mm (3 ft 7+5⁄16 in), which remains the case today. It was designated a national historic monument in 1985.: 111  After a derailment occurred on 27 August 2011, which left six dead, tram service was suspended to improve the system. The elderly tramcars, which dated from the 1950s, were retired and replaced with newly built replicas that have the appearance of the old fleet but with new mechanical equipment and additional safety features; delivery began in 2014. The line's track was also rebuilt, and after some delays, about one-third of the line reopened in July 2015. More sections reopened later in stages, following repair of additional sections of track. The line was restored to its full pre-2011 length of 6 km (4 mi) in January 2019. The most geographically close sister city to Rio that is on the other side of Guanabara Bay is Niterói. Many people who live in Niterói, as well its neighboring municipalities São Gonçalo and Maricá, commute to Rio de Janeiro to study and work. There are several ferry services that operate between the Rio Centro (Praça XV) and Niterói (Centro and Charitas). There is a traditional boat as well as several "fast cat" hydrofoil boats. One of the city neighborhoods is Paquetá Island, which can only be accessed by ferryboats or hydrofoil boats. The ferryboat to Paquetá leaves every hour, from early in the morning until around midnight. There is also a ferry to Cocotá. City buses, which come in both non-air conditioned and air conditioned versions, cost about R$4,30 to ride. The system may be relatively safe by day but less so at night. Integration of bus lines has been recently implemented, allowing users to take two non-air conditioned bus rides in two hours paying just one ticket. It is necessary to have a registered electronic card (the "Bilhete Único Carioca (BUC)") in order to benefit of this system. Another type of local bus is called the "Frescão" (air-conditioned). These buses run several routes, the main being from Centro through Botafogo, Copacabana and Ipanema to Leblon (and vice versa), and from the International Airport to Barra, through the beach road. They are air conditioned – about 22 °C (72 °F) – more upscale/comfortable and cost between R$13.35–R$19.95. However, it is only available during weekdays. The buses also run more frequently during the rush hours in the morning and evening. Going in the direction of Centro (city center), the bus can be flagged down on the beach road (buses with plaques showing "Castelo"). Driving in Rio de Janeiro, as in most large cities of Brazil, might not be the best choice because of the large car numbers. The city is served by a number of expressways, like Linha Vermelha, Linha Amarela, Avenida Brasil, Avenida das Américas and Avenida Infante Dom Henrique (Aterro do Flamengo); in spite of this, traffic jams are very common. Because of the organization of the 2016 Olympics the city is installing four BRT systems to link Barra da Tijuca with other major neighborhoods: TransOlimpica (between Barra and Deodoro); TransBrasil (over the Avenida Brasil expressway); TransCarioca (between Barra and the Galeão International Airport); and TransOeste (between Barra and Santa Cruz, over Avenida das Américas). In Brazil, most interstate transportation is done by road. A large terminal for long-distance buses is in the Santo Cristo neighborhood of Rio de Janeiro. There are also two port facilities for cargo and passenger ships (Rio de Janeiro and Sepetiba port). Rio has roads to all neighbor States. Some roads (like Via Dutra, to São Paulo, and a stretch of the BR-101 which covers the Rio-Niterói bridge) were chartered to private enterprises. The quality of the highways improved much, but was accompanied by a significant increase of the toll fees. From São Paulo: take the BR-116 (Presidente Dutra Federal Highway) or the BR-101 (Rio-Santos Federal Highway). From Belo Horizonte: BR-040. From Salvador: BR-101 or BR-324/BR-116/BR-393/BR-040. The city has 160 km (99 mi) of cycle paths that, wherever they exist, are very much preferable to riding in the city's traffic. Most paths run alongside beaches and extend intermittently from the Marina da Glória, Centro, through Flamengo, Copacabana and Ipanema, to Barra da Tijuca and Recreio dos Bandeirantes. six km (3.7 mi) of cycle paths traverse the Tijuca National Park. The Bike Rio began operations in October 2011. This bicycle sharing system is sponsored by the municipal government of Rio de Janeiro in partnership with Banco Itaú. The bike sharing system has 600 bicycles available at 60 rental stations in 14 neighborhoods throughout the city. As of 2021[update] only 65% of sewage was properly treated, leaving 35% to be improperly discharged. As of 2022[update] there were at least 400 illicit sewage disposal points in the drainage network. National policy changes in 2020-2021 for the universalization of sanitation kept the 2007 policy defining the municipality as the provider of sanitation service, delegating the organization, supervision, and provision of services to third parties. The National Water and Basic Sanitation Agency [pt] (ANA) is responsible for the setting standards regulating basic public sanitation services. In 2021-2022, distribution and treatment of sewage of the Rio State Water and Sewage Company [pt] (CEDAE) was divided into four blocks and auctioned to Aegea (Águas do Rio) and Iguá; CEDAE remained in control of water collection and treatment of drinking water. The Rio State Environmental Institute [pt] (INEA) has primary responsibility for water pollution monitoring and enforcement. Rio de Janeiro is a main cultural hub in Brazil. Its architecture embraces churches and buildings dating from the 16th to the 19th centuries, blending with the world-renowned designs of the 20th century. Rio was home to the Portuguese Imperial family and capital of the country for many years, and was influenced by Portuguese, English, and French architecture. Rio de Janeiro has inherited a strong cultural role from the past. In the late 19th century, there were sessions held of the first Brazilian film and since then, several production cycles have spread out, eventually placing Rio at the forefront of experimental and national cinema. The Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival has been held annually since 1999. Rio currently brings together the main production centers of Brazilian television. Major international films set in Rio de Janeiro include Blame it on Rio; the James Bond film Moonraker; the Oscar award-winning, critically acclaimed Central Station by Walter Salles, who is also one of Brazil's best-known directors; and the Oscar award-winning historical drama, Black Orpheus, which depicted the early days of Carnaval in Rio de Janeiro. Internationally distributed Brazilian-made movies illustrating a darker side of Rio de Janeiro include Elite Squad and City of God. Rio has many important cultural landmarks, such as the Biblioteca Nacional (National Library), one of the largest libraries in the world with collections totalling more than 9 million items; the Theatro Municipal; the National Museum of Fine Arts; the Carmen Miranda Museum; the Rio de Janeiro Botanical Garden; the Parque Lage; the Quinta da Boa Vista; the Imperial Square; the Brazilian Academy of Letters; the Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro; and the Natural History Museum. After Brazilian independence from Portugal in 1822, Rio de Janeiro quickly developed a European-style bourgeois cultural life, including numerous newspapers, in which most 19th-century novels were initially published in serial. Joaquim Manuel de Macedo's A Moreninha (1844) was perhaps the first successful novel in Brazil and inaugurates a recurrent 19th-century theme: a romantic relationship between idealistic young people in spite of cruelties of social fortune. The first notable work of realism focusing on the urban lower-middle class is Manuel Antônio de Almeida's Memórias de um sargento de milícias (1854), which presents a series of picaresque scenes, and evokes the transformation of a town into a city with suggestive nostalgia. Romantic and realist modes both flourished through the late 19th century and often overlapped within works. Machado de Assis is from Rio de Janeiro, and is widely regarded as the greatest writer of Brazilian literature and considered the founder of Realism in Brazil, with the publication of The Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas (1881). He commented on and criticized the political and social events of the city and country such as the abolition of slavery in 1888 and the transition from Empire to Republic with his numerous chronicles published in newspapers of the time. Many of his short stories and novels, like Quincas Borba (1891) and Dom Casmurro (1899), are placed in Rio. The headquarters of the Brazilian Academy of Letters is based in Rio de Janeiro. It was satirized by the novelist Jorge Amado in Pen, Sword, Camisole. Amado, himself, went on to be one of the 40 members of the academy. The Biblioteca Nacional (National Library of Brazil) ranks as one of the largest libraries in the world. It is also the largest library in all of Latin America. Located in Cinelândia, the National Library was originally created by the King of Portugal, in 1810. As with many of Rio de Janeiro's cultural monuments, the library was originally off-limits to the general public. The most valuable collections in the library include: 4,300 items donated by Barbosa Machado including a precious collection of rare brochures detailing the History of Portugal and Brazil; 2,365 items from the 17th and 18th centuries that were previously owned by Antônio de Araújo de Azevedo, the "Count of Barca", including the 125-volume set of prints "Le Grand Théâtre de l'Univers;" a collection of documents regarding the Jesuítica Province of Paraguay and the "Region of Prata;" and the Teresa Cristina Maria Collection, donated by Emperor Pedro II. The collection contains 48,236 items. Individual items of special interest include a rare first edition of Os Lusíadas by Luis de Camões, published in 1584; two copies of the Mogúncia Bible; and a first edition of Handel's Messiah. The Real Gabinete Português de Leitura (Portuguese Royal Reading Library) is located at Rua Luís de Camões, in the Centro (Downtown). The institution was founded in 1837 by a group of forty-three Portuguese immigrants, political refugees, to promote culture among the Portuguese community in the then capital of the Empire. The history of the Brazilian Academy of Letters is linked to the Real Gabinete, since some of the early meetings of the academy were held there. The official song of Rio de Janeiro is "Cidade Maravilhosa", which means "marvelous city". The song is considered the civic anthem of Rio, and is always the favorite song during Rio's Carnival in February. Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, are considered the center of the urban music movement in Brazil. "Rio was popularized by the hit song "The Girl from Ipanema", composed by Antônio Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de Moraes and recorded by Astrud Gilberto and João Gilberto, Frank Sinatra, and Ella Fitzgerald. It is also the main key song of the bossa nova, a music genre born in Rio. A genre unique to Rio and Brazil as a whole is Funk Carioca. While samba music continues to act as the national unifying agent in Rio, Funk Carioca found a strong community following in Brazil. With its genesis in the 1970s as the modern black pop music from the United States, it evolved in the 1990s to describe a variety of electronic music associated with the current US black music scene, including hip hop, modern soul, and house music." Brazil's return to democracy in 1985 allowed for a new music expression which promoted creativity and experimentation in expressive culture, in a wave of Rock'n'roll that swept the 80s. Lobão emerged as the most legendary rocker in Brazil. Commercial and cultural imports from Europe and North America have often influenced Brazil's own cultural output. For example, the hip hop that has stemmed from New York is localized into forms of musical production such as Funk Carioca and Brazilian hip hop. Bands from Rio de Janeiro also had influence in the mid-to-late development of the Punk in Brazil, and that of Brazilian thrash metal. Democratic renewal also allowed for the recognition and acceptance of this diversification of Brazilian culture. Some of the best artists in the history of Brazilian popular music hail from Rio de Janeiro, including aforementioned Lobão, Tim Maia, Agepê, Emílio Santiago, Evandro Mesquita, Byafra, Erasmo Carlos, Elymar Santos, Kátia Cega, Ivan Lins, Marcos Valle, Jorge Ben Jor e Wilson Simonal. Rio de Janeiro's Theatro Municipal is one of the most attractive buildings in the central area of the city. Home of one of the largest stages in Latin America and one of Brazil's best-known venues for opera, ballet, and classical music, the building was inspired by the Palais Garnier, home of the Paris Opera. Construction of the Theatro Municipal began in 1905 following designs of the architect Francisco Pereira Passos. The statues on the top, of two women representing Poetry and Music, are by Rodolfo Bernardelli, and the interior is rich with furnishings and fine paintings. Inaugurated in 1909, the Teatro Municipal has close to 1,700 seats. Its interior includes turn of the century stained glass from France, ceilings of rose-colored marble and a 1,000 pound crystal bead chandelier surrounded by a painting of the "Dance of the Hours". The exterior walls of the building are dotted with inscriptions bearing the names of famous Brazilians as well as many other international celebrities. Cidade das Artes (City of Arts) is a cultural complex in Barra da Tijuca in the Southwest Zone of Rio de Janeiro, which was originally planned to open in 2004. Formally known as "Cidade da Música" (City of Music), it was finally inaugurated at the beginning of 2013. The project will host the Brazilian Symphony Orchestra becoming a main center for music as will be the largest modern concert hall in South America, with 1,780 seats. The complex spans approximately 90×10^3 m2 (1×10^6 sq ft) and also features a chamber music hall, three theaters, and 12 rehearsal rooms. From the terrace there is a panoramic view of the zone. The building was designed by the French architect Christian de Portzamparc and construction was funded by the city of Rio de Janeiro. A series of covered theaters collectively known as Lona Cultural, administered by the city's Municipal Secretary of Culture, serve throughout the city as venues for cultural activities such as concerts, plays, workshops, art and craft fairs, and courses. Every 31 December, 2.5 million people gather at Copacabana Beach to celebrate New Year's in Rio de Janeiro. The crowd, mostly dressed in white, celebrates all night at the hundreds of different shows and events along the beach. It is the second-largest celebration only next to the Carnival. People celebrate the New Year by sharing chilled champagne. It is considered good luck to shake the champagne bottle and spray around at midnight. Chilled champagne adds to the spirit of the festivities. Rio Carnival is an annual celebration in the Roman Catholic tradition that allows merry-making and red meat consumption before the more sober 40 days of Lent penance which culminates with Holy or Passion Week and Easter. The tradition of Carnaval parades was probably influenced by the French or German courts and the custom was brought by the Portuguese or Brazilian Imperial families who had French and Austrian German ancestors. Up until the time of the marchinhas, the revelry was more of a high class and Caucasian-led event. The influence of the African-Brazilian drums and music became more noticeable from the first half of the 20th century. Rio de Janeiro has many Carnaval choices, including the samba school (Escolas de Samba) parades in the sambadrome exhibition center and the popular blocos de carnaval, street revelry, which parade in almost every corner of the city. In 1840, the first Carnival was celebrated with a masked ball. As years passed, adorned floats and costumed revelers became a tradition among the celebrants. Carnival is known as a historic root of Brazilian music. Rock in Rio is a music festival conceived by entrepreneur Roberto Medina for the first time in 1985, and since its creation, recognized as the largest music festival in the Latin world and the largest in the world, with 1.5 million people attending the first event, 700,000 attending the second and fourth, about 1.2 million attending the third, and about 350,000 people attending each of the 3 Lisbon events. It was originally organized in Rio de Janeiro, from where the name comes from, has become a world level event and, in 2004, had its first edition abroad in Lisbon, Portugal, before Madrid, Spain and Las Vegas, United States. The festival is considered the eighth best in the world by the specialized site Fling Festival. As in the rest of Brazil, association football is the most popular sport. The city's major teams are Flamengo, Vasco da Gama, Fluminense and Botafogo. Madureira, Bangu, Portuguesa, America and Bonsucesso are small clubs. Players born in the city include Zico, Romário and Ronaldo. Rio de Janeiro was one of the host cities of the 1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cups, for which on both occasions Brazil was the host nation. In 1950, the Maracanã Stadium hosted 8 matches, including all but one of the host team's matches. The Maracanã was also the location of the tournament-deciding match between Uruguay and Brazil, where Brazil only needed a draw to win the final group stage and the whole tournament. Brazil ended up losing 2–1 in front of a home crowd of more than 199,000. In 2014, the Maracanã hosted seven matches, including the final, where Germany beat Argentina 1–0. On 2 October 2009, the International Olympic Committee selected Rio de Janeiro to host the 2016 Summer Olympics. Rio made their first bid for the 1936 Summer Olympics, but lost to Berlin. They later made bids for the 2004 and 2012 Games, but failed to become a candidate city both times. Those games were awarded to Athens and London respectively. Rio is the first Brazilian and South American city to host the Summer Olympics. Rio de Janeiro also became the first city in the southern hemisphere outside of Australia to host the games – Melbourne in 1956 and Sydney in 2000. In July 2007, Rio successfully organized and hosted the XV Pan American Games. Rio de Janeiro also hosted the 2011 Military World Games from 15 to 24 July 2011. The 2011 Military World Games were the largest military sports event ever held in Brazil, with approximately 4,900 athletes from 108 countries competing in 20 sports. Rio de Janeiro hosted the 2016 Olympics and Paralympics. The Olympic Games were held from 5 to 21 August 2016. The Paralympics were held from 7 to 18 September 2016. The city has a history as host of major international sports events. The Ginásio do Maracanãzinho was the host arena for the official FIBA Basketball World Championship for its 1954 and 1963 editions. Later, the Jacarepaguá circuit in Rio de Janeiro was the site for the Formula One Brazilian Grand Prix from 1978 to 1989. Rio de Janeiro also hosted the MotoGP Brazilian Grand Prix from 1995 to 2004 and the Champ Car event from 1996 to 1999. WCT/WQS surfing championships were contested on the beaches from 1985 to 2001. The Rio Champions Cup Tennis tournament is held in the spring. As part of its preparations to host the 2007 Pan American Games, Rio built a new stadium, Estádio Olímpico João Havelange, to hold 45,000 people. It was named after Brazilian ex-FIFA president João Havelange. The stadium is owned by the city of Rio de Janeiro, but it was rented to Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas for 20 years. Rio de Janeiro has also a multi-purpose arena, the HSBC Arena. The Brazilian martial art capoeira is very popular. Other popular sports are basketball, beach football, beach volleyball, Beach American Football, footvolley, surfing, kite surfing, hang gliding, motor racing, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Luta Livre, sailing, and competitive rowing. Another sport that is highly popular in beaches of Rio is called frescobol (pronounced [fɾeʃkoˈbɔw]), a type of beach tennis. Rio de Janeiro is also a popular location for Rock climbing, with hundreds of routes all over the city, ranging from easy boulders to technical climbs. Sugarloaf Mountain is an example, with routes from the easy third grade (American 5.4, French 3) to the extremely difficult ninth grade (5.13/8b), up to 280 m (919 ft). Brazil portal South America portal List of people from Rio de Janeiro Outline of Rio de Janeiro "Rio de Janeiro Info". paralumun.com. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2016. "2019 population estimates. Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE)". Ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2020. "TelluBase—Brazil Fact Sheet (Tellusant Public Service Series)" (PDF). Tellusant. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2024. Retrieved 11 January 2024. "IDNM Ranking" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2013. "Gross Domestic Product of Municipalities". ibge.gov.br. Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Larousse Concise Dictionary: Portuguese-English, 2008, p. 339. "Rio de Janeiro: travel guide". Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Posição ocupada pelos 100 maiores municípios em relação ao Produto Interno Bruto" (PDF). Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (IBGE). 16 December 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2008. "The 150 richest cities in the world by GDP in 2005". City Mayors Statistics. 11 March 2007. Archived from the original on 18 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2008. "Assessoria de Comunicação e Imprensa". Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp). 17 June 2005. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 8 September 2008. "Veja o ranking das capitais mais violentas do Brasil". www.estadao.com.br. O Estado de Sao Paulo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2018. "Rio de Janeiro's Beach Culture" Archived 5 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine Tayfun King, Fast Track, BBC World News (11 September 2009) "BBC Sport, Rio to stage 2016 Olympic Games". BBC News. 2 October 2009. Archived from the original on 13 February 2019. Retrieved 4 October 2009. "Rio de Janeiro sediará cúpula do G20 em 2024". CNN Brazil (in Portuguese). 9 May 2023. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "Rio de Janeiro sediará cúpula dos chefes de Estado do G20 em 2024". G1 (in Portuguese). 9 May 2023. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Zimring, Carl A. (27 February 2012). Encyclopedia of Consumption and Waste: The Social Science of Garbage. SAGE Publications. ISBN 9781506338279. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Jorge Couto, 1995, A Construção do Brasil, Lisbon: Cosmos. "History of Rio". Paralumun.com. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Alex Robinson; Gardenia Robinson (2014). Rio de Janeiro Footprint Focus Guide: Includes Maracana Stadium, Copacabana, Paraty, Ilha Grande, Ipanema. Footprint Travel Guides. p. 28. ISBN 978-1-909268-88-3. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 9 November 2015. Romero, Simon (8 March 2014). "Rio's Race to Future Intersects Slave Past". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 10 April 2017. Sobrinho, Wanderley Preite (3 March 2008). "Chegada da família real portuguesa muda a arquitetura do Rio" [Arrival of the Portuguese royal family changes Rio's architecture]. Folha de S. Paulo (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Apresentação da Biblioteca Nacional do Brasil" [Presenting Brazil's National Library] (in Portuguese). Fundação Biblioteca Nacional. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2012. "199 anos do primeiro jornal impresso no Brasil" [199 years of Brazil's first printed newspaper]. O Rebate (in Portuguese). 20 September 2007. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012. Retrieved 10 October 2012. Coaracy, Vivaldo (1955). Livraria José Olympio Editora (ed.). Memória da cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro. p. 584.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "A África civiliza" (in Portuguese). Secretaria Municipal de Educação da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Valongo Wharf Archaeological Site". UNESCO World Heritage List. UNESCO. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2021. "Tour Rio De Janeiro's Oldest Slave Port With This New App". NPR.org. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Who is the true father of football in Brazil?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 25 November 2015. "Bangu Athletic Club History [Portuguese]". Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Suppia, Alfredo; Scarabello, Marília (7 May 2014). "As reformas do Rio de Janeiro no início do século XX" (in Portuguese). Universidade Virtual do Estado de São Paulo. Archived from the original on 23 May 2014. "Reforma Urbanística de Pereira Passos, o Rio com cara de Paris" (in Portuguese). Grupo Globo. Archived from the original on 31 December 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017. Cabral dos Santos, Marco (31 July 2005). "Revolta da Vacina: Oswaldo Cruz e Pereira Passos tentam sanear Rio". UOL Educação (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2017. Boone, Christopher G (1995). "Streetcars and Politics in Rio de Janeiro: Private Enterprise versus Municipal Government in Mass Transit Delivery, 1903–1920". Journal of Latin American Studies. 27 (2): 343–365. doi:10.1017/s0022216x00010786. S2CID 145351010. "Drugs and violence in Rio: The bottom line". The Economist. 22 October 2009. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2010.(subscription required) Juscelino Kubitschek and the city of Rio de Janeiro Archived 15 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Em 15 de março de 1975, Guanabara e Rio se transformaram num único estado". Acervo O Globo (in Portuguese). O Globo. 24 September 2013. Archived from the original on 21 November 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2017. "Where is Rio de Janeiro?". Riobrazilblog.com. 8 March 2011. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Area Territorial Official" (in Portuguese). IBGE. Archived from the original on 10 February 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2007. "Estimativas para 1° de Julho de 2006" (in Portuguese). IBGE. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 18 July 2007. ""Cochicho da Mata" recria floresta dentro da floresta" (in Portuguese). Instituto de Pesquisas Jardim Botânico do Rio de Janeiro. 7 October 2005. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2017. "Parque Estadual da Pedra Branca (PEPB)". Governo do Rio de Janeiro (in Portuguese). Instituto Nacional do Ambiente. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. Engelbrecht Ferreira, Daniel Ernesto (April 2005). "Poluição afeta Pedra Branca". O Globo (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 October 2007. Retrieved 18 July 2007. Afra Balazina (21 September 2007). "Estudo revela poluição elevada em seis capitais" [Study reveals high pollution levels in six capitals]. Folha Online (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 21 December 2007. Retrieved 26 October 2008. "Contexto ambiental da Baía de Sepetiba" (in Portuguese). Observatório Quilombola (OQ). 2001. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2008. Hélio Almeida (11 January 2011). "Lagoa de Marapendi sofre com poluição da água" [Marapendi Lagoon suffers with water pollution] (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 January 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2012. Agência Brasil (18 May 2010). "Lagoa Rodrigo de Freitas estará despoluída até 2014, diz secretário" [Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon will be unpolluted until 2014, says secretary]. O Estado de S. Paulo (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2012. "For rowers in Rio's Olympic water, it's all about avoiding the splash". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2017. Alvares, Clayton Alcarde; Stape, José Luiz; Sentelhas, Paulo Cesar; de Moraes Gonçalves, José Leonardo; Sparovek, Gerd (2013). "Köppen's climate classification map for Brazil". Meteorologische Zeitschrift. 22 (6). E. Schweizerbart'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung: 711–728. Bibcode:2013MetZe..22..711A. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2013/0507. S2CID 55147576. "BBC Weather – Rio de Janeiro". BBC Weather. Archived from the original on 1 May 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Hail falls in Rio de Janeiro's West Zone and Baixada Fluminense" (in Portuguese). Globo News. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Chuvinha de granizo – Nova Iguaçu 18-2-2013" [Little hail shower – Nova Iguaçu, 18 February 2013] (in Portuguese). YouTube. 18 February 2013. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "As hail falls, Rio enters a warning interval" (in Portuguese). G1. 28 January 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Brazil drought crisis leads to rationing and tensions". The Guardian. 5 September 2014. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Brazil's worst drought in history prompts protests and blackouts". The Guardian. 23 January 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Paraíba do Sul River might not have enough water to rescue São Paulo's Sistema Cantareira" (in Portuguese). G1. 1 February 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Tornado is responsible for havoc in Nova Iguaçu, Rio de Janeiro" (in Portuguese). Globo. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012. Retrieved 11 April 2012. "Tornado is responsible for havoc in Nova Iguaçu" (in Portuguese). Gazeta do Povo. 21 January 2011. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2012. Storm with winds above 90 km/h (56 mph) kill one in Rio Archived 8 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in Portuguese) "Bangu windstorm, inside the city of Rio, achieved near-cyclone speed" (in Portuguese). G1. 3 January 2015. Archived from the original on 2 February 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Temperatura Mínima (°C)" (in Portuguese). Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. 1961–1990. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Temperatura Máxima (°C)" (in Portuguese). Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. 1961–1990. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Temperatura Média Compensada (°C)" (in Portuguese). Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. 1961–1990. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Precipitação Acumulada Mensal e Anual (mm)" (in Portuguese). Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. 1961–1990. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Com sensação térmica de 48°C, cariocas se refugiram do calor nas praias" [Feeling like 48°C, cariocas bathe in beaches trying to escape from the heat] (in Portuguese). G1. 23 February 2010. Archived from the original on 26 February 2010. Retrieved 25 June 2013. "Sensação térmica no Rio de Janeiro chega a 50°C nesta terça-feira" [Rio de Janeiro will be feeling like 50°C this Tuesday] (in Portuguese). Yahoo! Notícias. 25 December 2012. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. "Sensação térmica no Rio ultrapassa os 50 graus" [Rio de Janeiro's feels like is now greater than 50 celsius] (in Portuguese). Rede TV!. 20 February 2013. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2013. "Sensação térmica no Rio chega aos 51 graus, diz pesquisa do Inpe" [Feels like in Rio gets in 51 celsius mark, according to research]. O Globo (in Portuguese). 3 January 2014. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2014. "Temperatura Mínima Absoluta (°C)". Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology (Inmet). Retrieved 8 September 2014.[dead link] "Temperatura Máxima Absoluta (°C)". Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology (Inmet). Retrieved 8 September 2014.[dead link] "Máximo Absoluto de Precipitação Acumulada (mm)" (in Portuguese). Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Temperatura desta quarta no Rio é recorde histórico, diz Inmet" (in Portuguese). G1 Rio de Janeiro. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2012. "Record lowest temperature since 7.3 °C (45.1 °F) in 2000". Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2012. "Número de Dias com Precipitação Maior ou Igual a 1 mm (dias)". Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Insolação Total (horas)". Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Umidade Relativa do Ar Média Compensada (%)". Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "População nos Censos Demográficos, segundo os municípios das capitais - 1872/2010". IBGE. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2010. 2010 IGBE Census (in Portuguese) Archived 14 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Portuguese) The largest Brazilian cities – 2010 IBGE Census Archived 6 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine "Censo 2022 - Panorama". Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 January 2024. 2010 IGBE Census Archived 14 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Portuguese) "Brasil 500 anos". .ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2009. Parra, FC; Amado, RC; Lambertucci, JR; Rocha, J; Antunes, CM; Pena, SD (January 2003). "Color and genomic ancestry in Brazilians". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100 (1): 177–82. Bibcode:2003PNAS..100..177P. doi:10.1073/pnas.0126614100. PMC 140919. PMID 12509516. "Tem índio no Rio". Paginas.terra.com.br. Archived from the original on 13 August 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2009. "Portuguese descent in the city of Rio de janeiro and Brazil". Presidencia.pt. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Brasil 500 anos". .ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2009. Venâncio, R.P., "Presença portuguesa: de colonizadores a imigrantes", in Brasil 500 anos, 2000, Rio de Janeiro, IBGE – Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística Archived 23 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine, from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. Os lusíadas na aventura do Rio moderno, p. 107, at Google Books Rio de Janeiro, uma cidade ... Retrieved 15 September 2011. Agencia Brasil (11 March 2011). "Consulado do Japão no Rio disponibiliza telefone para prestar informações sobre o país | Agencia Brasil". Agenciabrasil.ebc.com.br. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 15 September 2011. Guilherme Suarez-Kurtz; Daniela D. Vargens; Claudio J. Struchiner; Luciana Bastos-Rodrigues; Sergio D.J. Pena (2007). "Self-reported skin color, genomic ancestry and the distribution of GST polymorphisms" (PDF). Pharmacogenetics and Genomics. 17 (9): 765–771. doi:10.1097/FPC.0b013e3281c10e52. PMID 17700365. S2CID 23257335. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2015. "Negros e pardos do Rio têm mais genes europeus do que imaginam, segundo estudo". Meionews.com.br. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 15 September 2011. "Ensp.fiocruz.br/informe/anexos/ric.pdf" (PDF). Retrieved 23 August 2011.[dead link] Durso, DF; Bydlowski, SP; Hutz, MH; Suarez-Kurtz, G; Magalhães, TR; Pena, SD (2014). "Association of genetic variants with self-assessed color categories in Brazilians". PLOS ONE. 9 (1): e83926. Bibcode:2014PLoSO...983926D. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0083926. PMC 3885524. PMID 24416183. "2010 Population Census – Rio de Janeiro" (in Portuguese). Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics. 2010. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Brazil – Statistics by Diocese by Catholic Population". Catholic-Hierarchy.org. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Catedral Metropolitana de São Sebastião do Rio de Janeiro" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. A história da Catedral, desde a pedra fundamental, até os dias de hoje "Fiéis participam de procissão em homenagem ao padroeiro do Rio". G1. 2012. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "Rio de Janeiro – People". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2021. "International Schools in Rio de Janeiro". International Schools Database. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2020. "e-MEC". MEC – Ministério da Educação. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. Pati, Camila (17 July 2015). "As 18 melhores universidades do Brasil em 2015". EXAME.com. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. "QS University Rankings: Latin America 2015". topuniversities.com. 28 May 2015. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016. "Faculdades reconhecidas pelo MEC, Vestibular, Apostilas, Universitário, Profissão, Professor" [Colleges recognized by MEC, Vestibular, Handouts, University, Profession, Professor]. Ser Universitário (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 13 June 2011. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Trams of the World 2017" (PDF). Blickpunkt Straßenbahn. 24 January 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. "Brasilien". Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Education in Rio". Student.britannica.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Education institutions in Rio de Janeiro". Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved 29 June 2022. "Iko Poran". 5 January 2004. Archived from the original on 5 January 2004. Retrieved 11 October 2017. "FGV: desigualdade entre favela e asfalto cai no Rio". Revistaepoca.globo.com. 31 August 2010. Archived from the original on 9 October 2010. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "Rio é a cidade com maior população em favelas do Brasil". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 21 December 2011. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2017. Kleinfeld, Rachel; Barham, Elena (2018). "Complicit States and the Governing Strategy of Privilege Violence: When Weakness is Not the Problem". Annual Review of Political Science. 21: 215–238. doi:10.1146/annurev-polisci-041916-015628. "Rio violence: Police killings reach record high in 2019". BBC. 23 January 2020. Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2020. Marly Silva da Motta (2001). "O lugar da cidade do Rio de Janeiro na Federação brasileira:uma questão em três momentos" (PDF) (in Brazilian Portuguese). CPDOC-FGV. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. "Current Councilors - 8th Legislature". Municipal Chamber of Rio de Janeiro. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. "Constituição da República Federativa do Brasil: Artigo 29" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Senado Federal. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2008. "O Legislativo e os outros Poderes" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Municipal Chamber of Rio de Janeiro. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. "Projeto de lei nº 4-A/2001" (PDF) (in Brazilian Portuguese). Câmara Municipal do Rio de Janeiro. 2001. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2012. História do Palácio Guanabara Archived 14 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine, by Felipe Lucena. Diário do Rio, 4 October 2015. "História da Alerj (Assembleia Legislativa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro) e da inauguração do Palácio Tiradentes". Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "História do Palácio Tiradentes (Linha do Tempo) - Fonte: site do Palácio Tiradentes". Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Palácio Tiradentes é palco da posse de presidentes, de Washington Luís a JK". O Globo. 17 November 2017. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "TJRJ conclui segunda etapa de reforma do Fórum Central". destakjornal. 20 July 2018. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018. Retrieved 29 July 2018. "Por que o Rio deveria virar um segundo Distrito Federal, segundo este pesquisador". Nexo Jornal. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Regiões de Planejamento (RP), Regiões Administrativas (RA) e Bairros do Município do Rio de Janeiro". Data.Rio. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Lei n.º 5.407 de 17 de maio de 2012 Archived 2013-07-31 at the Wayback Machine "Dados sobre o Rio de Janeiro". Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 4 August 2022. Atlantic beach coastline of Rio de Janeiro. Rio 2014. Rio Reveillon Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine "Facts about North Zone - Rio". 25 January 2017. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "1950 World Cup Final registered the largest audience at Maracanã: 199,854 people". Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Reinventing Rio"[1] Archived 17 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Alan Riding, September 2010, Smithsonian "Inea – Portal". www.inea.rj.gov.br. Archived from the original on 19 March 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2015. "[PDF] Trail Guide of Pedra Branca State". Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2015. "Bispo do Rosário Museum, the contemporary museum of Colônia". Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2016. "SIDERÚRGICA DO ATLÂNTICO VAI GERAR 18 MIL EMPREGOS NA ZONA OESTE". Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Topo do blog Quais serão os novos ares cariocas?". Veja Rio (in Portuguese). 19 November 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014. "Acordos de Geminação". cm-arganil.pt (in Portuguese). Arganil. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Home Page". atlantariofoundation.org. Atlanta Rio de Janeiro Sister Cities Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Rio + Internacional 2009–2012 / 2013–2016". rio.rj.gov.br (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro. p. 14. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Sister Cities". ebeijing.gov.cn. Beijing. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2020. "Rio-Beirut project to link up sister cities' initiatives". anba.com.br. Brazil-Arab News Agency (ANBA). 14 March 2019. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Geminações". cm-braga.pt (in Portuguese). Braga. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Convenios Internacionales". buenosaires.gob.ar (in Spanish). Buenos Aires. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "List of Sister Cities". english.busan.go.kr. Busan Metropolitan City. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Rio e Tangier are sister cities". anba.com.br. Brazil-Arab News Agency (ANBA). 16 August 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2020.[permanent dead link] "Cidades". cm-guimaraes.pt (in Portuguese). Guimarães. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Sister Cities". chinadaily.com.cn. Guiyang. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Перелік міст, з якими Києвом підписані документи про поріднення, дружбу, співробітництво, партнерство" (PDF). kyivcity.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). Kyiv. 15 February 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 January 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "About Kobe". global.kobe-investment.jp. Global Kobe Investment. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Lei nº 6.105/2016". camara.rj.gov.br (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro. 29 November 2016. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Acordos de geminação". lisboa.pt (in Portuguese). Lisboa. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Liverpool China Sister City Partnerships". trueeducationpartnerships.com. True Education Partnerships. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Lei nº 1057/1987". Câmara Municipal do Rio de Janeiro. 15 September 1987. Archived from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2012. "Lei nº 7707/2022". Diário Oficial do Rio de Janeiro. 15 December 2022. Archived from the original on 16 December 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. "Agreements with cities". madrid.es. Madrid. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Jumelages". montpellier.fr (in French). Montpellier. Archived from the original on 26 August 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "La Déclaration de Nice signée par la Ville de Rio de Janeiro". nice.fr (in French). Nice. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Our Cities". sistercitiesokc.org. Sister Cities OKC. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Geminação entre cidades de Olhão e Rio de Janeiro vai avançar". regiao-sul.pt (in Portuguese). DiariOnline Região Sul. 9 January 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "ערים תאומות". ramat-hasharon.muni.il (in Hebrew). Ramat HaSharon. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Международные и межрегиональные связи". gov.spb.ru (in Russian). Federal city of Saint Petersburg. Archived from the original on 5 January 2018. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Samarkand and Gyeongju become sister cities". uzdaily.uz. UZ Daily. 3 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Santa Comba y Río de Janeiro refrendan su relación de amistad" (in Spanish). La Voz de Galicia. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Santa Cruz de Tenerife". arandadeduero.es (in Spanish). Aranda de Duero. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Relações internacionais / cooperação". cm-viana-castelo.pt (in Portuguese). Viana do Castelo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Cidades Geminadas com Viseu". cm-viseu.pt (in Portuguese). Viseu. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Miasta partnerskie Warszawy". um.warszawa.pl (in Polish). Warsaw. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Lei Ordinária". Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Lei Ordinária". Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Lei Ordinária". Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Lei Ordinária". Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. Mairie de Paris. "Les pactes d'amitié et de coopération". Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Lei 1383/89 – Lei nº 1383 de 10 de maio de 1989". JusBrasil. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Lei Ordinária". Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Anabailao". Retrieved 10 August 2015.[permanent dead link] "Partner cities". Yerevan Municipal Government. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "Ciudades miembro". ciudadesiberoamericanas.org (in Spanish). Unión de Ciudades Capitales Iberoamericanas. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "History of economy". Ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 3 January 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Economist (30 August 2011). "Comparing Brazilian states with countries". Magazine. Economist. Archived from the original on 10 February 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2012. "Cidade – Protected Planet". Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Rio de Janeiro %28city%29". Gold.dreab.com. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "About BCG – Rio de Janeiro". Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "IBGE – Economy of Rio de Janeiro". Sidra.ibge.gov.br. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Economy Of Rio de Janeiro, need To Know Economy Of Rio de Janeiro, About Economy Of Rio de Janeiro". Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Tourism in Rio". Portalemfoco.com.br. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Economy of Rio". Britannica.com. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. DataViva. "2014 Brazilian Trade by Municipality" Archived 6 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine, DataViva, Retrieved on 17 June 2015. DataViva. "Exports by Product for Rio de Janeiro (2014)" Archived 18 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine, DataViva, Retrieved 17 June 2015. DataViva. "International Trade by Section for Rio de Janeiro (2014)" Archived 18 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine, DataViva, Retrieved 17 June 2015. per capita income (PDF) (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: IBGE. 2005. ISBN 85-240-3919-1. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010. Retrieved 21 July 2009. "Worldwide Cost of Living survey 2011 – Top 50 cities: Cost of living ranking". Mercer. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011. "SP é a 10ª cidade mais cara do mundo para estrangeiros; RJ é a 12ª". UOL Noticias (in Portuguese). 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 15 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011. "Rio de Janeiro lidera lista de hotéis mais caros do País". UOL Noticias (in Portuguese). 23 March 2011. Archived from the original on 8 October 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011. "Rio de Janeiro is the main tourist destination in the South Hemisphere". 29 January 2010. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2010. Flickr roger4336. "Rio de Janeiro". TouristLink. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Boniface, Brian G.; Cooper, Christopher P. (2005). Worldwide destinations casebook: the geography of travel and tourism. Butterworth-Heinemann. pp. 233–35. ISBN 0-7506-6440-1. "Usually, tourists like to do as locals do – milk the city's sun-soaked atmosphere for all it is worth". BBC. 5 July 2011. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022. Do G1 RJ (24 November 2011). "G1 – Rio recebe quase 1 milhão de turistas homossexuais por ano, diz pesquisa – notícias em Rio de Janeiro". G1.globo.com. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "International Airport of Rio de Janeiro". Infraero. Archived from the original on 23 April 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Rio de Janeiro Airport". Infraero. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Jacarepaguá Airport". Infraero. Archived from the original on 6 July 2009. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "UNIFA – Página inicial". www.unifa.aer.mil.br. Archived from the original on 22 July 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2017. "MUSEU AEROESPACIAL". Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "WPS – Port of Rio de Janeiro contact information". Worldportsource.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 31 October 2012. "Port of Rio de Janeiro". Worldportsource.com. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Rio de Janeiro Public Transportation Statistics". Global Public Transit Index by Moovit. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2017. Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. "O DIA Online – Linha 3 do metrô vai receber R$35 milhões da União". odia.terra.com.br. 21 February 2008. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2009. "Metrô Rio inaugura novo Centro de Controle de Tráfego". globo.com. G1.globo.com. 7 December 2009. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Metro Rio". Metro Rio. Archived from the original on 25 January 1999. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Metro Rio Integrações". Metro Rio. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 10 August 2011. "SuperVia". SuperVia. Archived from the original on 6 January 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "You are being redirected..." www.supervia.com.br. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 7 June 2014. "Rio de Janeiro inaugurates new light rail section". Urban Transport Magazine. 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Rio de Janeiro inaugurates new light rail section". Urban Transport Magazine. 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Rio's trams will run for the Olympics: Brazil's wire-free modern tramway opens, part of a major revitalisation project for Rio de Janeiro" (July 2016). Tramways & Urban Transit, p. 244. UK: LRTA Publishing. "First Alstom Citadis Tram Delivered to Rio de Janeiro". Railway News. 10 July 2015. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Rio de Janeiro tramway inaugurated". Railway Gazette International. 6 June 2016. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2016. Morrison, Allen (November 2010; later updates). "The Tramways of Latin America in 2017". Archived 8 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 8 July 2020. Morrison, Allen (1989). The Tramways of Brazil: A 130-Year Survey. New York: Bonde Press. pp. 17, 90–113. ISBN 0-9622348-1-8. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2020. G1: Bombeiros confirmam cinco mortos em acidente com bonde no Rio Archived 20 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 9 May 2012. Morrison, Allen (2014). "Santa Teresa Tramway: Vehicles, 1875–present". Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "Worldwide Review [regular news section]". Tramways & Urban Transit. UK: LRTA Publishing. May 2013. p. 195. ISSN 1460-8324. "Bondinho de Santa Teresa passa por testes" [Testing of the Santa Teresa tramway is a saga without end]. O Dia (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro. 29 September 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Santa Teresa Tramway developments". Tramways & Urban Transit. No. 988. UK: Mainspring Enterprises Ltd. April 2020. p. 128. ISSN 1460-8324. "Passagem de ônibus municipal no Rio passa para R$ 4,30". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 30 December 2022. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "Bus – Transportation in Rio". Tripadvisor. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Secretaria de Transportes autoriza reajuste da tarifa de ônibus 'frescão'". Prefeitura da Cidade do Rio de Janeiro - prefeitura.rio (in Brazilian Portuguese). 15 February 2023. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "Driving in Rio de Janeiro". Rioholiday.com. Archived from the original on 24 May 2009. Retrieved 6 May 2009. "Getting around Rio de Janeiro". Worldtravelguide.net. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Louise Peres (28 October 2011). "Prefeitura lança Bike Rio, novo sistema de aluguel de bicicletas da cidade" [City Hall launches Bike Rio, the city's new bike sharing system]. Veja Rio (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 2 April 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2012. Louise Peres (28 October 2011). "Itaú patrocina programa de aluguel de bicicletas no Rio" [Itau sponsors bike sharing program in Rio]. Exame (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 2 April 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2012. "Brazil government sells Rio water treatment for $4 billion". Deutsche Welle. 1 May 2021. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Migliani, Felipe; Calé, Fernanda (20 November 2022). "The Degradation of Rio de Janeiro's Urban Wetlands, Part 2: Pollution Produced Through a Historical Absence of Sanitation Services". RioOnWatch. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. Law No. 14,026 of 15 July 2020 Archived 25 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine. Law No. 11,445 of 5 January 2007 Archived 3 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine. Nilson do Rosário Costa (September 2023). "Basic Sanitation Policy in Brazil: ideas, institutions and challenges in the Twenty-first Century". Revista Ciência & Saúde Coletiva. 28 (9): 2595–2600. doi:10.1590/1413-81232023289.20432022EN. PMID 37672449. Johnson, Andrew. "The endless struggle to clean up Rio de Janeiro's highly polluted Guanabara Bay". Mongabay. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "FBN Summit". Archived from the original on 8 March 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. festivaldorio.com.br "Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival". IMDb. Archived from the original on 11 July 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. "Coming Soon page". Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 14 May 2015. Piers Armstrong. "Rio's novel history". Cco.cambridge.org. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Candido; Antonio. (1970) Vários escritos. São Paulo: Duas Cidades. p.18. Faraco, Carlos Emílio e Moura, Francisco Mato. Português Projetos. São Paulo: Editora Ática, 2009, p.227. Gledson, John. J. Machado de Assis, ficção e história. Rio de Janeiro: Paz e Terra, 1986, p. 13. "National Library of Rio de Janeiro". Rio-de-janeiro.info. Archived from the original on 30 August 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Official website – National Library of Rio". Bn.br. 25 August 2008. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Um pedaço de Portugal no Rio de Janeiro – Opinião e Notícia". opiniaoenoticia.com.br. 28 May 2011. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 25 March 2016. Behague, Gerard. "Rap, Reggae, Rock, or Samba: The Local and the Global in Brazilian Popular Music (1985–1995)." Latin American Music Review 27, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2006): 79–90 Sansone, Livio. "The Localization of Global Funk in Bahia and Rio." In Brazilian Popular Music & Globalization, 135–60. London: Routledge, 2002. "Rio de Janeiro Carnival". carnivaland.net. 24 February 2004. Archived from the original on 30 May 2019. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Behague, Gerard (2006). "Globalization/Modernization: Rap, Reggae, Rock, or Samba: The Local and the Global in Brazilian Popular Music (1985–1995)". Latin American Music Review. 27 (1): 79–90. doi:10.1353/lat.2006.0021. S2CID 191430137. "Teatro Municipal do Rio". Rio-de-janeiro.info. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "New Year – Rio". Copacabana.info. Archived from the original on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 17 April 2010. Castro Brunetto, Carlos Javier (2013). "Arte popular y estética contemporánea en las escuelas de samba de Río de Janeiro". Between categories, beyond boundaries: Arte, ciudad e identidad. Granada: Libargo. pp. 112–130. ISBN 978-84-938812-9-0. "Cordão do Bola Preta in Rio". Carnaval.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2010. "Brazilian Music: Roots 3". Maria-brazil.org. Retrieved 6 May 2009.[dead link] "The Top 10 Music Festivals in the World". Festival Fling. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2017. "Ronaldo's return to glory". BBC. 8 December 2002. Archived from the original on 13 March 2009. Retrieved 4 October 2018. "Germany 1–0 Argentina". BBC. 13 July 2014. Archived from the original on 20 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Michaelis, Vicki (2 October 2009). "Rio de Janeiro to host 2016 Olympic Games". USA Today. Archived from the original on 3 October 2009. Retrieved 2 October 2009. "Rio de Janeiro, Brazil". Bid city profile and Fact sheet. GamesBids.com. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 3 July 2008. Rio 2011 Military Games Presentation Archived 25 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine Rio 2011 Official Website. Retrieved 16 July 2011. "Botafogo vai administrar estádio olímpico do Engenhão". Correio Web. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 28 August 2007. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Rio de Janeiro (category) Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Rio de Janeiro. Rio de Janeiro City Hall website (in Portuguese) back to Rio!. Royal Geographical Society of South Australia historical piece containing images of Rio, 1914. Rio de Janeiro Photo Gallery – Year of Brazil. Archived 28 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Queens College, CUNY. Rio de Janeiro clínica medica Archived 19 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine Images of Rio. Hundreds of images from the 1920s to the present. Rio de Janeiro – The Marvellous City. Archived 13 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine, AboutBrasil. Geographic data related to Rio de Janeiro at OpenStreetMap Explore Rio de Janeiro: Carioca Landscapes between the Mountain and the Sea in the UNESCO collection on Google Arts and Culture