Naya Marie Rivera (/ˈnaɪə rɪˈvɛərə/; January 12, 1987 – July 8, 2020) was an American actress, singer, and model. Recognized for her work on the popular musical comedy-drama series Glee which she starred from 2009 to 2015. She received various awards, including a Screen Actors Guild Award and nominations for two Grammy Awards. She began her career as a child actress and model, first appearing in national television commercials. At the age of four, she landed the role of Hillary Winston on the short-lived CBS sitcom The Royal Family (1991–1992), earning a nomination for a Young Artist Award at age five. After a series of recurring television roles and then guest spots as a teenager, she got her breakthrough role in 2009 as Santana Lopez on the Fox television series Glee. For the role, she received critical acclaim and various awards, including a SAG Award and ALMA Award, as well as earning nominations with the rest of the cast for two Grammy Awards and one Brit Award. She was signed to Columbia Records as a solo musical artist in 2011 and – despite never releasing a studio album – released a single, "Sorry", in 2013. She won two ALMA Awards as a music artist. On the big screen, Rivera made her debut in the horror film At the Devil's Door (2014) before playing a supporting role in the comedy Mad Families (2017). Besides performing, Rivera championed various charitable causes, particularly for LGBT rights, immigrants' rights, and women's rights. She also spoke out against racism, especially in entertainment. Her personal life garnered significant press and media attention throughout her career, and in 2016 she published a memoir titled Sorry Not Sorry: Dreams, Mistakes, and Growing Up. Because of her varied roles across her three decades as a performer, Rivera is seen as having been a vanguard of Afro-Latino and LGBT representation on television. On July 8, 2020, Rivera drowned at Lake Piru, near Santa Clarita, California, while swimming with her four-year-old son. Following a five-day search, her body was recovered from the lake on the morning of July 13. At the time of her death, she was between seasons of the television series Step Up, in which she played Collette Jones, the female lead. Naya Marie Rivera was born in Valencia, California, on January 12, 1987. She was raised in Valencia and lived in or around Los Angeles for most of her life. She was of African-American, German, and Puerto Rican descent. When the term "Afro-Latinx" became widespread in the 2010s, she was often identified as such. Her mother, Yolanda Previtire (née White), is a real estate agent and former model, while her father, George Rivera, worked various IT jobs including positions at Disney and Universal Music. Her parents had married in 1986, but divorced in 1996, and her mother was remarried to Charles Previtire in 1999; Rivera was close with her stepfather, but did not really know her grandparents. Her maternal grandmother was Clara White, an abortion counselor and figure in the civil rights movement who was involved in the March on Washington, Selma to Montgomery marches, and 1968 Chicago riots, and who organized protests with and was represented by activist and lawyer Lloyd Barbee. Rivera did not grow up speaking Spanish at home, but understood it and later learned to speak it. She was the oldest of three children: her younger brother is former NFL tight end Mychal Rivera (b. 1990), and her younger sister is runway model Nickayla Rivera (b. 1994). During the time her parents were married, the family's income would fluctuate dramatically, sometimes living lavishly and other times struggling; when they were in financial difficulty, Rivera approved the use of some of the money she earned as a child that was set aside in her Coogan account. The family owned a boat and often went boating when Rivera was a child; she still enjoyed boating as an adult and took many trips to Lake Piru near her home, which she considered a "sanctuary". At 8 or 9 months old, Rivera began to be represented by the same talent agent as her mother, who had moved to Los Angeles to pursue modeling. Rivera was a fan of Michael Jackson from a young age and became friends with one of Jackson's nieces as a child actress on the audition circuit, visiting Neverland Ranch twice (though not with Jackson present). She also met Tupac Shakur as a child; he was a fan of her acting and went over to introduce himself after spotting her family at LAX. Rivera attended Valencia High School in Santa Clarita and graduated in 2005. Her mother had convinced her to join a choir in her freshman year, but she quit it after a few weeks because she was constantly overlooked for classmate Nazanin Mandi. She challenged Mandi to a sing-off for a solo, but Mandi declined and so Rivera left. She had wanted to be a cheerleader, but her family could not afford this. Instead of high school activities, Rivera spent her free time at acting auditions. She suffered with anorexia as a teenager, something she opened up about as an adult. In 2019, Rivera described her high school experience as "terrible", indicating at other times that part of this was her attitude towards education (compared to her career), the lack of coffee served there, and racism. Rivera appeared in commercials for Kmart as a baby, but her first significant acting job was at the age of four when she appeared as Hillary Winston on the CBS sitcom The Royal Family in 1991. As she could not read the scripts, she would learn her lines through recitation and memorize them. This skill stayed with her, as she was known for learning lines quickly and never messing up on set. The show received positive reviews and high ratings initially, but it was canceled soon after star Redd Foxx suffered a fatal heart attack on set, which Rivera witnessed. Rivera wrote that she and Foxx "were intergenerational BFFs from the moment [they] met", and that she considered him like a grandfather. Watching Foxx die in front of her at a young age affected her for the rest of her life, particularly around filming season finales. Still, she said that on The Royal Family she "fell in love with being on TV"; she received a Young Artist Award nomination for her performance in the series. As a child and teen actor between 1992 and 2002, Rivera was part of the golden age of black sitcoms, and had roles in The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Family Matters, The Jersey, Live Shot, Baywatch, Smart Guy, House Blend, Even Stevens and The Master of Disguise. In 2002, she also appeared in the music video for B2K's "Why I Love You". She then had a guest appearance on The Bernie Mac Show in 2002, before returning to the show for ten episodes throughout its five-season run. Growing up mixed-race in the entertainment industry, she found that her ethnicity could both help and stifle her opportunities: sometimes she found that she could not be typecast by casting directors because she "wasn't Black enough, or Latina enough" and struggled to get roles as either ethnicity, but has also said that she "could play a lot of different ethnicities, from just plain old dark-skinned white girl, to Latino, to African-American", broadening the roles she could audition for. This also concerned her, feeling that she may have been picked for modeling jobs to be the "ethnic girl". In 2016 she discussed how she still faced racism in casting at this point in her career, using the example of an audition where she was told that she lost the part to a white woman because "the size of [her] lips [was] distracting to male execs", saying: "does she know that's racist? I'm Hispanic and black; you can't say that". As she got older, she was featured in episodes of 8 Simple Rules and CSI: Miami. She also recorded music as a teenager, with her father sneaking her into his workplace, and worked with Al B. Sure! at the age of fourteen. By this point, roles dried up and she was working less frequently. In between auditions and roles, Rivera worked jobs as a telemarketer, a nanny, and a greeter at an Abercrombie & Fitch store. In 2006 and 2007, she took part in a production of Mark E. Swinton's play, U Don't Know Me: The Musical, both in Los Angeles and when the production was taken on national tour. She also auditioned for an unspecified season of American Idol during the San Francisco auditions, but was cut in the first round. In March 2008, Rivera began studying screenwriting at New York Film Academy, graduating the same year. In 2009, Rivera was cast as Santana Lopez, a high school cheerleader, on Fox's musical comedy series Glee, about a high school glee club. She auditioned for the opportunity "to sing, dance and act all in the same show", and because she was a fan of co-creator Ryan Murphy's previous work on Nip/Tuck. She drew on her own high school experience of unpopularity to prepare for the role, as well as watching films including Mean Girls to "really get in the zone and feel like a bitchy sophomore". Rivera described her character Santana as "a bit of a bad girl" and "your typical high school cheerleader, for the most part", saying that she enjoyed playing Santana because she "always has these really witty one-liners she throws out there". The LA Times wrote that Rivera was "woefully underused for much of Glee's first season", though Santana played a more prominent part in the last nine episodes of it; Rivera said at the time that "Santana's been wreaking havoc with people's boyfriends and people's babies and teachers – she's the high school terror, and she's going to continue to be the villain". Rivera kept her job as a nanny while working on the first three episodes of Glee, not knowing if they would bring her back; Murphy was so impressed by her that he "convinced the network" to contract her at this point. After having her screen time and musical involvement increased in the second half of the first season, Rivera was promoted to series regular as of the beginning of the second season, something said to be earned because her "magnetism on screen was undeniable". She was given her first solo in the fifth episode of season two, "The Rocky Horror Glee Show", and performed several others as the season progressed. During the second season, Rivera's role in the show was radically changed when it was revealed that her character was a lesbian. Rivera portrayed Santana struggling to come to terms with her sexuality, with her love for her best friend, and with her inability to come out of the closet. Rivera spoke about the development of this aspect of her character, saying that it was first thought up by the writers as a "funny little thing" for a quick punchline; the actress pushed for the sexuality and relationship to be taken seriously. She received favorable reviews for her performance, and is celebrated for the representation that Santana and her portrayal of the character provide: one feature on Rivera's legacy said that "in a landscape starved of representation, Santana was an oasis. A bold, well-rounded, hilarious woman of colour who was openly and unapologetically gay". In 2013, Santana's second season coming-out scene was described as "one of the hallmarks of the entire series". In relation to the show, Rivera was a guest mentor on The Glee Project's second season episode "Sexuality" and, in January 2011, appeared in a Funny or Die parody of "Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang", called "Nuthin' But a Glee Thang", which had been co-written by her Glee co-star Heather Morris. Rivera and Morris played girlfriends and ultimately wives on the show; Rivera said that the pair were comfortable filming intimate scenes, but that these became awkward because "all the guys wanted to visit the set". They remained close friends for the rest of Rivera's life. In 2011, Rivera won her first ALMA Award, as Favorite Female Music Artist; she won two more in 2012, in the categories of Favorite TV Actress – Leading Role in a Comedy and Female Music Artist. She received a great amount of critical praise for both her acting and her singing performances in the latter part of season two and the beginning of season three of Glee. As 2011 ended, she or her character were on many "Best Of" lists, including HitFix's 25 Breakout Stars of 2011, TV Guide's Best Performances of 2011, and MTV's Best TV Characters of 2011 – in 2020, Santana appeared on the Thrillist list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters of the 21st Century, ranking at number 85 and the only Glee character included. In the third season, Rivera's character Santana was outed and began to publicly accept her sexuality, giving Rivera more complex and emotional storylines. She also performed a duet with Ricky Martin, and worked with Gloria Estefan, who was cast as Santana's mother. Estefan said that she studied Rivera's performance as inspiration for her own character, explaining: "I already knew [Santana] was very sarcastic, but [she] also has a heart, [...] So her mother had to be tough as nails, but with that little sarcastic edge", while also being supportive. Discussing Emmy nominations in 2012, Collider said that Rivera was "arguably the only bright spot" of the season. Study Breaks highlighted that while Santana had impactful storylines about her sexuality, she strayed from the "popular trope" of queer characters being defined by their queerness, as "she also stars in many other storylines in the show. The writers of Glee make it abundantly clear that Santana is a lesbian, but she is also a fierce, motivated dreamer who loves and loses like everyone else", with the article adding that her "firm sense of self goes beyond her race and sexuality". As the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards approached in 2012, Rivera was listed by many critics and media outlets as deserving of a nomination; The Hollywood Reporter included her in their "Emmys 2012: Supporting Players" photoshoot, the annual class photo of the 25 top contenders across the various Supporting performance categories, and she was honored by media outlets like E!, HitFix, and TV Guide. She was chosen by the Television Academy to host the "Countdown to the Emmys" video for the upcoming awards ceremony, a video introduction to each year's ceremony that is watched by an estimated 25 million people. For the awards, Rivera submitted the Glee episode "Mash Off" for consideration in the Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series category – an episode that had generated much Emmy buzz – because it "was so well rounded. [Glee is] a comedy but [she] also got to show off some dramatic aspects of the character" in it. Despite this, Rivera was not nominated for an Emmy in 2012, nor in her lifetime, with the media generally considering this a snub; The Daily Beast argued that she and other actors were overlooked because of their characters being young, while in 2020 criticism was leveled at the Television Academy for years of Latin under-representation at the Emmys. Rivera remained in a principal role on Glee in its fourth and fifth seasons from 2012 to 2014. While working on the later seasons of Glee, Rivera undertook other projects. In May 2011, it was announced that she had signed a deal with Columbia Records to produce a solo album; she said she had "been waiting for this day ever since [she] was a little girl" and that "it's always been [her] dream to release [her] own music". In 2012, the musical duo 2Cellos released the second single to their second album, a cover of Muse's "Supermassive Black Hole" featuring vocals by Rivera. She also starred in the music video for the song. Rivera and 2Cellos had first met and worked together with Grant Gustin for a song featured on Glee, with the cellists thinking that Rivera's "sexy voice" would be perfect for their Muse cover. At a point in the early production of the 2012 movie adaptation of The Hunger Games, Rivera had been considered for the role of Katniss Everdeen, a part she did not get, and was later a favorite to be cast as Johanna Mason in the sequel Catching Fire, a role she said she "would love to play". When the fourth season of Glee went into production, Rivera expressed a desire for more of her character's family to be shown and for her to have more Spanish dialogue to "really celebrate the culture", saying that there should be more Latin characters; as it began airing she said that Santana was "in limbo" and directionless. Vulture said that Rivera was "the best part of [the fourth season], even if she hasn't been in every episode"; Santana's stories included breaking up with Morris' character Brittany and moving to New York City. In the summer of 2013, Complex described her as "the biggest star on the [show]" with her own "cult-like fan base". Production of the fifth season of Glee was briefly postponed following the death of actor Cory Monteith as it was due to begin filming in July 2013; Rivera was close to Monteith and provided a statement that said he "always will be a part of [her] own family", as well as leading a moment of silence for him at the Giffoni Film Festival on July 24, 2013. In the fifth season, Santana embarks on a new relationship with Demi Lovato's character Dani before returning to Brittany, though Rivera did not appear in the season finale. Rivera's debut single "Sorry", featuring rapper Big Sean, was released as a digital download on September 17, 2013. While her most popular performances on Glee were softer ballads, she chose to write "something a little more glossy and soulful" for her own music and worked with her own team, including Glee drummer John Lock, rather than go with Columbia's suggestions; she said she told the label: "This is what I'm doing. Get on or get off. I think ["Sorry"] is a summer song, and I want it on the radio by the end of the summer". The single quickly reached the top 40 on the Billboard Rhythmic chart and the top 10 of the iTunes download chart. However, production on the album "kind of halted" due to "so many things going on". Rivera said: "Politics got involved so I've been putting it on the back burner". During this period she starred in an M&Ms commercial titled "Love Ballad" that aired during Super Bowl XLVII on February 3, 2013, as the girlfriend of the anthropomorphic "Red" M&M character, and voiced a rebellious reindeer character called Sparkle in the 2013 Christmas movie The Naughty List, for which she won a voice acting award. At the Devil's Door, Rivera's debut feature film, in which she played the lead role of Vera, premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival in Austin, Texas, on March 9, 2014. The film has been described by its director, Nicholas McCarthy, as "a unique kind of genre film I think, almost like a Rubik's Cube of a horror movie". Rivera explained that "there wasn't much screaming. It's not a jumpy film." The film was released through video on demand on August 8, 2014, and theatrically released on September 12, 2014. It continued to play at festivals, receiving mixed reviews. Rivera's acting, however, received praise. Edgar Chaput of Sound on Sight called Rivera "the standout [and] the most natural performance in the film", and Marsha McCreadie of Film Journal wrote that the film "doesn't pick up steam until late in the story, when Rivera carries the narrative". Diabolique magazine's Jeremy Kibler wrote: "Coming primarily from a TV background and fun to watch [...] the eye-grabbing Naya Rivera adjusts to the big screen with ease in front of the camera. Her Vera is headstrong and rigid but cut with just the right amount of vulnerability". On May 1, 2014, it was reported that Columbia had dropped Rivera because her debut single had underperformed, but Rivera's representative released a statement to news outlets stating that such claims were false, and they may pursue legal action to ensure Rivera's creditability. Rivera subsequently worked on a project with Guillermo Díaz, directing a short film PSA about the effect of immigration on children and their parents. Díaz's part of the project focuses on telling the stories of young DREAMers and the fear they have of their mothers being deported, and Rivera's part explores the culture of immigrants in the United States. The film is visually very stylized, and incorporates 360-degree shots. Rivera told Buzzfeed at the time that "immigration shows how beautiful America is as a country, how diverse it is [...] it's what you get when you have different cultures in one place. If everybody thought that way, [immigration] would be more of a no-brainer". In 2015, Rivera portrayed the recurring role of Blanca Alvarez in the third season of Lifetime's drama series Devious Maids, and from 2014 to 2015 was a recurring guest host of The View. She appeared in the final season of Glee in 2015, but had asked for her role to be reduced so that she could focus on other work. She was initially set to only host a few episodes of The View, but her appearances all produced "soundbites that have gone viral" and gave the show a boost on social media; it was reported that the producers were considering "bigger plans" for Rivera before she was made a more regular guest host. Rivera was the first person considered for the role of Blanca on Devious Maids, as the producers were "very interested in having a name actress play the role"; they initially did not really think that Rivera would be interested. Showrunner Brian Tanen described the character as "pivotal". Mitchel Broussard for We Got This Covered said that she was "maybe [the] most interesting" part of the season, and that her storyline "oozed the show's telenovela origins". Rivera was also working on music with Gloria Estefan around this time after having met on Glee; Rivera's pregnancy "sidetracked" this partnership and they did not produce anything. Rivera wrote a memoir called Sorry Not Sorry: Dreams, Mistakes, and Growing Up, published in September 2016, which was something she had decided to do while hosting The View and being suddenly struck when an audience member asked her what it was like to be a role model, feeling that she was in Santana's shadow. She decided to reveal more about her life and choices so that she could better feel like she deserved the title. Jarett Wieselman of BuzzFeed News wrote at the time of its release that the book was important to Rivera because "she was very pregnant when Glee ended, so it was basically impossible to capitalize on the show's momentum", but she could still write. After the birth of her son, Josey, in September 2015, Rivera chose to take some time off acting to spend with him because of the disruptive lifestyle that comes with filming for television. She returned with a secondary character role in another film, Mad Families, in 2017. The film focuses on three families – one white, one Latino, and one African-American – being forced together on a camping trip, with Rivera's "peacemaker" character Felipa being involved with both the Latino and Black families. In 2018, she auditioned for the role of Anita in the 2021 remake of West Side Story with the song "America", a song and role that she had performed on Glee. Rivera was announced as part of the cast for the YouTube Red series Step Up: High Water in 2017, taking the leading role of school administrator and dance instructor Collette Jones, alongside Ne-Yo and Faizon Love. The show's executive producer, Adam Shankman, had directed Rivera in the Glee episode "The Rocky Horror Glee Show" and helped her prepare for her first solo in it. He said that Rivera took the leading role in Step Up as "a favor" to him before becoming "the mother of [the] whole cast" and the show's "North Star". Showrunner Holly Sorensen recalled that Collette was one of the last characters to be cast; Shankman called Rivera as soon as she was discussed for the role and Rivera was immediately enthusiastic. Rivera said during the second season that the show felt like home in the way making Glee did. The series moved to Starz in May 2020, and Rivera was announced to be continuing her role; at the time, the third season was in production, but no timetable for its release was given. Of the renewal, Sorensen said Rivera was "more excited than she's ever been for a season of TV". After Rivera's death, Deadline reported that the third season would be rewritten, but "not right away" as the cast and crew took time away to process the loss. In 2019, it had been reported that the comic Batman: The Long Halloween was being adapted into a two-part animated film for DC Universe Animated Original Movies, with Rivera voicing Catwoman. The first part was released on June 22, 2021 and is dedicated in her memory; the second part was released several days later. During her career, Rivera appeared on the covers of several magazines, including Cosmopolitan, Maxim, Rolling Stone, FHM, Complex, Glow, Prestige, The Hollywood Reporter, Cosmo for Latinas, Latina, Fit Pregnancy and Baby and Galore. She was highly ranked on various magazines' most attractive lists. She made the Maxim Hot 100 list in 2010, 2011, and 2012, being ranked number 27 in 2012. For two years, in 2011 and 2012, she was ranked at number one on AfterEllen.com's "Hot 100" list, ranking at number three in 2013. In 2012 she was selected by People en Español for their 50 Most Beautiful list, and was listed on FHM's 100 Sexiest Women list, coming in at number 39. In May 2013, she posed nude in an issue of Allure magazine. Rivera was named one of The Hollywood Reporter's 35 under 35 Latinos in Entertainment in September 2012, and in October 2012 she was featured in the third episode of MTV's series This Is How I Made It. In the episode, Rivera recounted her childhood career as an actress and a model, as well as the lean times that came between the age of 16 and 21, leading up to her big break when cast on Glee. In 2013, Complex described her as "the rarest of Hollywood types: a young starlet who's genuinely down-to-earth." In December 2011 she was named a celebrity spokesperson for Proactiv, and became a brand ambassador for hair loss solution brand NIOXIN in March 2017, after experiencing hair loss after giving birth. With her diverse acting roles, Rivera is seen as having been one of the earliest, most prominent, and most profound examples of both Afro-Latino representation and queer Latinx (as Santana in Glee) representation on prime time television. Rivera has been described as a gay icon and "a true icon for all black and brown girls". In 2011, the president of GLAAD said that Rivera's storyline as Santana was "one that hasn't been told on a prime-time network television show at that level, particularly by an LGBT teen of color". Multiple scholarly works were written during Rivera's lifetime focusing on the important changes that, particularly, her portrayal of Santana brought to television with non-stereotypical stories in relation to race and sexuality – including a novel coming out story and relationship, Latinidad, and not being explicitly black- or white- coded – as well as being a minority involved in main storylines not focused on such identities. In her 2013 chapter of one such work, Isabel Molina-Guzmán added that Rivera played "the first lesbian Latina on primetime television [and thus was] honored for her compassionate and complex representation". In industry tributes after her death, NBC wrote that Rivera "[redefined] queer and Afro-Latino representation on TV"; Lionsgate wrote that her "remarkable contributions to our industry created a lasting memory"; Digital Spy said that "Naya Rivera's impact was nothing short of groundbreaking"; and NME called her a "trailblazer [who] leaves behind an enormously powerful legacy". Erika Abad, a professor of Gender and sexuality studies and scholar of Latinx studies, wrote that "Naya Rivera's characters provided solidarity and visibility, [her] career [and] diverse roles [showcase] the demand to support and build upon Afro-Latinx storylines". Similarly, Esquire wrote that "in such a short time, Rivera managed to shape a landscape and be part of measurable change". Naya Rivera's Santana Lopez started out as an antagonist. Mean, messy, complicated. All the things Latinx women often don't get to be in prime-time television [...] Naya shattered the tropes and gifted the audience with a complex, queer, Black Puerto Rican woman. Naya imbued Santana with equal parts resolve and vulnerability, and she quickly became a hero herself when Santana disclosed she was a lesbian. Naya served as a vessel for truth and by doing so brilliantly cracked the lid wide open on the possibilities of what Afro-Latinx representation could look like on TV. [...] She quietly inspired all of us Afro-Latinx storytellers to craft characters that center our identities authentically and unapologetically. – Steven Canals for Entertainment Weekly, 2020 Various journalists and television creatives wrote that Rivera merely appearing on-screen as an Afro-Latina was impactful, before the representation grew as her character Santana developed. Refinery29's Ariana Romero elaborated on the impact of Rivera appearing on television with her darker skin tone, noting that, even in 2020, shows with prominent Afro-Latinx performers – with the exception of Pose – are mostly canceled after one season, and that other queer Latinx characters exist as "one extremely restrictive vision" in which they "are all fairer-skinned" and have personalities that fit a stereotypical mold, while "Santana looks nothing like these [other characters]. She acts like them even less". Ms. noted that though there was much more queer representation by 2020, Rivera's push for Santana's relationship to be handled well marks the character as "one of the few lesbian characters to ultimately have a happy ending". A BBC retrospective in 2020 looked at the impact of Rivera's role as Santana in providing important representation, internationally, for young queer women and the idea of being out in the music industry. The article did note that casting a straight actress for the role may have been frowned upon in later years, but that having the representation was revolutionary at the time and it was positive that Rivera openly embraced playing the lesbian character. Queer media journalist Dana Piccoli wrote a tribute feature on the actress's legacy for NBC, saying: "I don't use the word "legacy" lightly. But Rivera and her beloved Glee character, Santana Lopez, helped change queer television history". Piccoli and other journalists stated that later examples of representation, like Elena Alvarez in One Day at a Time and characters in Vida, are attributable to Rivera's role, and the executive editor of them., Whembley Sewell, said when interviewed on the subject by NPR that "what [LGBTQ people of color] are going to create and put out into the world because [Rivera] gave us what she did is going to be so, so incredible". Steven Canals – a co-creator of the 2018 show Pose, which is set in queer African-American and Latinx culture – wrote that he will "never be able to articulate the importance of seeing Naya [Rivera], a Black Puerto Rican, portraying a queer Afro-Latina on prime-time TV" at the time. Rivera dated actor Tahj Mowry between 2000 and 2004, after having first met shooting a commercial when Rivera was four and later working together on Smart Guy in the 1990s. She remained close with Tahj and his family, particularly his sisters, Tia and Tamera Mowry, for many years, including helping the sisters find an apartment when they got kicked out of their house and appearing on Tia Mowry at Home in 2017. In an Instagram tribute post on July 12, 2020, after Rivera was declared missing, Mowry wrote that he never stopped loving Rivera. Between 2008 and 2010, Rivera dated Glee co-star Mark Salling. The two had a rocky relationship and ultimately split at the request of Salling's publicist; she later said that Salling breaking up with her felt like "the worst thing ever" at the time. Salling was arrested in 2015 for possessing child pornography; in her book (written before Salling's subsequent suicide), Rivera expressed that she was not "totally shocked" at this, but it still took her by surprise. She then briefly dated actor Ryan Dorsey, whom she would later marry. In her memoir, Rivera revealed that she had an abortion in 2010, shortly after splitting from Dorsey, due to the fact that her career was taking off with the success of Glee; she did not tell Dorsey about the abortion until they got back together in 2014, and said that he was supportive and respectful when she did. She wrote about the abortion in her book "[to use] her platform [to] tackle the stigma". In April 2013 she began dating recording artist Big Sean, and the couple announced their engagement in October 2013 but split up in April 2014. While they were together, Big Sean rapped about her in his featured part on the track "All Me" by Drake. In her memoir, Rivera wrote that she found out their relationship was over "at the same time as the rest of the world" when Big Sean published the news on the internet. After they broke up, she asked Big Sean not to write a song about her; this instead encouraged him to do so, and he added verses about Rivera to a song he was writing called "I Don't Fuck with You", which became the lead single from his 2015 album Dark Sky Paradise. The song peaked at number 1 on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Rivera performed the song on a 2018 episode of Lip Sync Battle, seen as shading him. In 2017, Big Sean released another diss track about Rivera, "No More Interviews", which In Touch Weekly said "really takes aim at Naya's neck". Soon after her split from Big Sean, Rivera rekindled her relationship with Ryan Dorsey and they were married in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, on July 19, 2014; they did not announce the engagement or wedding until July 23. In February 2015, Rivera announced that she and Dorsey were expecting their first child, and their son, Josey Hollis, was born on September 17, 2015. Rivera was raising Josey as bilingual in Spanish and English, having improved her own knowledge of Spanish with this intention. In November 2016, she filed for divorce from Dorsey after two years of marriage, but called off the separation in October 2017. During this separation she was linked with actor David Spade. In late November 2017, Rivera was arrested and charged in Kanawha County, West Virginia, with misdemeanor domestic battery against Dorsey after she allegedly hit him in the head during an altercation over their child; she was released and picked up from the courthouse by her father-in-law. She subsequently refiled for divorce in December 2017, and in January 2018 the domestic battery charge was dismissed at the request of Dorsey, who "notified both the prosecution and the defense counsel that he was no longer seeking prosecution and has confirmed he was never at any time injured by the conduct of Ms. Rivera". On June 14, 2018, Rivera and Dorsey finalized their divorce, sharing joint custody of Josey, with both waiving rights to child support. The joint custody agreement was modified in March 2020, giving Rivera primary custody while stipulating Dorsey "be afforded frequent and meaningful custodial contact"; after Rivera's death, Dorsey took sole custody. Rivera was in a relationship with retired soccer player Jermaine Jones in 2020. In January 2015, during an appearance as a guest host on The View, Rivera suggested "that she might be bisexual". In the episode, Rosie O'Donnell remarked on a study showing that bisexual women were more likely to have mental health problems than lesbians, to which Rivera replied: "Rosie, no wonder I'm crazy. This just solves it all". Esquire wrote after her death that "Rivera never disclosed her real-life sexuality", and Gay Times included her and character Santana on their list of "beloved LGBTQ+ characters who were actually played by LGBTQ+ actors". Rivera notably supported various charities, particularly for the LGBT+ community and immigrants. She dedicated her time to organizations including GLAAD, Stand Up to Cancer, The Trevor Project, The Elephant Project, The Sunshine Foundation, I Am an Immigrant, Alliance of Moms, Point Foundation, the Thirst Project, FEED, Los Angeles Mission, Get Schooled, and Kindred Foundation. In 2009 she said: "I feel like [...] participating in charity events or giving back to the community [...] is really important to do because I feel like I am so blessed with my job and my life right now that I would love to take time to bowl for a cause. I hope to raise money to help some other people that are in a really tough situation." Her publicist from her time on Glee described Rivera as "ahead of her time" in terms of being an advocate, saying that she "really wanted to use her platform and her voice for good, whether it was for anti-bullying, for equal rights, for women of color, she wanted to use this role to help talk about a bigger message". Best known for lesbian character Santana, Rivera also championed LGBT+ rights off-screen. In May 2011, she hosted the San Francisco GLAAD Media Awards, and on March 24, 2012, she hosted the event again, this time in New York City as a co-host with Glee co-star Cory Monteith. Along with John Stamos, a guest star on the show, both hosts auctioned off kisses to the crowd, raising $15,000. In December 2012 she attended the annual Trevor Live! event, where she performed a cover of the song "Silent Night", and for Pride Month in 2017 she was invited to write for Billboard, composing "Love Letter to the LGBTQ Community", thanking fans for embracing her character and reiterating her active support for the community. In other charitable endeavors, Rivera volunteered at Los Angeles area food banks and homeless shelters and the Foothill AIDS Project in 2009, and performed with Amber Riley at the 10th Annual Celebration of Dreams Event for the Dream Foundation in November 2011. In October 2012, along with other members of the Glee cast, Rivera took part in "The Biggest Show", a performance of young writers' scripts for the literacy non-profit Young Storytellers. Rivera's favorite charity was Alexandria House, a women's shelter in Los Angeles, which she organized fundraisers for and volunteered at during 2019 and 2020. After her death, a GoFundMe drive she had started for Alexandria House saw an influx of donations in her memory. On June 5, 2020, Rivera attended a Black Lives Matter protest, on what would have been Breonna Taylor's birthday. She gave her support to Black Lives Matter on other occasions. In August 2020, Entertainment Tonight announced that, to "continue [honoring] Rivera's legacy", they would be promoting some of the causes closest to the late star. In December 2020, members of the Glee cast launched a campaign called Snixxmas to benefit Alexandria House, continuing a Christmas charity tradition Rivera had started among their friends. A lifelong Democrat, Rivera performed with the cast of Glee at the White House during the first Obama administration, as well as with Amber Riley and Darren Criss at his second inauguration. She campaigned with Everyone Votes and Rock the Vote in 2016 to promote voter participation and took part in a Funny or Die celebrity campaign song ("Holy Shit (You've Got to Vote)") that supported Hillary Clinton. Rivera wrote on her religion in her memoir, and was a lifelong Christian. Her mother became very religious for a period during Rivera's childhood, and from the age of seven until her teens she recalls that she and her brother were only allowed to listen to Christian music; in junior high school talent shows she would perform Christian songs, which "didn't really bring the house down". There was no apprehension from Rivera or her family about her lesbian storyline on Glee, with Rivera saying that her mother is "the most nonjudgmental, cool person". Rivera explained that she had always felt comfortable with her Christianity and would particularly return to it in stressful times during her career, highlighting a point in 2014 when she was receiving negative media attention after it was rumored that she had been fired from Glee in the same week Big Sean broke up with her, saying that to move on she "had to just be with [herself], and with God". On July 8, 2020, Rivera was declared a missing person after her four-year-old son, Josey, was found alone in Rivera's rented boat at Lake Piru, a reservoir in the Los Padres National Forest in Ventura County, California. Rivera had been visiting the lake for years, and was considered a strong swimmer. The search for both Rivera and Josey had begun at 4:00 p.m. PDT, three hours after they left the dock, when their rental was over and they had not returned. Josey was found alone, asleep on the boat with his life jacket on, around 5:00 p.m. Josey told investigators that he and Rivera were swimming when she told him to get back onto the boat. Police reports state that he recalled that she helped him climb back into the boat but was unable to climb back onboard herself and then disappeared underwater, while Ryan Dorsey's lawsuit claims that Josey Dorsey climbed aboard unaided while his mother struggled to do the same. Both accounts state that he watched his mother reaching up and calling out for help; he searched for a rope on the boat to help while she was struggling. He also stated that his mother was not wearing a life jacket. The next day, the Ventura County Sheriff's Office confirmed to NBC that Rivera was presumed dead and that rescue efforts would shift to recovery efforts. On July 11 and 12, Rivera's parents and stepfather, brother, ex-husband Ryan Dorsey and close friend and co-star Heather Morris joined the search team at the lake, and the sheriff's office dissuaded more civilians from trying to search because of dangerous terrain. On July 13, it was announced that a body had been found by divers in Lake Piru when the search resumed in the morning; the body was confirmed to be Rivera's at a press conference held later that day. The sheriff suggested that Rivera and Josey may have found themselves caught in a rip current and struggled to get back to the boat, saying that she likely "mustered enough energy to save her son, but not enough to save herself". On July 14, the Ventura County medical examiner released an autopsy report stating that the cause of death was an accidental drowning and that there was no evidence of injury or intoxication. Rivera was interred at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Hollywood Hills, a cemetery known for its many entertainment industry burials, following a private service on July 24, 2020. When people die young it really hurts, because we lose them and also their potential. [Rivera] was a guiding light for all of us struggling for more diversity and representation. – Jack Rico, NBC and Telemundo journalist Fans of Rivera posted messages of support during the time of her disappearance, and tributes after she was found dead. Her family thanked them for the "outpouring of love" in a message shared on July 15. Rivera's ex-husband Dorsey made no public statement until after Rivera's funeral, when he posted on Instagram to say that he was still finding her death hard to believe, but that having their son makes coping easier; her boyfriend Jones had made an Instagram post on the day her body was found, expressing his grief while focusing on Rivera's love for her son. Prominent politicians and performers from across music, television, film, and theatre, also shared messages in her memory. A memorial to Rivera was constructed under the Lake Piru sign in the days after her death. Lake Piru remained closed to the public for over a month after Rivera's death, and swimming became prohibited. Rivera's many Glee co-stars also paid tribute, and the show's creators, Ryan Murphy, Ian Brennan, and Brad Falchuk, announced that they planned to start a college fund for Rivera's son, Josey. Heather Morris posted photos of their sons together, calling her a "consistent and loving friend" who was the "strongest and most resilient human being [she knew]". Amber Riley, under her stage name RILEY, performed a tribute to Rivera on the August 27, 2020 episode of Jimmy Kimmel Live!. The media noted that Rivera's body was found on the anniversary of the death of her co-star Cory Monteith seven years earlier; a tribute she had sung for him, the song "If I Die Young", saw a surge of views, and other cast members made social media posts for both of the actors. Monteith's mother, Ann McGregor, also posted a lengthy tribute, writing how much Rivera's friendship had meant to her son and their family and saying: "We'll carry you in our hearts forever. We miss you. Friends reunited for eternity". In 2012, Rivera was featured on a single by the music duo 2Cellos, performing a cover of the Muse song "Supermassive Black Hole". The single, from the album In2ition, spent two weeks on the charts, reaching number 16 on the iTunes Top 100 Classical chart in the week of July 13 to July 19, 2020, and dropping to number 81 the week after. The Japanese collector's edition of In2ition also included the Glee cast feat. 2Cellos version of "Smooth Criminal", on which Rivera sang. This version of the album went to number 1 in Japan and won a Japan Gold Disc Award. In her own musical career, she released her debut single "Sorry", featuring then-boyfriend Big Sean, in 2013. The planned album had been stuck in development before being canceled entirely. Rivera's next and last release was a six-track EP titled My Heart in April 2019, containing the tracks "Seven Days", "Prayer for the Broken", "My Heart", "Think You Slick", "Beautiful Boy", and "Radio Silence". She also contributed to the original soundtrack for Step Up: High Water, singing a piano version of "Amazing Grace". In 2023, Rivera's vocals were featured on a single called "You and I" by Jaffa Moore, son of James Bond actor, Roger. At the beginning of February 2023, the single had climbed to number 21 on Rockefella TV's/Talking Pictures TV's Heritage Chart show. As a featured singer in the cast of Glee, Rivera and her castmates released many singles and held numerous accolades; in 2011 they were collectively nominated for a Grammy Award for their version of "Don't Stop Believin'", receiving an album Grammy nomination and a Brit Award nomination, and by the start of the sixth season they were the most-charting act in history – a record held until March 2020. Rivera's first Glee single as a lead vocalist was a duet cover of "The Boy Is Mine" performed with Amber Riley (as Mercedes Jones). The last Glee single to chart during the show's run was Rivera's cover of "If I Die Young". Besides her charting singles, several other performances by Rivera have been particularly highlighted, including "Girl on Fire" in season 4; "Don't Rain on My Parade" and "Doo Wop (That Thing)" in season 5; and "Science Fiction Double Feature" and the original song "Trouty Mouth" in season 2. She was a featured singer on the original song "Loser like Me", which is certified Gold; it and five other songs she performed charted in the World top 40. Rivera was first nominated for an award at the age of 5, in 1992, but did not win one until 2010, eighteen years later. After this she was consistently nominated for – and won – awards for acting, singing, and her public image, including various audience awards. For her work on Glee, she won 9 awards from 24 nominations. Her last award, given in 2018, 26 years after her first nomination, was for the cast and production of Step Up: High Water providing equal female representation. Rivera was officially pronounced dead on July 13, 2020, after her body was recovered. Her death certificate lists her legal date of death as July 13, 2020, but also notes as part of the cause of death that she died "within minutes", meaning actual date of death was July 8. Rivera's death was ruled an accidental drowning, but her ex-husband, on behalf of their son, and estate brought wrongful death lawsuits against the county and water management services in November 2020. Rivera self-described her race as "one-quarter African-American, one-quarter German and one-half Puerto Rican". Her father is Puerto Rican, while her mother is of African-American and German descent. She said that members of her family migrated from Puerto Rico and Yugoslavia. See section on Representation and legacy. A selection of such books includes Narratives at the Beginning of the 3rd Millennium eds. Homberg-Schramm, Rasokat, Schweiker; Latinos and Narrative Media: Participation and Portrayal ed. Aldama; The Palgrave Handbook of Sexuality Education eds. Allen, Rasmussen; Queer in the Choir Room: Essays on Gender and Sexuality in Glee ed. Parke; and Glee and new directions for social change eds. Johnson, Faill. Journal coverage includes Sexuality & Culture (2013; vol. 17, issue 3). Non-album single Friends From Glee is composed of Ashley Fink, Vanessa Lengies, Heather Morris, Kevin McHale, Jenna Ushkowitz, and Amber Riley Non-album single "Forget You", "Landslide", "Rumour Has It / Someone Like You", "We Are Young", and "Smooth Criminal". Shared with Cory Monteith, Lea Michele, Chris Colfer, Kevin McHale, Jenna Ushkowitz, Mark Salling and Amber Riley List of Afro-Latinos List of television actors who died during production "Glee star Naya Rivera died of accidental drowning". BBC News. July 15, 2020. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. "Naya Rivera Laid to Rest 2 Weeks After Drowning as Death Certificate Reveals She Died Within Minutes". People. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Naya Rivera: Wrongful death lawsuit filed over Glee star's drowning". BBC News. November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Naya Rivera marries actor Ryan Dorsey in surprise wedding". Los Angeles Times. July 23, 2014. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Countdown to the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards (United Airlines). Television Academy. 2012. Event occurs at 00:31. Retrieved August 5, 2020. How to Pronounce Naya Rivera. American Pronunciation Guide. July 9, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2020 – via YouTube. "Naya Rivera Bio". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2013. Simpson, Melody (March 17, 2009). "Meet Cory Monteith and Naya Rivera of Glee". Hollywood the Write Way. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2010. "Naya Rivera says being racially 'other' has affected her life, career from early age". Fox News. December 3, 2016. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Naya Rivera: Stakes Is High (2013 Cover Story)". Complex. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Carrasquillo, Adrian (June 24, 2014). "'Glee' Star Naya Rivera Welcomes Immigrants To America In Directorial Debut". BuzzFeed. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Romero, Ariana (July 17, 2020). "In Celebration Of Naya Rivera, Glee's Queer Afro-Latinx TV Icon". Refinery29. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Naya Rivera remembered as inspirational Latina who redefined Afro-Latinx representation". NBC News. July 14, 2020. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Yolanda Rivera: Who Is Naya Rivera's Mother?". The Inquisitr. July 9, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Naya Rivera buys and sells homes between 'Glee' episodes". Los Angeles Times. April 25, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2020. "Mychal Rivera Profile". UTSports. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Naya Rivera, actress and singer, 1987-2020". Financial Times. July 17, 2020. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Rivera, Naya (September 13, 2016). Sorry Not Sorry: Dreams, Mistakes, and Growing Up. New York. ISBN 978-0-399-18499-4. OCLC 956530348.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Rivera, Naya. "Naya Rivera: The story behind my abortion". USA TODAY. Retrieved August 16, 2020. "Inside Naya Rivera's Legacy as an LGBTQ TV Trailblazer: 'Meant So Much to So Many Queer Women'". PEOPLE.com. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Naya Rivera. "This morning I meditated on her, On what we are all seeing play out in front of us today. It has been playing out for decades. We have been fighting this same fight for centuries. I am proud to come from a lineage of people who stand up for what is right". Retrieved August 16, 2020 – via Twitter. "Legislator Arrested for Demonstrating: Helps Form Barricade in Front of Bus: Group Protests Transferring of Negro Children". Vol. 67, no. 190. Manitowoc Herald-Times. AP. May 24, 1965. Alternative web view: https://www.ancestry.com/sharing/21852372?h=39f8df Barbee, Lloyd A. (October 10, 2017). Justice for All: selected writings of Lloyd A. Barbee. Barbee-Wooten, Daphne; Moore, Gwen. Madison, WI. p. 146. ISBN 978-0-87020-839-3. OCLC 988028045.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Edwards, Gavin (November 7, 2013). "Naya Rivera: 'Glee' Bad Girl Aims for the Pop Charts". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Naya Rivera is Cosmo For Latinas' Spring 2014 Cover Girl!". Cosmopolitan. January 29, 2014. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "EXCLUSIVE: Naya Rivera Talks New Show 'Step Up: High Water'". LATINA. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020. Corman, Rebecca. "Get to Know Mychal Rivera". Raiders.com. The Oakland Raiders. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 16, 2013. Massabrook, Nicole (August 7, 2017). "National Sister Day 2017: Celebrities You Didn't Know Were Siblings". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2020. Retrieved January 20, 2020. "Naya Rivera Talks Invisible Skirt, Says Her Style Is 'Sexy' But Classy". Yahoo. January 12, 2017. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "EXCLUSIVE: Naya Rivera Talks 'Mad Families,' Raising Her Son Josey and Growing Up in a Crazy Family". LATINA. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Naya Rivera Visited Lake Piru 'for Years' Before Disappearance: It May Have Been a 'Sanctuary for Her'". In Touch Weekly. July 10, 2020. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Naya Rivera Boated Before on Lake Where Police Believe She Drowned". TheWrap. July 9, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "EXCLUSIVE: We Chat with GLEE's Naya Rivera". Nice Girls TV. March 12, 2009. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2010. "Rest in Peace Naya Rivera". MJVibe. July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Thompson, Eliza (September 13, 2016). "The 13 Biggest Reveals From Naya Rivera's New Book". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Inside Naya Rivera's Incredibly Full Life and the Legacy She Leaves Behind". E! Online. July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. SCVHistory | Valencia High School | 2005 Yearbook (Complete). p. 92. Retrieved August 3, 2020. "Naya Rivera Makes Shocking Confessions in New Memoir 'Sorry Not Sorry'". In Touch Weekly. September 13, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Why Naya Rivera Says Working on Step Up: High Water Reminds Her of Glee". E! Online. March 20, 2019. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Carter, Bill; Rutenrberg, Jim (November 9, 2011). "ABC Mourning Star of Series That Was Key To Its Lineup". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2009. Sarner, Lauren (July 13, 2020). "Naya Rivera's best moments: From 'Glee' to 29-year career highlights". New York Post. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (July 17, 2020). "'Step Up' Creator Holly Sorensen Mourns Naya Rivera, Shares Stories Of "One Of The Coolest And Most Beautiful People We Will Ever Know"". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2020. "Naya Rivera: We take a look at The Glee star's career highlights". Evening Standard. July 9, 2020. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Britton, Felicity (2013). The Glee cast: inspiring Gleek mania. Minneapolis: Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 978-1-4677-0153-2. OCLC 812925030. "Naya Rivera Memorable Roles: From 'Glee' to 'Family Matters' (Photos)". TheWrap. July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Bell, Amy (May 19, 2012). "Glee Rivera entered pole-dancing contest". Digital Spy. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Ramírez, Alicia (July 15, 2020). "Naya Rivera Opened Doors for Many Latinas Like Me". Oprah Magazine. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Obituary: Naya Rivera, child star who later found fame with ground-breaking role in US TV hit, Glee". HeraldScotland. July 25, 2020. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. Wieselman, Jarett (September 13, 2016). "Naya Rivera's New Direction". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Steinberg, Jamie. "Naya Rivera: Filled with Glee". Starry Constellation Magazine. Archived from the original on September 8, 2009. Retrieved January 8, 2010. Al B. Sure!. "Al B. Sure! on Instagram: "#AlBeez 🐝 around the 🌍 When you get caught up in the blogs that are looking for traffic, what's trending because I expressed my thoughts or…"". Archived from the original on September 12, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2020 – via Instagram. "Remembering Naya Rivera, a magnetic performer who broke down boundaries on 'Glee'". The Independent. July 30, 2020. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2020. Ito, Robert (May 24, 2011). "'Glee': Naya Rivera is glad to portray gay cheerleader Santana". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2011. "11 Famous Singers Rejected by 'American Idol'". Rolling Stone. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016. Pasquine, Frank (October 18, 2011). "New York Film Academy Graduates on Season 3 of Glee". New York Film Academy Blog. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Eames, Tom (October 28, 2012). "Naya Rivera: 'I nearly quit acting at 21'". Digital Spy. Retrieved August 19, 2020. "TWIST Chats With Glee's Naya Rivera". Twist. Bauer Publishing. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on November 16, 2009. Retrieved December 18, 2009. "'Glee' actress Naya Rivera's Santana comes out to applause". Los Angeles Times. May 24, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Ninojosa, Stacy (December 3, 2009). "Naya Rivera From 'Glee' Talks Santana, Singing and Spencer Pratt". Just So You Know. Archived from the original on October 9, 2011. Retrieved December 18, 2009. Dos Santos, Kristin (December 14, 2009). "Spoiler Chat: Is Jenny Humphrey a Gossip Girl Homewrecker?". E! Online. Archived from the original on December 18, 2009. Retrieved December 18, 2009. Ausiello, Michael (April 27, 2010). "'Glee' exclusive: Brittany and Santana poised for major promotions". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 29, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Browne, Emily (July 14, 2020). "Naya Rivera's profound impact on the LGBTQ+ community will not be forgotten". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Naya Rivera: remembering a trailblazer for LGBTQ+ representation". NME. July 14, 2020. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. VanDerWerff, Emily (April 27, 2011). "Born This Way". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on July 25, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Gonzalez, Sandra (March 9, 2011). "Glee recap: Let's Talk About Sex". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Goldberg, Lesley (June 28, 2012). "Emmys 2012: 'Glee's' Naya Rivera on Playing a Lesbian Role Model". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012. "Nuthin' But A Glee Thang with Heather Morris, Matthew Morrison & Sofia Vergara from Heather Morris, Sofia Vergara, Matthew Morrison, Cory Monteith, Naya Rivera, Harry Shum Jr, Riki Lindhome, Ashley Lendzion, David Bernad, Isaac Hagy, BoTown Sound, Shauna O'Toole, Funny Or Die, Keith Schofield, Brian Mulchy, and Christin Trogan". Funny or Die. March 22, 2011. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Alter, Rebecca (July 15, 2020). "Heather Morris Is 'Taking Time to Honor My Grief' Following Naya Rivera's Death". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. "Naya Rivera's screen wife remembers 'loving friend'". BBC News. July 16, 2020. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Heather Morris Details Her Friendship With Naya Rivera In Touching Tribute". CINEMABLEND. July 17, 2020. Archived from the original on August 3, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "2011 ALMA Awards Nominees" (PDF). almaawards.com. July 29, 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "Naya Rivera Takes Home Two ALMA Awards". NBC News. December 18, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "The 25 Breakout Stars of 2011". HitFix. November 24, 2011. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "Best of the Year—Best Performances". TV Guide. December 13, 2011. Archived from the original on January 10, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "'Glee' Star Cheers Up Our Top 50 TV Characters Of 2011". MTV. December 8, 2011. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012. "The 100 Greatest TV Characters of the 21st Century". Thrillist. August 12, 2020. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Ford, Rebecca (January 29, 2012). "SAG Awards: Naya Rivera Calls Working With Ricky Martin a 'Dream-Come-True' (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Gloria Estefan on Glee Season Finale with Naya Rivera". Latina. May 22, 2012. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Keene, Allison (July 18, 2012). "2012 Emmy Awards: Our List of Underrated Performances and Shows That Deserve Recognition". Collider. Retrieved September 19, 2020. "Naya Rivera Broke Ground as a True Multidimensional Lesbian Character on 'Glee'". Study Breaks. August 7, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Goldberg, Lesley (June 6, 2012). "Emmys 2012: TV's Supporting Players Talk Ensemble Work, Geek Out at THR's Photo Shoot (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 13, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012. "Emmys 2012: TV's Supporting Players Storm THR's Photo Shoot". The Hollywood Reporter. June 6, 2012. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Emmy Contenders: Supporting Actress, Comedy". E!. July 5, 2012. Archived from the original on July 6, 2014. Retrieved July 12, 2012. "Emmy Nomination Preview 2012 – Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy". HitFix. June 15, 2012. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012. "Emmys: TVGuide.com's Picks for Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series". TV Guide. June 14, 2012. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012. "2012 Emmy Snubs: Which Latinos Should Have Been Nominated?". LATINA. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2020. "Emmys 2011: 18 Snubs That Bug You". EW.com. Retrieved August 6, 2020. "Emmys 2012: 10 Actors and Actresses Worthy of First-Time Nominations". Hollywood Reporter. July 18, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2020. NatDeeGee. "Do I think Lea should have been nominated for an Emmy?". SpoilerTV. Retrieved August 6, 2020. "Emmy Nominations 2011: Friday Night Lights (FINALLY) and More..." thefilmexperience. Retrieved August 6, 2020. "2012 Emmy Nominations: Five Biggest Snubs and Surprises". E! Online. July 19, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Martin, Rebecca (July 19, 2012). "Emmys 2012: Biggest Snubs and Surprises". Wetpaint. Retrieved August 6, 2020.[dead link] Fallon, Kevin (September 19, 2013). "Do the Emmy Awards Hate Kids?". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Ordoña, Michael (July 28, 2020). "Emmys 2020 nominees are more diverse, but Latino representation still abysmal". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 19, 2020. "'Glee' Season 6 Won't Have Naya Rivera as a Regular but They Better Not Waste Her Character". Bustle. July 8, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "Glee's Naya Rivera Scores Solo Record Deal". Zap2it. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Neumyer, Scott (September 18, 2013). "'Glee' Star Naya Rivera Dishes on New Song, Nudity". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "2CELLOS Release New Music Video Featuring Glee Star Naya Rivera On Muse Hit "Supermassive Black Hole"". PRNewswire. December 19, 2012. Archived from the original on January 9, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "WATCH: Naya Rivera & 2CELLOS's Seductive 'Supermassive Black Hole'". Out. December 19, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Naya Rivera Could Have Played Katniss In The Hunger Games If One Marvel Director Got His Wish". CINEMABLEND. July 16, 2020. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "INTERVIEW: Glee's Naya Rivera says she'd love to play Johanna in The Hunger Games: Catching Fire". The Hunger Gamers. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "THR's 35 Hottest Young Latinos in Entertainment". Hollywood Reporter. September 20, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2020. "'Glee's' Naya Rivera: Santana's 'At a Crossroads'". Hollywood Reporter. October 25, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2020. "Glee's Naya Rivera on Angry Brittana Fans, Crazy Quinn, and Finn's Cardigans". Vulture. March 14, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Ausiello, Michael (July 20, 2013). "Glee Boss Ryan Murphy Opens Up About Cory Monteith's Death, Finn Tribute Episode, How Grieving Lea Michele Has 'Been a Rock'". TVLine. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "Naya Rivera of 'Glee': Cory Monteith Was a 'Special Part of This World'". Hollywood Reporter. July 15, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "Rivera holds moment of silence for Monteith". Metro. July 25, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Rigby, Sam (September 18, 2013). "'Glee' Rivera on 'making out' with Lovato". Digital Spy. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "Glee Recap: Brittana Make-Ups, Quinn Break-Ups and Musical Shake-Ups—Find Out What Happened in the 100th Episode!". E! Online. March 19, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "How Did 'Glee' Write Naya Rivera's Santana Out Of The Season 5 Finale? In The Lamest Way Ever, Apparently". Bustle. May 14, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "iTunes – Music – Sorry (feat. Big Sean) – Single by Naya Rivera". iTunes. September 17, 2013. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2014. "Naya Rivera Dishes On Recording 'Sorry' Single With Big Sean". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Johnson, Zach (July 23, 2014). "Is Naya Rivera the New Shannen Doherty". E! Online. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014. "Naya Rivera Gets Her Flirt On in M&M's Super Bowl Commercial!". LATINA. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Khogeer, Yusra K. (2013). Brand Anthropomorphism: The Literary Lives of Marketing Mascots (PDF) (Thesis). University of Liverpool. pp. 167–173. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 9, 2020. "The Naughty List - Movie Review". Common Sense Media. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on December 11, 2017. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Naya Rivera (Awards)". Behind The Voice Actors. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Whyte, Jason (March 4, 2014). "South By Southwest 2014 Interview HOME director Nicholas McCarthy". eFilmCritic. HBS Entertainment, Inc. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Yamato, Jen (April 10, 2014). "IFC Midnight Nabs SXSW Midnighter 'Home'". Deadline. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Miska, Brad (May 29, 2014). "IFC Dates 'At the Devil's Door', Formerly 'Home' (Exclusive)". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. McGranaghan, Mike (July 29, 2014). "At the Devil's Door". Aisle Seat. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Lockwood, Justin (August 8, 2014). "Monster Nation: At the Devil's Door". Geeks Out. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Hunter, Craig (August 24, 2014). "FrightFest 2014: Home (aka At the Devil's Door) Review". Screen Relish. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Chaput, Edgar (July 29, 2014). "Fantasia 2014: 'At the Devil's Door' easily frightens despite a muddy script". Sound on Sight. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. McCreadie, Marsha (August 7, 2014). "Film Review: At the Devil's Door". Film Journal. Film Journal International. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Kibler, Jeremy (August 8, 2014). "Film Review: At the Devil's Door". Diabolique Magazine. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (May 1, 2014). "Naya Rivera Dropped From Columbia Records". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 1, 2014. Nude, Tim (May 2, 2014). "Naya Rivera's Rep Denies She's Been Dropped by Columbia Records". People Magazine. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 2, 2014. "Naya Rivera makes directorial debut". Business Standard India. June 26, 2014. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Shine, Matt (June 26, 2014). "Naya Rivera's directorial debut". www.femalefirst.co.uk. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Swift, Andy (May 29, 2015). "Devious Maids First Look: Naya Rivera Makes a Horrifying Discovery". TVLine. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Naya Rivera". TVGuide.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (February 4, 2015). "Naya Rivera To Join 'Devious Maids', Return To 'The View' As Guest Co-Host". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "New 'Devious Maids' Boss Talks Sexier, More Mysterious Season 3". The Hollywood Reporter. June 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "Devious Maids Season 3 Review". We Got This Covered. May 31, 2015. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved August 5, 2020. "Gloria Estefan Hopes Glee Daughter Naya Rivera Is Remembered as a "Wonderful Triple Threat"". E! Online. August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. "Book Deals: Week of June 8, 2015". PublishersWeekly.com. Archived from the original on February 7, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2016. "Mad Families DVD Review". Retrieved September 9, 2020. "Naya Rivera Posts West Side Story Audition Video". E! Online. March 18, 2018. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Quinn, Dave (January 31, 2018). "Glee's Naya Rivera Returns to the Classroom for a Sexy Dance with Ne-Yo in Step Up: High Water". People. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2018. Petski, Denise (June 28, 2017). "'Step Up: High Water': Ne-Yo, Naya Rivera & Faizon Love To Topline YouTube Red Drama Series". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Adam Shankman Shares Sweet Throwback Video of Naya Rivera and Son Josey Singing Together". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2020. Iannucci, Rebecca (May 28, 2020). "Step Up Series Revived at Starz for Season 3 After YouTube Cancellation". Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "'Step Up' series creator shares touching stories of Naya Rivera on set: 'We will never, ever forget'". EW.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (July 13, 2020). "'Step Up' On Starz: The Series the Late Naya Rivera Left Behind". Deadline. Retrieved July 24, 2020. "REPORT: DC Working on Standalone Batman: The Long Halloween Animated Film". CBR. January 4, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Batman: The Long Halloween Is Getting A Two-Part Animated Movie". ScreenRant. January 4, 2019. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "'Batman: The Long Halloween, Part One' Sets Voice Cast (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. March 31, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Truitt, Brian. "Exclusive: Watch Naya Rivera's final role as Catwoman in new animated 'Batman' movie". USA TODAY. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Lane, Carly (May 19, 2021). "'Batman: The Long Halloween, Part Two' Trailer Reveals Release Date for R-Rated Conclusion". Collider. Retrieved July 29, 2021. "Naya Rivera's Son Makes His Magazine Cover Debut". E! Online. April 18, 2016. Archived from the original on April 7, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "Naya Rivera's May 2012 Latina Magazine Cover". Latina. April 2, 2012. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Naya Rivera Magazine Cover Photos - List of magazine covers featuring Naya Rivera - FamousFix". FamousFix.com. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Hernandez, Lee (May 7, 2012). "Naya Rivera Shows Off Hot Bikini Bod In 'Cosmo for Latinas' Spread". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 5, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Bar Refaeli, Naya Rivera and Stephen Colbert make Maxim's 'Hot 100' list". The Washington Post. May 22, 2012. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "The 2011 AfterEllen.com Hot 100". AfterEllen. May 23, 2011. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "Announcing the 2012 AfterEllen Hot 100!". AfterEllen. June 27, 2012. Archived from the original on September 25, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "The AfterEllen.com 2013 Hot 100!". AfterEllen. June 25, 2013. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "PEOPLE en Espanol Names The 50 Most Beautiful Hispanic Celebrities" (Press release). Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020 – via www.prnewswire.com. "FHM's 100 Sexiest Women In The World 2012: The full list!". FHM. May 2, 2012. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Naya Rivera Talks Spanx, Hooters Uniforms, and Her Locker-Room Attitude on the Set of Her Allure Nudes Shoot". Allure. April 2, 2012. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014. "'Glee' Star Naya Rivera 'Almost Quit' Before She 'Made It'". MTV.com. October 26, 2012. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2012. "Glee Star Naya Rivera's Skin Care Secret". Cosmopolitan. December 21, 2011. Archived from the original on November 26, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2011. "EXCLUSIVE: Naya Rivera Opens Up About Her Confidence-Shattering Hair Loss Experience". LATINA. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "Naya Rivera, Pioneering 'Glee' Star, Found Dead at 33". Time. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "These Latinos made a mark in our communities and nation. We lost them in 2020". NBC News. December 30, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Szofi (January 12, 2021). "Don't Forget Me, I Beg: Naya Rivera's Remarkable Legacy". Retrieved February 7, 2021. Damante, Becky (July 14, 2020). "Naya Rivera's profound queer legacy". Advocate. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Schorn, Johanna (May 2017). "Coming out into the 21st Century: Queer on Contemporary TV". In Homberg-Schramm, Jessica; Rasokat, Anna; Schweiker, Felicitas (eds.). Narratives at the Beginning of the 3rd Millennium. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. ISBN 978-1-4438-5554-9. OCLC 966288193.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Womack, Kalyn (July 22, 2020). "Naya Rivera and her Legacy on 'Glee'". New York Minute Magazine. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Aldama, Frederick Luis, ed. (2013). Latinos and Narrative Media: Participation and Portrayal (First ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 3, 16–18, 28, 143–144, 154–160. ISBN 978-1-137-36645-0. OCLC 845085678. Molina-Guzmán, Isabel (2013). "Latina Ethnoracial Ambiguity in Postracial Television Narratives". In Aldama, Frederick Luis (ed.). Latinos and Narrative Media. New York: Palgrave Macmillan US. pp. 143–160. doi:10.1057/9781137361783_10. ISBN 978-1-349-47415-8. Aldama, Frederick Luis (2013). "Multimediated Latinos in the Twenty-First Century: An Introduction". In Aldama, Frederick Luis (ed.). Latinos and Narrative Media. New York: Palgrave Macmillan US. pp. 1–31. doi:10.1057/9781137361783_1. ISBN 978-1-349-47415-8. Clarke, Kyra (2017). "Touching Affect: The Pedagogy of Intimate and Banal Moments in Glee". In Allen, Louisa; Rasmussen, Mary Lou (eds.). The Palgrave Handbook of Sexuality Education. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 439–454. doi:10.1057/978-1-137-40033-8_21. ISBN 978-1-137-40032-1. Hawkins, Tracy L. (2014). "Coming Out: Challenging Portrayals of Diverse Sexualities". In Parke, Michelle (ed.). Queer in the Choir Room: Essays on Gender and Sexuality in Glee. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. pp. 11–23. ISBN 978-0-7864-9593-1. OCLC 879584372. Johnson, Brian C.; Faill, Daniel K., eds. (February 27, 2015). Glee and new directions for social change. Rotterdam, The Netherlands. ISBN 978-94-6209-905-0. OCLC 904397330.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Meyer, Michaela D. E.; Wood, Megan M. (2013). "Sexuality and Teen Television: Emerging Adults Respond to Representations of Queer Identity on Glee". Sexuality & Culture. 17 (3): 434–448. doi:10.1007/s12119-013-9185-2. ISSN 1095-5143. S2CID 145371984. "Erika Abad, Ph.D." University of Nevada, Las Vegas. September 26, 2016. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Revisiting Naya Rivera's Santana Lopez: The Afro-Latina who Deserved More Time". Latinx Spaces. July 15, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. Kirkland, Justin (July 13, 2020). "Naya Rivera Made People Feel Seen For the First Time. Her Legacy Will Not Be Forgotten". Esquire. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "Late Greats: Tributes to stars we lost in 2020". EW.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Rodriguez-Jimenez, Jorge (July 14, 2020). "Queer People Are Shouting Their Gratitude For Naya Rivera's Trailblazing Character Santana Lopez". we are mitú. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Naya Rivera: How 'Glee' Helped Femme Lesbians Feel Seen". Ms. Magazine. August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Baggs, Michael (July 14, 2020). "Why Naya Rivera on Glee was important to LGBT women". BBC News. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Naya Rivera's performance on "Glee" changed lives — and queer TV history". NBC News. July 14, 2020. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020. "Remembering Naya Rivera's Legacy For LGBT People Of Color". NPR. Retrieved September 8, 2020. "Tahj Mowry Opens Up About Naya Rivera Being His "First" Love in Touching Tribute". E! Online. July 11, 2020. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Alexander, Bryan. "'Rest sweet Naya': Ricky Martin, 'Glee's Lea Michele, more stars react to Naya Rivera's tragic death". USA TODAY. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Tamera Mowry-Housley Leaving 'The Real' After 6 Seasons". The Hollywood Reporter. July 13, 2020. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "Tamera Mowry-Housley Remembers Late 'Glee' Star Naya Rivera as 'Such a Beautiful Light' (Exclusive)". Pop Culture.com. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Gariano, Francesca (July 11, 2020). "Tahj Mowry says Naya Rivera was his 1st love in heartbreaking tribute". Today. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020. "Inside Mark Salling's Time on Glee — and His 'Stormy' Relationship with Naya Rivera". People. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Jordan, Julie (July 23, 2014). "Naya Rivera Marries Ryan Dorsey". People. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2014. Gomez, Patrick (August 24, 2016). "Naya Rivera Reveals She Battled Anorexia as a Teen, Had an Abortion While on Glee". People. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 24, 2016. Harris, Hunter. "Naya Rivera's Husband Had The Perfect Response To Her Abortion". Refinery29. Retrieved August 11, 2020. "Glee actress discusses her decision to have an abortion". The Independent. August 24, 2016. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Nessif, Bruna (October 3, 2013). "Naya Rivera and Big Sean Are Engaged!". E! Online. Retrieved October 3, 2013. Lee, Esther (April 9, 2014). "Naya Rivera, Big Sean's Engagement Is Off; Rapper Releases Statement". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2014. "Naya Rivera of 'Glee' debuts 'Sorry,' first single from solo album". Hypable. August 10, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Nesvig, Kara (September 14, 2016). "You Need to Read What Naya Rivera Is Saying About Ariana Grande". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2020. Alexander, Brenda (July 21, 2020). "How Naya Rivera Really Felt About Her Ex Big Sean's Alleged Diss Record About Her". Showbiz Cheat Sheet. Retrieved August 6, 2020. "iTunes – Music – I Don't F**k With You (feat. E-40) – Single by Big Sean". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on September 22, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2016. "Big Sean Chart History: Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 20, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. "Big Sean Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 20, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. "Naya Rivera Shades Big Sean With I Don't F--k With You Performance on Lip Sync Battle". E! Online. July 25, 2018. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Big Sean Disses Naya Rivera in New Song, Accuses His Ex of Having Multiple Plastic Surgeries!". In Touch Weekly. November 1, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Finn, Natalie (February 24, 2015). "Naya Rivera Is Pregnant! Baby on the Way for Glee Star and Husband Ryan Dorsey". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Leon, Anya; Leonard, Elizabeth (September 30, 2015). "Ryan Dorsey and Naya Rivera Welcome Son Josey Hollis". People. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "Naya Rivera Divorce: Ryan Dorsey Marriage Ends After 2 Years". People. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 22, 2016. Kimble, Lindsay. "Naya Rivera Calls Off Divorce from Husband Ryan Dorsey Nearly a Year After Split: Reports". People. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2017. Zimmerman, Amy (April 4, 2017). "The Tao of David Spade: Hollywood's Unlikeliest Pickup Artist". The Daily Beast. "Naya Rivera Arrested for Domestic Battery in West Virginia". E! Online. November 26, 2017. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017. "Glee star Naya Rivera charged with domestic violence against her husband". BBC News. November 26, 2017. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017. "Naya Rivera Refiles for Divorce From Ryan Dorsey After Arrest". Us Weekly. December 5, 2017. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017. "Naya Rivera's Domestic Battery Charge Has Been Dismissed". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved January 18, 2018. Bueno, Antoinette (January 17, 2018). "Naya Rivera's Domestic Battery Charges Dropped, Ryan Dorsey 'No Longer Seeking Prosecution'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2020. "Naya Rivera and Ryan Dorsey Finalize Their Divorce". E! News. June 14, 2018. "Naya Rivera finalizes divorce from Ryan Dorsey". UPI. Retrieved August 18, 2020. "Naya Rivera & Ryan Dorsey Agreed to Joint Custody of Son Josey 3 Months Before She Disappeared". People. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2020. "How Naya Rivera's Son Josey Is Coping One Month After His Mom's Death". Entertainment Tonight. August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2020. "Exfutbolista de Estados Unidos escribe emotivo mensaje a Naya Rivera". El Universal (in Spanish). July 13, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Vultaggio, Maria (January 14, 2015). "Naya Rivera Coming Out? Watch Actress Respond To Bisexual Comment On 'The View'". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2015. "32 beloved LGBTQ+ characters who were actually played by LGBTQ+ actors". GAY TIMES. January 11, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2022. "John Stamos, Naya Rivera & Cory Monteith's Three-Way Smooch". People. March 25, 2012. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2012. Donnelly, Matt (December 3, 2012). "Katy Perry honored at 'Trevor Live' (but it's Amy Poehler's show)". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Glee star in T.O. to help kids". Toronto Sun. July 30, 2012. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2012. "How Naya Rivera Championed Equality, Self-Acceptance and LGBTQ Rights". Entertainment Tonight. July 17, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "Wanda Sykes, Jill Soloway Honored for LGBTQ Impact, Pledge to Fight Against Trump". The Hollywood Reporter. October 9, 2017. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "Ansel Elgort, Catherine Hardwicke Tapped as Thirst Gala Honorees (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. May 20, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Hinojosa, Stacy (December 3, 2009). "Naya Rivera From 'Glee' Talks Santana, Singing and Spencer Pratt". JSYK.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2011. Retrieved August 15, 2010. "Naya Rivera: Charity Work & Causes". Look to the Stars. Retrieved August 11, 2020. "Naya Rivera 'Gets Schooled' in South Los Angeles". BroadwayWorld.com. Archived from the original on May 24, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "Naya Rivera Wanted to 'Use Her Platform' for Good, Former Publicist Says". Us Weekly. July 14, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2020. "Feeling represented means a lot". Otago Daily Times. July 16, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Brittana Forever: Celebrating Naya Rivera's Immeasurable Impact on the Queer Community". E! Online. July 20, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Snarker, Dorothy (May 16, 2011). "Naya Rivera wows as the host of the GLAAD Media Awards in San Francisco". AfterEllen.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012. Retrieved November 9, 2011. "Dream Foundation Honors Donna Karan at 10th Annual Celebration of Dreams". The Santa Barbara Independent. November 10, 2011. Archived from the original on December 22, 2011. Retrieved December 24, 2011. Gioia, Michael (October 12, 2012). "'Glee' Cast, Including Darren Criss, Naya Rivera and Dean Geyer, Will Take Part in Young Storytellers' Biggest Show". Playbill. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Following Naya Rivera's tragic death, fans are coming together to support a fundraiser she started for her favorite nonprofit". GoFundMe. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020 – via Twitter. Hi guys! Last year I started to research different organizations that I could lend my personal time to. In doing so, I came across Alexandria House. The connection I feel with this organization and the people who reside and work there has been the biggest blessing and made such a huge positive impact on myself and my son. We truly have found a home away from home through the time we spend volunteering there. (from 2020 GoFundMe, linked) Naya Rivera. "In honor of Black History Month, let's raise some money for my favorite organization!". Archived from the original on February 8, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020 – via Twitter. "Glee Cast Launches Holiday Fundraiser in Honor of Late Friend Naya Rivera". news.yahoo.com. December 4, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Lee, Janet W. (December 5, 2020). "'Glee' Cast Launches Holiday Fundraiser to Honor Naya Rivera". Variety. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "Photo Flash: GLEE Cast Performs At White House Easter Egg Roll 2010". BroadwayWorld.com. Retrieved August 12, 2020. "2013 Presidential Inauguration Concerts and Parties". Billboard. January 20, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Roiz, Jessica (October 18, 2016). "Naya Rivera's Super Sarcastic Video Might Just Change The Minds Of Hard-Headed People". we are mitú. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. HOLY SH*T (You've Got To Vote). Funny or Die. November 4, 2016. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2020 – via YouTube. Bloom, Rachel (November 3, 2016). "HOLY SH*T (You've Got To Vote)". Funny Or Die. Archived from the original on November 3, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Martinelli, Marissa (November 4, 2016). "Rachel Bloom, Elizabeth Banks, and Others Sing a Profane Anti-Trump Anthem à la "We Are the World"". Slate. ISSN 1091-2339. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Ngo, Sheiresa (August 9, 2020). "Naya Rivera Turned to God After Her Relationship With Big Sean and 'Glee' Ended". Showbiz Cheat Sheet. Retrieved August 9, 2020. "Naya Rivera missing". CNN. July 9, 2020. Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "Glee star 'likely drowned in tragic accident'". BBC News. July 10, 2020. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "Naya Rivera and Son Counted '1,2,3' and Jumped in Lake Together Before She Yelled 'Help' and Drowned". PEOPLE. Retrieved September 12, 2020. "Jane Lynch, Chris Colfer and More Hollywood Stars Pay Tribute to Naya Rivera". The Hollywood Reporter. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Naya Rivera: Son says he watched his mother disappear beneath water of Lake Piru". Sky News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Authorities give update on search for Naya Rivera (LIVE). USA Today. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 – via YouTube. "Naya Rivera drowning: wrongful death lawsuit filed on behalf of Glee actor's son". The Guardian. Associated Press. November 19, 2020. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Chan, Stella; Vera, Amir (November 18, 2020). "Naya Rivera's ex-husband and estate file wrongful-death suit on behalf of the actress' son". CNN. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Naya Rivera's family files wrongful death lawsuit on behalf of her son". Yahoo! News. November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Naya Rivera feared dead". Fox LA. July 9, 2020. Cohen, Jess (July 9, 2020). "Naya Rivera Presumed Dead as Authorities Shift Search to 'Recovery Operation'". E!. "Naya Rivera's Dad Joins Mom, Brother in Lake Piru Search, Emotional Visit". TMZ. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Yang, Rachel (July 12, 2020). "Amber Riley asks fans to 'focus' on Naya Rivera, other Glee alumni 'don't matter right now'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Heather Morris Called Sheriff 'Several Times' During Search for Naya Rivera". Us Weekly. July 14, 2020. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Saperstein, Pat (July 12, 2020). "Naya Rivera Search Continues; Surrounding Area Is Part of Effort". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Body found during search for 'Glee' actress Naya Rivera at Lake Piru. Los Angeles Times. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 – via YouTube. "Police searching for Glee's Naya Rivera find body". BBC News. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Aiello, McKenna (July 13, 2020). "Naya Rivera Dead at 33: Actress' Body Recovered 5 Days After Boating Accident". E! Online. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Yeates, Cydney (July 13, 2020). "Naya Rivera dead: Glee star 'mustered energy to save her son, not herself'". Metro. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Bailey, Alyssa (July 13, 2020). "Naya Rivera May Have Sacrificed Her Own Life To Get Her 4-Year-Old Son Back On Their Boat". Elle. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Naya Rivera Laid to Rest at Hollywood Cemetery After Her Drowning Death". Us Weekly. July 30, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Wilkinson, Joseph (July 30, 2020). "'Glee' star Naya Rivera buried at private funeral in Los Angeles". nydailynews.com. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Naya Rivera Laid to Rest, Death Certificate States She Died in Minutes". Entertainment Tonight. July 30, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Jack Rico". Color Magazine. September 17, 2019. Retrieved February 7, 2021. "Glee star Naya Rivera's family say 'heaven gained our sassy angel'". The Independent. July 15, 2020. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. Woodward, Ellie (July 31, 2020). "Naya Rivera's Death Certificate Revealed She Drowned "Within Minutes"". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved August 1, 2020. Harris, Kamala. "From Family Matters to Glee, the world saw Naya Rivera grow up on screen". Retrieved July 14, 2020 – via Twitter. "Glee's Jane Lynch, Chris Colfer and More Pay Tribute to Naya Rivera: 'What a Force You Were'". People. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Tia Mowry, More Stars Celebrate Naya Rivera". Us Weekly. August 28, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Viola Davis and Lili Reinhart pay tribute as Naya Rivera dies aged 33". Metro. July 14, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Glee's Iqbal Theba and Dot-Marie Jones Visit Naya Rivera's Memorial at Lake Piru". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2020. "Lake Piru reopens weeks after Naya Rivera's death - but swimming banned". Metro. August 22, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Kennedy, Mark (July 14, 2020). "Actress rose to fame on TV musical 'Glee'". News & Observer – via Associated Press.[permanent dead link] "'Glee' cast remembers Naya Rivera: 'What a force you were'". Los Angeles Times. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. Chase, Stephanie (July 15, 2020). "Grant Gustin pays tribute to Glee co-star Naya Rivera". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2020. "Glee creators start a college fund for son Josey". Evening Standard. July 14, 2020. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Alter, Rebecca (July 15, 2020). "Heather Morris Shares Tribute to Naya Rivera: 'I Know You're Still With Me'". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Jackson, Angelique (August 28, 2020). "Amber Riley Performs Tribute to Late 'Glee' Co-Star Naya Rivera on 'Jimmy Kimmel Live'". Variety. Retrieved August 29, 2020. "Amber Riley Pays Tribute to Naya Rivera in Emotional Performance". Hollywood Reporter. August 28, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2020. "Glee stars gather with Naya Rivera's family at Lake Piru". Metro. July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Naya Rivera's 'If I Die Young' 'Glee' Tribute to Cory Monteith Circulates Amid Her Disappearance, Reported Death". Pop Culture. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Naya Rivera's Body Found on the 7th Anniversary of Glee Costar Cory Monteith's Death". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Schwartz, Ryan (July 13, 2020). "Lea Michele Remembers Naya Rivera, Cory Monteith With Photo Tribute". TVLine. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "'Glee' Stars and Celebrities React to Naya Rivera's Death". Life & Style. July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Lock, John. "today of all the days". Retrieved August 14, 2020 – via Twitter. "Glee's Dianna Agron Remembers 'Friend and Ally' Naya Rivera: 'I Will Hold onto Her'". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Cory Monteith's Mom Says He "Adored" Naya Rivera in Heartfelt Tribute". E! Online. July 15, 2020. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020. "'Glee' Star Naya Rivera Dead at 33". Rolling Stone Australia. July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2020. "Naya Rivera's birthday! 10 facts about the actress". MSN Entertainment. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Cheung, Nadine (July 29, 2011). "'Glee' Star Naya Rivera Covers Amy Winehouse's 'Valerie' in 3D Concert Movie". PopCrush. Archived from the original on September 21, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Crump, William D. (April 4, 2019). Happy holidays--animated!: a worldwide encyclopedia of Christmas, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa and New Year's cartoons on television and film. Jefferson, N.C. p. 208. ISBN 978-1-4766-7293-9. OCLC 1076805299.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Wagmeister, Elizabeth (September 20, 2016). "Charlie Sheen, Leah Remini, Naya Rivera to Star in Crackle Film 'Mad Families'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "'And the Winner Isn't': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. December 13, 2017. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "The Sinbad Show (1993) :: starring: Naya Rivera, Christel Khalil". www.rarefilmfinder.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "Naya Rivera's 11 Most Memorable Roles, From 'Family Matters' to 'Glee' (Photos)". Yahoo. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Davies, Hannah J. (July 9, 2020). "Naya Rivera: Glee star feared dead after son found alone in boat at lake". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Naya Rivera Talks About Engagement to Big Sean w/ Nene Leakes on Real Housewives of Atlanta, archived from the original on November 4, 2020, retrieved June 19, 2021 "Naya Rivera Meets Mr. Steal Yo' Girl | Kevin Hart: Lyft Legend". Laugh Out Loud Network. July 20, 2018. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2020 – via YouTube. "Step Up season 1 playlist". YouTube. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Step Up season 2 playlist". YouTube. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (July 30, 2020). "Naya Rivera To Appear On 'Sugar Rush'; Netflix Dedicates Episode To Late Actress Following Her Tragic Death". Deadline. Retrieved July 30, 2020. Respers France, Lisa (July 31, 2020). "Naya Rivera makes one of her final appearances in 'Sugar Rush'". CNN. Archived from the original on July 31, 2020. Retrieved July 31, 2020. Desta, Yohana (October 22, 2020). "Eric Andre Isn't Going Anywhere". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Masley, Ed (May 16, 2010). "'Glee' fans keep the faith as tour kicks off". USA Today. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "London calling!: Glee Live! In Concert! heads to stages across the Atlantic this spring" (Press release). Fox Broadcasting Corporation. November 19, 2010. Archived from the original on November 22, 2010. Retrieved November 19, 2010. "Supermassive Black Hole (feat. Naya Rivera)". www.top-charts.com. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "United States iTunes Top 100 Classical Songs". www.top-charts.com. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "2cellos2-In2ition-Collector's Edition". HMV Japan. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "2CELLOS、お茶の間へのビジュアル戦略でヒット". ORICON NEWS (in Japanese). November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "The Japan Gold Disc Award 2014". RIAJ (in Japanese). February 28, 2014. "My Heart - EP* by Naya Rivera". Genius. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 16, 2020. "NayaRivera". SoundCloud. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Step Up: High Water, Season 2 (Original Soundtrack) by Step Up: High Water". Apple Music. March 20, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2020. "Naya Rivera Mourned by 'Step Up: High Water' Co-Star Ne-Yo". Popculture. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Jaffa Moore, Son of Sir Roger Moore, Releases New Album 'Photograph'". January 27, 2023. "Week 133 05 February 2023 — Heritage Chart". "Chart Search – Billboard". Billboard. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Sorry by Naya Rivera and Big Sean – Music Charts". Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Naya Rivera featuring Big Sean". Official Charts. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2016. Y (Ginge), Kat (January 27, 2023). "Jaffa Moore, son of Sir Roger Moore, releases new album 'Photograph'". Ginger and Nuts. Retrieved October 4, 2023. "Rock On The Net: Grammy Awards: Best Pop Vocal Performance by a Group or Duo". www.rockonthenet.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "Rock On The Net: 54th Annual Grammy Awards - 2012". www.rockonthenet.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Nominees for 2011 BRIT Awards". British Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original on January 16, 2011. Retrieved January 15, 2011. McIntyre, Hugh. "'Glee' Has More Chart Hits Than Anyone Else In History". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2020. Bell Média. "Drake Tops 'Glee' Cast For Most Entries On Hot 100 Chart". www.iheartradio.ca. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "21 of the most iconic female music collaborations of all time, ranked". indy100. May 22, 2020. Archived from the original on June 12, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Glee Cast | full Official Chart History". Official Charts Company. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Glee Cast - Music Charts". acharts.co. Retrieved August 1, 2020. Osifo, Ehis (July 15, 2020). "16 Of Santana Lopez's Best Performances On "Glee"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. McHenry, Jackson (July 13, 2020). "Remembering Naya Rivera's Standout Glee Performances". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Naya Rivera's 10 Best Songs on 'Glee'". Billboard. July 13, 2020. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "'Glee' Premieres Original Songs "Loser Like Me" And "Get It Right"". Idolator. February 25, 2011. Retrieved April 16, 2011. "Glee RIAA Gold & Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2011. "Gwyneth Paltrow Remembers Her Time On "Glee" With Naya Rivera". Grazia. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "Naya Rivera Performing "Landslide" Was 'Glee' at Its Best". Decider. July 14, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Loved last night's cover of 'We Are Young' on 'Glee'? Meet the NYC indie rockers who wrote it, and hear their original". EW.com. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "13th Annual Youth In Film Awards". YoungArtistAwards.org. Archived from the original on April 3, 2011. Retrieved March 31, 2011. AfterEllen.com Staff (December 20, 2010). "The AfterEllen.com 2010 Visibility Awards – Winners". AfterEllen.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2011. "2010 Winners". ABC. Archived from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010. "The 2nd Annual Gay People's Choice Awards Winners". AfterElton. January 20, 2010. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved January 20, 2010. "2010 GOLDDERBY TV AWARDS". GoldDerby. March 7, 2016. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "25th Annual Imagen Awards Announced". Hispanic Lifestyle. August 25, 2010. Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "The 1st Annual Lesbian/Bi People's Choice Awards Winners". AfterEllen. January 20, 2010. Archived from the original on July 20, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2010. "Kids' Choice Awards 2010 nominees announced". au.yahoo.tv.com. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2010. Dobuzinskis, Alex (January 24, 2010). "Factbox: List of winners at Screen Actors Guild Awards". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2017. Soll, Lindsay. "Teen Choice Awards 2010: First Round Of Nominees Announced". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "TV Land Awards: 'Glee' honored as future classic on nostalgic night". EW. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "2011 GOLDDERBY TV AWARDS". GoldDerby. March 7, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "17th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards Nomination Announcement". Screen Actors Guild. December 16, 2010. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved June 22, 2017. "Teen Choice Awards 2011 Nominees Announced: Harry Potter vs Twilight". HuffPost. June 29, 2011. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2020. "2012 GOLDDERBY TV AWARDS". GoldDerby. March 7, 2016. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "Naya Rivera Picks Up 'Cause You're Hot' Award". NewNowNext. April 5, 2012. Archived from the original on April 10, 2012. "Screen Actors Guild Awards 2012: Full list of nominees". CBS News. December 14, 2011. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2018. Giffoni_ Experience (July 24, 2013), Naya Rivera, retrieved July 28, 2020 "Naya Rivera al Giffoni Film Festival 2013". Giffoni (in Italian). April 8, 2013. Retrieved July 28, 2020. Blake, Meredith (December 12, 2012). "SAG award nominations: Cable dramas and network sitcoms dominate". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2012. "People's Choice Awards 2014: The winners". USA Today. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "Second Wave of Nominations for 'Teen Choice 2014' Announced". July 17, 2014. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved July 17, 2014. Pedersen, Erik (November 14, 2018). "ReFrame Gives 62 TV Shows Its Gender-Balance Seal Of Approval; Group's First Small-Screen Stamps". Deadline. Retrieved March 14, 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Naya Rivera. Naya Rivera at IMDb Naya Rivera at Find a Grave Portals:  Biography  Hispanic and Latino Americans  Puerto Rico  United States