"Au Revoir" is a song performed by German dance recording trio Cascada. It was produced by Yann Peifer and Manuel Reuter, who also co-wrote the song with Allan Eshuijs, for the band's fourth studio album Original Me (2011). The song serves as the second single (and third overall) from the album, on 23 September 2011 through Zooland Records in Germany. Musically, the song is a fast-paced electropop that features the use of Auto-Tune and bass instruments, and the lyrics are about being unimpressed with a man that presents himself as bigger than life. The song was met with generally positive reviews from critics, with the majority of them praising its experimental sound. "Au Revoir" peaked at number 73 on the German Singles Chart and at number 31 on the Austrian Singles Chart. The accompanying music video was directed by Lex Halaby and Lisa Mann, and choreographed by Luther Brown. The video's premise portrays Horler at a warehouse masquerade party. The sound of the song was compared to the work of American dance pop recording artist Britney Spears. It has similarities in sound mainly with “If U Seek Amy”, an electropop song from Spears's 2008 album Circus famous for its double entendre and its homophonic name. The song has an uptempo sound and was lyrically about being put off by a man who elevates himself to high status. The song is composed as an electronic pop song with some elements of Europop music and lasts for three minutes and eight seconds. “Au revoir” features the influence of glam schlager and the use of synthesizers, bass drums and a heavy bassline. In 2011, the music video of "Au Revoir", was premiered in the United Kingdom on Clubland TV. It features Natalie Horler and many dancers attending an underground party. There are many shots of Horler walking down a corridor with her taunting some of the male dancers until finally persuading one of them to follow her. It then features Horler and that dancer doing some tango-style dancing with masquerade masks before she starts dancing with the other female dancers. As it gets to the final chorus, it shows shots of Horler singing in front of a mirror and the other dancers dancing in the corridor. Eventually, Horler and the female dancers leave, ending the video with a shot of Horler winking at the camera. Due to a major lack of airplay, multiple cancelled concerts and no TV performances, "Au Revoir" became Cascada's second single to not reach the UK Singles Chart, after "Fever". "Cascada's New Song "Night Nurse" Is A Real Monster". Idolator.com. 16 August 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "Cascada – Au Revoir" (in German). Ö3 Austria Top 40. "Cascada – Au Revoir" (in German). GfK Entertainment charts. Retrieved 13 February 2019. ""Au revoir (Remixes) - EP" von Cascada". 1 January 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2022 – via Apple Music. "ITunes - Music - Au Revoir (Remixes) - EP by Cascada". iTunes. Archived from the original on 2015-04-02. Retrieved 2015-03-17. "Au Revoir by Cascada". iTunes. 15 November 2011. Official Cascada Site