"Summer of Love" is a song performed by German dance recording trio Cascada. It served as the lead single from their compilation album, Back on the Dancefloor, released on 30 March 2012 through Zooland Records. In Germany it peaked at #13, while it peaked at #7 in Austria, the song's highest peak. In an interview in January 2012, Natalie Horler from Cascada had mentioned the group would start working on more dance-like songs. In February, her Facebook page revealed that Cascada had recorded the track, and that many would love it. On 2 March 2012, it was revealed that the new single was called "Summer of Love", and would be released on 30 March. A preview was released on the same day, with many praising the track for its dance composition as opposed to the more "pop" sound of their past few singles which had led to a decline in record sales. It was released on 30 March in Germany, Austria, Switzerland and the U.S. In the UK it was released on 22 July, it peaked at #123 on the UK singles chart. On 5 March 2012, Natalie posted a Facebook update stating that she was on her way to Tenerife to shoot the music video for the single. A music video was first released onto YouTube on 22 March 2012 at a total length of three minutes and thirty-nine seconds. Cascada - Summer Of Love (Preview of new Single) - Video Dailymotion Archived March 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine On the plane to... | Facebook Cascada - Summer Of Love on YouTube "Cascada – Summer Of Love" (in German). Ö3 Austria Top 40. "Cascada – Summer Of Love" (in French). Ultratip. "Cascada – Summer Of Love". Tracklisten. "Cascada – Summer Of Love" (in French). Les classement single. "Cascada – Summer Of Love" (in German). GfK Entertainment charts. Retrieved 21 March 2019. "Cascada – Summer Of Love" (in Dutch). Single Top 100. "Official Scottish Singles Sales Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. "Cascada – Summer Of Love". Swiss Singles Chart. "Official Dance Singles Chart Top 40". Official Charts Company. "Chart Log UK – 2012 + Weekly Updates + Sales 2012". "Top de l'année Top Singles 2012" (in French). SNEP. Retrieved 27 January 2021. iTunes - Musik - Summer of Love (Special Version) - EP von Cascada. AUT iTunes - Musik - Summer of Love (Special Version) - EP von Cascada. GER iTunes - Musik - Summer of Love (Special Version) - EP von Cascada. SWI iTunes - Music - Summer of Love (Remixes) - EP by Cascada. US iTunes - Musique - Summer of Love (Remixes) - EP by Cascada. FR "Clubland 21". Amazon UK. Official Cascada site