Chelsea Elizabeth Manning (born Bradley Edward Manning, December 17, 1987) is an American activist and whistleblower. She is a former United States Army soldier who was convicted by court-martial in July 2013 of violations of the Espionage Act and other offenses, after disclosing to WikiLeaks nearly 750,000 classified, or unclassified but sensitive, military and diplomatic documents. She was imprisoned from 2010 until 2017 when her sentence was commuted by President Barack Obama. A trans woman, Manning said in 2013 that she had a female gender identity since childhood and wanted to be known as Chelsea Manning. Assigned in 2009 to an Army unit in Iraq as an intelligence analyst, Manning had access to classified databases. In early 2010, she leaked classified information to WikiLeaks and confided this to Adrian Lamo, an online acquaintance. Lamo indirectly informed the Army's Criminal Investigation Command, and Manning was arrested in May 2010. The material included videos of the July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike and the 2009 Granai airstrike in Afghanistan; 251,287 U.S. diplomatic cables; and 482,832 Army reports that came to be known as the "Iraq War Logs" and "Afghan War Diary". The material was published by WikiLeaks and its media partners between April 2010 and April 2011. Manning was charged with 22 offenses, including aiding the enemy, which was the most serious charge and could have resulted in a death sentence. She was held at the Marine Corps Brig, Quantico in Virginia, from July 2010 to April 2011, under Prevention of Injury status—which entailed de facto solitary confinement and other restrictions that caused domestic and international concern—before being transferred to the Joint Regional Correctional Facility at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where she could interact with other detainees. In February 2013 she pleaded guilty to 10 of the charges. The trial on the remaining charges began on June 3, 2013, and on July 30, she was convicted of 17 of the original charges and amended versions of four others, but acquitted of aiding the enemy. She was sentenced to 35 years at the maximum-security U.S. Disciplinary Barracks at Fort Leavenworth. On January 17, 2017, Obama commuted Manning's sentence to nearly seven years of confinement dating from her arrest in May 2010. After release, Manning makes her living through speaking engagements. In 2018, Manning challenged incumbent Senator Ben Cardin for the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate election in her home state of Maryland. She received 6.1% of the vote; Cardin won renomination with 79.2%. From March 8, 2019, to March 12, 2020 (except for a week from May 9 to 16), Manning was jailed for contempt and fined $256,000 for refusing to testify before a grand jury investigating WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange. Born in 1987 in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, Manning is the second child of Susan Fox, who is Welsh, and Brian Manning, an American. Brian had joined the United States Navy in 1974, at age 19, and served five years as an intelligence analyst. He met Susan while stationed in Wales at RAF Brawdy. Manning has an older sister. The couple returned to the U.S. in 1979, settling first in California. After moving near Crescent, Oklahoma, they bought a house with five acres of land, where they kept pigs and chickens. Manning's sister told the court-martial that both their parents were alcoholics, and that their mother drank continually while pregnant with Chelsea. Captain David Moulton, a Navy psychiatrist, told the court that Manning's facial features showed signs of fetal alcohol syndrome. The sister became Manning's principal caregiver, waking at night to prepare the baby's bottle. The court heard that Manning was fed only milk and baby food until the age of two. As an adult she reached 5 ft 2 in (1.57 m) and weighed around 105 pounds (48 kg). Manning's father took a job as an information technology (IT) manager for a rental car agency, The Hertz Corporation, which required travel. The family lived several miles out of town, and Manning's mother was unable to drive. She spent her days drinking, while Manning was left largely to herself playing with Lego toys or on the computer. Brian stocked up on food before his trips and left signed checks that the sister mailed to pay the bills. A neighbor said that whenever Manning's elementary school went on field trips, she would give her own son extra food or money so he could make sure Manning had something to eat. Friends and neighbors considered the Mannings a troubled family. As a child, Manning was opinionated about the intersection of religion and politics. For example, she invariably remained silent during the part of the Pledge of Allegiance that makes reference to God. In a 2011 interview, Manning's father said, "People need to understand that he's a young man that had a happy life growing up." He also said that Manning excelled at the saxophone, science, and computers, and created a website at the age of 10. Manning learned how to use PowerPoint, won the grand prize three years in a row at the local science fair, and in sixth grade, took top prize at a statewide quiz bowl. A childhood friend of Manning's, speaking about a conversation they had when Manning was 13, said: "he told me he was gay". The friend also said that Manning's home life was not good and that her father was very controlling. Around this time, Manning's parents divorced. She and her mother, Susan, moved out of the house to a rented apartment in Crescent, Oklahoma. Susan's instability continued, and in 1998 she attempted suicide; Manning's sister drove their mother to the hospital, with the 11-year-old Manning sitting in the back of the car trying to make sure their mother was still breathing. Manning's father remarried in 2000, the same year as his divorce. His new wife, also named Susan, had a son from a previous relationship. When the son changed his surname to Manning too, Chelsea felt rejected, telling her mother, "I'm nobody now, Mom." In November 2001, aged 14, Manning and her mother left the U.S., moving to Haverfordwest, Wales, where her mother had family. Manning attended the town's Tasker Milward secondary school. A school friend there told Ed Caesar for The Sunday Times that Manning's personality was "unique, extremely unique. Very quirky, very opinionated, very political, very clever, very articulate." Manning's interest in computers continued, and in 2003, she and a friend, James Kirkpatrick, set up an online message board, angeldyne.com, that offered games and music downloads. The only American at her school, and viewed as effeminate, Manning was bullied. In Oklahoma, she had come out to a few friends as gay, but was not open about it at school in Wales. The students frequently mocked her accent. Once, they abandoned her during a camping trip. Her aunt told The Washington Post that Manning had awoken to an empty campsite after the other campers had left without her. After graduating from high school in 2005 at age 17 and fearing her mother was becoming too ill to cope, Manning returned to the U.S. She moved in with her father, then living in Oklahoma City with his second wife and her child. Manning landed employment as a developer for the software company Zoto. She was apparently happy there, but was let go after four months. Her boss told The Washington Post that on a few occasions Manning had "just locked up" and would simply sit and stare, and in the end, communication became too difficult. The boss told the newspaper that "nobody's been taking care of this kid for a really long time". By then, Manning was living as an openly gay man. Her relationship with her father was apparently good, but there were problems between Manning and her stepmother. In March 2006, Manning reportedly threatened her stepmother with a knife during an argument about Manning's failure to get another job; her stepmother called the police, and Manning was asked to leave the house. Manning drove to Tulsa in a pickup truck her father had given her. At first she slept in it, before moving in with a friend from school. The two got jobs at Incredible Pizza in April. Manning moved on to Chicago before running out of money and again having nowhere to stay. Her mother arranged for Brian's sister, Debra, a lawyer in Potomac, Maryland, to take Manning in. American journalist and Manning biographer Denver Nicks wrote that the 15 months Manning spent with her aunt were among the stablest of her life. Manning had a boyfriend, took several low-paid jobs, and spent a semester studying history and English at Montgomery College but left after failing an exam. Manning's father spent weeks in 2007 asking her to consider joining the Army. Hoping to gain a college education through the G.I. Bill, and perhaps to study for a PhD in physics, she enlisted in September that year. She told her Army supervisor later that she had also hoped joining such a masculine environment would resolve her gender dysphoria. Manning began basic training at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, on October 2, 2007. She wrote that she soon realized she was neither physically nor mentally prepared for it. Six weeks after enlisting, she was sent to the discharge unit. She was allegedly being bullied, and according to another soldier, was having a breakdown. The soldier told The Guardian: "The kid was barely five foot ... [She] was a runt, so pick on [her]. [She's] crazy, pick on [her]. [She's] a faggot, pick on [her]. The [girl] took it from every side. [She] couldn't please anyone." Nicks writes that Manning, who was used to being bullied, fought back—if the drill sergeants screamed at her, she would scream at them—to the point where they started calling her "General Manning". The decision to discharge her was revoked, and she started basic training again in January 2008. After graduating in April, she moved to Fort Huachuca, Arizona, to attend Advanced Individual Training (AIT) for Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) 35F, intelligence analyst, receiving a TS/SCI security clearance (Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information). According to Nicks, this security clearance, combined with the digitization of classified information and the government's policy of sharing it widely, gave Manning access to an unprecedented amount of material. Nicks writes that Manning was reprimanded while at Fort Huachuca for posting three video messages to friends on YouTube in which she described the inside of the Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) where she worked. Upon completion of her initial MOS course, Manning received the Army Service Ribbon and the National Defense Service Medal. In August 2008, Manning was sent to Fort Drum in Jefferson County, New York, where she joined the 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 10th Mountain Division, and trained for deployment to Iraq. In late 2008, while stationed there, she met Tyler Watkins, who was studying neuroscience and psychology at Brandeis University, near Boston. Watkins was her first serious relationship, and she posted happily on Facebook about it, regularly traveling 300 miles (480 km) to Boston for visits. Watkins introduced Manning to a network of friends and the university's hacker community. She also visited Boston University's "hackerspace" workshop, known as "Builds", and met its founder, David House, the MIT researcher who was later allowed to visit her in jail. In November 2008, she gave an anonymous interview to a high-school reporter during a rally in Syracuse in support of gay marriage: I was kicked out of my home and I once lost my job. The world is not moving fast enough for us at home, work, or the battlefield. I've been living a double life. ... I can't make a statement. I can't be caught in an act. I hope the public support changes. I do hope to do that before ETS [Expiration of Term of Service]. Nicks writes that Manning traveled back to Washington, D.C., for visits. An ex-boyfriend helped her find her way around the city's gay community, introducing her to lobbyists, activists, and White House aides. Back at Fort Drum, she continued to display emotional problems and by August 2009 had been referred to an Army mental-health counselor. A friend told Nicks that Manning could be emotionally fraught, describing an evening they had watched two movies together—The Last King of Scotland and Dancer in the Dark—after which Manning cried for hours. By September 2009, her relationship with Watkins was in trouble; they reconciled for a short time, but it was effectively over. After four weeks at the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) in Fort Polk, Louisiana, Manning was deployed to Forward Operating Base Hammer, near Baghdad, arriving in October 2009. From her workstation there, she had access to SIPRNet (the Secret Internet Protocol Router Network) and JWICS (the Joint Worldwide Intelligence Communications System). Two of her superiors had discussed not taking her to Iraq; it was felt she was a risk to herself and possibly others, according to a statement the Army later issued—but the shortage of intelligence analysts dictated their decision to take her. In November 2009, she was promoted from Private First Class to Specialist. In November 2009, Manning wrote to a gender counselor in the U.S. that she felt female and discussed having surgery. The counselor told Steve Fishman of New York magazine in 2011 that it was clear Manning was in crisis, partly because of her gender concerns, but also because she opposed the kind of war in which she found herself involved. Manning was by all accounts unhappy and isolated. Because of the military's "Don't ask, don't tell" (DADT) policy (in effect until September 20, 2011), she was unable to live as an openly gay man without risk of being discharged. But she apparently made no secret of her orientation: her friends said she kept a fairy wand on her desk. When she told her roommate she was attracted to men, he responded by suggesting they not speak to each other. Manning's working conditions included 14- to 15-hour night shifts in a tightly packed, dimly lit room. On December 20, 2009, during a counseling session with two colleagues to discuss her poor time-keeping, Manning was told she would lose her one day off a week for persistent lateness. She responded by overturning a table, damaging a computer that was sitting on it. A sergeant moved Manning away from the weapons rack, and other soldiers pinned her arms behind her back and dragged her out of the room. Several witnesses to the incident believed her access to sensitive material ought to have been withdrawn at that point. The next month, January 2010, she began posting on Facebook that she felt hopeless and alone. Manning said her first contact with WikiLeaks was in January 2010, when she began to interact with them on IRC and Jabber. She had first noticed them toward the end of November 2009, when they posted 570,000 pager messages from the September 11 attacks. Items of historic significance of two wars Iraq and Afghanistan Significant Activity, Sigacts, between 0001 January 2004 and 2359 31 December 2009 extracts from CSV documents from the Department of Defense and CDNE database. These items have already been sanitized of any source identifying information. You might need to sit on this information for 90 to 180 days to best send and distribute such a large amount of data to a large audience and protect the source. This is one of the most significant documents of our time removing the fog of war and revealing the true nature of 21st century asymmetric warfare. Have a good day. Manning, January 9, 2010 On January 5, 2010, Manning downloaded the 400,000 documents that became known as the Iraq War logs. On January 8, she downloaded 91,000 documents from the Afghanistan database, later known as part of the Afghan War logs. She saved the material on CD-RW and smuggled it through security by labeling the CD-RW media "Lady Gaga" and storing it in a Gaga CD case. She lip-synced to Lady Gaga music to make it appear that she was using the classified computer's CD player to listen to music. She then copied it onto her personal computer. The next day, she wrote a message in a readme.txt file, which she told the court was initially intended for The Washington Post. Manning copied the files from her laptop to an SD card for her camera so that she could take it with her to the U.S. while on R&R leave. Army investigators later found the card in Manning's room in her aunt's home in Potomac, Maryland. On January 23, Manning flew to the U.S. via Germany for two weeks of leave. It was during this visit that she first went out dressed as a woman, wearing a wig and makeup. After her arrest, Manning's friend Tyler Watkins told Wired that Manning had said during the visit that she had found some sensitive information and was considering leaking it. In 2021, Manning said that while home on leave in 2010, she had reached out to her then-Congressman, Chris Van Hollen, but got no response. Manning contacted The Washington Post and The New York Times to ask whether they were interested in the material; the Post reporter did not sound interested, and the Times did not return the call. Manning decided to give it to WikiLeaks, and on February 3 sent them the Iraq and Afghan War logs via Tor. She returned to Iraq on February 11, with no acknowledgment from WikiLeaks that they had received the files. On or around February 18, she passed WikiLeaks a diplomatic cable, dated January 13, 2010, from the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavík, Iceland. They published it within hours, which suggested to Manning that they had received the other material, too. She found the Baghdad helicopter attack ("Collateral murder") video in a Judge Advocate's directory and passed it to WikiLeaks on or around February 21. In late March, she sent them a video of the May 2009 Granai airstrike in Afghanistan; this was the video later removed and apparently destroyed by Daniel Domscheit-Berg when he left the organization. Between March 28 and April 9, she downloaded the 250,000 diplomatic cables and on April 10, uploaded them to a WikiLeaks dropbox. Manning told the court that, during her interaction with WikiLeaks on IRC and Jabber, she developed a friendship with someone there, believed to be Julian Assange (although neither knew the other's name), which she said made her feel she could be herself. Army investigators found 14 to 15 pages of encrypted chats, in unallocated space on her MacBook's hard drive, between Manning and someone believed to be Assange. She wrote in a statement that the more she had tried to fit in at work, the more alienated she became from everyone around her. The relationship with WikiLeaks had given her a brief respite from the isolation and anxiety. On April 24, 2010, Manning sent an email to her supervisor, Master Sergeant Paul Adkins—with the subject line "My Problem"—saying she was suffering from gender identity disorder. She attached a photograph of herself dressed as a woman and with the filename breanna.jpg. She wrote: This is my problem. I've had signs of it for a very long time. It's caused problems within my family. I thought a career in the military would get rid of it. It's not something I seek out for attention, and I've been trying very, very hard to get rid of it by placing myself in situations where it would be impossible. But, it's not going away; it's haunting me more and more as I get older. Now, the consequences of it are dire, at a time when it's causing me great pain in itself Adkins discussed the situation with Manning's therapists, but did not pass the email to anybody above him in his chain of command; he told Manning's court-martial that he was concerned the photograph would be disseminated among other staff. Captain Steven Lim, Manning's company commander, said he first saw the email after Manning's arrest, when information about hormone replacement therapy was found in Manning's room on base; at that point Lim learned that Manning had been calling herself Breanna. Manning told former "grey hat" hacker Adrian Lamo that she had set up Twitter and YouTube accounts as Breanna to give her female identity a digital presence, writing to Lamo: "I wouldn't mind going to prison for the rest of my life [for leaking information], or being executed so much, if it wasn't for the possibility of having pictures of me ... plastered all over the world press ... as [a] boy ... the CPU is not made for this motherboard". On April 30, she posted on Facebook that she was utterly lost, and over the next few days wrote that she was "not a piece of equipment", and was "beyond frustrated" and "livid" after being "lectured by ex-boyfriend despite months of relationship ambiguity". On May 7, according to Army witnesses, Manning was found curled in a fetal position in a storage cupboard; she had a knife at her feet and had cut the words "I want" into a vinyl chair. A few hours later she had an altercation with an intelligence analyst, Specialist Jihrleah Showman, during which she punched Showman in the face. The brigade psychiatrist recommended a discharge, referring to an "occupational problem and adjustment disorder". Manning's supervisor removed the bolt from her weapon, making it unable to fire, and she was sent to work in the supply office, although her security clearance remained in place. As punishment for the altercation with Showman, she was demoted from Specialist (E-4) to Private First Class (E-3) three days before her arrest on May 27.[citation needed] Ellen Nakashima writes that, on May 9, Manning contacted Jonathan Odell, a gay American novelist in Minneapolis, via Facebook, leaving a message that she wanted to speak to him in confidence; she said she had been involved in some "very high-profile events, albeit as a nameless individual thus far". On May 19, according to Army investigators, she emailed Eric Schmiedl, a mathematician she had met in Boston, and told him she had been the source of the Baghdad airstrike video. Two days later, she began the series of chats with Adrian Lamo that led to her arrest. WikiLeaks was set up in late 2006 as a disclosure portal, initially using the Wikipedia model, where volunteers would write up restricted or legally threatened material submitted by whistleblowers. Julian Assange—an Australian Internet activist and journalist, and the de facto editor-in-chief of WikiLeaks—had the idea of creating what Ben Laurie called an "open-source, democratic intelligence agency". The open-editing aspect was soon abandoned, but the site remained open for anonymous submissions. According to Daniel Domscheit-Berg, a former WikiLeaks spokesperson, part of WikiLeaks's security concept was that they did not know who their sources were. The New York Times wrote in December 2010 that the U.S. government was trying to discover whether Assange had been a passive recipient of material from Manning or had encouraged or helped her to extract the files, in which case he could be charged with conspiracy. Manning told Lamo in May 2010 that she had developed a working relationship with Assange, communicating directly with him using an encrypted Internet conferencing service, but knew little about him. WikiLeaks did not identify Manning as their source. Army investigators found pages of chats on Manning's computer between Manning and someone believed to be Assange. Nicks writes that, despite this, no decisive evidence was found of Assange's offering Manning any direction. On February 18, 2010, WikiLeaks posted the first of the material from Manning, the diplomatic cable from the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavík, a document now known as "Reykjavik13". On March 15, WikiLeaks posted a 32-page report written in 2008 by the U.S. Department of Defense about WikiLeaks itself, and on March 29 it posted U.S. State Department profiles of politicians in Iceland. WikiLeaks named the Baghdad airstrike video "Collateral Murder", and Assange released it on April 5, 2010, during a press conference at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. The video showed two U.S. helicopters firing on a group of 10 men in the Amin District of Baghdad. Among the people killed in the attack were two Reuters employees, who were there to photograph an American Humvee under attack by the Mahdi Army. The U.S. pilots mistook their cameras for weapons. The helicopters also fired on a van, targeted earlier by one helicopter, that had stopped to help wounded members of the first group. Two children in the van were wounded, and their father was killed. The pilots also attacked a building where retreating insurgents were holed up. The Washington Post wrote that the video, viewed by millions, put WikiLeaks on the map. According to Nicks, Manning emailed a superior officer after the video aired and tried to persuade her that it was the same version as the one stored on SIPRNet. Nicks writes that it seemed as though Manning wanted to be caught. On July 25, 2010, WikiLeaks and three media partners—The New York Times, The Guardian, and Der Spiegel—began publishing the 91,731 documents that, in their entirety, became known as the Afghan War Logs. (Around 77,000 of these had been published as of May 2012.) This was followed on October 22, 2010, by 391,832 classified military reports covering the period January 2004 to December 2009, which became known as the Iraq War Logs. Nicks writes that the publication of the former was a watershed moment, the "beginning of the information age exploding upon itself". Manning was also responsible for the "Cablegate" leak of 251,287 State Department cables, written by 271 American embassies and consulates in 180 countries, dated December 1966 to February 2010. Assange passed the cables to his three media partners, plus El País and others, and they were published in stages from November 28, 2010, with the names of sources removed. WikiLeaks said it was the largest set of confidential documents ever released into the public domain. WikiLeaks published the remaining cables, unredacted, on September 1, 2011, after David Leigh and Luke Harding of The Guardian inadvertently published the passphrase for a file that was still online; Nicks writes that an Ethiopian journalist consequently had to leave his country, and the U.S. government said it had to relocate several sources. Manning was accused of being the source of the Guantanamo Bay files leak obtained by WikiLeaks in 2010 and published by The New York Times and The Guardian in April 2011. Manning said she gave WikiLeaks a video in March 2010 of the Granai airstrike in Afghanistan. The airstrike occurred on May 4, 2009, in the village of Granai, Afghanistan, killing 86 to 147 Afghan civilians. The video was never published; Assange said in March 2013 that Daniel Domscheit-Berg had taken it with him when he left WikiLeaks and had apparently destroyed it. On May 20, 2010, Manning contacted Adrian Lamo, a former "grey hat" hacker convicted in 2004 of having accessed The New York Times's computer network two years earlier without permission. Lamo had been profiled that day by Kevin Poulsen in Wired magazine; the story said Lamo had been involuntarily hospitalized and diagnosed with Asperger syndrome. Poulsen, by then a reporter, was himself a former hacker who had used Lamo as a source several times since 2000. In 2002, Poulsen had told The New York Times that Lamo had gained unauthorized access to its network; he then wrote the story up for SecurityFocus. Lamo would hack into a system, tell the organization, then offer to fix their security, often using Poulsen as a go-between. Lamo said Manning sent him several encrypted emails on May 20. He said he was unable to decrypt them but replied anyway and invited the emailer to chat on AOL IM. Lamo said he later turned the emails over to the FBI without having read them. In a series of chats between May 21 and 25, Manning—using the handle "bradass87"—told Lamo that she had leaked classified material. She introduced herself as an Army intelligence analyst, and within 17 minutes, without waiting for a reply, alluded to the leaks. Lamo replied several hours later. He said: "I'm a journalist and a minister. You can pick either, and treat this as a confession or an interview (never to be published) & enjoy a modicum of legal protection." They talked about restricted material in general, then Manning made her first explicit reference to the leaks: "This is what I do for friends." She linked to a section of the May 21, 2010, version of Wikipedia's article on WikiLeaks, which described the WikiLeaks release in March that year of a Department of Defense report on WikiLeaks itself. She added "the one below that is mine too"; the section below in the same article referred to the leak of the Baghdad airstrike ("Collateral Murder") video. Manning said she felt isolated and fragile, and was reaching out to someone she hoped might understand. Manning said she had started to help WikiLeaks around Thanksgiving in November 2009—which fell on November 26 that year—after WikiLeaks had released the 9/11 pager messages; the messages were released on November 25. She told Lamo she had recognized that the messages came from an NSA database and that seeing them had made her feel comfortable about stepping forward. Lamo asked what kind of material Manning was dealing with; Manning replied: "uhm ... crazy, almost criminal political backdealings ... the non-PR-versions of world events and crises ..." Although she said she dealt with Assange directly, Manning also said Assange had adopted a deliberate policy of knowing very little about her, telling Manning: "lie to me." Lamo again assured her that she was speaking in confidence. Manning wrote: "but im not a source for you ... im talking to you as someone who needs moral and emotional fucking support," and Lamo replied: "i told you, none of this is for print." Manning said the incident that had affected her the most was when the Iraqi Federal Police arrested 15 detainees for printing anti-Iraqi literature. The Army asked her to find out who the "bad guys" were, and she discovered that the detainees had followed what Manning said was a corruption trail within the Iraqi cabinet. She reported this to her commanding officer, but said "he didn't want to hear any of it"; she said the officer told her to help the Iraqi police find more detainees. Manning said it made her realize "i was actively involved in something that i was completely against". She said, "I cant separate myself from others ... I feel connected to everybody ... like they were distant family", citing Carl Sagan, Richard Feynman and Elie Wiesel. She said she hoped the material would lead to "hopefully worldwide discussion, debates, and reforms. if not ... than [sic] we're doomed as a species." She said she had downloaded the material onto Lady Gaga music CD-RWs, erased the music and replaced it with a compressed split file. Part of the reason no one noticed, she said, was that staff were working 14 hours a day, seven days a week, and "people stopped caring after 3 weeks". Shortly after the first chat with Manning, Lamo discussed the information with Chet Uber of the volunteer group Project Vigilant, which researches cybercrime, and Timothy Webster, a friend who had worked in Army counterintelligence. Both advised Lamo to go to the authorities. His friend informed the Army's Criminal Investigation Command (CID), and Lamo was contacted by CID agents shortly thereafter. He told them he believed Manning was endangering lives. The hacker community largely ostracized him afterward, but Nicks argues that it was thanks to Lamo that the government had months to ameliorate any harm caused by the release of the diplomatic cables. On May 25, Lamo met with FBI and Army investigators in California and showed them the chat logs. On or around that date he also passed the story to Kevin Poulsen of Wired, and on May 27 gave him the chat logs and Manning's name under embargo. He met with the FBI again that day, at which point they told him Manning had been arrested in Iraq the day before. Poulsen and Kim Zetter broke the news of the arrest in Wired on June 6. Wired published around 25 percent of the chat logs on June 6 and 10, and the full logs in July 2011. The Army's Criminal Investigation Command arrested Manning on May 27,[citation needed] 2010, and four days later transferred her to Camp Arifjan in Kuwait. She was charged with several offenses in July, replaced by 22 charges in March 2011, including violations of Articles 92 and 134 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), and of the Espionage Act. The most serious charge was "aiding the enemy", a capital offense, although prosecutors said they would not seek the death penalty. Another charge, which Manning's defense called a "made-up offense" but of which she was found guilty, read that Manning "wantonly [caused] to be published on the internet intelligence belonging to the US government, having knowledge that intelligence published on the internet is accessible to the enemy". While in Kuwait, Manning was placed on suicide watch after her behavior caused concern. She was moved from Kuwait to the Marine Corps Base Quantico, Virginia, on July 29, 2010, and classified as a maximum custody detainee with Prevention of Injury (POI) status. POI status is a less extreme form of suicide watch, entailing checks by guards every five minutes. Her lawyer, David Coombs, a former military attorney, said Manning was not allowed to sleep between 5 am (7 am on weekends) and 8 pm, and was made to stand or sit up if she tried to. She was required to remain visible at all times, including at night, which entailed no access to sheets, no pillow except one built into her mattress, and a blanket designed not to be shredded. Manning complained that she regarded it as pretrial punishment. Her cell was 6 × 12 ft (1.8 x 3.6 m) with no window, containing a bed, toilet, and sink. The jail had 30 cells built in a U shape, and although detainees could talk to one another, they were unable to see each other. Her lawyer said the guards behaved professionally and had not tried to harass or embarrass Manning. She was allowed to walk for up to one hour a day, meals were taken in the cell, and she was shackled during visits. There was access to television when it was placed in the corridor, and she was allowed to keep one magazine and one book. Because she was in pretrial detention, she received full pay. On January 18, 2011, after Manning had an altercation with the guards, the commander of Quantico classified her as a suicide risk. Manning said the guards had begun issuing conflicting commands, such as "turn left, don't turn left", and upbraiding her for responding to commands with "yes" instead of "aye". Shortly afterward, she was placed on suicide watch, had her clothing and eyeglasses removed, and was required to remain in her cell 24 hours a day. The suicide watch was lifted on January 21 after her lawyer complained, and the brig commander who ordered it was replaced. On March 2, she was told that her request for removal of POI status—which entailed among other things sleeping wearing only boxer shorts—had been denied. Her lawyer said Manning joked to the guards that, if she wanted to harm herself, she could do so with her underwear or her flip-flops. The comment resulted in Manning's being ordered to strip naked in her cell that night and sleep without clothing. On the following morning only, Manning stood naked for inspection. After her lawyer protested and some media attention, Manning was issued a sleeping garment on or before March 11. The detention conditions prompted national and international concern. Juan E. Méndez, United Nations Special Rapporteur on torture, told The Guardian that the U.S. government's treatment of Manning was "cruel, inhuman and degrading". In January 2011, Amnesty International asked the British government to intervene because of Manning's status as a British citizen by descent, although Manning's lawyer said Manning did not regard herself as a British citizen. On March 10, State Department spokesman Philip J. Crowley criticized Manning's treatment as "ridiculous, counterproductive and stupid". The next day, President Obama responded to Crowley's comments, saying the Pentagon had assured him that Manning's treatment was "appropriate and meet[s] our basic standards". Under political pressure, Crowley resigned three days after his comments. On March 15, 295 members of the academic legal community signed a statement arguing that Manning was being subjected to "degrading and inhumane pretrial punishment" and criticizing Obama's comments. On April 20, the Pentagon transferred Manning to the medium-custody Midwest Joint Regional Correctional Facility, at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, where she was placed in an 80-square-foot cell with a window and a normal mattress, able to mix with other pretrial detainees and keep personal objects in her cell. In April 2011, a panel of experts, having completed a medical and mental evaluation of Manning, ruled that she was fit to stand trial. An Article 32 hearing, presided over by Lieutenant Colonel Paul Almanza, was convened on December 16, 2011, at Fort Meade, Maryland; after the hearing, Almanza recommended that Manning be referred to a general court-martial. She was arraigned on February 23, 2012, and declined to enter a plea. During the Article 32 hearing, the prosecution, led by Captain Ashden Fein, presented 300,000 pages of documents in evidence, including chat logs and classified material. The court heard from two Army investigators, Special Agent David Shaver, head of the digital forensics and research branch of the Army's Computer Crime Investigative Unit (CCIU), and Mark Johnson, a digital forensics contractor from ManTech International, who works for the CCIU. They testified that they had found 100,000 State Department cables on a workplace computer Manning had used between November 2009 and May 2010; 400,000 military reports from Iraq and 91,000 from Afghanistan on an SD card found in her room in her aunt's home in Potomac, Maryland; and 10,000 cables on her personal MacBook Pro and storage devices that they said had not been given to WikiLeaks because a file was corrupted. They also recovered 14 to 15 pages of encrypted chats in unallocated space on Manning's MacBook hard drive between Manning and someone believed to be Assange. Two of the chat handles, which used the Berlin Chaos Computer Club's domain (ccc.de), were associated with the names Julian Assange and Nathaniel Frank. Johnson said he found SSH logs on the MacBook that showed an SFTP connection from an IP address that resolved to Manning's aunt's home to a Swedish IP address with links to WikiLeaks. Also found was a text file named "Readme", attached to the logs and apparently written by Manning to Assange, which called the Iraq and Afghan War logs "possibly one of the most significant documents of our time, removing the fog of war and revealing the true nature of 21st century asymmetric warfare". The investigators testified they had also recovered an exchange from May 2010 between Manning and Eric Schmiedl, a Boston mathematician, in which Manning said she was the source of the Baghdad helicopter attack ("Collateral Murder") video. Johnson said there had been two attempts to delete the material from the MacBook. The operating system had been reinstalled in January 2010, and on or around January 31, 2010, an attempt had been made to erase the hard drive by doing a "zero-fill", which involves overwriting material with zeroes. The material was recovered after the overwrite attempts from unallocated space. Manning's lawyers argued that the government had overstated the harm the release of the documents had caused and had overcharged Manning to force her to testify against Assange. The defense also raised questions about whether Manning's confusion over her gender identity affected her behavior and decision making. The judge, Army Colonel Denise Lind, ruled in January 2013 that any sentence would be reduced by 112 days because of the treatment Manning received at Quantico. On February 28, Manning pleaded guilty to 10 of the 22 charges. Reading for over an hour from a 35-page statement, she said she had leaked the cables "to show the true cost of war". Prosecutors pursued a court-martial on the remaining charges. The trial began on June 3, 2013. On July 30, Manning was convicted on 17 of the 22 charges in their entirety, including five counts of espionage and theft, and an amended version of four other charges; she was acquitted of aiding the enemy. The sentencing phase began the next day. Captain Michael Worsley, a military psychologist who had treated Manning before her arrest, testified that Manning had been left isolated in the Army, trying to deal with gender identity issues in a "hyper-masculine environment". David Moulton, a Navy forensic psychiatrist who saw Manning after the arrest, said Manning had narcissistic traits, and showed signs of both fetal alcohol syndrome and Asperger syndrome. He said that, in leaking the material, Manning had been "acting out [a] grandiose ideation". A defense psychiatrist, testifying to Manning's motives, suggested a different agenda: Well, Pfc Manning was under the impression that [her] leaked information was going to really change how the world views the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and future wars, actually. This was an attempt to crowdsource analysis of the war, and it was [her] opinion that if ... through crowdsourcing, enough analysis was done on these documents, which [she] felt to be very important, that it would lead to a greater good ... that society as a whole would come to the conclusion that the war wasn't worth it ... that really no wars are worth it. On August 14, Manning apologized to the court: "I am sorry that my actions hurt people. I'm sorry that they hurt the United States. I am sorry for the unintended consequences of my actions. When I made these decisions I believed I was going to help people, not hurt people. ... At the time of my decisions, I was dealing with a lot of issues." Manning's offenses carried a maximum sentence of 90 years. The government asked for 60 years as a deterrent to others, while Manning's lawyer asked for no more than 25 years. On August 21 she was sentenced to 35 years in prison, reduction in rank to private (private E-1 or PVT), forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and a dishonorable discharge. She was given credit for 1,293 days of pretrial confinement, including 112 days for her treatment at Quantico, and would have been eligible for parole after serving one-third of the sentence. She was confined at the United States Disciplinary Barracks (USDB) at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. The sentence was criticized as "unjust and unfair" by The Guardian and as "excessive" by The New York Times. On April 14, 2014, Manning's request for clemency was denied; the case went to the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals for further review. On September 3, 2013, Manning's lawyer filed a Petition for Commutation of Sentence to President Obama through the pardon attorney at the Department of Justice and Secretary of the Army John M. McHugh. The petition contended that Manning's disclosures did not cause any "real damage", and that the documents in question did not merit protection, as they were not sensitive. The request included a supporting letter from Amnesty International which said that Manning's leaks had exposed violations of human rights. David Coombs's cover letter touched on Manning's role as a whistleblower, asking that Manning be granted a full pardon or that her sentence be reduced to time served. In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she wrote: "I am now preparing for my court-martial appeal before the first appeals court. The appeal team, with my attorneys Nancy Hollander and Vince Ward, are hoping to file our brief before the court in the next six months. We have already had success in getting the court to respect my gender identity by using feminine pronouns in the court filings (she, her, etc.)." In November 2016, Manning made a formal petition to Obama to reduce her 35-year sentence to the six years of time she had already served. On December 10, 2016, a White House petition to commute her sentence reached the minimum 100,000 signatures required for an official response. Lawyers familiar with clemency applications said in December 2016 that a pardon was unlikely; the request did not fit the usual criteria. In January 2017, a Justice Department source said that Manning was on Obama's short list for a possible commutation. On January 17, Obama commuted all but four months of Manning's remaining sentence. In a press conference held on January 18, he said that Manning's original 35-year prison sentence was "very disproportionate relative to what other leakers have received" and that "it makes sense to commute—and not pardon—her sentence." In 2021, Forbes reported that Obama's commutation of Manning's sentence was "unconditional". Notwithstanding her commutation, Manning's military appeal would continue, with her attorney saying, "We fight in her appeal to clear her name." On January 26, 2017, in her first column for The Guardian since the commutation, Manning lamented that Obama's political opponents consistently refused to compromise, resulting in "very few permanent accomplishments" during his time in office. As The Guardian summarized it, she saw Obama's legacy as "a warning against not being bold enough". In response, President Donald Trump tweeted that Manning was an "ungrateful traitor" and should "never have been released". Manning was released from Fort Leavenworth's detention center at approximately 2 a.m. Central Time on May 17, 2017. Although sentenced during her court-martial to be dishonorably discharged, Manning was reportedly returned to active unpaid "excess leave" status while her appeal was pending. On May 31, 2018, the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals upheld Manning's 2013 court-martial conviction of violating the Espionage Act. The court rejected Manning's contention that the statute was too vague to provide fair notice of the criminal nature of disclosing classified documents. "The facts of this case", the three-judge panel ruled, "leave no question as to what constituted national defense information. Appellant's training and experience indicate, without any doubt, she was on notice and understood the nature of the information she was disclosing and how its disclosure could negatively affect national defense." The court also rejected Manning's assertion that her actions in disclosing classified information related to national security are protected by the First Amendment. Manning, the court found, "had no First Amendment right to make the disclosures—doing so not only violated the nondisclosure agreements she signed but also jeopardized national security." On May 30, 2019, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces denied Manning's petition for grant of review of the decision of the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals. In February 2019, Manning received a subpoena to testify in a U.S. government case proceeding under prosecutors in Virginia against Assange, the existence of which had been accidentally revealed in November 2018. Manning objected to the secrecy of the grand jury proceedings and announced she would refuse to testify, saying: "we've seen this power abused countless times to target political speech. I have nothing to contribute to this case and I resent being forced to endanger myself by participating in this predatory practice." She added that she had provided all the information she had in 2013 during her court martial and that she stood by her previous answers. On March 8, 2019, Manning was found in contempt of court and jailed in the women's wing of a detention center in Alexandria, Virginia, with the judge conditioning her release on her testifying or the grand jury concluding its work. Manning was initially held in administrative segregation for 28 days until she was placed in the general population on April 5, 2019. Her supporters described her period in administrative segregation as "effective solitary confinement" as it involved "up to 22 hours each day spent in isolation". Officials at the facility said that administrative segregation was used for safety reasons and that prisoners still had access to recreation and social visits during that time. On April 22, 2019, a federal appeals court upheld the trial court's decision holding Manning in contempt and denied Manning's request to be released on bail. After the grand jury's term expired, Manning was released on May 9, 2019, and served with a subpoena to appear before a new grand jury on May 16. She again refused to testify, saying that she "believe[d] this grand jury seeks to undermine the integrity of public discourse with the aim of punishing those who expose any serious, ongoing, and systemic abuses of power by this government". The court ordered her returned to jail and fined $500 for each day over 30 days and $1,000 for each day over 60 days. In June 2019, she challenged the fines because of inability to pay. On December 30, 2019, United Nations special rapporteur Nils Melzer released a letter dated November 1, 2019, in which he accused the U.S. government of torturing Manning, called for her immediate release, and called for her court fines to be canceled or reimbursed. On March 11, 2020, Manning attempted suicide two days before she was scheduled to appear before a judge on a motion to terminate sanctions. Alexandria Sheriff Dana Lawhorne reported that Manning was safe and her lawyers said she was recovering in a hospital. On March 12, 2020, U.S. District Judge Anthony Trenga of the Eastern District of Virginia found that the grand jury's business had concluded. Since Manning's testimony was no longer needed, the judge found that detention no longer served any coercive purpose and ordered her released. He denied a request by Manning's lawyers to vacate her accrued fines of $256,000, which he ordered due and payable immediately. The same day, a supporter launched an online crowdfunding campaign to defray Manning's fines. Within 48 hours, nearly 7,000 donations ranging from $5 to $10,000 were received, totaling $267,000. A separate crowdfund by the same supporter raised an additional $50,000 to help pay Manning's post-incarceration living expenses. In January 2021, in refusing to extradite Assange to the U.S. for trial on federal charges, UK District Judge Vanessa Baraitser cited Manning's March 2020 suicide attempt to support finding that, if exposed to the "harsh conditions" of incarceration in America, "Assange's mental health would deteriorate, causing him to commit suicide." The publication of the leaked material, particularly the diplomatic cables, attracted in-depth coverage worldwide, with several governments blocking websites that contained embarrassing details. Guardian editor Alan Rusbridger said: "I can't think of a time when there was ever a story generated by a news organization where the White House, the Kremlin, Chávez, India, China, everyone in the world was talking about these things. ... I've never known a story that created such mayhem that wasn't an event like a war or a terrorist attack." United States Navy Admiral Michael Mullen, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the leaks had placed American soldiers and Afghan informants in danger. Journalist Glenn Greenwald argued that Manning was the most important whistleblower since Daniel Ellsberg leaked the Pentagon Papers in 1971. In an impromptu questioning session after a fundraiser, captured on a cellphone video, President Obama said that Manning "broke the law", which was later criticized as "unlawful command influence" on Manning's upcoming trial. In 2011, Manning and WikiLeaks were credited in part, along with news reporters and political analysts, as catalysts for the Arab Spring that began in December 2010, when waves of protesters rose up against rulers across the Middle East and North Africa, after the leaked cables exposed government corruption. But in 2012, James L. Gelvin, an American scholar of Middle Eastern history, wrote: "After the outbreak [January 2011] of the Egyptian uprising ... journalists decided to abandon another term they had applied to the Tunisian uprising: the first 'WikiLeaks Revolution,' a title they had adopted that overemphasized the role played by the leaked American cables about corruption in provoking the protests." A Washington Post editorial asked why an apparently unstable Army private had been able to access and transfer sensitive material in the first place. According to her biographer, the American far right saw Manning's sexuality as evidence that gay people were unfit for military service, while the American mainstream thought of Manning as a gay soldier driven mad by bullying. A Defense Department report a year after the breach found that Manning's document leaks had no significant strategic impact on U.S. war efforts. The heavily redacted final report was not published until June 2017, after a Freedom of Information request by investigative reporter Jason Leopold. In 2011, the German Section of the International Association of Lawyers against Nuclear Arms and the Federation of German Scientists awarded Manning a "Whistleblowerpreis". While still in detention in 2011, Graham Nash of Crosby, Stills and Nash released a song, "Almost Gone (The Ballad of Bradley Manning)", in reference to her deteriorated mental state. In 2012, she received a "People's Choice Award" from Global Exchange. In 2013, the U.S. Peace Memorial Foundation awarded her the U.S. Peace Prize "for conspicuous bravery, at the risk of his own freedom, above and beyond the call of duty." The same year, the International Peace Bureau awarded her the Sean MacBride Peace Prize. In 2014, Sam Adams Associates gave her the Sam Adams Award for Integrity in Intelligence. Icelandic and Swedish Pirate Party MPs nominated Manning and fellow whistleblower Edward Snowden for the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize. In 2013, Roots Action launched a petition nominating Manning for the prize that received more than 100,000 supporting signatures. In May 2015, Anything to Say?, an art installation made of mobile bronze statues of Manning, Snowden, and Assange, was placed at Berlin's Alexanderplatz for a weekend, as a "monument for courage". Germany's Green Party sponsored the sculpture, by Italian sculptor Davide Dormino. The installation was later exhibited in different European cities. In 2015, Paper magazine commissioned artist Heather Dewey-Hagborg to create 2D DNA phenotype portraits of Manning using DNA collected from cheek swabs and hair clippings Manning sent the artist while incarcerated. 3D printed versions of the portraits premiered at the World Economic Forum in 2016. In the summer of 2017, Manning (by then released from prison) and Dewey-Hagborg presented their collaboration at an exhibition at the Fridman Gallery in New York City. In September 2017, Manning accepted the EFF Pioneer Award in recognition of her actions as a whistleblower and for her work as an advocate for government transparency and transgender rights. In November, she was named 2017 Newsmaker of the Year by Out, which noted her "whistle-in-the-wind tenacity that belies the trauma she's had to contend with". Later that month, Bitch listed her among the first-ever "Bitch 50" impactful creators, artists, and activists in pop culture, recognizing her as "a leading voice for transgender and healthcare rights". In December, Foreign Policy honored Manning as one of its forty-eight 2017 Global Thinkers "for forcing the United States to question who is a traitor and who is a hero". In October 2020, Manning shared with the German nonprofit investigative journalism organization CORRECT!V and Greece's anonymous Novartis whistleblowers the third annual European United Left–Nordic Green Left (GUE/NGL) prize for Journalists, Whistleblowers and Defenders of the Right to Information. The GUE/NGL posted a video of her acceptance from her home in Brooklyn, New York. In an article written by Manning, she says her first public appearance as female was in February 2010 while on leave from her military duties; Manning was exhilarated to blend in as a woman. On August 22, 2013, the day after sentencing, Manning's attorney issued a press release to the Today show announcing that his client was a female, and asked that she be referred to by her new name of Chelsea and feminine pronouns. Manning's statement included the following: As I transition into this next phase of my life, I want everyone to know the real me. I am Chelsea Manning. I am a female. Given the way that I feel, and have felt since childhood, I want to begin hormone therapy as soon as possible. I hope that you will support me in this transition. I also request that, starting today, you refer to me by my new name and use the feminine pronoun (except in official mail to the confinement facility). I look forward to receiving letters from supporters and having the opportunity to write back. The news media split in its reaction to Manning's request; some organizations used the new name and pronouns, and others continued to use the former ones. Advocacy groups such as GLAAD, the National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association, and the Human Rights Campaign (HRC) encouraged media outlets to refer to Manning by her self-identified name and pronoun. In April 2014, the Kansas District Court granted a petition from Manning for a legal name change. An Army spokesman stated that while the Army would update personnel records to acknowledge the name change, the military would continue to regard Manning as a male. Manning sought hormone therapy and the right to live as a woman while confined, consistent with her gender dysphoria, which had been confirmed by two Army medical specialists. Such treatment is provided in civilian federal prisons when it is found to be medically necessary, but it is not available in military prisons. The Pentagon policy at the time considered transgender individuals ineligible to serve. In July, the Federal Bureau of Prisons rejected a request by the Army to transfer Manning from the USDB to a civilian facility for treatment of her gender dysphoria. Instead, the Army kept Manning in military custody and said it would begin rudimentary gender treatment, which could include allowing her to wear female undergarments and possibly receive hormone treatments. On August 12, 2014, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and Manning's civilian attorney David Coombs said Manning was not receiving treatment for her gender identity condition as previously approved by Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel. They notified the USDB, Hagel and other Defense Department officials that a lawsuit would be filed if they did not confirm by September 4 that treatment would be provided. On August 22, Army spokeswoman Lt. Col. Alayne Conway told NBC News, "The Department of Defense has approved a request by Army leadership to provide required medical treatment for an inmate diagnosed with gender dysphoria." Although Conway would not discuss "the medical needs of an individual", she did say, "In general terms, the initial stages of treatment for individuals with gender dysphoria include psychotherapy and elements of the 'real life experience' therapy. Treatment for the condition is highly individualized and generally is sequential and graduated." The Army declined to say when treatment might begin. In September, Manning filed a lawsuit in federal district court in Washington, D.C., against Secretary of Defense Hagel, claiming she had "been denied access to medically necessary treatment" for gender dysphoria. She sued to be allowed to grow her hair longer and use cosmetics, and to receive hormone treatments "to express her female gender". On February 12, 2015, USA Today reported that the commandant of the USDB wrote in a February 5 memo, "After carefully considering the recommendation that (hormone treatment) is medically appropriate and necessary, and weighing all associated safety and security risks presented, I approve adding (hormone treatment) to Inmate Manning's treatment plan." According to USA Today, Manning remained a soldier, and the decision to administer hormone therapy was a first for the Army. Manning was not allowed to grow her hair longer. Her ACLU attorney, Chase Strangio, said that the delay in approving her hormone treatment "came with a significant cost to Chelsea and her mental health". On March 5, in response to Manning's request for an order compelling the military to use pronouns that conform to her chosen gender identity, the U.S. Army Court of Criminal Appeals ruled, "Reference to appellant in all future formal papers filed before this court and all future orders and decisions issued by this court shall either be neutral, e.g., Private First Class Manning or appellant, or employ a feminine pronoun." On March 14, the digital library host Cryptome posted an unsigned public copy of a court document, filed March 10, wherein the parties to Manning's September 2014 lawsuit against Secretary of Defense Hagel agreed to stay proceedings for seven months, after which time they would address how the litigation should proceed in light of Manning's status at that time. The document revealed that the Army was then providing Manning with weekly psychotherapy, including psychotherapy specific to gender dysphoria; cross-sex hormone therapy; female undergarments; the ability to wear prescribed cosmetics in her daily life at the USDB; and speech therapy. In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she said: I finally began my prescribed regime of hormones to continue my overdue gender transition in February. It's been such an amazing relief for my body and brain to finally come into alignment with each other. My stress and anxiety levels have tapered off quite considerably. Overall, things are beginning to move along nicely. On September 13, 2016, the ACLU announced that the army would be granting Manning's request for gender transition surgery, a first for a transgender inmate. In December, Manning's attorneys reported that her military doctor refused Manning's request to change the gender on her military records to female. In January 2017, Manning wrote to The New York Times that although months had passed, she had still not seen a surgeon. At the time of Manning's release from prison in May 2017, her attorney stressed that she would be pursuing her own medical care and "building her life on her own terms, separate from the military". Manning subsequently stated via her verified Twitter account that her healthcare from the military had stopped on May 16, 2017, and that she had secured a private health plan. She said her gender transition while in prison had cost "only $600 over 2 years", explaining that the Department of Defense "got meds at a markdown". Although the Army had agreed in September 2016 to allow her to have gender transition surgery, the operation was not performed before her release. On May 22, 2017, Manning's 2014 lawsuit seeking a federal court to order the Defense Department to provide hormone therapy and other treatment for her gender identity condition was dismissed because, her ACLU attorney explained, "she is free". On October 20, 2018, Manning tweeted a photograph of herself in a hospital bed reportedly recovering from gender reassignment surgery. "After almost a decade of fighting," she wrote, "thru prison, the courts, a hunger strike, and thru the insurance company—I finally got surgery this week." In March 2019, in the context of medical care provided during her re-incarceration, the news media continued to report that she had undergone gender reassignment surgery. In a declaration to the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia filed on May 6, 2019, Manning formally attested that she underwent gender confirmation surgery in October 2018. In March 2015, Bloomberg News reported that Manning could be visited by only those she had named before her imprisonment, and not by journalists. She could not be photographed or give interviews on camera. Manning was not allowed to browse the web, but could consult print news and have access to new gender theory texts. In April 2015, Amnesty International posted online a letter from Manning in which she described her daily life. "My days here are busy and very routine," she wrote. "I am taking college correspondence courses for a bachelor's degree. I also work out a lot to stay fit, and read newspapers, magazines and books to keep up-to-date on current events around the world and learn new things." Also that month, Cosmopolitan published the first interview with Manning in prison, conducted by mail. Cosmo reported that Manning was optimistic about recent progress but said that not being allowed to grow her hair long was "painful and awkward ... I am torn up. I get through each day okay, but at night, when I'm alone in my room, I finally burn out and crash." Manning said it was "very much a relief" to announce that she is a woman and did not fear the public response. "Honestly, I'm not terribly worried about what people out there might think of me. I just try to be myself." According to Cosmo, Manning had her own cell with "two tall vertical windows that face the sun", and could see "trees and hills and blue sky and all the things beyond the buildings and razor wire". Manning denied being harassed by other inmates and claimed some had become confidantes. In February 2015, Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief of Guardian US, announced that Manning had joined The Guardian as a contributing opinion writer on war, gender, and freedom of information. In 2014, The Guardian had published two op-eds by Manning: "How to make Isis fall on its own sword" (September 16) and, "I am a transgender woman and the government is denying my civil rights" (December 8). Manning's debut under the new arrangement, "The CIA's torturers and the leaders who approved their actions must face the law," appeared on March 9, 2015. In April 2015, Manning began communicating via Twitter, under the handle @xychelsea, by using a voice phone to dictate to intermediaries, who tweeted on her behalf. On July 5, 2016, Manning was taken to a hospital after a suicide attempt. On July 28, 2016, the ACLU announced that Manning was under investigation and facing several possible charges related to her suicide attempt. She was not allowed to have legal representation at the disciplinary hearing for these charges. At the hearing, held on September 22, she was sentenced to 14 days in solitary confinement, with seven of those days suspended indefinitely. Manning emerged from solitary confinement on October 12, after serving seven days; she said that she was not given the opportunity to appeal the ruling before being placed in solitary. In an article following her recovery, entitled "Moving On", Manning reflected on her change in identity, wishing people to see her no longer as "Chelsea Manning, formerly Bradley Manning, a US Army Soldier... convicted...", but as a person. She used a selfie from 2008 to accompany the article. In November 2016, Manning disclosed that she made a second suicide attempt on October 4, 2016, on the first night of her solitary confinement. On September 9, 2016, Manning began a hunger strike to protest what she described as her being bullied by prison authorities and the U.S. government. On September 13, the ACLU announced that Manning had ended the five-day hunger strike after the Army agreed to provide gender transition surgery. The operation, however, was not performed before her release from prison in May 2017. In a June 9, 2017, appearance on Good Morning America, her first interview following her release, Manning said she "accepted responsibility" for her actions, and thanked former President Obama for giving her "another chance". She now earns a living through speaking engagements. On September 13, 2017, Manning was named a visiting fellow at Harvard University. Bill Delahunt, acting director of the Harvard Institute of Politics, said: "Broadening the range and depth of opportunity for students to hear from and engage with experts, leaders and policy-shapers is a cornerstone of the Institute of Politics. We welcome the breadth of thought-provoking viewpoints on race, gender, politics and the media." Harvard said Manning would visit for a limited number of events meant to spark campus discussion, and in particular would engage students in discourse on "issues of LGBTQ identity in the military". According to online newspaper PinkNews, this marked "the only LGBT-related fellowship in Harvard history". The next day Michael Morell, former deputy director and twice acting director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), resigned as a nonresident senior fellow at Harvard's Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. "Unfortunately," Morell wrote, "I cannot be part of an organization—The Kennedy School—that honors a convicted felon and leaker of classified information ... the Kennedy School's decision will assist Ms. Manning in her long-standing effort to legitimize the criminal path that she took to prominence, an attempt that may encourage others to leak classified information as well." Later that day, CIA director Mike Pompeo advised the university that he supported Morell's decision, and withdrew from his scheduled public appearance that evening at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government. Calling Manning an "American traitor", Pompeo wrote: "While I have served my country as a soldier in the United States Army and will continue to defend Ms. Manning's right to offer a defense of why she chose this path, I believe it is shameful for Harvard to place its stamp of approval upon her treasonous actions." On September 15, 2017, Douglas Elmendorf, dean of the Kennedy School, announced that Manning had been invited to spend only a single day at the school and that her title of visiting fellow did not convey a special honor. "We did not intend to honor her in any way," Elmendorf wrote, "or to endorse any of her words or deeds ... However, I now think that designating Chelsea Manning as a Visiting Fellow was a mistake, for which I accept responsibility. ... Therefore, we are withdrawing the invitation to her to serve as a Visiting Fellow—and the perceived honor that it implies to some people—while maintaining the invitation for her to spend a day at the Kennedy School and speak in the Forum. I apologize to her and to the many concerned people from whom I have heard today for not recognizing upfront the full implications of our original invitation." When Elmendorf phoned Manning, a member of her support team challenged him to explain why Harvard was so concerned about the title "visiting fellow". The team was alienated by his response, which they inferred suggested she had nothing to contribute. Manning then hung up on the dean. On September 17, 2017, during a public appearance at The Nantucket Project in Massachusetts, Manning said: "I'm not ashamed of being disinvited. I view that just as much of an honored distinction as the fellowship itself." She added, "This is a military intelligence and it is a police state in which we can no longer engage in actual political discourse in our institutions." On September 22, 2017, Manning was denied entry to Canada from the United States because of her criminal record. According to a letter from Canadian immigration officials, posted online by Manning, she is inadmissible due to being convicted of offenses equivalent to treason in Canada. Manning told Reuters that she had planned to vacation in Montreal and Vancouver, but was stopped at a Quebec border crossing by the Canada Border Services Agency on the evening of September 21 and detained overnight. She said she would retain a Canadian lawyer to challenge the inadmissibility finding before a Canadian tribunal. In October 2021, appearing virtually at an Immigration and Refugee Board hearing to determine her admissibility, Manning called the four-year process to visit Canada "exhausting". When questioned by the adjudicator, Manning did not go into detail about what she leaked because she is bound by a non-disclosure agreement with the U.S. government. The two-day hearing concluded with the adjudicator indicating a final written decision could be expected in 2022. On April 8, 2022, Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board upheld the government's decision to bar Manning's entry. On January 11, 2018, Manning filed with the Federal Election Commission to run for the U.S. Senate in Maryland. On January 18, Manning filed with the Maryland State Board of Elections to challenge the state's senior senator, two-term incumbent Ben Cardin, as a Democrat in the June 26, 2018, primary election. On February 1, The Washington Post raised questions about Manning's eligibility to run. "While her case is on appeal," reported The Post, "she is on a technical form of unpaid active duty, putting her political campaign at odds with Department of Defense regulations that prohibit military personnel from seeking public office." Military law expert Eugene R. Fidell of Yale Law School considered it unlikely the Army would take action against her, saying, "Services don't like to create martyrs." On February 2, Manning commented: "This is an issue that's cropped up mostly from the conservative blogosphere, and the campaign and we don't believe this is an issue at all. ... I've been issued a dishonorable discharge, and I'm not sure where the issue lies in this case." She also confirmed that she was still appealing her court-martial sentence. In mid-February, she said she had no plans to run television ads, explaining, "I can't stand watching campaign ads. We don't need to go to these old-media methods." Commenting on her opponent, 74-year-old incumbent Ben Cardin, she stated, "He's old hat. He's kept this establishment going." In May, Manning told the Associated Press that she did not, in fact, consider herself a Democrat, but wanted to shake up establishment Democrats who were "caving in" to President Trump. The AP noted that, despite having raised $72,000 during the first quarter (compared to the incumbent's $336,000), "The candidate has barely made an effort at tapping sources of grassroots enthusiasm outside of activism circles. And it's easy to find progressive Democrats who feel her candidacy is just a vehicle to boost her profile." Manning said she would not run as an independent should her primary bid fail. On June 26, 2018, Manning finished second among eight Democrats vying for their party's U.S. Senate nomination in Maryland's primary election. Manning received 5.8% of the votes. Incumbent Ben Cardin won renomination with 80.4% of the votes cast. Shortly after the polls closed, Manning posted a statement on her campaign website. "Over the past several months," she wrote, "it has become clear that my experiences have taken an enormous toll on my physical and emotional health. I stepped back from campaigning to prioritize my own well-being." She thanked "the more than one thousand individual donors who generously contributed to our campaign," and "our team of hundreds of volunteers." But, she added, "after spending hours and hours knocking on doors and making phone calls, I'm convinced that the change people truly need goes beyond what our corrupt two-party system is willing to offer." On January 20, 2018, Manning attended "A Night for Freedom" hosted by far-right social media personality Mike Cernovich at the nightclub FREQ in Hell's Kitchen, Manhattan. The party was billed, in Cernovich's words, as a "gathering of patriots and political dissidents who are bored with mainstream political events", and included right-wing figures such as Gavin McInnes, James O'Keefe, Lucian Wintrich, and Jack Posobiec. According to The Washington Post, Manning's attendance infuriated the far-left. "What followed," The Post reported, "was an overheated Internet tug-of-war between opposite sides of the political spectrum, each accusing the other of co-opting Manning, while her intentions were relentlessly picked apart." Manning afterward stated that she was acting as a double agent, infiltrating the alt-right to gather information and insight about alt-right rally plans. It later emerged that Manning participated with Cassandra Fairbanks (an admirer and writer for the right-wing website The Gateway Pundit), Posobiec, Wintrich, and others in Escape the Room DC, and spent an evening drinking and playing Cards Against Humanity at Wintrich's apartment with him, Fairbanks, and others. Manning repeated her intentions to gain information about the alt-right, but apologised to her supporters who felt betrayed. In August 2018, the Government of Australia refused to issue Manning a visa to enter the country, where she was scheduled to make a series of public appearances. The company arranging Manning's speaking tour said it would appeal the decision, taken under s501(1) of the Migration Act, which authorizes a minister to refuse a visa on character grounds. The Department of Home Affairs specified that Manning did not pass the character test because of her "substantial criminal record". On September 2, Manning spoke as scheduled at the Sydney Opera House except that she appeared onscreen live via satellite from Los Angeles. On August 31, 2018, Immigration New Zealand granted Manning special direction to apply for a work visa to enter New Zealand, stating there was "no reason to believe Ms Manning would not comply with the terms and conditions of any visa issued". Due to her previous convictions for espionage and other offenses, Manning is subject to character provisions of the Immigration Act. Manning had plans to tour Auckland and Wellington on September 8 and 9. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern defended the New Zealand Government's decision to allow Manning entry, stating that "we are a nation that allows free speech". By contrast, the center-right National Party had called for Manning to be banned from entering New Zealand on national security grounds due to her espionage and computer fraud convictions. In August 2021, Forbes reported that Manning had been contracted to conduct an information security audit with NYM Technologies SA, a Switzerland-based for-profit cryptocurrency startup "to send data anonymously around the Internet using the same blockchain technology underlying Bitcoin." In May 2019, Manning announced that Farrar, Straus & Giroux would publish her memoir. She said it would be primarily a personal narrative that would not relitigate the facts of her case. The book, titled README.txt, was published in 2022, and it focuses on her early adulthood, career in the U.S. Army, and her early gender transition. Writer P.E. Moskowitz interviewed Manning about the book in which Manning says, "I wanted to put down in writing the context of who I am, my whole life, my life story—from my perspective as much as possible. Obviously, it's in the context of people's interest in certain events. But I am an all-encompassing human being, and I didn't come from a vacuum. I was shaped into the person I've become. And I wanted to sketch that out, give people an idea of my own background, my own story. It's been called a memoir but I think of it more as a coming-of-age story." Prior to her arrest in 2010, Manning was known to DJ on occasion. She has returned to DJing as of August 2022. Information security Information sensitivity LGBT people in prison List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States McCarran Internal Security Act of 1950 Reception of WikiLeaks The Source (oratorio) Yours Truly (2019 film) WikiLeaks tweeted on January 8, 2010, that they had obtained "encrypted videos of U.S. bomb strikes on civilians", and linked to a story about the airstrike; see "Have encrypted videos ...", Twitter, January 8, 2010 (archived from the original, May 8, 2012). The tweet said: "Have encrypted videos of US bomb strikes on civilians http://bit.ly/wlafghan2 we need super computer time http://ljsf.org/". Bit.ly is on Wikipedia's spam blacklist, which is why the first link is not live. It leads to Shachtman, Noah. "Afghan Airstrike Video Goes Down the Memory Hole", Wired, June 23, 2009. During an October 8, 2017, appearance at The New Yorker Festival, Manning said she is legally unable to speak about certain details concerning her leaks, confirming a July 2017 post from her verified Twitter account saying "technically, i cant [sic] read, comment on, discuss, or even look at any leaked material, even if it was after 2010". Tate, Julie; Londoño, Ernesto (July 30, 2013). "Bradley Manning found not guilty of aiding the enemy, convicted on other charges". The Washington Post. Tate, Julie (August 21, 2013). "Judge sentences Bradley Manning to 35 years". The Washington Post. Londoño, Ernesto (April 23, 2014). "Convicted leaker Bradley Manning changes legal name to Chelsea Elizabeth Manning". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 27, 2014. "Whistleblower Chelsea Manning sent back to jail". RFI. May 17, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. Humphreys, Adrian (October 7, 2021). "Public importance of leaked military secrets crucial to U.S. whistleblower Manning's bid to enter Canada". National Post. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Butterworth, Benjamin (January 15, 2018). "Transgender activist Chelsea Manning's Senate video listed as 'inappropriate' by YouTube". PinkNews. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Manning, Chelsea E. (May 27, 2015). "The years since I was jailed for releasing the 'war diaries' have been a rollercoaster". The Guardian. Retrieved May 28, 2015. Savage, Charlie (January 17, 2017). "Obama Commutes Bulk of Chelsea Manning's Sentence". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2017. Retrieved January 17, 2017. Manning, Chelsea E. (August 22, 2013). "The Next Stage of My Life". Press release. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. As I transition into this next phase of my life, I want everyone to know the real me. I am Chelsea Manning. I am a female. Given the way that I feel, and have felt since childhood, I want to begin hormone therapy as soon as possible. ...I also request that...you refer to me by my new name and use the feminine pronoun.... Thank you, Chelsea E. Manning Hansen, Evan (July 13, 2011). "Manning-Lamo Chat Logs Revealed". Wired. "Alleged Army Whistleblower Felt "Isolated"". CBS News. July 7, 2010. "Secret US Embassy Cables". WikiLeaks. November 28, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2015. "Iraq War logs". WikiLeaks. October 22, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2015. "Afghan War diary". WikiLeaks. July 25, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2015. Miklaszewski, Jim; Kube, Courtney (March 2, 2011). "Manning faces new charges, possible death penalty". MSNBC. Nicks 2012, pp. 237, 246 "WikiLeaks suspect transferred to Fort Leavenworth". The Oklahoman. Associated Press. April 19, 2011. "Judge accepts Manning's guilty pleas in WikiLeaks case". CBS News. February 28, 2013. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved February 28, 2013. Pilkington, Ed (July 31, 2013). "Bradley Manning verdict: cleared of 'aiding the enemy' but guilty of other charges". The Guardian. the soldier was found guilty in their entirety of 17 out of the 22 counts against him, and of an amended version of four others. Sledge, Matt (August 21, 2013). "Bradley Manning Sentenced To 35 Years In Prison For WikiLeaks Disclosures". The Huffington Post. Hanna, John (August 21, 2013). "Manning to Serve Sentence at Famous Leavenworth". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. "Chelsea Manning freed from prison decades early". BBC News. Retrieved May 17, 2017. "President Obama Grants Commutations and Pardons". obamawhitehouse.archives.gov. January 17, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Fritze, John (February 16, 2018). "Is Chelsea Manning's Senate campaign for real? 'I'm willing to put myself out there'". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2018. Jouvenal, Justin (January 13, 2018). "Chelsea Manning files to run for U.S. Senate in Maryland". The Washington Post. "2018 Primary Election Results". The Baltimore Sun. June 26, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Katelyn Polantz; Veronica Stracqualursi; Mark Morales (March 12, 2020). "Federal judge orders Chelsea Manning's release from jail". CNN. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Gosztola, Kevin (March 12, 2020). "Federal Judge Orders Chelsea Manning Released from Jail". Consortium News. "Order Changing Name" (PDF). ChelseaManning.org. April 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 1, 2014. McKelvey, Tara (August 22, 2013). "Bradley Manning's disrupted family life". BBC News Magazine. Nicks (September 23, 2010). Biography of Manning. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Fishman (July 3, 2011). "Features: Bradley Manning". New York. pp. 2–3. Tate, Julie (August 14, 2013). "Manning apologizes, says he 'hurt the United States'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Lewis, Paul (August 21, 2013). "Bradley Manning trial revealed a lonely soldier with a troubled past". The Guardian. Fort Meade. Kirkland, Michael (March 13, 2011). "Under the U.S. Supreme Court: Bradley Manning, WikiLeaks martyr?". United Press International. Shaer, Matthew (June 12, 2017). "The Long, Lonely Road of Chelsea Manning". The New York Times. Thompson, Ginger (August 8, 2010). "Early Struggles of Soldier Charged in Leak Case". The New York Times. p. 1. Nakashima, Ellen (May 4, 2011). "Bradley Manning is at the center of the WikiLeaks controversy. But who is he?". The Washington Post. "The Private Life of Bradley Manning; Interview Brian Manning". Frontline. "The Private Life of Bradley Manning; Interview Jordan Davis". Frontline. PBS. March 2011. "The Private Life of Bradley Manning". Frontline. PBS. March 29, 2011. Thompson, Ginger (August 8, 2010). "Early Struggles of Soldier Charged in Leak Case". The New York Times. p. 1. Nicks (September 23, 2010). Biography. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Nicks 2012, p. 90 Fishman (July 3, 2011). "Bradley Manning". New York. p. 4. Nicks 2012, pp. 19–20 "The Private Life of Bradley Manning". PBS. "Interview Brian Manning" (transcript) "Interview Jordan Davis" (transcript), PBS Frontline, March 7, 2011 Also see Hansen, July 13, 2011, at "(11:36:34 AM) bradass87". Caesar, Ed (December 19, 2010). "Manning Article". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Hansen, Evan (July 13, 2011). "Manning Lamo Logs". Wired. "Online message board created by Manning and James Kirkpatrick". angeldyne.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2003. Retrieved December 7, 2003. Caesar, Ed (December 19, 2010). "Manning article". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Hansen, Evan (July 13, 2011). "Manning Lamo Logs". Leigh and Harding 2011, p. 24 Nicks (September 23, 2010). "Private Manning and the Making of Wikileaks". thislandpress.com. Archived from the original on April 29, 2011. Nakashima, Ellen (May 8, 2011). "Who is WikiLeaks suspect Bradley Manning?". The Washington Post. Hansen, Evan (July 13, 2011). "Manning Lamo Logs". Wired. Nicks 2012, pp. 23–24. Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 3 For Zoto and Campbell, see Nakashima, May 4, 2011. Nicks 2012, pp. 24–25, 51–56. Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 3. Nakashima, May 4, 2011. For the jobs, see "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011. Nicks 2012, p. 57 For the PhD in physics, see Nakashima, May 4, 2011. Also see Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 4. Reeve, Elspeth. "A Portrait of the Mind of Bradley Manning" Archived October 23, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, The Atlantic Wire, August 14, 2013. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 2. For concerns about her stability, see Nakashima, May 4, 2011. For basic training and the video interview with the soldier, see Smith, Teresa et al. "The madness of Bradley Manning?", The Guardian, May 27, 2011; soldier's interview begins 07:10 mins. For a transcript of the interview, see "Bradley Manning: fellow soldier recalls 'scared, bullied kid'", The Guardian, May 28, 2011. For the drill sergeants and "General Manning", see Nicks 2012, p. 62. For restarting basic training in January 2008, see Nicks 2012, p. 73. For the top-security clearance, see Nakashima, May 4, 2011 For the "TS/SCI security clearance", see Nicks 2012, p. 116. For "unprecedented access to state secrets", see Nicks 2012, p. 117; also see Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 2. For the reprimand regarding YouTube, see Nicks, September 23, 2010; also see Nicks 2012, p. 75. "Bradley Manning", The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 31, 2014. Nicks 2012, p. 82. Leigh and Harding 2011, pp. 27–28; Nicks 2012, p. 83. For her introduction to the hacker community, see Leigh and Harding 2011, pp. 27–28. For the anonymous interview, see Her, Phim. "Teen hears peoples' stories at LGBTQ rally", syracuse.com, November 17, 2008. That the interviewee was Manning, see Nicks, September 23, 2010, and Nick 2012, p. 82. For Manning's reference to the interview on Facebook, see "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011. For the introduction to lobbyists and others, see Nicks 2012, p. 85. For the emotional problems and referral to a counselor, see Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 1, and Nicks 2012, p. 114. For the films, see Nicks 2012, p. 88. For the relationship with Watkins, see Nicks, September 23, 2010, and Nicks 2012, p. 122. For her time in Fort Polk, and for "risk to himself and possibly others", see Nicks 2012, pp. 114–115; for Forward Operating Base Hammer, see pp. 123–124. For "risk to himself", also see Nakashima, May 4, 2011, and "Accused WikiLeaker Bradley Manning's Dream of Becoming President", Newsweek, April 12, 2012 (excerpt from Nicks 2012). "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011. Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 5. For the fairy wand, see Thompson, August 8, 2010, p. 2. For the roommate, see Rushe, Dominic and Williams, Matt. "Bradley Manning pre-trial hearing – Monday 19 December", The Guardian, December 19, 2011. Fishman, July 3, 2011, p. 4. Nicks 2012, pp. 133–134. Radia, Kirit and Martinez, Luis. "Bradley Manning Defense Reveals Alter Ego Named 'Breanna Manning'", ABC News, December 17, 2011. Williams, Matt; Pilkington, Ed (December 18, 2011). "Bradley Manning hearing told of lax security at military intelligence unit". The Guardian. Fort Meade. Lewis, Paul (August 12, 2013). "Bradley Manning flipped a table during counseling, defence tells hearing". The Guardian. "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011, and Blake, Heidi; Bingham, John; and Rayner, Gordon. "Bradley Manning, suspected source of WikiLeaks documents, raged on his Facebook page", The Daily Telegraph, July 30, 2010. Hansen, Evan (July 13, 2011). "Manning Lamo Logs". Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 11. Nicks 2012, pp. 137–138; also see Zetter, December 19, 2011. Shanker, Tom (July 8, 2010). "Loophole May Have Aided Theft of Classified Data". The New York Times. Retrieved November 15, 2014. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 13. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 16. For the army investigators' testimony, see Zetter, December 19, 2011. For more from the army investigators, including the reference to Eric Schmiedl, see Dishneau, David and Jelinek, Pauline. "Witness: Manning said leak would lift 'fog of war'", Associated Press, December 19, 2011. Also see "Investigators link WikiLeaks suspect to Assange", Agence France-Presse, December 20, 2011. Nicks 2012, pp. 131–135, 137–138. For her living as a woman, see Nicks 2012, p. 146. For the details of her leave, see "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011. Poulsen and Zetter, June 6, 2010. Manning, January 29, 2013, pp. 15–16. Myers, Steven Lee (July 6, 2010). "Charges for Soldier Accused of Leak". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 18. Hansen, July 13, 2011. Manning, January 29, 2013, pp. 18–22. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 33. For Domscheit-Berg's destroying the video, see Dorling, Philip. "WikiLeaks has more US secrets, Assange says". The Age. March 5, 2013. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 31. Manning, January 29, 2013, p. 23. Nicks 2012, pp. 162–163. Email from Manning to Lim Archived August 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Army Records Management and Declassification Agency, April 24, 2010. Lewis, Paul. "Bradley Manning supervisor 'ignored photo of soldier dressed as woman '", The Guardian, August 13, 2013. Hansen, July 13, 2011; also see Nicks 2012, pp. 171–184. Nicks 2012, p. 164, and "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", PBS Frontline, March 2011. For the storage cupboard, the psychiatrist, and the recommended discharge, see Nakashima, May 4, 2011. For the same incident, see Nicks 2012, pp. 161–163. For the altercation with the intelligence analyst, see Sanchez, Raf. "Bradley Manning 'attacked female soldier and sent picture of himself as a woman'", The Daily Telegraph, December 18, 2011. O'Kane, Maggie et al. "Bradley Manning: the bullied outsider who knew US military's inner secrets" "WikiLeaks accused Bradley Manning 'should never have been sent to Iraq'", The Guardian, May 27, 2011. Dishneau, David and Jelinek, Pauline. "Witness: Manning said leak would lift 'fog of war'", Associated Press, December 19, 2011. Also see Nicks 2012, p. 164. Leigh and Harding 2011, pp. 52–56. For WikiLeaks security, see Domscheit-Berg 2011, p. 165. For the U.S. government trying to determine whether Assange encouraged Manning, see Savage, Charlie. "U.S. Tries to Build Case for Conspiracy by WikiLeaks", The New York Times, December 15, 2010. For Manning's chats with Lamo, see Hansen, July 13, 2011. Nicks 2012, p. 155. For Manning calling Reykjavik13 a "test document", see Hansen, July 13, 2011 Nicks, September 23, 2010. For the publishing sequence, see Leigh and Harding 2011, p. 70. For the leak of the Defense Dept report on WikiLeaks, see Kravets, David. "Secret Document Calls Wikileaks 'Threat' to U.S. Army", Wired, March 15, 2010. For the Defense Dept report itself, see Assange, Julian. "U.S. intelligence planned to destroy WikiLeaks", WikiLeaks release on March 15, 2010, of Horvath, Michael D. "Wikileaks.org – An Online Reference to Foreign Intelligence Services, Insurgents, or Terrorist Groups?", United States Army Counterintelligence Center, Department of Defense Counterintelligence Analysis Program, March 18, 2008. "Open Secrets: WikiLeaks, War and American Diplomacy [Unedited version]". The New York Times. January 2011. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. "Open Secrets: WikiLeaks, War and American Diplomacy [Edited version]". The New York Times. January 2011. Archived from the original on January 27, 2011. Nicks 2012, pp. 157–161. Nakashima (May 4, 2011). "Who is WikiLeaks Suspect Bradley Manning?". The Washington Post Magazine. For Nicks's analysis, see Nicks 2012, pp. 191–193 For the number of documents in the Afghan and Iraq War logs and Cablegate, and for the publication dates, see Nicks 2012, pp. 204, 206. Leigh and Harding, 2011, p. 70 for the publishing sequence; pp. 194ff for the material WikiLeaks published. For Manning's chat with Adrian Lamo, see Hansen, July 13, 2011. Greenwald, Glenn (September 2, 2011). "Facts and myths in the WikiLeaks/Guardian saga". Salon. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Stöcker, Christian. "A Dispatch Disaster in Six Acts", Der Spiegel, September 1, 2011; archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Mackey, Robert et al. "All Leaked U.S. Cables Were Made Available Online as WikiLeaks Splintered", The New York Times, September 1, 2011; archived from the original on March 7, 2012. For the Ethiopian journalist and the relocation of sources, see Nicks 2012, p. 208. Leigh, David (April 25, 2011). "What are the Guantánamo Bay files? Understanding the prisoner dossiers". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved July 16, 2020. Savage, Charlie; Glaberson, William; Lehren, Andrew W. (April 24, 2011). "Classified Files Offer New Insights Into Detainees". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 26, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2020. Leigh, David; Ball, James; Cobain, Ian; Burke, Jason (April 24, 2011). "Guantánamo leaks lift lid on world's most controversial prison". The Guardian. Nicks 2012, p. 153. For Poulsen's relationship with Lamo, see Last, January 11, 2011 Archived May 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. For more on the relationship, see Greenwald, June 18, 2010. For Wired.com's response to Greenwald, see Hansen, Poulsen, December 28, 2010. For Poulsen's article about Lamo, see Poulsen, May 20, 2010. For Lamo's conviction, see Shachtman, Noah, "Adrian Lamo Cuts Deal With Feds", Wired, January 9, 2004. Archived link Hulme, George V. "With Friends Like This" Archived September 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, InformationWeek, July 8, 2002. Greenwald, June 18, 2010 Greenwald, Glenn. Email exchange between Glenn Greenwald and Kevin Poulsen, June 14–17, 2010. Greenwald wrote: "Lamo told me that Manning first emailed him on May 20 and, according to highly edited chat logs released by Wired, had his first online chat with Manning on May 21; in other words, Manning first contacted Lamo the very day that Poulsen's Wired article on Lamo's involuntary commitment appeared (the Wired article is time-stamped 5:46 p.m. on May 20). "Lamo, however, told me that Manning found him not from the Wired article—which Manning never mentioned reading—but from searching the word 'WikiLeaks' on Twitter, which led her to a tweet Lamo had written that included the word 'WikiLeaks.' Even if Manning had really found Lamo through a Twitter search for 'WikiLeaks,' Lamo could not explain why Manning focused on him, rather than the thousands of other people who have also mentioned the word 'WikiLeaks' on Twitter, including countless people who have done so by expressing support for WikiLeaks." For the section and revision of the Wikipedia article Manning linked to, see "U.S. Intelligence report on Wikileaks", Wikipedia, May 21, 2010. Nicks 2012, p. 179. Caesar, December 19, 2010 Archived May 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. For more on Lamo approaching the authorities, see Zetter, Kim. "In WikiLeaks Case, Bradley Manning Faces the Hacker Who Turned Him In", Wired, December 2011. Nicks 2012, p. 232. For the first Wired story, see Poulsen and Zetter, June 6, 2010. For the sequence of events, see Greenwald, June 18, 2010. Hansen and Poulsen, December 28, 2010. For the full chat log, see Hansen, July 13, 2011. Poulsen and Zetter, June 6, 2010. Poulsen and Zetter, June 16, 2010. Nicks 2012, p. 247. "Charge sheet" Retrieved December 26, 2010. For the number of documents involved, and the penalty if convicted, see "WikiLeaks: Bradley Manning faces 22 new charges", CBS News, March 2, 2011. For date of arrest and transfer to Kuwait, see "AE 494 Ruling Speedy_Trial.pdf" Archived August 12, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Army Records Management and Declassification Agency, Freedom of Information Act Electronic Reading Room. Retrieved June 8, 2013. "see p 5". Documentcloud.org. Retrieved June 2, 2014. O'Brien, Alexa (June 30, 2013). "US v Pfc. Manning | Criminal Elements and Definitions for Wanton Publication and State Dept, CIA, FBI, and Classified Witnesses". alexaobrien.com. Archived from the original on September 10, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Pilkington, Ed. "Bradley Manning: how keeping himself sane was taken as proof of madness", The Guardian, November 30, 2012. For a description of the jail, see Nakashima, Ellen. "In brig, WikiLeaks suspect Bradley Manning ordered to sleep without clothing", The Washington Post, March 5, 2011. For Manning's lawyer's description, see "A Typical Day for PFC Bradley Manning", The Law Offices of David E. Coombs, December 18, 2010; archived from the original on April 6, 2012. For Manning's description, see Manning, March 10, 2011, particularly pp. 10–11. For the books she requested, see Nicks, Denver. "Bradley Manning's Life Behind Bars", The Daily Beast, December 17, 2010. The list was: Decision Points by George W. Bush; Critique of Practical Reason and Critique of Pure Reason by Immanuel Kant; Propaganda by Edward Bernays; The Selfish Gene by Richard Dawkins; A People's History of the United States by Howard Zinn; The Art of War by Sun Tzu; The Good Soldiers by David Finkel; and On War by Gen. Carl von Clausewitz. Manning, March 10, 2011, p. 7. Marshall, Serena. "Court-Martial for Bradley Manning in Wikileaks Case?", ABC News, December 22, 2011, p. 2. "Manning's lawyer David Coombs suicide watch timeline". Armycourtmartialdefense.info. January 21, 2011. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved June 2, 2014. Nicks 2012, pp. 240–242. For Manning's letter, see Manning, March 10, 2011, pp. 7–8. Manning, March 10, 2011, p. 9ff. Nakashima, Ellen. "In brig, WikiLeaks suspect Bradley Manning ordered to sleep without clothing", The Washington Post, March 5, 2011. For a sleep garment having been supplied, see Nakashima, Ellen. "WikiLeaks suspect's treatment 'stupid,' U.S. official says", The Washington Post, March 12, 2011. Also see "Editorial; The Abuse of Private Manning", The New York Times, March 15, 2011. Pilkington, Ed. "Bradley Manning's treatment was cruel and inhuman, UN torture chief rules", The Guardian, March 12, 2012. Pilkington, Ed; Chris McGreal & Steven Morris. "Bradley Manning is UK citizen and needs protection, government told", The Guardian, February 1, 2011. For Manning's view of her nationality, see Coombs, David E. "Clarification Regarding PFC Manning's Citizenship" Archived August 13, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Law Offices of David E. Coombs, February 2, 2011: "There has been some discussion regarding PFC Bradley Manning's citizenship. PFC Manning does not hold a British passport, nor does he consider himself a British citizen. He is an American and is proud to be serving in the United States Army. His current confinement conditions are troubling to many both here in the United States and abroad. This concern, however, is not a citizenship issue." Nakashima, Ellen. "WikiLeaks suspect's treatment 'stupid,' U.S. official says", The Washington Post, March 12, 2011. Tapper, Jake and Radia, Kirit. "Comments on Prisoner Treatment Cause State Department Spokesman to Lose His Job" Archived August 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, ABC News, March 13, 2011. "A Statement on Private Manning's Detention". balkin.blogspot.com. March 15, 2011. Pilkington, Ed. "Bradley Manning's jail conditions improve dramatically after protest campaign", The Guardian, May 4, 2011. "Panel Says WikiLeaks Suspect Is Competent to Stand Trial", Associated Press, April 29, 2011. Rizzo, Jennifer "Bradley Manning charged" Archived March 1, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, CNN, February 23, 2012. Rath, Arun. "What Happened At Bradley Manning's Hearing This Week?", PBS Frontline, December 22, 2011. For the government overcharging Manning, see Zetter, Kim. "Army Piles on Evidence in Final Arguments in WikiLeaks Hearing", Wired, December 22, 2011. For the gender issues, see Radia, Kirit, and Martinez, Luis. "Bradley Manning Defense Reveals Alter Ego Named 'Breanna Manning'", ABC News, December 17, 2011. Tate, Julie and Nakashima, Ellen. "Judge refuses to dismiss charges against WikiLeaks suspect Bradley Manning", The Washington Post, January 8, 2013. O'Brien, Alexa. "Bradley Manning's full statement", Salon, March 1, 2013. Kube, Courtney; DeLuca, Matthew; McClam, Erin. "I'm sorry that I hurt the United States': Bradley Manning apologizes in court", NBC News, August 14, 2013. Hartmann, Margaret. "Ahead of His Sentencing, Bradley Manning Says, 'I'm Sorry I Hurt the United States'", The New York Times magazine, August 15, 2013. O'Brien, Alex (August 18, 2013). "The ethical consistency of Bradley Manning's apology". The Guardian. Retrieved July 22, 2014. Courson, Paul. "Bradley Manning apologizes, tells court he must pay price", CNN, August 14, 2013. Sledge, Matt. "Bradley Manning Sentenced To 35 Years In Prison For WikiLeaks Disclosures", The Huffington Post, August 21, 2013. Bradley Manning: a sentence both unjust and unfair, The Guardian, August 21, 2013. Bradley Manning's Excessive Sentence The New York Times, August 21, 2013. Cavaliere, Victoria "Army General upholds Manning's prison sentence in WikiLeaks case", yahoo.com, April 18, 2014. Coombs, David. "Re: Pardon/Commutation Request For Private Bradley E. Manning", September 3, 2013. Manning, Bradley. "Petition for Commutation of Sentence", September 3, 2013. "Bradley Manning seeks presidential pardon", CBS News, September 4, 2013. "Manning seeks presidential pardon for leaking classified information", Associated Press, September 4, 2013. "Manning seeks presidential pardon in WikiLeaks case", Reuters, September 4, 2013. Sunde, Kristin Hulaas. "Whistleblower Chelsea Manning thanks Amnesty activists for their support" Archived May 28, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Amnesty International, April 8, 2015. Savage, Charlie (November 14, 2016). "Chelsea Manning Asks Obama to Cut Sentence to Time Served". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Daniella Silva (December 11, 2016). "Chelsea Manning Petition Reaches Threshold for White House Response". NBC News. Retrieved December 20, 2016. Gerstein, Josh (December 30, 2016). "Snowden and Manning ask Obama for clemency". Politico. Retrieved December 30, 2016. McFadden, Cynthia; Monahan, Kevin; Arkin, William M.; Connor, Tracy (January 11, 2017). "Army Leaker Chelsea Manning on Obama's 'Short List' for Commutation". NBC News. Retrieved January 11, 2017. "Obama commutes Chelsea Manning's prison sentence". CBC News. January 17, 2017. Retrieved January 17, 2017. Sabrina Siddiqui; Ed Pilkington (January 18, 2017). "Obama's final press conference: Chelsea Manning commutation is 'appropriate'". The Guardian. Retrieved January 18, 2017. del Castillo, Michael (August 25, 2021). "Chelsea Manning Is Back, And Hacking Again, Only This Time For A Bitcoin-Based Privacy Startup". Forbes. Retrieved August 25, 2021. "Chelsea Manning, Legal Team on Manning's Upcoming Release from Military Prison". Luminairity. May 9, 2017. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2017. Manning, Chelsea (January 26, 2017). "Compromise does not work with our political opponents. When will we learn?". The Guardian. Retrieved January 26, 2017. "Trump rips 'ungrateful' Chelsea Manning after Obama criticism". Fox News. January 26, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Shubailai, Nadine (May 17, 2017). "Chelsea Manning released: The past 'is only my starting point, not my final destination'". ABC News. Grinberg, Emanuella; McLaughlin, Eliott C. (May 17, 2017). "Chelsea Manning released from prison". CNN. "Chelsea Manning to be released from prison Wednesday on special active duty status". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. May 16, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2017. Volokh, Eugene (June 1, 2018). "Chelsea Manning Loses Wikileaks First Amendment Appeal". Reason. Retrieved June 1, 2018. Blake, Andrew (June 2, 2018). "Chelsea Manning loses appeal in WikiLeaks case". The Washington Times. Retrieved June 2, 2018. "Petition for Grant of Review of the decision of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals is Denied". Daily Journal. United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces. May 30, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2020. @xychelsea (April 21, 2020). "hi all - been staying safe inside a lot 🏠 doing what i can to help collect & distribute PPE to some of those most in need 🚫🦠 thankful for all your wonderful love and support! we will get through this together 😷🌈💕 #WeGotThis" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Shortell, David (March 5, 2019). "Judge rejects effort by Chelsea Manning to avoid grand jury testimony". CNN. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Weiner, Rachel; Nakashima, Ellen (March 1, 2019). "Chelsea Manning subpoenaed to testify before grand jury in Julian Assange investigation". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on March 7, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Axelrod, Tal (March 2, 2019). "Chelsea Manning subpoenaed for testimony in Julian Assange probe: reports". The Hill. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Savage, Charlie (March 8, 2019). "Chelsea Manning Is Jailed for Refusing to Testify in WikiLeaks Case". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Barakat, Matthew (March 8, 2019). "Chelsea Manning jailed for refusing to testify on WikiLeaks". Associated Press. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "Chelsea Manning: Wikileaks source jailed for refusing to testify". BBC News. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Dukakakis, Ali (March 8, 2019). "Chelsea Manning taken into custody for refusing to testify before secret grand jury". ABC News. Retrieved March 8, 2019. "Chelsea Manning no longer held in segregated status at jail". AP News. April 5, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2019. Lartey, Jamiles (March 24, 2019). "Chelsea Manning: supporters demand release from solitary confinement". The Guardian. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Lynch, Sarah (April 22, 2019). "U.S. appeals court denies Manning's bail request, upholds contempt finding". Reuters. Retrieved April 24, 2019. "Chelsea Manning freed from jail – for now". The Age. Melbourne, Australia. Associated Press. May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2019. Fortin, Jacey (May 16, 2019). "Chelsea Manning Ordered Back to Jail for Refusal to Testify in WikiLeaks Inquiry". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2019. "The Latest: Chelsea Manning ordered back to jail". Associated Press. May 16, 2019. Retrieved December 15, 2019. Weiner, Rachel (June 20, 2019). "Chelsea Manning fights fines as she remains in jail for refusing to testify". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 15, 2019. Allyn, Bobby (December 31, 2019). "Jailing And Fining Chelsea Manning Constitutes Torture, Top U.N. Official Says". NPR. Helmore, Edward (December 31, 2019). "Top UN official accuses US of torturing Chelsea Manning". The Guardian. Coleman, Justine (December 31, 2019). "UN official says US is torturing Chelsea Manning with detention". The Hill. Cameron, Dell (March 11, 2020). "Chelsea Manning Attempted Suicide in Jail on Wednesday, Lawyers Say". Gizmodo. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Statement From Chelsea Manning's Legal Team: Ms. Manning is Recovering in Hospital, Scheduled to Appear in Court Friday". The Sparrow Project. March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Lawyer: Chelsea Manning attempts suicide in Va. jail". Associated Press. March 11, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Weiner, Rachel (March 12, 2020). "Chelsea Manning ordered released from jail". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Savage, Charlie (March 12, 2020). "Chelsea Manning Is Ordered Released From Jail". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Reed, Kevin (March 16, 2020). "Fund drive to pay Chelsea Manning's court fines raises $267,000 in two days". World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved March 16, 2020. Duffy, Nick (March 17, 2020). "Chelsea Manning was stung with massive court fines – but her supporters bailed her out in just two days". PinkNews. Retrieved March 17, 2020. Brodkin, Jon (January 4, 2021). "UK blocks Assange extradition due to suicide risk, poor US jail conditions". Ars Technica. Retrieved January 5, 2021. Brooke 2011, p. 223. Jaffe, Greg; Partlow, Joshua (July 30, 2010). "Mullen says leak put troops and Afghans in danger; WikiLeaks documents include names of informants helping U.S." The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 9, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2017. Fishman (July 3, 2011). "Bradley Manning". New York. p. 8. "Video Of Obama On Bradley Manning: 'He Broke The Law'". Forbes. April 22, 2011. "Did Obama taint Manning's right to fair trial?". NBC News. April 26, 2011. Horne, Nigel (January 15, 2011). "Tunisia: WikiLeaks had a part in Ben Ali's downfall". The Week. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. It is clear that leaked cables ... played an important role in firing up the nation's disaffected youth. ... No one is suggesting WikiLeaks and its editor Julian Assange can take full credit for toppling the corrupt Tunisian regime. Malinowski, Tom (January 25, 2011). "Whispering at Autocrats". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on January 27, 2011. ...the cables did have an impact. Walker, Peter. "Amnesty International hails WikiLeaks and Guardian as Arab spring 'catalysts'", The Guardian, May 13, 2011. Gelvin, James L. (2012). The Arab Uprisings: What Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford University Press. p. 50. ISBN 978-0199891771. "The right response to WikiLeaks". The Washington Post. November 30, 2010. Nicks 2012, p. 196: "To the far right he [Manning] was clear evidence that gays were unfit for military service. And in the American mainstream, the leaks were explained away as the actions of a disaffected homosexual who had come to hate the army after being bullied into madness." Pilkington, Ed (June 20, 2017). "Chelsea Manning leaks had no strategic impact on US war efforts, Pentagon finds". The Guardian. Retrieved June 20, 2017. "Whistleblowerpreis". Whistleblower-Netzwerk. April 16, 2007. Retrieved June 2, 2014. Nash, Graham (December 14, 2011). "Bradley Manning Is "Almost Gone"". Huffington Post. Retrieved August 29, 2019. "People to People Blog 'And the 2012 People's Choice Winner is...'". Global Exchange. April 2, 2012. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved June 2, 2014. "Chelsea Manning Awarded 2013 US Peace Prize". US Peace Memorial Foundation. Retrieved January 1, 2020. "IPB Awards MacBride Peace Prize 2013 to US Whistleblower Bradley Manning". Geneva: International Peace Bureau. July 13, 2013. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. "Edward Snowden in Oxford Union video-link to honour leaker". Oxford Mail. February 20, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2020. Fellow intelligence documents leaker Edward Snowden made a video for the ceremony in which he also congratulated Ms Manning. "Chelsea Manning". Sam Adams Associates for Integrity in Intelligence. February 19, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2020. "Petition Passes 100K Signatures Backing Bradley Manning Nobel Prize Nomination". CBS. August 12, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2014. Kirstan, Klara Niederbacher, Nina (May 2015). "Kunstaktion auf dem Alexanderplatz: Whistleblower-Statuen im Einsatz für die Meinungsfreiheit".{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Mejia, Paula (May 3, 2015). "Statues of Snowden, Assange and Manning Erected in Berlin's Alexanderplatz". Newsweek. "Anything to say". www.anythingtosay.com. "The Stranger Could Be You: Artist Heather Dewey-Hagborg on Her Chelsea Manning DNA Portrait". Papermag. September 1, 2015. Retrieved September 28, 2017. "Suppressed Images and Radical Love". Open Space. Retrieved September 28, 2017. "The Strange and Troubling Science Behind the 3-D Printed Portraits of Chelsea Manning". artnet News. August 4, 2017. Retrieved September 28, 2017. "Fridman Gallery". Fridman Gallery. Retrieved September 28, 2017. "Pioneer Awards 2017". Electronic Frontier Foundation. May 17, 2017. Retrieved September 26, 2017. "OUT100: Chelsea Manning, Newsmaker of the Year". Out. November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 8, 2017. "Presenting the First-Ever Bitch 50". Bitch. November 30, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2017. "2017 Global Thinkers". Foreign Policy. December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. "Chelsea Manning, Correctiv & Novartis whistleblowers win GUE/NGL award". European United Left–Nordic Green Left. October 14, 2020. Retrieved October 14, 2020. The Left in the European Parliament (October 14, 2020). Winner GUE/NGL Whistelblowers' Award 2020: Chelsea Manning, whistleblower & former US army (YouTube video). Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Manning, Chelsea (August 19, 2016) Facing my fear: being in public as a woman for the very first time The Guardian, Retrieved August 19, 2016. Bayetti Flores, Verónica (August 22, 2013). "Manning announces she is transitioning". Feministing. Retrieved August 28, 2013. Carmon, Irin (August 27, 2013). "Who is still calling Chelsea Manning 'he?'". MSNBC. Retrieved August 29, 2013. O'Connor, Maureen (August 22, 2013). "Why Is It So Hard to Call Chelsea Manning 'She'?". New York. Retrieved August 28, 2013. Heffernan, Dani (August 22, 2013). "Reporting On Private Chelsea Manning With Consistent Respect For Gender Identity". GLAAD. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. "NLGJA Encourages Journalists to be Fair and Accurate About Manning's Plans to Live as a Woman". National Lesbian and Gay Journalists Association. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 24, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. Krehely, Jeff (August 22, 2013). "Pvt. Chelsea E. Manning Comes Out, Deserves Respectful Treatment by Media and Officials". HRC Blog. Human Rights Campaign. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 19, 2013. ...journalists and other officials should use her chosen name of Chelsea and refer to her with female pronouns. Using the name Bradley or male pronouns is nothing short of an insult. Media, having reported on her wishes, must respect them as is the standard followed by the AP Stylebook. Neal, Alicia (August 23, 2014). "How Chelsea Manning sees herself. By Alicia Neal, in cooperation with Chelsea herself, commissioned by the Chelsea Manning Support Network, 23 April 2014". Chelsea Manning Support Network. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2014. Middleton, Josh (October 14, 2014). "Philly Artist Paints Only Authorized Portrait of Chelsea Manning". Philadelphia. Retrieved August 8, 2017. "Chelsea Manning granted name change from Bradley". BBC News. April 23, 2014. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "Chelsea Manning petitioning Kansas court for legal name change". The Guardian. Associated Press. March 21, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014. "Army Regulation 40-501, Standards of Medical Fitness, Chapters 2-27n and 3-35" (PDF). Retrieved April 2, 2014. Baldor, Lolita C. "APNewsBreak: Manning to begin Gender Treatment", Associated Press, July 17, 2014. "Attorney: Manning not receiving hormone therapy". Military Times. Associated Press. August 12, 2014. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. Tracy Connor (August 22, 2014). "Chelsea Manning Says Military Still Denying Gender Treatment". NBC News. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Mears, Bill (September 23, 2014). "Chelsea Manning sues to get transgender medical treatment". CNN. Retrieved September 23, 2014. Tom Vanden Brook (February 12, 2015). "Military approves hormone therapy for Chelsea Manning". USA Today. Retrieved February 12, 2015. Mullen, Jethro (February 13, 2015). "Report: U.S. Army approves hormone therapy for Chelsea Manning". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2015. Leitsinger, Miranda (March 5, 2015). "Army Must Refer to Chelsea Manning As a Woman, Not Man: Court". NBC News. Retrieved March 5, 2015. "Joint Status Report And Motion To Stay Proceedings For Seven Months" (PDF). Cryptome.org. March 10, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. "Chelsea Manning ends hunger strike after winning battle for gender surgery". The Guardian. Retrieved September 13, 2016. "Military Doctor Denies Chelsea Manning's Request to Have Records Reflect Gender". NBC News. Reuters. December 8, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2016. Savage, Charlie (January 13, 2017). "Chelsea Manning Describes Bleak Life in a Men's Prison". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved July 2, 2017. "Chelsea Manning Free: Whistleblower's Safety From 'Enemies' Top Priority When She Leaves Prison, Attorney Says". Newsweek. May 16, 2017. Retrieved July 3, 2017. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (July 26, 2017). "it stopped on May 16, 2017" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 26, 2017 – via Twitter. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (June 10, 2017). "i have a private health plan" (Tweet). Archived from the original on June 29, 2017 – via Twitter. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (July 9, 2017). "it was only $600 over 2 years" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 23, 2017 – via Twitter. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (July 9, 2017). "got meds at a markdown" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 24, 2017 – via Twitter. Maxwell, Lida (December 21, 2017). "Whistleblower, Traitor, Soldier, Queer? (The Truth of Chelsea Manning)". The Yale Review. Retrieved February 5, 2018. "Chelsea Manning's Conditions of Confinement Lawsuit Dismissed". Military.com. Associated Press. May 24, 2017. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. Lam, Katherine (October 22, 2018). "Chelsea Manning posts photo from hospital after gender reassignment surgery". Fox News. Retrieved December 16, 2019. Palmer, Ewan (October 22, 2018). "Chelsea Manning tweets photo from hospital bed after gender affirmation surgery". Newsweek. Retrieved December 16, 2019. Weiner, Rachel (March 8, 2019). "Chelsea Manning sent to jail for refusing to testify in WikiLeaks case". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 16, 2019. Hedges, Chris (March 18, 2019). "Chelsea Manning and the New Inquisition". Truthdig. Retrieved December 16, 2019. "United States District Court Eastern District of Virginia, In re: Grand Jury Subpoena, Chelsea Manning, Subpoenaed Party, Declaration 19-1287-cv, Case 1:19-dm-00003-CMH Document 29-1 Filed 05/06/19 Page 5 of 8 PageID# 457 (PDF page 17 of 33)" (PDF). Cryptome. May 6, 2019. Retrieved December 16, 2019. Greenhouse, Emily (March 10, 2015). "What Chelsea Manning Has Won". Bloomberg Politics. Pesta, Abigail (April 8, 2015). "Chelsea Manning Shares Her Transition to Living as a Woman—Behind Bars". Cosmopolitan. "Chelsea Manning to join The Guardian as an opinion writer". PBS NewsHour. PBS. February 10, 2015. Manning, Chelsea (September 16, 2014). "How to make Isis fall on its own sword". The Guardian. Manning, Chelsea (December 8, 2014). "I am a transgender woman and the government is denying my civil rights". The Guardian. Manning, Chelsea (March 9, 2015). "The CIA's torturers and the leaders who approved their actions must face the law". The Guardian. "Chelsea E. Manning (@xychelsea)". Twitter. Retrieved March 11, 2018. Lamothe, Dan (April 3, 2015). "Chelsea Manning, imprisoned for leaking secrets, to tweet from Fort Leavenworth". The Washington Post. Lamothe, Dan (July 6, 2016). "Chelsea Manning, convicted in WikiLeaks case, hospitalized after reported suicide attempt". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 6, 2016. Pilkington, Ed (July 11, 2016). "Chelsea Manning confirms she was hospitalized over suicide attempt". The Guardian. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Volz, Dustin (July 11, 2016). "Jailed U.S. soldier Manning attempted suicide last week: lawyers". Yahoo! News. Reuters. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Woolf, Nicky (July 28, 2016). "Chelsea Manning faces charges, solitary confinement after suicide attempt". The Guardian. Retrieved July 28, 2016. Pilkington, Ed (September 21, 2016). "Chelsea Manning readies for disciplinary hearing over suicide attempt". The Guardian. Retrieved September 21, 2016. Glenza, Jessica (September 23, 2016). "Chelsea Manning gets 14 days in solitary confinement for suicide attempt". The Guardian. Retrieved September 23, 2016. Pilkington, Ed (October 12, 2016). "Chelsea Manning emerges from solitary confinement after suicide attempt". The Guardian. Retrieved October 12, 2016. Manning, Chelsea (July 18, 2016). "Moving On: Reflecting on my identity". Medium. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Savage, Charlie (November 4, 2016). "Chelsea Manning Tried Committing Suicide a Second Time in October". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2016. Pilkington, Ed (September 9, 2016). "Chelsea Manning starts hunger strike, saying she is bullied in prison". The Guardian. Retrieved September 10, 2016. Lartey, Jamiles (June 9, 2017). "Chelsea Manning on responsibility: owed it to public, accepts it for actions". The Guardian. Retrieved June 9, 2017. "Chelsea Manning, Sean Spicer named fellows at Harvard". Reuters. September 13, 2017. "Former CIA Leader Quits Harvard Role Over Chelsea Manning Appointment". Bloomberg Politics. Associated Press. September 14, 2017. "Institute of Politics at Harvard Kennedy School Announces Additional Visiting Fellows". Harvard Kennedy School. September 13, 2017. Duffy, Nick (September 15, 2017). "Harvard University revokes Chelsea Manning's LGBT rights fellowship after pressure from CIA". PinkNews. Beavers, Olivia (September 14, 2017). "Former CIA official resigns from Harvard after Chelsea Manning hiring". The Hill. Brammer, John Paul (September 14, 2017). "Ex-CIA Director Resigns From Harvard Over Chelsea Manning Hire". NBC News. "The Latest: Pompeo cancels Harvard speech over Manning". The News & Observer. Associated Press. September 14, 2017. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2017. "Statement from Dean Elmendorf regarding the invitation to Chelsea Manning to be a Visiting Fellow". Harvard Kennedy School. September 15, 2017. Pilkington, Ed (September 15, 2017). "Chelsea Manning hung up phone on Harvard dean who delivered fellowship snub". The Guardian. "Chelsea Manning: 'I believe I did the best I could'". Associated Press. September 17, 2017. Pilkington, Ed (September 18, 2017). "'This is a police state': Chelsea Manning accuses Harvard of caving to CIA". The Guardian. "Chelsea Manning says she was denied entry to Canada over criminal record". The Globe and Mail. September 25, 2017. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (September 25, 2017). "so, i guess canada has permanently banned me ?" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 25, 2017 – via Twitter. "Chelsea Manning says she was denied entry to Canada". Reuters. September 25, 2017. Tunney, Catharine (October 7, 2021). "Controversial whistleblower Chelsea Manning fighting to be let into Canada". CBC News. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Chelsea Manning finds a sympathetic crowd during New Yorker Festival panel". New York Daily News. Associated Press. October 9, 2017. Archived from the original on October 10, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017. Manning, Chelsea E. [@xychelsea] (July 15, 2017). "technically, i cant read, comment on, discuss, or even look at any leaked material, even if it was after 2010" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 15, 2017 – via Twitter. Tunney, Catharine (October 8, 2021). "No decision yet on whether Chelsea Manning can visit Canada Social Sharing". CBC News. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Tunney, Catharine. "Chelsea Manning can't enter Canada due to prior convictions, says immigration board". CBC News. Retrieved April 12, 2022. "Chelsea Manning officially files for US Senate race". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. January 18, 2018. Portnoy, Jenna (February 1, 2018). "Is Chelsea Manning eligible to run for U.S. Senate?". The Washington Post. "The Kojo Nnamdi Show – The Politics Hour". WAMU. Retrieved February 5, 2018. "Chelsea Manning: Insurgent bid for U.S. Senate is genuine". CBS News. May 7, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Manning, Chelsea (June 26, 2018). "Thank You". xychelsea.is. Chelsea Manning for U.S. Senate. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Swenson, Kyle (January 23, 2018). "Chelsea Manning showed up at a far-right pro-Trump bash, infuriating the far left". The Washington Post. Nguyen, Tina (January 23, 2018). "Can Mike Cernovich Be Steve Bannon's Mini-Me?". Vanity Fair. Burns, Katelyn (January 26, 2018). "Chelsea Manning on Her Alt-Right Partying: 'I Was a Spy, Not a Racist'". The Daily Beast. Westcott, Ben; Watson, Angus (August 30, 2018). "Australia refuses to give a visa to Chelsea Manning, who wants to visit as part of a speaking tour". CNN. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Noyes, Jenny; Lallo, Michael (August 30, 2018). "'She poses no threat': Chelsea Manning tour promoters ask for discretion". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Kwai, Isabella (August 29, 2018). "Australia Plans to Deny Chelsea Manning an Entry Visa, Citing 'Criminal Record'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 30, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Truu, Maani (September 2, 2018). "'A convicted terrorist and a convicted spy' walk into the Opera House...and get a standing ovation". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018. "Manning allowed visa for NZ talks". Otago Daily Times. August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Cooke, Henry (August 31, 2018). "Chelsea Manning granted special direction to apply for visa". Stuff.co.nz. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Perry, Nick (August 31, 2018). "New Zealand to Allow Chelsea Manning after she was barred by Australia". Time. Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. "'We are a nation that allows free speech' – New Zealanders should be allowed to hear Chelsea Manning, says Ardern". 1 News. August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Cooke, Henry (August 31, 2018). "National wants Chelsea Manning barred from New Zealand". Stuff.co.nz. Retrieved August 31, 2018. "Judith Collins calls Chelsea Manning a 'traitor' who cost lives". Newshub. August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Savage, Charlie (May 13, 2019). "'I'm Really Opening Myself Up': Chelsea Manning Signs Book Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2022. Reviews: Brockes, Emma (October 22, 2022). "Chelsea Manning: 'I struggle with the so-called free world compared with life in prison'". The Guardian. Sullivan, Margaret (October 18, 2022). "Why Chelsea Manning Went to WikiLeaks, and What It Cost Her". The New York Times. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Rosenberg, Jordy (October 18, 2022). "A memoir in which everything is classified and nothing is secret". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Parkin, Simon (October 27, 2022). "README.txt by Chelsea Manning review – secrets and spies". The Guardian. Retrieved November 12, 2022. "README.txt". Kirkus Reviews. October 16, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Deery, Phillip (December 18, 2022). "Chelsea Manning's memoir is gripping, but you're barred from reading it all". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Manning, Chelsea (2022). README.txt: A Memoir. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. "Chelsea Manning Is Done Being a Symbol". Them. October 21, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Goldberg, Lily (August 23, 2022). "Know Who Else Is a D.J. in Brooklyn? Chelsea Manning". The New York Times. Retrieved August 23, 2022. Heller, Nathan (September 5, 2022). "Manning drops bass". The Talk of the Town. There and Back Dept. The New Yorker. Vol. 98, no. 27. pp. 12–13. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Brooke, Heather (2012). The revolution will be digitised : dispatches from the information war. London: Windmill. ISBN 978-0-09-953808-0. OCLC 794295988. Domscheit-Berg, Daniel (2011). Inside Wikileaks : my time with Julian Assange at the world's most dangerous website (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-307-95191-5. OCLC 701412231. Fowler, Andrew (2011). The most dangerous man in the world : how one hacker ended corporate and government secrecy forever. New York: Skyhorse. ISBN 978-1-61608-489-9. OCLC 706021712. Leigh, David; Harding, Luke (2011). Wikileaks : inside Julian Assange's war on secrecy (1st ed.). New York: Guardian Books. ISBN 978-1-61039-062-0. OCLC 708581074. Nicks, Denver (2012). Private : Bradley Manning, WikiLeaks, and the biggest exposure of official secrets in American history (First ed.). Chicago, Illinois: Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-61374-069-9. OCLC 794491750. Caesar, Ed. "Bradley Manning: Wikileaker" Archived May 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, The Sunday Times, December 19, 2010; from the original on April 7, 2012. Fishman, Steve. "Bradley Manning's Army of One", New York Magazine, July 3, 2011. Greenwald, Glenn. "The strange and consequential case of Bradley Manning, Adrian Lamo and WikiLeaks", Salon, June 18, 2010. Last, Jonathan V. "The Left's Canonization of St. Bradley Manning" Archived May 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, CBS News, January 11, 2011. Manning, Bradley. "Memorandum", released by David Coombs, March 10, 2011; archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Manning, Bradley. "PFC Manning's statement redacted", January 29, 2013. Nakashima, Ellen. "Bradley Manning is at the center of the WikiLeaks controversy. But who is he?", The Washington Post, May 4, 2011; from the original on April 7, 2012. Nicks, Denver. "Private Manning and the Making of Wikileaks", This Land, September 23, 2010. PBS Frontline. "Bradley Manning's Facebook Page", March 2011; archived from the original on April 7, 2011. Smith, Martin. "The Private Life of Bradley Manning", PBS Frontline, March 7, 2011 (interview transcripts: "Brian Manning" and "Jordan Davis"). Thompson, Ginger. "Early Struggles of Soldier Charged in Leak Case", The New York Times, August 8, 2010. Zetter, Kim. "Jolt in WikiLeaks Case: Feds Found Manning-Assange Chat Logs on Laptop", Wired, December 19, 2011. Poulsen, Kevin. "Ex-Hacker Adrian Lamo Institutionalized for Asperger's", Wired magazine, May 20, 2010. Poulsen, Kevin and Zetter, Kim. "U.S. Intelligence Analyst Arrested in WikiLeaks Video Probe", Wired magazine, June 6, 2010. Poulsen, Kevin and Zetter, Kim. 'I Can't Believe What I'm Confessing to You': The WikiLeaks Chats", Wired magazine, June 10, 2010. Nakashima, Ellen. "Messages from alleged leaker Bradley Manning portray him as despondent soldier", The Washington Post, June 10, 2010. Greenwald, Glenn. Email exchange between Glenn Greenwald and Kevin Poulsen, June 14–17, 2010. Poulsen, Kevin and Zetter, Kim. "Three Weeks After Arrest, Still No Charges in WikiLeaks Probe", Wired magazine, June 16, 2010. Jardin, Xeni. "WikiLeaks: a somewhat less redacted version of the Lamo/Manning logs", Boing Boing, June 19, 2010. Greenwald, Glenn. "The worsening journalistic disgrace at Wired" Archived September 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Salon, December 27, 2010. Hansen, Evan and Poulsen, Kevin. "Putting the Record Straight on the Lamo-Manning Chat Logs", Wired magazine, December 28, 2010. Greenwald, Glenn. "Wired's refusal to release or comment on the Manning chat logs" Archived January 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Salon, December 29, 2010. Firedoglake. "Manning/WikiLeaks timeline", published as a complete version of the released excerpts. Retrieved March 14, 2011; from the original on March 28, 2012. Hansen, Evan. "Manning-Lamo Chat Logs Revealed", Wired magazine, July 13, 2011; from the original on March 28, 2012. Khatchadourian, Raffi. "No Secrets", The New Yorker, June 7, 2010. The Guardian. "Afghanistan: The War Logs". Retrieved May 9, 2012. The Guardian. "Iraq: The War Logs". Retrieved May 9, 2012. The New York Times. "The War Logs" – WikiLeaks Documents. Retrieved May 9, 2012. Wired. "Bradley Manning". Retrieved August 26, 2017. Manning, Chelsea (June 15, 2014). "The Fog Machine of War". The New York Times. p. SR4. Retrieved June 14, 2014. Shaer, Matthew (June 12, 2017). "The Long, Lonely Road of Chelsea Manning". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Assange, Julian. Julian Assange: The Unauthorised Autobiography. Canongate, 2011. ISBN 978-0857863843. Madar, Chase. The Passion of Bradley Manning. OR Books, 2012. ISBN 978-1935928539. Mitchell, Greg and Gosztola, Kevin. Truth and Consequences: The U.S. vs. Bradley Manning. Sinclair Books, 2012. ISBN 978-0615621975. Maxwell, Lida. Insurgent Truth: Chelsea Manning and the Politics of Outsider Truth-Telling. Oxford University Press, 2019. ISBN 0190920025. Fischer, Mia. Terrorizing Gender: Transgender Visibility and the Surveillance Practices of the U.S. Security State. University of Nebraska Press, 2019. ISBN 978-1496206749. Lombardi, Chris. I Ain't Marching Anymore: Dissenters, Deserters, and Objectors to America's Wars. The New Press, 2020. ISBN 978-1620973172. Chelsea Manning at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Chelsea Manning on Twitter Chelsea Manning on Twitch Chelsea Manning at IMDb Federal Election Commission (FEC) Form 2 Statement of Candidacy filed January 11, 2018 by Chelsea Elizabeth Manning Federal Election Commission (FEC) Maryland – Senate Candidate Financial Totals including Chelsea Elizabeth Manning Chelsea Manning for U.S. Senate campaign website Portals:  Biography  LGBT  Transgender