This article contains Indic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks or boxes, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text. Lucknow (/ˈlʌknaʊ/, Hindustani: [ˈləkʰnəuː] Lakhnaū) is the capital and the largest city of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh and it is the administrative headquarters of the eponymous district and division. Having a population of 2.8 million as per 2011 census, it is the eleventh most populous city and the twelfth-most populous urban agglomeration of India. Lucknow has always been a multicultural city that flourished as a North Indian cultural and artistic hub, and the seat of power of Nawabs in the 18th and 19th centuries. It continues to be an important centre of governance, administration, education, commerce, aerospace, finance, pharmaceuticals, information technology, design, culture, tourism, music, and poetry. Lucknow, along with Agra and Varanasi, is in the Uttar Pradesh Heritage Arc, a chain of survey triangulations created by the Government of Uttar Pradesh to boost tourism in the state. Lucknow ranks 7th in the state in GDP per capita. The top two cities of the state are Noida and Meerut. "Lucknow" is the anglicised spelling of the local pronunciation "Lakhnau". According to one legend, the city is named after Lakshmana, a hero of the Hindu epic Ramayana. The legend states that Lakshmana had a palace or an estate in the area, which was called Lakshmanapuri (Sanskrit: लक्ष्मणपुरी, lit. Lakshmana's city). The settlement came to be known as Lakhanpur (or Lachhmanpur) by the 11th century, and later, Lucknow. A similar theory states that the city was known as Lakshmanavati (Sanskrit: लक्ष्मणवती, fortunate) after Lakshmana. The name changed to Lakhanavati, then Lakhnauti and finally Lakhnau. Yet another theory states that the city's name is connected with Lakshmi, the Hindu goddess of wealth. Over time, the name changed to Laksmanauti, Laksmnaut, Lakhsnaut, Lakhsnau and, finally, Lakhnau. Another theory is that Lucknow was named after a very influential architect named Lakhna Ahir, who built the fort Qila Lakhna. From 1350 onwards, Lucknow and parts of the Awadh region were ruled by the Delhi Sultanate, Sharqi Sultanate, Mughal Empire, Nawabs of Awadh, the British East India Company and the British Raj. For about eighty-four years (from 1394 to 1478), Awadh was part of the Sharqi Sultanate of Jaunpur. Emperor Humayun made it a part of the Mughal Empire around 1555. Emperor Jahangir (1569–1627) granted an estate in Awadh to a favoured nobleman, Sheikh Abdul Rahim, who later built Machchi Bhawan on this estate. It later became the seat of power from where his descendants, the Sheikhzadas, controlled the region. The Nawabs of Lucknow, in reality, the Nawabs of Awadh, acquired the name after the reign of the third Nawab when Lucknow became their capital. The city became North India's cultural capital, and its nawabs, best remembered for their refined and extravagant lifestyles, were patrons of the arts. Under their dominion, music and dance flourished, and construction of numerous monuments took place. Of the monuments standing today, the Bara Imambara, the Chota Imambara, and the Rumi Darwaza are notable examples. One of the Nawab's enduring legacies is the region's syncretic Hindu–Muslim culture that has come to be known as the Ganga-Jamuni Tehzeeb. Until 1719, the subah of Awadh was a province of the Mughal Empire administered by a governor appointed by the emperor. Persian adventurer Saadat Khan, also known as Burhan-ul-Mulk, was appointed Nizam of Awadh in 1722 and established his court in Faizabad, near Lucknow. Many independent kingdoms, such as Awadh, were established as the Mughal Empire disintegrated. The third Nawab, Shuja-ud-Daula (r. 1753–1775), fell out with the British after aiding the fugitive Nawab of Bengal, Mir Qasim. Roundly defeated at the Battle of Buxar by the East India Company, he was forced to pay heavy penalties and surrender parts of his territory. Awadh's capital, Lucknow rose to prominence when Asaf-ud-Daula, the fourth Nawab, shifted his court to the city from Faizabad in 1775. The British East India Company appointed a resident (ambassador) in 1773 and by early 19th century gained control of more territory and authority in the state. They were, however, disinclined to capture Awadh outright and come face to face with the Maratha Empire and the remnants of the Mughal Empire. In 1798, the fifth Nawab Wazir Ali Khan alienated both his people and the British and was forced to abdicate. The British then helped Saadat Ali Khan take the throne. He became a puppet king, and in a treaty of 1801, yielded large part of Awadh to the East India Company while also agreeing to disband his own troops in favour of a hugely expensive, British-controlled army. This treaty effectively made the state of Awadh a vassal of the East India Company, although it continued to be part of the Mughal Empire in name until 1819. The treaty of 1801 proved a beneficial arrangement for the East India Company as they gained access to Awadh's vast treasuries, repeatedly digging into them for loans at reduced rates. In addition, the revenues from running Awadh's armed forces brought them useful returns while the territory acted as a buffer state. The Nawabs were ceremonial kings, busy with pomp and show. By the mid-nineteenth century, however, the British had grown impatient with the arrangement and demanded direct control over Awadh. In 1856, the East India Company first moved its troops to the border, then annexed the state for alleged maladministration. Awadh was placed under a chief commissioner – Sir Henry Lawrence. Wajid Ali Shah, the then Nawab, was imprisoned, then exiled by the East India Company to Calcutta. In the subsequent Indian Rebellion of 1857, his 14-year-old son Birjis Qadra, whose mother was Begum Hazrat Mahal, was crowned ruler. Following the rebellion's defeat, Begum Hazrat Mahal and other rebel leaders sought asylum in Nepal. It is the most important center of Shia Islam in the Indian Subcontinent and has influence of Persian, Shiite, Arabic and British culture and tradition in the architecture, language and customs. Lucknow was one of the major centres of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 and actively participated in India's independence movement, emerging as a strategically important North Indian city. During the Rebellion (also known as the First War of Indian Independence and the Indian Mutiny), the majority of the East India Company's troops were recruited from both the people and nobility of Awadh. The rebels seized control of the state, and it took the British 18 months to reconquer the region. During that period, the garrison based at the Residency in Lucknow was besieged by rebel forces during the Siege of Lucknow. The siege was relieved first by forces under the command of Sir Henry Havelock and Sir James Outram, followed by a stronger force under Sir Colin Campbell. Today, the ruins of the Residency and the Shaheed Smarak offer an insight into Lucknow's role in the events of 1857. With the rebellion over, Oudh returned to British governance under a chief commissioner. In 1877, the offices of lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces and chief commissioner of Oudh were combined; then in 1902, the title of chief commissioner was dropped with the formation of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, although Oudh still retained some marks of its former independence. The Khilafat Movement had an active base of support in Lucknow, creating united opposition to British rule. In 1901, after remaining the capital of Oudh since 1775, Lucknow, with a population of 264,049, was merged into the newly formed United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. In 1920, the provincial seat of government moved from Allahabad to Lucknow. Upon Indian independence in 1947, the United Provinces were reorganised into the state of Uttar Pradesh, and Lucknow remained its capital. Lucknow witnessed some of the pivotal moments in the history of India. One is the first meeting of the stalwarts Mahatma Gandhi, Jawaharlal Nehru and Mohd Ali Jinnah during the Indian National Congress session of 1916 (the Lucknow pact was signed and moderates and extremists came together through the efforts of Annie Besant during this session only). The Congress President for that session, Ambica Charan Majumdar in his address said that "If the Congress was buried at Surat, it is reborn in Lucknow in the garden of Wajid Ali Shah." The Kakori conspiracy involving Ram Prasad Bismil, Ashfaq Ullah Khan, Rajendra Nath Lahiri, Roshan Singh and others, followed by the Kakori trial which captured the imagination of the country, also took place in Lucknow. Culturally, Lucknow has also had a tradition of courtesans, with popular culture distilling it in the avatar of the fictional Umrao Jaan. Historically, Lucknow was the capital of the Awadh region, controlled by the Delhi Sultanate and later the Mughal Empire. It was transferred to the Nawabs of Awadh. In 1856, the British East India Company abolished local rule and took complete control of the city along with the rest of Awadh and, in 1857, transferred it to the British Raj. Along with the rest of India, Lucknow became independent from Britain on 15 August 1947. It has been listed as the 17th-fastest growing city in India and 74th in the world. The Gomti River, Lucknow's chief geographical feature, meanders through the city and divides it into the Trans-Gomti and Cis-Gomti regions. Situated in the middle of the Indus-Gangetic Plain, the city is surrounded by rural towns and villages: the orchard town of Malihabad, Kakori, Mohanlalganj, Gosainganj, Chinhat and Itaunja. To the east lies Barabanki, to the west Unnao, to the south Raebareli, while to the north lie the Sitapur and Hardoi. Lucknow city is located in a seismic zone III. Lucknow stands at an elevation of approximately 123 metres (404 ft) above sea level. The city had an area of 402 km2 (155 square miles) until December 2019, when 88 villages were added to the municipal limits and the area increased to 631 km2 (244 square miles). Bounded on the east by Barabanki, on the west by Unnao, on the south by Raebareli and in the north by Sitapur and Hardoi, Lucknow sits on the northwestern shore of the Gomti River. As of 2008[update], there were 110 wards in the city. Morphologically, three clear demarcations exist: The central business district, which is a fully built up area, comprises Hazratganj, Aminabad and Chowk. A middle zone surrounds the inner zone with concrete houses while the outer zone consists of villages. Lucknow has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa) with cool, dry winters from mid-November to February and dry, hot summers with sunshine from March to mid-May. More than nine-tenths of the annual rainfall occurs from June to October when the city receives an average of 827.2 millimetres (32.57 in) from the southwest monsoon winds, although occasionally frontal rainfall from the northeast monsoon will occur in January. In winter the maximum temperature is around 25 °C or 77 °F and the minimum is in the 3 to 7 °C (37.4 to 44.6 °F) range. Fog is quite common from mid-December to late January. Occasionally, Lucknow experiences colder winter spells than places like Shimla and Mussoorie which are situated way high up in the Himalayas. In the extraordinary winter cold spell of 2012–2013, Lucknow recorded temperatures below freezing point on two consecutive days and the minimum temperature hovered around freezing point for over a week.[citation needed] Summers are very hot with temperatures rising into the 40 to 45 °C (104 to 113 °F) range, the average maxima being in the high 30s Celsius. Lucknow has a total of 5.66 per cent of forest cover, the state average being around 7 per cent. Native tree species are: shisham, dhak, mahuamm, babul, neem, peepal, ashok, khajur, mango and gular. Several varieties of mangoes, especially Dasheri, are grown in the Malihabad adjacent to the city and a block of the Lucknow district for export. The main crops are wheat, paddy, sugarcane, mustard, potatoes, and vegetables such as cauliflower, cabbage, tomato and brinjal. Similarly, sunflowers, roses, and marigolds are cultivated over a fairly extensive area. Many medicinal and herbal plants are grown, while common Indian monkeys are found in patches in and around city forests such as Musa Bagh. Established in 1921, the Lucknow Zoo is one of the oldest in the country. It houses a rich collection of animals from Asia, and other continents. The zoo also has enjoyable toy train rides for visitors. The city has a botanical garden, which is a zone of wide botanical diversity. It is home to the Uttar Pradesh State Museum, which has sculptural masterpieces dating back to the 3rd century AD, including intricately carved Mathura sculptures ranging from dancing girls to scenes from the life of Buddha. The major industries in the Lucknow urban agglomeration include aeronautics, automotive, machine tools, distillery chemicals, furniture and Chikan embroidery. Lucknow is among the top cities of India by GDP. It is a centre for research and development as home to the R&D centres of the National Milk Grid of the National Dairy Development Board, the Central Institute of Medical and Aromatic Plants, the National Handloom Development Corporation and U.P. Export Corporation. Lucknow is ranked sixth in a list of the ten fastest growing job-creating cities in India according to a study conducted by Assocham Placement Pattern, Lucknow's economy was formerly based on the tertiary sector and the majority of the workforce were employed as government servants. Large-scale industrial establishments are few compared to other northern Indian state capitals like New Delhi. The economy is growing with contributions from the fields of IT, manufacturing and processing and medical/biotechnology. Business-promoting institutions such as the CII have set up their service centres in the city. Major export items are marbled products, handicrafts, art pieces, gems, jewellery, textiles, electronics, software products, computers, hardware products, apparel, brass products, silk, leather goods, glass items and chemicals. Lucknow has promoted public-private partnerships in sectors such as electricity supply, roads, expressways, and educational ventures. Lucknow in recent times have lagged in growth and only ranks 7th in per capita income in the state of Uttar Pradesh, despite being the capital. Cities like Noida, Ghaziabad and Meerut have dominated in terms of industrial growth and attracting IT jobs and opportunities. Noida ranks highest, followed by Meerut in per capita income in the state. Multiple software and IT companies are present in the city. Tata Consultancy Services, HCL Technologies are present in the city. IT companies are located in Gomtinagar. While it still lags behind cities like Noida, Greater Noida and Meerut in IT hubs. The city is also home to a number of important national and state level headquarters for companies including Sony Corporation and Reliance Retail. The handicrafts sector accounts for 60 per cent of total exports from the state. Companies such as Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, KARAM, Tata Marcopolo, Exide Industries, Tata Motors set up their plants in Lucknow. Lucknow is an emerging automobile hub. Tata Motors have a plant primarily for light commercial vehicles. It was set up in 1992 and has a production capacity of 640 vehicles per day. Additionally there is a plant of Tata Marcopolo in the city. To promote the textile industry in the city, the Indian government has allocated Rs. 2 billion (2000 million rupees) to set up a textile business cluster in the city. A sprawling 40 hectares (0.40 km2; 100 acres) IT city costing 15 billion Rupees is planned by the state government at the Chak Ganjaria farms site on the road to Sultanpur and they have already approved special economic zone status for the project, which is expected to create thousands of job opportunities in the state. A defence industrial corridor is also coming in the city. Traditionally, Lucknow has been a mandi town for mangoes, melons, and grains grown in the surrounding areas.[citation needed] Sugarcane-growing plantations and sugar industries are also in close proximity. This attracted Edward Dyer to set up a unit based on molasses in the city. Dyer Breweries was incorporated in 1855 and was Asia's first commercial brewery. The company name was changed to Mohan Meakin Brewery in 1967 (the word "Breweries" was dropped in the eighties as the company diversified into other industries). Lucknow is famous for its small scale industries that are based on unique styles of embroidery, namely, Chikan and Lakhnawi Zardozi, both of which are significant foreign exchange earners. Chikan has caught the fancy of fashion designers in Bollywood and abroad.[citation needed] It is very popular in Indian markets and have very high demand. During the period of the Nawabs, kite-making reached a high level of artistry, and is still a small-scale industry. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology set up Software Technology Parks of India in 2001. Currently, biotechnology and information technology are the two focus areas to promote economic development in and around the city.[citation needed] The Ministry of Science and Technology is setting up a biotech park in the city. Lucknow is also one of the selected cities for the Smart City project of STPI. The city is being developed on the lines of Delhi's National Capital Region and will be the headquarters of the Uttar Pradesh State Capital Region or Lucknow State Capital Region. It will be developed as the country's first AI City and the largest IT hub in the country. It ranks 7th in the state as per GDP per capita. Lucknow is also being set to manufacture Bramhos Missile with the establishment of two Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) centres. Lucknow region is emerging as a key industrial and logistics hub in North India after Delhi-NCR as the warehousing sector. Lucknow division which consists of six districts, and is headed by the Divisional Commissioner of Lucknow, who is an IAS officer of high seniority, the Commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. The District Magistrate of Lucknow reports to the divisional commissioner. The current commissioner is Mukesh Meshram. Lucknow district administration is headed by the District Magistrate of Lucknow, who is an IAS officer. The DM is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. The district has five tehsils, viz. Sadar, Mohanlalganj, Bakshi ka Talab, Malihabad and Sarojini Nagar, each headed by a Sub-Divisional Magistrate. The current DM is Abhishek Prakash. The district magistrate is assisted by a Chief Development Officer (CDO), eight Additional District Magistrates (ADM) (Finance/Revenue, East, West Trans-Gomti, Executive, Land Acquisition-I, Land Acquisition-II, Civil Supply), one City Magistrate (CM) and seven Additional City Magistrates (ACM). The Lucknow Municipal Corporation oversees civic activities in the city. The city's first municipal body dates from 1862 when the municipal board was established. The first Indian mayor, Syed Nabiullah, was elected in 1917 after the enforcement of the UP Municipalities Act, 1916. In 1948, the Uttar Pradesh government changed the system from an electoral one to an administrator-run one and Bhairav Datt Sanwal became the administrator. In 1959, the UP Municipalities Act, 1916 was replaced with Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 and Lucknow Municipal Corporation was established in 1960 with Raj Kumar Shrivastava becoming the mayor. The head of the corporation is the mayor, but the executive and administration of the corporation are the responsibility of the municipal commissioner, who is an Uttar Pradesh government-appointed Indian Administrative Services (IAS) officer of high seniority. The last municipal election took place in 2017 when Sanyukta Bhatia from Bharatiya Janata Party became the first female mayor of Lucknow. Bharatiya Janata Party won 57 councillor seats, Samajwadi Party won 31 seats, independent candidates won 14 seats, and Indian National Congress won 8 seats. Ajay Kumar Dwivedi, an IAS officer, is the present municipal commissioner since 17 August 2020. The Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 gives provisions for the establishment of ward committees, but they have not been formed yet. The sources for revenue generation for Lucknow Municipal Corporation include property tax, user charges for SWM, penalties, rent from municipal properties, income from water storage, water transmission, drainage and sanitation, grants, and charges for services such as birth and death certificates. There is also an executive committee (कार्यकारिणी समिति) made up of 12 elected councillors from different political parties, who decide on policy matters of the corporation. The Police Commissionerate System was introduced in Lucknow on 14 January 2020. The district police is headed by a Commissioner of Police (CP), who is an IPS officer of ADGP rank and is assisted by two Joint Commissioners of Police (IG rank), and five Deputy Commissioners of Police (SP rank). Lucknow is divided into five zones, each headed by a Deputy Commissioner of Police. Of the two Joint Commissioners, one looks after law and order, the other crime. The current police commissioner of Lucknow City is IPS SB Shirodkar. The district police observes the citizenry through high-technology control rooms and all important streets and intersections are under surveillance with the help of CCTVs and drone cameras. Crowd-control is carried out with the help of pepper-spraying drones. There are more than 10,000 CCTV cameras deployed by the Lucknow Police Department across the city roads and trijunctions, making Lucknow the first city in the country to do so. The Lucknow Modern Police Control Room (abbreviated as MCR) is India's biggest 'Dial 112' service centre with 300 communication officers to receive distress calls from all over the state and 200 dispatch officers to rush for police help. It is billed as the India's most hi-tech police control room. Lucknow is also the center for 1090 Women Power line, a call center based service directed at dealing with eve-teasing. An Integrated 'Dial 112' Control Room building is also there which is having the world's biggest modern Police Emergency Response System (PERS). There is a bench of the Allahabad High Court in Lucknow. Aside from this, Lucknow has a District & Sessions Court, five CBI Courts, one family court and two railway courts. The High Court Bench as well as the District & Sessions Court and the CBI courts are located in Qaiser Bagh, and the railway courts are in Charbagh. People have often criticised various governments for being judicial focussed on central UP. Where western Uttar Pradesh is the economic center and has long demanded the setting up of another high court bench in west Uttar Pradesh. Almost 54% of all cases reaching the High Court originate from the 22 districts of Western UP. Still, western Uttar Pradesh does not have a High Court. People have to travel 700 km away to Allahabad for hearings. In fact 6 high courts (Shimla, Delhi, Jaipur, Chandigarh, Nainital, Jammu) from other states are closer than Allahabad from western Uttar Pradesh. Western Uttar Pradesh has been advocating to have a high court bench in Meerut so that Western Uttar Pradesh can get justice. This is important as west UP accounts for 51.71% of the state GDP. Since 1 May 1963, Lucknow has been the headquarters of the Central Command of the Indian Army, before which it was the headquarters of Eastern Command. Lucknow also houses a branch office of National Investigation Agency which is responsible for combating terrorist activities in India. It oversees five states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh for Naxal and terrorist activities. The Commission of Railway Safety of India, under the Ministry of Civil Aviation, has its head office in the Northeast Railway Compound in Lucknow. The development of infrastructure in the city is overseen by Lucknow Development Authority (LDA), which comes under the Housing Department of Uttar Pradesh government. The Divisional Commissioner of Lucknow acts as the ex-officio chairman of LDA, whereas a vice-chairman, a government-appointed IAS officer, looks after the daily matters of the authority. The current vice-chairman of the Lucknow Development Authority is IAS Akshay Tripathi. LDA prepared the Lucknow master plan 2031. As the seat of the government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow is the site of the Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha, a bench of the Allahabad High Court and numerous government departments and agencies. Rajnath Singh, the Union Defense Minister, from Bharatiya Janata Party is the Member of Parliament from Lucknow Lok Sabha Constituency. Kaushal Kishore is the Member of Parliament from Mohanlalganj (Lok Sabha constituency), the second Lok Sabha constituency in Lucknow. Apart from the Lok Sabha Constituency, there are nine Vidhan Sabha Constituencies within Lucknow city: Madhyanchal Power Distribution Corporation Limited, also known as Madhyanchal Vidyut Vitaran Nigam is responsible for supplying electricity in Lucknow. It is under the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd. Fire safety services are provided by the Uttar Pradesh Fire Service, which is under the state government. Jal Nigam is responsible for developing and maintaining the infrastructure for water supply, sewer lines, and storm water drains. Jal Sansthan is responsible for supplying water and providing water and sewer connections. Lucknow Municipal Corporation is responsible for the solid waste management of Lucknow. Two major Indian National Highways have their intersection at Lucknow's Hazratganj intersection: NH-30 to Shahjahanpur Via Sitapur in north and NH-30 to south Allahabad via Raebareli, NH-27 to Kanpur and Porbandar via Jhansi and Silchar via Gorakhpur. Multiple modes of public transport are available such as metro rail, taxis, city buses, cycle rickshaws, auto rickshaws and compressed natural gas (CNG) low-floor buses with and without air-conditioning. CNG was introduced as an auto fuel to keep air pollution under control. Radio Taxis are operated by several major companies like Ola and Uber. Lucknow city's bus service is operated by Lucknow City Transport Services Limited (LCTSL), a public sector passenger road transport corporation headquartered in Triloki Nath Margh. It has 260 buses operating in the city. There are around 35 routes in the city. Terminals for city buses are located in Gudamba, Viraj Khand, Alambagh, Scooter India, Institute of Engineering and Technology, Babu Banarasi Das University, Safedabad, Pasi qila, Charbagh, Andhe Ki Chowki, Jankipuram, Gomti Nagar Railway Station, Budheshwar Intersection, Faizabad Road and Qaiserbagh. There are four bus depots in Gomti Nagar, Charbagh, Amausi, and Dubagga. The major Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Inter-state Bus Terminal (ISBT) in Alambagh provides the main inter and intrastate bus lines in Lucknow. Located on National Highway 25, it provides adequate services to ongoing and incoming customers. There is a smaller bus station at Qaiserbagh. The bus terminal formally operated at Charbagh, in front of the main railway station, has now been re-established as a city bus depot. This decision was taken by the state government and UPSRTC to decongest traffic in the railway station area. Kanpur Lucknow Roadways Service is a key service for daily commuters who travel back and forth to the city for business and educational purposes. Air conditioned "Royal Cruiser" buses manufactured by Volvo are operated by UPSRTC for inter state bus services. Main cities served by the UPSRTC intrastate bus service are Allahabad, Varanasi, Jaipur, Jhansi, Agra, Delhi, Gorakhpur. The cities outside Uttar Pradesh that are covered by inter-state bus services are Jaipur, New Delhi, Kota, Singrauli, Faridabad, Gurgaon, Dausa, Ajmer, Dehradun, and Haridwar. Lucknow is served by several railway stations in different parts of the city. The main long-distance railway station is Lucknow Railway Station located at Charbagh. It has an imposing structure built in 1923 and acts as the divisional headquarters of the Northern Railway division. Its neighbouring and second major long-distance railway station is Lucknow Junction railway station operated by the North Eastern Railway. The city is an important junction with links to all major cities of the state and country such as New Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Nashik, Amritsar, Jammu, Chennai, Bangalore, Ahmedabad, Pune, Indore, Bhopal, Jhansi, Jabalpur, Jaipur, Raipur and Siwan. The city has a total of fourteen railway stations. Earlier the meter-gauge services originated at Aishbagh and connected to Lucknow city, Daliganj and Mohibullapur. Now all the stations have been converted to broad gauge. All stations lie within the city limits and are well interconnected by bus services and other public road transport. Suburban stations include Bakshi Ka Talab and Kakori. The Lucknow–Kanpur Suburban Railway was started in 1867 to cater for the needs of commuters travelling between Lucknow and Kanpur. Trains running on this service also stop at numerous stations at different locations in the city forming a suburban rail network. Lucknow is served by Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport. The airport has been ranked the second-best in the world in the small airport category. The airport is suitable for all-weather operations and provides parking facilities for up to 14 aircraft. Covering 480 hectares (4.80 km2; 1,187 acres), with Terminal 1 for international flights and Terminal 2 for domestic flights, the airport can handle Boeing 767 to Boeing 747-400 aircraft allowing significant passenger and cargo traffic. International destinations include Dubai, Muscat, Sharjah, Riyadh, Bangkok, Dammam and Jeddah. The planned expansion of the airport will allow Airbus A380 jumbo jets to land at the airport. The Nagarjuna construction company (NCC) has started the construction of the new terminal at Lucknow Airport which is expected to be completed by December 2021 to meet the growing demand. There is also a plan for runway expansion. The airport is the eleventh busiest airport in India, the busiest in Uttar Pradesh, and the second-busiest in northern India. Lucknow Metro is a rapid transit system which started its operations from 6 September 2017. Lucknow Metro system is the most-quickly built metro system in the world and most economical high-speed rapid transit system project in India. The commencement of civil works started on 27 September 2014. Lucknow has the third largest metro network in the state after Noida, Meerut and Ghaziabad. In February, Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav approved to set up of a metro rail system for the state capital. It is divided into two corridors the north–south corridor connecting Munshipulia to CCS International Airport and the east–west corridor connecting Charbagh Railway Station to Vasant Kunj. This will be the most expensive public transport system in the state but will provide a rapid means of mass transport to decongest traffic on city roads. Construction of the first phase will be complete by March 2017. The completion of metro rail project is the primary object of Uttar Pradesh government currently headed by the chief minister Yogi Adityanath On 5 September 2017, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and CM Yogi Adityanath showed green flag to the Lucknow Metro. Lucknow is among the most bicycle-friendly cities in Uttar Pradesh. Bike-friendly tracks have been established near the chief minister's residence in the city. The four-and-a-half-kilometre (2.8 mi) track encompasses La-Martiniere College Road next to a golf club on Kalidas Marg, where the chief minister resides, and Vikramaditya Marg, which houses the office of the ruling party. The dedicated four-metre (13 ft) lane for cyclists is separate from the footpath and the main road. With Amsterdam as the inspiration, new cycle tracks are to be constructed in the city to make it more cycle-friendly, with facilities like bike rental also in the works. In the year 2015, Lucknow also hosted a national level cycling event called 'The Lucknow Cyclothon' in which professional and amateur cyclists took part. An under-construction cycle track network by the government of Uttar Pradesh is set to make Lucknow the city with India's biggest cycle network. The population of Lucknow Urban Agglomeration (LUA) rose above one million in 1981, while the 2001 census estimated it had risen to 2.24 million. This included about 60,000 people in the Lucknow Cantonment and 2.18 million in Lucknow city and represented an increase of 34.53% over the 1991 figure. According to the provisional report of 2011 Census of India, Lucknow city had a population of 2,815,601, of which 1,470,133 were men and 1,345,468 women. This was an increase of 25.36% compared to the 2001 figures. Between 1991 and 2001, the population registered growth of 32.03%, significantly lower than the 37.14% which was registered between 1981 and 1991. The initial provisional data suggests a population density of 1,815 inhabitants per square kilometre (4,700/sq mi) in 2011, compared to 1,443 in 2001. As the total area covered by the Lucknow district is only about 2,528 square kilometres (976 sq mi), the population density was much than the 690 inhabitants per square kilometre (1,800/sq mi) recorded at the state level. The Scheduled Caste population of the state represented 21.3% of the total population, a figure higher than the state average of 21.15%. Hindi is spoken by 88.16% of the population, while Urdu is spoken by 10.26%. The sex ratio in Lucknow city stood at 915 females per 1000 males in 2011, compared to the 2001 census figure of 888. The average national sex ratio in India is 940 according to the Census 2011 Directorate. The city has a total literacy level in 2011 of 84.72% compared to 67.68% for Uttar Pradesh as a whole. In 2001 these same figures stood at 75.98% and 56.27%. In Lucknow city, the total literate population totalled 2,147,564 people of which 1,161,250 were male and 986,314 were female. Despite the fact that the overall work-participation rate in the district (32.24%) is higher than the state average (23.7%), the rate among females in Lucknow is very low at only 5.6% and shows a decline from the 1991 figure of 5.9%. Lucknow's buildings show different styles of architecture with the many iconic buildings built during the British and Mughal era. More than half of these buildings lie in the old part of the city. The Uttar Pradesh Tourism Department organises a "Heritage Walk" for tourists covering the popular monuments. Among the extant architecture, there are religious buildings such as Imambaras, mosques, and other Islamic shrines as well as secular structures such as enclosed gardens, baradaris, and palace complexes. Bara Imambara in Hussainabad is a colossal edifice built in 1784 by the then Nawab of Lucknow, Asaf-ud-Daula. It was originally built to provide assistance to people affected by the deadly famine, which struck the whole of Uttar Pradesh in the same year. It is the largest hall in Asia without any external support from wood, iron or stone beams. The monument required approximately 22,000 labourers during construction. The 18 m (60 feet) tall Rumi Darwaza, built by Nawab Asaf-ud-daula (r. 1775–1797) in 1784, served as the entrance to the city of Lucknow. It is also known as the Turkish Gateway, as it was erroneously thought to be identical to the gateway at Constantinople. The edifice provides the west entrance to the Great Imambara and is embellished with lavish decorations. Various architectural styles can be seen in the historical areas of Lucknow. The University of Lucknow shows a huge inspiration from the European style while Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture is prominently present in the Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha building and Charbagh Railway station. Dilkusha Kothi is the remains of a palace constructed by the British resident Major Gore Ouseley around 1800 and showcases English Baroque architecture. It served as a hunting lodge for the Nawab of Awadhs and as a summer resort. The Chattar Manzil, which served as the palace for the rulers of Awadh and their wives is topped by an umbrella-like dome and so named on account of Chattar being the Hindi word for "umbrella". Opposite Chattar Manzil stands the 'Lal Baradari' built by Nawab Saadat Ali Khan I between 1789 and 1814. It functioned as a throne room at coronations for the royal courts. The building is now used as a museum and contains delicately executed portraits of men who played major roles in the administration of the kingdom of Oudh. Another example of mixed architectural styles is La Martiniere College, which shows a fusion of Indian and European ideas. It was built by Major-General Claude Martin who was born in Lyon and died in Lucknow on 13 September 1800. Originally named "Constantia", the ceilings of the building are domed with no wooden beams used for construction. Glimpses of Gothic architecture can also be seen in the college building. Lucknow's Asafi Imambara exhibits vaulted halls as its architectural speciality. The Bara Imambara, Chhota Imambara and Rumi Darwaza stand in testament to the city's Nawabi mixture of Mughlai and Turkish styles of architecture while La Martiniere college bears witness to the Indo-European style. Even the new buildings are fashioned using characteristic domes and pillars, and at night these illuminated monuments become the city's main attractions. Around Hazratganj, the city's central shopping area, there is a fusion of old and modern architecture. It has a multi-level parking lot in place of an old and dilapidated police station making way for extending the corridors into pebbled pathways, adorned with piazzas, green areas and wrought-iron and cast-iron lamp-posts, reminiscent of the Victorian era, flank both sides of the street. In common with other metropolitan cities across India, Lucknow is multicultural and multilingual. Many of the cultural traits and customs peculiar to Lucknow have become living legends today. The city's contemporary culture is the result of the amalgamation of the Hindu and Muslim rulers who ruled the city simultaneously. The credit for this goes to the secular and syncretic traditions of the Nawabs of Awadh, who took a keen interest in every walk of life and encouraged these traditions to attain a rare degree of sophistication. Modern-day Lucknowites are known for their polite and polished way of speaking which is noticed by visitors. The residents of Lucknow call themselves Lucknowites or Lakhnavi. It also represents the melting pot of globalisation where the legacy of Nawab's culture continues to be reflected in the traditional vocabulary of the Hindi language of the city along with better avenues for modernisation present here.[citation needed] Lucknow is known for its ghararas. It is a traditional women's outfit that originated from the Nawabs of Awadh. It is a pair of loose trousers with pleats below the knee worn with a kurta (shirt) and a dupatta (veil). It is embroidered with zari and zardozi along with gota (decorative lace on the knee area). This dress is made from over 24 metres (26 yd) of fabric, mostly silk, brocade and kamkhwab. Although Uttar Pradesh's primary official language is Hindi, the most commonly spoken language is colloquial Hindustani. Indian English is also well understood and is widely used for business and administrative purposes, as a result of India's British heritage and Commonwealth tradition, as well as globalisation. The Urdu language is also a part of Lucknowi culture and heritage. It is mostly used by wealthier families, the remaining members of the royal family as well as in Urdu poetry and on public signs. The government has taken many innovative steps to promote Urdu. Awadhi, a dialect of the Hindi dialect continuum, is the native dialect of Lucknow and has played an important role in Lucknow's history and is still used in the city's rural areas and by the urban population on the streets. Historically, Lucknow was considered one of the great centres of Muslim culture. Two poets, Mir Babar Ali Anis and Mirza Dabeer, became legendary exponents of a unique genre of Muslim elegiacal poetry called marsiya centred on Imam Husain's supreme sacrifice in the Battle of Karbala, which is commemorated during the annual observance of Muharram. The revolutionary Ram Prasad Bismil, who was hanged by the British at Gorakhpur jail, was largely influenced by the culture of Lucknow and remembered its name in his poetry. Surrounding towns such as Kakori, Daryabad, Fatehpur, Barabanki, Rudauli, and Malihabad produced many eminent Urdu poets and litterateurs including Mohsin Kakorvi, Majaz, Khumar Barabankvi and Josh Malihabadi. The Awadh region has its own distinct Nawabi-style cuisine. Since ages, the Bawarchis (chefs) and Rakabdars (royal chefs) have developed great finesse in cooking and presentation of food, under royal patronage. This gave rise to the art of cooking over a slow fire (or Dum style cooking), which has become synonymous with "Awadhi" cuisine. These Bawarchis added elaborately prepared dishes like kababs, kormas, kaliya, nahari-kulchas, zarda, sheermal, roomali rotis and warqi parathas to the traditional "Awadhi" dastarkhwaan (feast of dishes). The best-known dishes of this area consist of biryanis, kebabs and breads. Kebabs are served in a variety of styles; kakori, galawati, shami, boti, patili-ke, ghutwa and seekh are among the available varieties. Tunde ke kabab restaurants are popular for a type of soft kebab developed by a one-armed chef (hence the name Tunday) for a Nawab who had lost his teeth. The reputation of Lucknow's kebabs is not limited to the local population and the dish attracts people from other cities as well as other countries. Lucknow is also known for its chaats, street food, kulfi, paan and sweets. Nahari, a dish prepared using mutton, is popular among non-vegetarians. Sheermal is a type of sweet bread (paratha) prepared in Lucknow. Makkhan-malai is another sweet delicacy of Lucknow made and sold only during winters. Some restaurants in the city are around a century old; there are also many high-end restaurants, bakeries, lounges and pubs which cater to the affluent class and foreign travellers. Indian festivals such as Christmas, Diwali, Durga Puja, Eid, Holi, Raksha Bandhan and Vijayadashami are celebrated with great pomp and show in the city. Some of the other festivals or processions are as follows: Lucknow Mahotsav Lucknow Festival is organised every year to showcase Uttar Pradesh art and culture and to promote tourism. With 1975–76 designated South Asian Tourism Year, Lucknow took the opportunity to promote the city's art, culture and tourism to national and international tourists. The first Lucknow Festival was staged as a part of this promotion and ever since, with some exceptions, Lucknow Mahotsava has taken place annually. Lucknow Literature Festival This is an annual literature festival held in the month of November every year since 2013. Lucknow LitFest is India's second-largest literature festival featuring some of the greatest writers and thinkers from across the globe. Muharram Lucknow is known as a seat of Shia Islam and the epitome of Shia culture in India. Muslims observe Muharram, the first month of the Islamic calendar and on Ashura (the tenth day of the month) mourn the memory of Imam Husain, grandson of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad. Muharram processions in Lucknow have a special significance and began during the reign of the Awadh Nawabs. Processions such as Shahi Zarih, Jaloos-e-Mehndi, Alam-e-Ashura and Chup Tazia had special significance by the Shia community and were affected with great religious zeal and fervour until 1977 the government of Uttar Pradesh banned public Azadari processions. For the following twenty years, processions and gatherings took place in private or community spaces including Talkatora Karbala, Bara Imambara (Imambara Asifi), Chota Imambara (Imambara Husainabad), Dargah Hazrat Abbas, Shah Najaf and Imambara Ghufran Ma'ab. The ban was partially lifted in 1997 and Shias were successful in taking out the first Azadari procession in January 1998 on the 21st of Ramadan, the Muslim fasting month. The Shias are authorised to stage nine processions out of the nine hundred that are listed in the register of the Shias. Deva Mela Deva Mela is celebrated during the anniversary of Sufi saint Haji Waris Ali Shah at Dewa, India which is 26 K.M from Lucknow city. Sufi songs (Qawwalis) are recited at the Dargah. Devotees also carry sheets/Chadars to the shrines. Chup Tazia The procession originated in Lucknow before spreading to other parts of South Asia. Dating back to the era of the Nawabs, it was started by Nawab Ahmed Ali Khan Shaukat Yar Jung a descendant of Bahu Begum. It has become one of the most important Azadari processions in Lucknow and one of the nine permitted by the government. This last mourning procession takes place on the morning of the 8th of Rabi' al-awwal, the third Muslim month and includes alam (flags), Zari and a ta'zieh (an imitation of the mausoleums in Karbala). It originates at the Imambara Nazim Saheb in Victoria Street then moves in complete silence through Patanala until it terminates at the Karbala Kazmain, where the colossal black ta'zieh is buried. Bada Mangal festival is celebrated in May as a birthday of the ancient Hanuman temple known as Purana Mandir. During this festival, fairs are conducted by the local public in the whole city. Bhandara is organised by local people almost in all streets across the city and serves free food to all the passersby irrespective of religion. Many of the Muslim Community also set up these Bhandara. It is celebrated in the name of Hindu God Lord Hanuman and reflects the Ganga Jamuni Tehzeeb. The classical Indian dance form Kathak originated from Lucknow. Wajid Ali Shah, the last Nawab of Awadh, was a great patron and a passionate champion of Kathak. Lachhu Maharaj, Acchchan Maharaj, Shambhu Maharaj and Birju Maharaj have kept this tradition alive. Lucknow is also the home city of the eminent ghazal singer Begum Akhtar. A pioneer of the style, "Ae Mohabbat Tere anjaam pe rona aaya" is one of her best known musical renditions. Bhatkande Music Institute University at Lucknow is named after the musician Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande Bhartendu Academy of Dramatic Arts (BNA), also known as Bhartendu Natya Academy, is a theatre-training institute situated at Gomti Nagar. It is a deemed university and an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Culture, Government of Uttar Pradesh. It was set up in 1975 by the Sangeet Natak Akademy (government of Uttar Pradesh), and became an independent drama school in 1977. Apart from government institutes, there are many private theatre groups including IPTA, Theatre Arts Workshop (TAW), Darpan, Manchkriti and the largest youth theatre group, Josh. This is a group for young people to experience theatre activities, workshops and training. Lucknow is also the birthplace of musicians including Naushad, Talat Mahmood, Anup Jalota and Baba Sehgal as well as British pop celebrity Sir Cliff Richard. Lucknow is known for embroidery works including chikankari, zari, zardozi, kamdani and gota making (gold lace weaving). Chikankari is an embroidery work well known all over India. This 400-year-old art in its present form was developed in Lucknow and it remains the only location where the skill is practised today. Chikankari constitutes 'shadow work' and is a delicate and artistic hand embroidery done using white thread on fine white cotton cloth such as fine muslin or chiffon. Yellowish muga silk is sometimes used in addition to the white thread. The work is done on caps, kurtas, saris, scarfs, and other vestments. The chikan industry, almost unknown under the Nawabs, has not only survived but has flourished. About 2,500 entrepreneurs have engaged in manufacturing chikan for sale in local, national and international markets with Lucknow the largest exporter of chikan embroidered garments. As a sign of recognition, in December 2008, the Indian Geographical Indication Registry (GIR) accorded Geographical Indication (GI) status for chikankari, recognising Lucknow as the exclusive hub for its manufacture. Lucknow was ranked "India's second happiest city" in a survey conducted by IMRB International and LG Corporation, after only Chandigarh. It fared better than other metropolitan cities in India including New Delhi, Bangalore and Chennai. Lucknow was found to be better than other cities in areas such as food, transit and overall citizen satisfaction. Lucknow is home to a number of prominent educational and research organisations including Indian Institute of Management Lucknow (IIM-L), Indian Institute of Information Technology, Lucknow (IIIT-L), Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI), Institute of Engineering and Technology (IET Lko), Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia National Law University (RMNLU), Institute of Hotel Management, Lucknow (IHM), Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences (SGPGI), Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Institute of Medical Sciences and King George's Medical University (KGMU). The National P. G. College (NPGC), affiliated to the University of Lucknow, was ranked as the second-best college imparting formal education in the country by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council in 2014. Educational institutions in the city include seven universities including the University of Lucknow, a Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, a technical university (Uttar Pradesh Technical University), a law university (RMLNLU), an Islamic university (DUNU) and many polytechnics, engineering institutes and industrial-training institutes. Other research organisations in the state include the Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Central Food Technological Research Institute, and the Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute. Some of Uttar Pradesh's major schools are located in Lucknow including Delhi Public School having its branches in Eldeco, Indiranagar. Lucknow International Public School, City Montessori School, Colvin Taluqdars' College, Centennial Higher Secondary School, St. Francis' College, Loreto Convent Lucknow, St. Mary's Convent Inter College, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Lucknow Public School, Stella Maris Inter College, Seth M.R. Jaipuria School, Cathedral School, Mary Gardiner's Convent School, Modern School, Amity International School, St. Agnes, Army Public School, Mount Carmel College, Study Hall, Christ Church College, Rani Laxmi Bai School and Central Academy, Study Hall School, Vidyasthali Kanar Inter College (Unit of SHEF foundation). City Montessori School, with over 20 branches spread throughout the city, is the only school in the world to have been awarded a UNESCO Prize for Peace Education. CMS also holds a Guinness World Record for being the largest school in the world, with over 40,000 pupils. The school consistently ranks among the top schools of India. La Martiniere Lucknow, founded in 1845, is the only school in the world to have been awarded a battle honour. It is one of the oldest schools in India, often ranked among the top ten schools in the country. Lucknow also has a sports college named Guru Gobind Singh Sports College. Indian Institute of Management Lucknow Institute of Engineering and Technology, Lucknow Indian Institute of Information Technology, Lucknow La Martiniere College University of Lucknow Central Drug Research Institute Amity University Lucknow Campus, also known as Mango Orchard Campus BBD groups of colleges Campus in Lucknow BBD University building in BBD Campus in Lucknow Bhatkhande Sanskriti Vishwavidyalaya, Lucknow Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama There are several minority educational institutions in the city including Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama, Integral University, Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti Language University, Era University, Era's Lucknow Medical College, and Maulana Azad National Urdu University's satellite campus. Lucknow has had an influence on the Hindi film industry as the birthplace of poet, dialogue writer and script writer K. P. Saxena, Suresh Chandra Shukla born 10 February 1954 along with veteran Bollywood and Bengali film actor Pahari Sanyal, who came from the city's well known Sanyal family. Several movies have used Lucknow as their backdrop including Shashi Kapoor's Junoon, Muzaffar Ali's Umrao Jaan and Gaman, Satyajit Ray's Shatranj ke khiladi. Ismail Merchant's Shakespeare Wallah, PAA and Shailendra Pandey's JD. In the movie Gadar: Ek Prem Katha Lucknow was used to depict Pakistan, with locations including Lal Pul, the Taj Hotel and the Rumi Darwaza used in Tanu Weds Manu. Some parts of Ladies vs Ricky Bahl, Bullett Raja, Ishaqzaade, Ya Rab and Dabangg 2 were shot in Lucknow or at other sites nearby. A major section of the Bollywood movie, Daawat-e-Ishq starring Aditya Roy Kapur and Parineeti Chopra was shot in the city as was Baawre, an Indian TV drama, airing on the Life OK channel. The government has announced to develop two film cities in Lucknow. The news channel Bharat Samachar is headquartered in Lucknow. Newspaper services in the city include Amar Ujala, Dainik Jagran, Hindustan Times, The Times of India and Dainik Bhaskar. The Pioneer newspaper, headquartered in Lucknow and started in 1865, is the second-oldest English-language newspaper in India still in production. The country's first prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru founded The National Herald in the city prior to World War II with Manikonda Chalapathi Rau as its editor. One of the earliest All India Radio stations has been operational in Lucknow since 1938. FM radio transmission started in Lucknow in 2000. The city has the following FM radio stations: Radio City 91.1 MHz Red FM 93.5 MHz Radio Mirchi 98.3 MHz AIR FM Rainbow 100.7 MHz Fever 104 FM 104.0 MHz Gyan Vani 105.6 MHz (educational) AIR FM Vividh Bharti 101.6 MHz CMS FM 90.4 MHz (educational) Mirchi Love 107.2 FM BBDU FM 90.8 MHz (of Babu Banarsi Das University) "My Lucknow My Pride" is a mobile app launched by the district administration of Lucknow circa December 2015 in efforts to preserve "the cultural heritage of Lucknow" and to encourage tourism. Cricket, association football, badminton, golf, and hockey are among the most popular sports in the city. The main sports hub is the K. D. Singh Babu Stadium, which also has a swimming pool and indoor games complex. There are plans to develop KDSB stadium along the lines of Ekana Stadium. KDSB stadium needs Rs 2 billion in funds to redesign and upgrade as per international standards. The other stadiums are Dhyan Chand Astroturf Stadium, Mohammed Shahid Synthetic Hockey Stadium, Dr. Akhilesh Das Gupta Stadium at Northern India Engineering College, Babu Banarsi Das UP Badminton Academy, Charbagh, Mahanagar, Chowk and the Sports College near the Integral University. In September 2017, Ekana International Cricket Stadium was opened to the public as it hosted 2017–18 Duleep Trophy. On 6 November 2018 Ekana International Cricket Stadium hosted its first T20 international match between Indian national cricket team and West Indies cricket team. It is the third largest cricket stadium in India by capacity after Kolkata's Eden Gardens and Ahmedabad's Narendra Modi Stadium. For decades Lucknow hosted the Sheesh Mahal Cricket Tournament. Lucknow is the headquarters for the Badminton Association of India. Located in Gomti Nagar, it was formed in 1934 and has been holding national-level tournaments in India since 1936. Syed Modi Grand Prix is an international Badminton competition held here. Junior-level Badminton players receive their training in Lucknow after which they are sent to Bangalore. The Lucknow Race Course in Lucknow Cantonment is spread over 28.42 hectares (0.2842 km2; 70.22 acres); the course's 3.2 kilometres (2.0 mi)-long race track is the longest in India. The Lucknow Golf Club is on the sprawling greens of La Martinière College. The city has produced several national and world-class sporting personalities. Lucknow sports hostel has produced international-level cricketers Mohammad Kaif, Piyush Chawla, Suresh Raina, Gyanendra Pandey, Praveen Kumar and R. P. Singh. Other notable sports personalities include hockey Olympians K. D. Singh, Jaman Lal Sharma, Mohammed Shahid and Ghaus Mohammad, the tennis player who became the first Indian to reach the quarter finals at Wimbledon. In October 2021, an IPL franchise based in Lucknow was officially formed and was later named Lucknow Super Giants. It will play its home matches at BRSABV Ekana Cricket Stadium. The city has parks and recreation areas managed by the Lucknow Development Authority. These include Kukrail Reserve Forest, Qaisar Bagh, Gomti Riverfront Park, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Park, Eco Park, Ambedkar Memorial Park, Janeshwar Mishra park, the largest park in Asia, Buddha Park, Hathi Park. It boasts lush greenery, a human-made lake, India's longest cycling and jogging track and a variety of flora. The plan is also to set up a giant Ferris wheel inside the park on the lines of London Eye, providing a panoramic view of the city. Kukrail Picnic Spot (crocodile-breeding sanctuary), located near Lucknow Indiranagar Area. This is Asia's largest crocodile-breeding center. This along with a small zoo and ample open space make it unique. Brisbane, Queensland Australia Bara Imambara Chhota Imambara Imambara Ghufran Ma'ab Aminabad Colvin Taluqdars' College La Martiniere Lucknow Isabella Thoburn College Qaisar Bagh Rumi Darwaza Shah Najaf Imambara Dargah of Hazrat Abbas Dilkusha Kothi Karbala of Dayanat-ud-Daulah Tomb of Mir Babar Ali Anis Imambara Sibtainabad (Maqbara of Amjad Ali Shah) Rauza Kazmain Residency Usman Enclave All Saints Garrison Church, Lucknow Alambagh Begum Hazrat Mahal Park Aastha Hospice & Geriatric Care Centre (2003) Amir-ud-daula Public Library Bharwara Sewage Treatment Plant Fun Republic Mall List of cities in India by population List of million-plus urban agglomerations in India List of tallest buildings in Lucknow List of twin towns and sister cities in India National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources "Lucknow to expand, 88 new villages under LMC wings". Times of India. 4 December 2019. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Cities having population 1 lakh and above, Census 2011" (PDF). The Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2014. "52nd Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India" (PDF). nclm.nic.in. Ministry of Minority Affairs. p. 49. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2019. "Awadhi". Ethnologue. Retrieved 7 May 2019. "District Domestic Product Per Capita" (PDF). Retrieved 8 January 2023. Records, Official. "District Domestic Product Estimates Uttar Pradesh Year 2020–21" (PDF). Directorate of Economics And Statistics Government Of Uttar Pradesh. Retrieved 6 November 2021. Singh, Padam; Keshari, Satyendra (8 March 2016). "Development of Human Development Index at District Level for EAG States" (PDF). Statistics and Applications. 14 (1–2): 43–61. ISSN 2454-7395. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2019. "Lucknow directory of service". Lucknow Online. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "LDA begins process to expand Lucknow's territory". The Times of India. Lucknow. 24 January 2015. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Lucknow gets bigger by 380 sq km in 10 yrs". The Times of India. Lucknow. 12 February 2011. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Cole, Juan Ricardo. "Sacred space and holy war" (PDF). Divine Conspiracy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Veena Talwar Oldenburg (14 July 2014). The Making of Colonial Lucknow, 1856–1877. Princeton University Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4008-5630-5. P. Nas (1993). Urban Symbolism. BRILL. p. 329. ISBN 90-04-09855-0. Philip Lutgendorf Professor of Hindi and Modern Indian Studies University of Iowa (13 December 2006). Hanuman's Tale : The Messages of a Divine Monkey: The Messages of a Divine Monkey. Oxford University Press. p. 245. ISBN 978-0-19-804220-4. Richard Stephen Charnock (1859). Local Etymology: A Derivative Dictionary of Geographical Names. Houlston and Wright. p. 167. Architects, Indian Institute of (1991). Journal of the Indian Institute of Architects. S. Kumar. Hasan, Amir (1983). Palace Culture of Lucknow. B.R. Publishing Corporation. ISBN 978-93-5050-037-8. "Introduction to Lucknow". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 24 August 2014. "Lucknow City". Laxys. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2012. Safvi, Rana (15 June 2014). "Understanding Ganga-Jamuni Tehzeeb: How diverse is the "Indian multiculturalism"". DNA India. Mumbai: DNA Webdesk. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Faizabad, Town, India". Bartleby. The Columbia Encyclopaedia. Archived from the original on 2 June 2009. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Shuja Ud Daula". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 24 August 2014. "Asaf Ud Daula". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 11 September 2015. Retrieved 24 August 2014. "Saadat-Ali-Khan". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 24 August 2014. "Awadh". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Wajid Ali Shah". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 24 August 2014. Sarkar, Sudeshna (12 September 2004). "Begum Hazrat Mahal: forgotten icon of India's freedom movement". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "1857 Memorial Museum, Residency, Lucknow". Archaeological Survey of India. Archived from the original on 27 June 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "AVADH". Iranica Online. Encyclopaedia Iranica. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Lucknow" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 106. "History of Lucknow". Lucknow City. Archived from the original on 4 December 2014. Retrieved 24 August 2014. "Big Moments in Lucknow History". Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2016. "Prostituting the Tawa'if: Nawabi Patronage and Colonial Regulation of Courtesans in Lucknow, 1847–1899 | Zoya Sameen". Academia.edu. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Lucknow: The City of Tehzeeb (culture) | Maharajas Express Blog – Luxury Train Guide, News". Maharaja Express Train. Maharajas Express India. 27 February 2013. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "World's fastest growing urban areas (1)". City Mayors. Archived from the original on 25 November 2010. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "UNDP report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2005. Retrieved 26 September 2006. Srivastava, Pranchal (4 December 2019). "Lucknow to expand, 88 new villages under LMC wings". The Times of India. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Lucknow Report". Urban Health Initiative. Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Lucknow Minimum Temperature". The Times of India. 29 December 2012. Archived from the original on 1 January 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2013. "Nagpur(42867)". India Meteorological Department. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "Climatological Tables 1991-2020" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. p. 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023. "Extremes of Temperature & Rainfall for Indian Stations (Up to 2012)" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. December 2016. p. M218. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Climate & Weather Averages in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India". Time and Date. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "Climate and monthly weather forecast Lucknow, India". Weather Atlas. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Normals Data: Lucknow/Amausi - India Latitude: 26.75°N Longitude: 80.88°E Height: 383 (m)". Japan Meteorological Agency. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Government of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests". Ministry of Environment and Forest lucknow. Archived from the original on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2012. Adawadkar, Bharati; Makhija, Urmila (November 2004). "A new isidiate species of Graphis from India". The Lichenologist. 36 (6). Cambridge University Press: 361–363. doi:10.1017/S0024282904014409. S2CID 86463133. "Lucknow mangoes earn fans in foreign countries". Times of India. 26 June 2013. Archived from the original on 16 August 2015. "Musa Bagh". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 11 June 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Botanic Garden Sikandar Bagh". Visit Lucknow. Google Sites. Archived from the original on 22 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Planet, Lonely. "State Museum – Lonely Planet". Lonely Planet. Archived from the original on 25 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "Economical Report of Lucknow" (PDF). Department of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "The top 15 Indian cities by GDP | India's top 15 cities with the highest GDP – Yahoo India Finance". In.finance.yahoo.com. 28 September 2012. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Lucknow Profile" (PDF). National Informatics Centre, Uttar Pradesh State Unit, Lucknow. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "The 10 fastest job-creating cities in India – Rediff.com Business". Rediff. 3 October 2010. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 17 February 2014. Singh, Priyanka (12 July 2014). "CII Young Indians unite Lucknow residents to empower women". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Economy of State" (PDF). U.P economy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012. "State-wise Data On Per Capita Income". www.pib.gov.in. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "TCS News & Events: Press Release : Tata Consultancy Services Expands in Lucknow; New Facility Inaugurated". Tata Consultancy Services. Archived from the original on 24 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014. Diksha P Gupta. ""We are where we are because of open source technology" – LINUX For You". Linux For U. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "Govt gives approval to IT city in Lucknow on Sultanpur Road". Times of India. 19 April 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "OFFICE OF THE DEVELOPMENT COMMISSIONER (HANDICRAFTS)". MINISTRY OF TEXTILES. Archived from the original on 16 January 2016. "Tata Motors' Jamshedpur, Lucknow and Pantnagar plants win National Energy Conservation Award 2020". Autocar. 13 January 2021. Retrieved 4 April 2021. Nair, Geeta (15 December 2020). "Tata Motors' VRS may not interest workers at Pune plant". The Financial Express. Retrieved 4 April 2021. PTI (10 July 2014). "Budget 2014: Rs 200 crore allocated to set up six textiles clusters". Economic Times. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "IT City Lucknow" (PDF). UP Government. 29 October 2013. p. 18. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Chak Gajaria farm land use changed". Times of India. 8 June 2013. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "BrahMos Aerospace proposes facility in Lucknow for next-gen missile project". Hindustan Times. 24 August 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2021. Roger Protz (28 March 2007). "Cheers! | Life and style". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "Lucknow crafts". Archived from the original on 11 January 2006. Retrieved 23 October 2006. "lucknow.stip.in". Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Biotech city Lucknow". Archived from the original on 21 October 2006. Retrieved 23 October 2006. https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/lucknow/state-capital-region-to-cover-five-districts-adjacent-to-lucknow/amp_articleshow/104054990.cms https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/lucknow/state-capital-region-to-cover-five-districts-adjacent-to-lucknow/amp_articleshow/104054990.cms "UP to build India's first AI city in Lucknow". https://government.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/digital-india/yogi-govt-set-to-build-indias-largest-it-hub-in-lucknow/102711790 https://government.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/digital-india/yogi-govt-set-to-build-indias-largest-it-hub-in-lucknow/102711790 "Lucknow to be developed as India's eighth 'Magnet City'". 24 June 2023. "Rajnath lays foundation stone for two DRDO centres in Lucknow". The Hindu. 26 December 2021. "BrahMos manufacturing in Lucknow likely to begin from March: Rajnath Singh". The Economic Times. 16 September 2023. https://www.business-standard.com/india-news/lucknow-emerging-as-industrial-logistic-hub-sector-to-generate-70k-direct-jobs-in-next-5-yrs-cbre-123080300676_1.html "CONSTITUTIONAL SETUP". Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Maheshwari, S.R. (2000). Indian Administration (6th ed.). New Delhi: Orient Blackswan Private Ltd. pp. 563–572. ISBN 81-250-1988-X. Singh, G. P. (1993). Revenue administration in India: A case study of Bihar. Delhi: Mittal Publications. pp. 26–129. ISBN 81-7099-381-4. Laxmikanth, M. (2014). Governance in India (2nd ed.). Noida: McGraw Hill Education. pp. 5.1–5.2. ISBN 978-93-392-0478-5. "Role and Functions of Divisional Commissioner". Your Article Library. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 20 August 2017. "Contact Details of Commissioners and District Magistrates of U.P." Department of Home and Confidential, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. जिलाधिकारी/मंडलायुक्त की सूची [List of District Magistrates and Divisional Commissioners]. Department of Appointments and Personnel, Government of Uttar Pradesh (in Hindi). Archived from the original on 10 February 2011. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Administration". Lucknow District. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Kumari, Kiran. "Urban Sprawl: A Case Study of Lucknow City" (PDF). International Journal of Humanities and Social Science Invention. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Jain, Isha (24 November 2017). "Lucknow to get its first woman mayor in 100 years". The Times of India. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Lucknow's first woman mayor, 110 corporators sworn in". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Lucknow Nagar Nigam Election Results: Ward-wise List of Winning Candidates". India.com. 1 December 2017. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "प्रशासक |मुख्यनगर अधिकारी | नगरआयुक्त" (PDF). Lucknow Municipal Corporation. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "National Consultation on Urban Governance" (PDF). Praja Foundation. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Singh, Priyanka (31 March 2017). "Lucknow Municipal Corporation: LMC targets Rs 22 crore surplus income". The Times of India. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Lucknow Municipal Corporation: Revenue Receipts". openbudgetsindia.org. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "LMC gets its executive committee". The Times of India. 20 January 2018. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Lucknow, Kanpur commissioners transferred in reshuffle of 7 IPS officers in UP". Hindustan Times. 1 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "Lucknow Police Plans to Use Drones for Dispersing Mobs". Archived from the original on 25 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "Lucknow cops get 'pepper-drones' for mob control, surveillance". The Hindu. 13 April 2015. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "Lucknow police deploying smart surveillance system to make the city safer – The Economic Times". m-economictimes-com.cdn.ampproject.org. "UP poised for nation's biggest Dial 100 service – The Times of India". The Times of India. 29 April 2015. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "What's inside the 'country's most hi-tech police control room'?". The Times of India. 30 January 2015. Archived from the original on 2 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "UP CM lays foundation stone for integrated dial 100 control room". UNI India. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Lucknow/District Court in India | Official Website of District Court of India". districts.ecourts.gov.in. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Rai, Sandeep (3 September 2023). "Lawyers rally for Meerut HC bench, suspend all work on Saturdays". The Times of India. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Central Command Raising Day concludes". The Times of India. 3 May 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2013. "NIA :: Contact Us". nia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Shri Rajnath Singh to lay the Foundation Stone of Office cum". Business Standard India. 27 December 2015. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Commission of Railway Safety." (Archive) Ministry of Civil Aviation. Retrieved 19 February 2012. "Ashok Marg, NE Railway compound, Lucknow- 226001." "Commission of Railway Safety- Ministry of civil aviation - India". Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2012. "LDA gets new VC, GNoida new chairman". The Times of India. 19 April 2017. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "List of IAS officers who are Vice Chairmen of Development Authorities". Department of Appointment and Personnel, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2017. "Master Plan 2031" (PDF). Lucknow Development Authority (in Hindi). Retrieved 2 November 2020. "List of Central Government Departments". Archived from the original on 30 May 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. PTI (23 May 2019). "Lucknow Lok Sabha results 2019: Rajnath Singh wins with over 6.3 lakh votes". India Today. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Members : Lok Sabha". Loksabhaph.nic.in. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Result Sheet Lok Sabha-2014 | District Lucknow , Government of Uttar Pradesh | India". Lucknow.nic.in. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Chief Electoral Officer, Uttar Pradesh". ceouttarpradesh.nic.in. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Jan Pratinidhi | District Lucknow , Government of Uttar Pradesh | India". Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Vidhan Sabha List 2019 | District Lucknow , Government of Uttar Pradesh | India". Lucknow.nic.in. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Members of Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly". Uplegisassembly.gov.in. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Electricity | District Lucknow , Government of Uttar Pradesh | India". Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Welcome to Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited, Government of Uttar Pradesh, India. / About UPPCL / Agencies under the Administrative Control". www.upenergy.in. Archived from the original on 24 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "About Us". Uttar Pradesh Fire Service. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "About Jal Nigam". Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Lucknow Jal Sansthan". jklmc.gov.in. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Waste management in a mess, Lucknow growing by heaps and bounds!". Hindustan Times. 11 April 2017. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "National Highways of India" (PDF). Department of Road Transport And Highways. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2017. "Study of Lucknow City (Final Report)" (PDF). Teerthankar Mahaveer University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. "Depots and Bus Stations". UPSRTC. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Inter State Bus Terminal opened". The Times of India. 26 October 2002. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Lucknow Charbagh railway station#Railway stations in Lucknow Suburban rail in India "Lucknow airport judged second best in small airport category". TOI. 4 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 January 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2016. "Airports Authority of India". AAI. 20 April 2010. Archived from the original on 15 September 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "Airports Authority of India". AAI. 20 April 2010. Archived from the original on 13 February 2014. Retrieved 17 February 2014. "Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport". World Airport Codes. Archived from the original on 30 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Pandemic delays work on swanky Terminal 3 at CCS Airport by a year". 3 September 2020. "Metro Man Appeals to People to Keep Metro Clean". Blive. 23 June 2017. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Lucknow Metro Rail fastest and most economical project in India". Archived from the original on 19 December 2015. Retrieved 28 December 2015. "Lucknow Metro construction begins, Akhilesh fulfils promise to father". The Times of India. 28 September 2014. Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014. "DMRC assures Lucknow Metro first phase completion". railnews. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Lucknow Metro Inauguration Live". Amar Ujala. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. "Lucknow to get Amsterdam-inspired cycling tracks". Times of India. 11 June 2014. Archived from the original on 1 September 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2014. "Noida, Agra and Lucknow to be cycle-friendly". The Hindu. 13 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 15 December 2014. "City hosts, cheers national level cycling event". The Times of India. 6 April 2015. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "CM Akhilesh Yadav puts Lucknow on track to be city with country's largest cycle network". The Indian Express. 29 December 2015. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Historical Census of India". Archived from the original on 17 February 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2014. "C-1 Population By Religious Community". Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs. Archived from the original on 13 September 2015. Retrieved 11 May 2016. On this page, select "Uttar Pradesh" from the download menu. "Lucknow (M.Corp.)" is at line 890 of the excel file. "Lucknow City Census 2011 data". Census2011. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017. "Lucknow pips Kanpur, emerges as most populous city in UP". The Times of India. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 18 April 2014. "Cities having population 100,000 and above" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 18 May 2014. "District Census Handbook – Lucknow" (PDF). Census of India. The Registrar General & Census Commissioner. p. 28. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2016. "Lucknow district population, Census 2011". Archived from the original on 16 April 2014. Retrieved 18 April 2014. "Primary Census Abstract data". Census of India. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "DALITS/SCHEDULED CASTES – 2011" (PDF). Human Rights Documentation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2009. "2011 Census of India, Population By Mother Tongue - Uttar Pradesh (Town Level)". censusindia.gov.in. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "UP improves literacy rate, child sex ratio dips: Census". The Times of India. 2 April 2011. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2011. "Upsurge in state literacy". The Times of India. 21 August 2001. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2001. "Riding His Lucknow | Sharat Pradhan". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Uttar Pradesh Tourism, Official Website of Government of Uttar Pradesh, India". UP Tourism. Archived from the original on 20 June 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Architecture of Lucknow". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Times of India-Lucknow". Lucknow Travel. Times of India Travel. Archived from the original on 2 September 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2014. "Bada Imambara". Indian Monuments. Archived from the original on 3 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Bayly, C. A. (1988). Rulers, Townsmen and Bazaars: North Indian Society in the Age of British Expansion, 1770–1870. Cambridge University Press. p. 135. ISBN 0-521-31054-7. "Roomi Darwaza". The Turkish Gate (Rumi Darwaza), Lucknow. The British Library. Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2014. "Dilkusha Garden Lucknow". Lucknow Online. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Hay, Sidney (2001). Historic Lucknow. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 81-206-0964-6. "About The Founder". La Martiniere College Lucknow. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Rich Urban Heritage of Lucknow". Town and Country Planning Organisation. Government of India. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Magic makeover for Lucknow's famed Hazratganj – IBNLive". IBN Live. Archived from the original on 30 July 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Rain brings relief to Lucknowites". The Times of India. 14 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 August 2015. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "Narendra Modi's messages to Lucknowites". The Times of India. 28 April 2014. Archived from the original on 16 August 2015. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Rain brings relief to Lucknowites". The Times of India. Times News Network. 14 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 August 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2014. Yojana. Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 1 January 1962. "Culture of Lucknow". Lucknowcity. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2014. "Govt committed to promote Urdu: Akhilesh Yadav". The Times of India. 30 November 2012. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2013. "About Lucknow Literary Festival". Lucknow Literary Festival. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Yulia Egorova; Tudor Parfitt (2013). Jews, Muslims and Mass Media: Mediating the 'Other'. SUNY Press. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-203-47583-6. "Lucknow Culture | Four Californian Lectures | Books on Islam and Muslims". Al-Islam. 4 December 2012. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 17 February 2014. Jones, Justin (2011). Shi'a Islam in Colonial India: Religion, Community and Sectarianism. Cambridge University Press. p. 93. ISBN 978-1-139-50123-1. Madan Lal Verma 'Krant' Krantikari Bismil Aur Unki Shayri page-28 ("याद आयेगा बहुत लखनऊ का जेल हमें") Piracha, Imtiaz (18 May 2014). "REVIEW: Josh Malihabadi". Dawn. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Cuisine of Lucknow". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "History of the Tunday Kabab". indianfoodsguide. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. Shubha Singh (22 December 2012). "Lucknow for the love of Kebabs | The Alternative". Thealternative. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Festivals in Lucknow". Lucknow. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Lucknow Festival". Incredible India. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "About Mahotsava". Lucknow Mahotsav. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Lucknow Literature Festival™". Lucknow Literature Festival™. 3 October 2016. Archived from the original on 1 October 2021. "The Third Imam, Husayn Ibn 'Ali". Al-Islam. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Festivals in Lucknow". lucknowlive. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Chup Tazia" procession in Lucknow: A religious and cultural tradition". twocircles. 23 February 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "A North Indian Classical Dance Form: Lucknow Kathak" (PDF). Journal for Anthropological Study of Human Movement. Illinois University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. "Pandit Birju Maharaj". Pt. Birju Maharaj Kalashram. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Famous Kathak Dancers". Bhavalaya. Archived from the original on 23 April 2012. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Chakraborty, Tapas (29 October 2012). "Tomb tribute to Begum Akhtar". The Telegraph. Telegraph India. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Bhatkhande Music Institute Deemed University". Bhatkhande Music Institute. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "About Us". BNA Lucknow. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Josh Group". We are Josh. Blogger. 17 November 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "The art of chikankari". Lucknow Chikan House. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Chikankari". Lucknow City. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Popularity of Chikankari outside India and exports" (PDF). chikanbarn. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Chikankari GI a step towards international branding". The Times of India. 16 January 2009. Archived from the original on 31 January 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2013. "Happiest city survey: What makes Lucknow India's second happiest city?". The Times of India. 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015. "Lucknow ahead of Delhi, other metros on happiness quotient". The Times of India. 12 June 2015. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2015. "List of Top Colleges in Lucknow". Career Info. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "National PG College rated second best in the country". The Times of India. 23 February 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Institutes in Lucknow" (PDF). Central Bureau of Health Intelligence- Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Pursues in-depth research and development in food science and technology". Central Food Technological Research Institute. Archived from the original on 1 August 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2012. "IUET-UG-PG-2012". Success Cds. Archived from the original on 27 June 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Guinness- City Montessori School". CMS enters 2013 Guinness Book of World Records. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "City Montessori School [CMS], Lucknow, India". Cmseducation.org. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Top ICSE-ISC Schools Based on Academic Performance (Based on Otherwise Insider Information – Courtesy: Electronic Data Mining)". the learning point. Archived from the original on 7 August 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Infrastructure – La Martiniere College". lamartinierelucknow.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. "Loreto, La Martiniere among top-10 schools in the country". The Times of India. 11 September 2013. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. "History – La Martiniere College". lamartinierelucknow.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. Mohan, Ajay (31 October 2013). "Famous Poet of Lucknow KP Saxena passes away" (in Hindi). One India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. Mukhopadhyay, Sudhiranjan. "Hemanta- The Early Years". University of Nebraska Ohama Faculty. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2012. "Gen X losing interest in Durga Puja". The Times of India. 16 October 2010. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2012. "Govind Namdev shoots in Lucknow". The Times of India. 28 March 2015. Archived from the original on 21 May 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2017. "Teen Patti won't release with Paa". Bolluwood Hungama. 24 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Venning, Dan (2011). "Cultural Imperialism and Intercultural Encounter in Merchant Ivory's Shakespeare Wallah". Asian Theatre Journal. 28 (1). Project Muse- Johns Hopkins University: 149–167. doi:10.1353/atj.2011.0000. S2CID 163049623. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Movie > Gadar: Ek Prem Katha | Movies and Locations | Filmapia – Reel Sites. Real Sights". Filmapia. 8 June 2014. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. Adejonwo, Damilola (26 October 2009). "Number #1 Resource For Everything Kangana Ranaut: Kangana Talks About Shooting Tanu Weds Manu". Kangana Ranaut Info. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Bullet Raja shooting at Lucknow – Oneindia Videos". One India. 27 November 2012. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Ishaqzaade release preponed". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. Jha, Subhash K (13 September 2012). "Dabangg 2: Salman skips shoot in Lucknow, Kanpur". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "SPOTTED! Aditya Roy Kapoor, Parineeti in Lucknow for YRF's Dawaat-e-Ishq". Hindustan Times. 18 November 2013. Archived from the original on 8 May 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "'Baawre': Bringing alive the quaintness of Lucknow". Television Post. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Hindi Newspapers". Amar Ujala. Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2016. "Lucknow Edition". Daily Pioneer. Archived from the original on 16 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Bansal, Shuchi (14 November 2012). "Tracing the journey of the 'National Herald'". LiveMint and Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "All India Radio Lucknow". Prasar Bharti. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. "FM Radio Stations". Archived from the original on 4 November 2006. Retrieved 27 October 2006. PTI (12 January 2016). "Mobile App on Lucknow launched". BGR India. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2016. Sinha, Arunav (11 January 2016). "District administration takes smart move, comes up with mobile app on Lucknow". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 14 January 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2016. Press Trust of India (11 January 2016). "Mobile App on Lucknow launched". Business Standard. Lucknow. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2016. Sinha, Arunav (28 September 2015). "Lucknow district administration takes hi-tech route to boost tourism". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 18 January 2016. "DR Akhilesh Das Gupta Stadium, Faizabad Road, Lucknow | Outdoor Stadiums in Faizabad Road, Lucknow | buy tickets for venues". Buzzintown. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 4 August 2014. लखनऊ को मिला देश का दूसरा 'ईडन गार्डन', अंतर्राष्ट्रीय क्रिकेट मैच की मेजबानी के लिए तैयार– News18 हिंदी. News18 India. 7 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 28 September 2017. "Duleep Trophy 2017 season to begin at Lucknow's new Ekana stadium". hindustantimes.com/. 31 August 2017. Archived from the original on 28 September 2017. Retrieved 28 September 2017. Here, Your. "The Official website of Badminton Association of India | BadmintonIndia.org". badmintonindia.org. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "Badminton Association of India Announce Rewards for Saina, Kashyap". NDTV. Press Trust of India. 17 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 2 July 2015. "Lucknow Race course". Times of India E-Paper. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Sports in Lucknow". Lucknow Online. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Picnik Spots and Parks in Lucknow". Picnik Spots and Parks in Lucknow Blog. 12 October 2011. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Picnic Spots, Parks in Lucknow". Visit Lucknow. Google Sites. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Lucknow chosen Brisbane's sister city". The Times of India. April 2009. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. Darogha Ubbas Alli (1874). The Lucknow Album. Baptist Mission Press,Calcutta. Poorno Chunder Mookherji (1883). The Pictorial Lucknow. P.C. Mookherji. ISBN 978-81-206-1701-8. Veena Talwar Oldenburg (1984). The Making of Colonial Lucknow, 1856–1877. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-06590-X. Violette Graff (13 November 1997). Lucknow: Memories of a City. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-563790-9. Amaresh Misra (1998). Lucknow, Fire of Grace: The Story of its Renaissance, Revolution and the Aftermath. HarperCollins Publishers India. ISBN 81-7223-288-8. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones; Ravi Kapoor (2003). Lucknow, Then and Now. Marg Publications. ISBN 81-85026-61-0. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones (2006). Lucknow: City of Illusion. Prestel Verlag. ISBN 3-7913-3130-2. Shamim A. Aarzoo (2014). Discovering Lucknow. Lucknow Society. ISBN 978-81-928747-0-8. ASIN 8192874702. Vipul B. Varshney (2017). Lucknow: The City of Heritage and Culture, A walk through history. Niyogi Books. ISBN 978-93-85285-52-3. Vipul B. Varshney; Shaam -e Awadh (2017). A visual journey of Lucknow. Bloomsbury. Lucknow at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Lucknow travel guide from Wikivoyage Official Site of Lucknow The India of the Nawabs, The New York Times, Published: 25 February 1990 Portal:  India