Cher (/ʃɛər/ shair; French: [ʃɛʁ]; Berrichon: Char) is a department in central France, part of the Centre-Val de Loire region. Named after the river Cher, its prefecture is Bourges. In 2019, it had a population of 302,306. Cher is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. Most of it was created, along with the adjacent department of Indre from the former province of Berry. The southeastern corner of the department, however, was part of the Duchy of Bourbon. The department is part of the current administrative region of Centre-Val de Loire. It is surrounded by the departments of Indre, Loir-et-Cher, Loiret, Nièvre, Allier, and Creuse. The most populous commune is Bourges, the prefecture. As of 2019, there are 8 communes with more than 5,000 inhabitants: The inhabitants of the department are called Chériens or Berrichons after the former province of Berry. The President of the General Council is Jacques Fleury of The Republicans, elected in July 2021. The Bourges Cathedral of St. Étienne is a major tourist attraction. Bourges Cathedral Bourges Apremont-sur-Allier Noirlac Abbey Château de Meillant The historical languages are Berrichon and the northern version of Bourbonnais. These are both dialects of French, or the Langues d'oïl. They are named respectively after the former Province of Berry and the former Duchy of Bourbon. Some 11 communes in the extreme South used to speak Occitan. The old dialects were in widespread use until the middle decades of the twentieth century and incorporated major regional variations within the department, influenced by the dialects of adjacent regions near the departmental frontiers. During the twentieth century government educational policy promoted a more standardised version of the French language. In the extreme south of the department influence from the southern Occitan language begins to appear, with "chambrat" being used in place of "grenier a foin" (hayloft), "betoulle" in place of "bouleau" (birch tree) and "aigue" in place of "eau" (water). Cantons of the Cher department Communes of the Cher department Arrondissements of the Cher department "Répertoire national des élus: les conseillers départementaux". data.gouv.fr, Plateforme ouverte des données publiques françaises (in French). 4 May 2022. "Téléchargement du fichier d'ensemble des populations légales en 2021". The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies. 28 December 2023. Populations légales 2019: 18 Cher, INSEE Cher, habitants.fr "Historique du Cher". Le SPLAF. "Évolution et structure de la population en 2016". INSEE. Simon, Frank (1 July 2021). "Politique - Jacques Fleury, élu président du conseil départemental du Cher". leberry.fr (in French). Retrieved 7 July 2022. Nationale, Assemblée. "Assemblée nationale ~ Les députés, le vote de la loi, le Parlement français". Assemblée nationale. (in French) Departmental Council of Cher (in French) Prefecture of Cher (in English) Cher at Curlie