Rachel Karen Green is a fictional character, one of the six main characters who appeared in the American sitcom Friends. Portrayed by Jennifer Aniston, the character was created by David Crane and Marta Kauffman, and appeared in all of the show's 236 episodes during its decade-long run, from its premiere on September 22, 1994, to its finale on May 6, 2004. Introduced in the show's pilot as a naïve runaway bride who reunites with her childhood best friend Monica Geller and relocates to New York City, Rachel gradually evolves from a spoiled, inexperienced "daddy's girl" into a successful businesswoman. During the show's second season, the character becomes romantically involved with Monica's brother, Ross, with whom she maintains a complicated on-off relationship throughout the series. Together, Ross and Rachel have a daughter, Emma. The role of Rachel was originally offered to Téa Leoni, the producer's first choice, and Courteney Cox, both of whom declined, Leoni in favor of starring in the sitcom The Naked Truth, and Cox in favor of playing Rachel's best friend Monica in Friends. A virtually unknown actress at the time, who had previously starred in five short-lived sitcoms, Aniston auditioned for the role of Rachel after turning down an offer as a cast member on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live. After acquiring the role and before Friends aired, Aniston was temporarily at risk of being recast because she had also been involved with another sitcom, Muddling Through, at the time, which was ultimately cancelled and allowed Aniston to remain on Friends. Critical reception towards Rachel has remained consistently positive throughout Friends' decade-long run, with The A.V. Club attributing much of the show's early success to the character. However, some of her storylines have been criticized, specifically her romantic relationship with her friend Joey Tribbiani during season 10. Rachel's popularity established her as the show's breakout character, who has since been named one of the greatest television characters of all time, while the character's second season haircut spawned an international phenomenon of its own. Named the "Rachel" after her, the character's shag continues to be imitated by millions of women around the world and remains one of the most popular hairstyles in history, in spite of Aniston personally disliking it. Rachel is also regarded as a style icon due to her influence on womenswear during the 1990s. Meanwhile, the character's relationship with Ross is often cited among television's most beloved. Rachel is considered to be Aniston's breakout role, credited with making her the show's most famous cast member and for spawning her successful film career. Praised for her performance as Rachel, Aniston won both an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series and a Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress In A Television Series – Comedy Or Musical. Rachel debuts in the pilot episode of Friends as a runaway bride who is distraught after abandoning her fiancé Barry Farber (Mitchell Whitfield) at the altar. She locates her high school best friend Monica Geller (Courteney Cox), the only person she knows in New York City, who agrees to let Rachel reside with her while she attempts to reorganize her life. Rachel meets and befriends Monica's friends Phoebe Buffay (Lisa Kudrow), Joey Tribbiani (Matt LeBlanc), and Chandler Bing (Matthew Perry), while reuniting with Monica's older brother Ross Geller (David Schwimmer), who has harbored unrequited romantic feelings for her since high school. Having previously relied on her parents' money her entire life with a sole goal of marrying wealthy, Rachel attempts to reinvent herself as an independent young woman by waitressing at Central Perk, a coffeehouse where her new friends regularly socialize. She is terrible at the job, but remains employed because the manager, Gunther (James Michael Tyler), is in love with her. As season one concludes, Rachel finds out that Ross is in love with her, and realizes that she loves him, too. When she goes to tell him, however, she finds that he has begun a relationship with a woman named Julie (Lauren Tom). However, Ross eventually chooses Rachel over Julie, and the couple dates for the remainder of the second season. However, their relationship begins to deteriorate during the middle of the third season after Rachel quits her job at the coffeehouse in favor of working in fashion. While Rachel becomes increasingly preoccupied with her new job, Ross grows jealous of her companionship with her coworker Mark (Steven Eckholdt), culminating in Rachel deciding that they should "take a break" from their relationship. Ross interprets this as a sign of their breakup and sleeps with another woman after calling Rachel and learning Mark is with her. Ross and Rachel reunite the following day, but she breaks up with him after finding out about his infidelity. In the episodes following the break up, Rachel and Ross are initially hostile towards each other, but continue to harbor feelings for each other. During a beach house vacation with their friends, Rachel and Ross briefly reconcile when he ends his relationship with Bonnie (Christine Taylor), only to break up once again due to a disagreement shortly after returning to New York. During season four, Rachel dates her customer Joshua Burgin (Tate Donovan), while Ross dates her boss' niece Emily (Helen Baxendale), to whom he eventually gets engaged. Competitively, Rachel proposes to Joshua, frightening him off as his divorce is not yet finalized. Rachel realizes she still loves Ross and comes to London to stop their wedding. She decides not to act upon it when seeing how happy he is with Emily, but Ross accidentally utters Rachel's name while exchanging their wedding vows. Ross ultimately divorces Emily after she demands that he end his friendship with Rachel. At the end of season five, Ross and Rachel drunkenly get married while vacationing with their friends in Las Vegas. In season six, Ross initially wants to remain married to Rachel, but she persuades him to get the annulment. He tells Rachel he's done so but confesses to Phoebe that they're still married. Rachel eventually finds out and fills in the annulment form, but their annulment request is denied because of Rachel having leveled unfounded allegations against Ross and because of their past relationship, forcing the two to file for a divorce instead. After signing the papers, they admit that if they ever got married properly, it would be the one that lasted. In season seven, Ross and Rachel have sex, and Rachel gets pregnant. Rachel gives birth to a girl in season eight, naming the baby Emma Geller-Green; the name Emma is a gift from Monica, who had previously been reserving the name for her own child. In a misunderstanding, Rachel believes that Joey had proposed to her, Joey having told her he loved her a few months earlier, whereas he had simply picked up Ross' engagement ring. Rachel and Ross live together as non-romantic roommates during the first half of season nine. After an argument following Rachel kissing her colleague Gavin (Dermot Mulroney) and giving her phone number to a man she met at a bar, Rachel leaves Ross and moves back in with Joey. At the end of season nine, Rachel begins to develop feelings for Joey. Joey confesses that he still has feelings for Rachel, and they decide to try dating. They break up in season ten, however, both because their romance upsets Ross and because they realize that they do not work as a couple. Rachel eventually finds a job opportunity in France, but has second thoughts when Ross tells her he still loves her. Rachel ultimately decides to stay and reignite her relationship with Ross, getting off the plane at the last minute. In the first episode of the spin-off/sequel Joey, it is implied that Ross and Rachel remarried shortly after the events of the Friends finale, as Joey tells his sister Gina (Drea de Matteo) that all of his friends have gotten married. In the episode "Joey and the Breakup", while discussing his relationship with Sarah (Mädchen Amick), Joey mentions Rachel to Gina, though not by name, as the only woman he ever confessed his love to, which led to brief heartbreak when Rachel did not reciprocate his feelings, as Joey says, "We were living together, she was pregnant with my best friend's baby and she ended up with him." During the 2021 reunion special, David Schwimmer and Jennifer Aniston both said they imagined that Ross and Rachel had remarried after the end of the series. After their short-lived television series Family Album was canceled, television writers David Crane and Marta Kauffman pitched Friends to then-NBC president Warren Littlefield as a sitcom about "that special time in your life when your friends are your family," basing the show on their own experiences as young people living in New York; the main characters themselves were inspired by their own friends. Conceived as a young woman who is unprepared for adulthood, the character Rachel Green (occasionally spelled Greene) was originally named Rachel Robbins in the pilot. Although critics and audiences initially perceived Monica as the show's main character when Friends premiered, the writers had actually given Rachel the pilot's most prominent storyline. Before deciding that Rachel and Ross would be an item for the entire series, the writers had originally intended for the show's defining couple to be Joey and Monica. However, after the success of the pilot, in which Rachel and Ross' developing romance is first hinted at, and witnessing Aniston and co-star David Schwimmer's on-screen chemistry for the first time, Crane and Kauffman determined that the entire series relied on "finding all the wonderful roadblocks for them to be with each other". Audiences began rooting for Rachel and Ross' union from the very beginning of Friends, openly voicing their frustration with Rachel's obliviousness to Ross' feelings for her. The episode that would ultimately transform the friends' relationship for the remainder of the series was the first-season finale "The One Where Rachel Finds Out", in which Rachel finally learns of Ross' true feelings for her, at the same time discovering she actually feels the same. However, the episode nearly went unwritten because, at the time, few Friends writers were expecting the couple's relationship to morph into the phenomenon that it ultimately became. The episode was first suggested by director James Burrows; the writers felt that it was time to alter the couple's dynamic in order to avoid the repetitive "he's pining, she's oblivious" pattern, using the work of author Jane Austen as inspiration on how to finally shift the pining arc from Ross to Rachel. Because stakes for the episode were unprecedentedly high, "The One Where Rachel Finds Out" became Friends' most reworked episode. The couple's first kiss at the end of season two's "The One Where Ross Finds Out" was met with deafening applause from the studio audience. Crane admitted that keeping viewers interested in their relationship for ten years was challenging. Jonathan Bernstein of The Daily Telegraph believes that they accomplished this by "dangl[ing] the possibility of a Ross and Rachel recoupling through several cliffhangers without ever putting them back together". According to Encyclopedia of Television author Horace Newcomb, Ross and Rachel's ever-changing relationship "converted the traditional amnesic plotlines of the situation comedy into ones akin to episodic drama". Meanwhile, writing for The New York Review of Books, Elaine Blair agreed that Friends created "a sense of chemistry between two characters while also putting obstacles in their way, setting us up for a long-deferred union". After Rachel and Ross drunkenly get married while on vacation in Las Vegas during season five, Schwimmer had initially objected to the idea of having Ross divorce her – his third divorce – because he felt that it was taking it "too far". The actor explained that "The whole arc of the relationship was weird then ... because for [Ross] to be able to move on enough to marry someone else and then go back to being in love with Rachel later just went a bit too far." Rachel and Joey's romantic storyline was conceived because the writers wanted to delay Ross and Rachel's reunion further. Crane felt that pairing Rachel and Joey during season ten "was for the greater good" because "it was inappropriate". However, the cast initially protested the idea, fearing that Rachel, Joey, and Ross would ultimately become unlikeable characters and audiences would either "resent Joey for going after a pregnant woman, or resent Rachel for rejecting him, or resent Ross for standing between the two of them". Meanwhile, the writers also approached the concept of Rachel's pregnancy and baby tentatively, worrying about how they would include it in the show because they did not want Friends "to become a show about a baby" while "On the other hand, we don't want to pretend that there isn't one." According to Robert Bianco of USA Today, the critical success and popularity of Rachel's pregnancy is ultimately responsible for "propel[ling] the show to the top of the ratings". When it finally came time to write the series finale, "The only thing [Crane and Kauffman] absolutely knew from very early on was that we had to get Ross and Rachel together," deciding, "We had dicked the audience around for 10 years with their 'will they or won't they,' and we didn't see any advantage in frustrating them" any longer. However, at one point the writers had deliberated ending the series with Ross and Rachel in "a gray area of where they aren't together, but we hint there's a sense that they might be down the road". Ultimately, Crane and Kauffman relented in favor of giving the audience what they wanted. The final character to be cast, Rachel is portrayed by actress Jennifer Aniston, who auditioned for the role shortly after declining a position as a cast member on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live. Her decision was initially ridiculed by both her friends as well as actor Adam Sandler, a Saturday Night Live alum. Actress Téa Leoni, who at the time was being referred to by the media as "the next Lucille Ball", was offered the role of Rachel as the studio's first choice, but she declined in favor of starring in the sitcom The Naked Truth. Actress Elizabeth Berkley also auditioned for the role. Other actresses who auditioned for Rachel include Denise Richards, Melissa Rivers, Nicollette Sheridan, Parker Posey, and Jami Gertz. Originally, the producers wanted to cast actress Courteney Cox as Rachel, who Crane and Kauffman were particularly drawn to because of her "cheery, upbeat energy". Additionally, Cox was the most famous cast member at the time amidst an ensemble of relatively unknown actors. However, the actress lobbied for the role of Rachel's best friend Monica, as whom she was ultimately cast, because she felt that she was not "quirky" enough to play Rachel. At the same time, although unbeknownst to each other, Aniston was being considered for the role of Monica, but fought to play Rachel because she felt that the character suited her better. At one point, Cox had begun to regret her decision to play Monica until her own character's storylines started improving. Friends was Aniston's sixth sitcom; each of her previous ventures had been canceled prematurely. Feeling vulnerable, Aniston had begun to doubt herself as an actress and personally approached Littlefield for reassurance on her career, who encouraged her to audition for Friends, which was being referred to as Friends Like These at the time. Crane and Kauffman had worked with Aniston prior to this. However, casting her as Rachel posed a challenge for the network because, at the time, Aniston was simultaneously starring in a developing CBS sitcom called Muddling Through, in which she plays a young woman whose mother is returning home from jail after two years. CBS was initially reluctant to release Aniston from her contract, which required the actress to balance both roles simultaneously, traveling back-and-forth between Muddling Through and Friends for two weeks. Meanwhile, NBC risked having to recast the role of Rachel, replace Aniston, and reshoot several episodes if CBS' series proved successful, which would have potentially cost the network millions of dollars. However, Littlefield remained confident that Muddling Through would fail. Essentially, the producers of Friends hoped that Muddling Through would be canceled before Friends premiered, while Aniston feared that Muddling Through would be the more successful of the two sitcoms in spite of her preference for Friends. During this time of uncertainty, Aniston was forced not to participate in several Friends-related promotions and photo shoots; the network excluded her from these in case she would be replaced. Aniston explained, "When we were shooting the first grouping of cast photos ... I was asked to step out of a bunch because they didn't know if I was going to be still playing Rachel." Director James Burrows admitted that Aniston had been cast in second position. The producers had already begun auditioning other actresses for the part, while Aniston also received phone calls from her own friends warning her, "I'm auditioning for your part in Friends." Ultimately, Muddling Through was canceled after only three months and 10 episodes, two weeks before the pilot of Friends aired, thus allowing Aniston to keep her role on the show, becoming its second youngest cast member at the age of 25. Crane appreciated Aniston's interpretation of Rachel because "in the wrong hands Rachel is kind of annoying and spoiled and unlikable," commending the actress for "breathing life into a difficult character". Crane and Kauffman strongly envisioned Friends as an ensemble comedy, and Warner Bros. initially marketed the show as such by having the cast appear in their entirety for all press, interviews and photo shoots. One of few sitcoms at the time to be neither a workplace comedy, family sitcom or star a famous comedian, Elizabeth Kolbert of The New York Times explained that each of the show's main characters are "of equal importance". As a writer, Crane preferred it this way because "utilizing six equal players, rather than emphasizing one or two, would allow for myriad story lines". Kauffman echoed that "Friends worked best when the entire ensemble was onstage." The only reason Aniston is credited first during the show's title sequence is because the cast is listed alphabetically. The show's ensemble format is also believed to have prevented jealous conflicts among the cast. Famously, the Friends cast became the first in television history to negotiate as a group for equal salaries, refusing to work until their demands of $100,000 per episode were met during season three, which eventually increased to $1 million per episode by seasons nine and ten – approximately $25 million per year. Alongside Cox and actress Lisa Kudrow, who portrays Phoebe, Aniston became the highest-paid television actress of all time. By then, Aniston had surpassed Cox as the show's most famous cast member due to having launched an international hair trend with the "Rachel" and successfully transitioning into a film career, combined with her high-profile relationship with her then-husband, actor Brad Pitt, who had once guest starred in an episode of the show. At times the producers would use the actress' popularity to boost the show's ratings, notably her character's seventh season kiss with actress Winona Ryder and pregnancy arc. Aniston had been telling the press that the show's ninth season would be her last, and was initially hesitant to return to Friends to film its tenth and final season. She explained to NBC's Matt Lauer, "I wanted it to end when people still loved us and we were on a high. And then I was also feeling like, 'How much more of Rachel do I have in me?'" However, the actress ultimately agreed to complete the tenth season of Friends, which was reduced from 24 to 18 episodes to accommodate Aniston's busy film schedule. Rachel is the youngest of Friends six main characters. She was brought up in Long Island, New York. The term "spoiled" is often used to describe the character's personality during her early appearances. Encyclopædia Britannica describes Rachel as a spoiled and funny character. According to Rachel's original character description, written by Crane and Kauffman themselves for the show's pilot, the character is a spoiled yet courageous young woman who "has worked for none of what she has", unlike best friend Monica, and is initially "equipped to do nothing". James Endrst of the Hartford Courant identified her as "a spoiled rich kid", while the Daily News dubbed Rachel an "endearingly spoiled Daddy's girl". Author Kim Etingoff wrote about Rachel in her book Jennifer Aniston: From Friends to Films that the character is "spunky and sometimes spoiled", while TV Land called her "naive". Citing the differences between Rachel and her two female friends, The Guardian's Ryan Gilbey observed that the character "wasn't insulated by self-regard, like Monica, or swaddled in gormlessness, like Phoebe". Frequently identified as fitting the "girl next door" archetype, Anne Bilson of The Telegraph described Rachel as "funny but not too funny, pretty but not too pretty, sexy but not too sexy, scatterbrained but not too scatterbrained". TalkTalk's Dominic Wills described the character as "smart but ditzy, determined but undisciplined." Meanwhile, Liat Kornowski, writing for The Huffington Post, wrote that Rachel is a "beautiful, coveted, slightly neurotic, borderline egocentric" character. Observing that the show's main characters are each based on a stereotype, Jonathan Bernstein of The Daily Telegraph identified Rachel as "the self-absorbed one who goes from riches to rags". According to Reign Magazine, Rachel is "a human being full of vulnerability, humor and strength while aesthetically donning an undeniable beauty and allure". Originally depicted as a character who is unprepared for "the world as an adult", Rachel's personality was gradually tailored to suit Aniston as the series progressed, becoming "more self-sufficient and sympathetic". According to Shining in the Shadows: Movie Stars of the 2000s author Murray Pomerance, "The more boundary collapsed between the 'real' Jennifer Aniston and Rachel, the more 'authentic' Aniston became." Pomerance also noted that the character's "well-roundedness, normalcy and relatability" is similar to Aniston's, while both the character and the actress herself are very expressive, talking "with [their] hands a good deal." In her book How To Write For Television, author Madeline Dimaggio wrote that although "Rachel grew within the context of the series ... she would always struggle with the spoiled, image-conscious Daddy's girl who fled from her wedding in the pilot." Similarly, BuddyTV wrote that although Rachel "eventually evolves into being less absorbed in later series, she [remains] the most image-centric among the six", while Vogue's Edward Barsamian opined, "She might have been self-centered and bratty, but Rachel Green was perhaps the most stylish and unabashedly fashion-obsessed character on the show." TV Land summarized the character's arc and development in the website's biography of her, writing, "Rachel is a born shopper, but... she's not necessarily a born worker. In fact, before moving in with Monica, she's never had to work at all, thanks to the generosity of her parents. Luckily, Rachel is smart, resourceful and chic, so her future is bright, both as a member of the workforce and with her newfound tribe." Examining the character's sexuality, Splitsider's Mike D'Avria determined that Rachel has had the third most sexual partners, 14, as well as the highest percentage of serious monogamous relationships at 71%. D'Avria opined, "Throughout the whole series Rachel is continually meeting men she wants to impress. Her flirtations typically fail, but she somehow winds up in a serious relationship with them." Additionally, Rachel is also the only female character to admit to having had a homosexual experience (Chandler having likewise admitted to kissing a man on season 7, episode 4). In an interview with the Jewish Telegraph, Kauffman confirmed that Rachel is Jewish. On the character's "Jewish ties", Kauffman told J. The Jewish News of Northern California that Rachel had always been Jewish "in our minds", explaining, "You can't create a character with the name 'Rachel Green' and not from the get-go make some character choices". Prior to this, critics and fans had long speculated whether or not Rachel is Jewish. Vulture's Lindsey Weber, who identifies herself as Jewish, observed several similarities and Jewish stereotypes she shares with the character, citing the facts that Rachel refers to her grandmother Ida Green as "Bubbe", Long Island origin, and engagement to a Jewish doctor as allusions to the character's Jewish culture. In her book Changed for Good: A Feminist History of the Broadway Musical, author Stacy Wolf identified Rachel as one of several popular female television characters who embodied Jewish stereotypes during the 1990s and often served as "the butt of the shows' jokes". Meanwhile, JDate's Rebecca Frankel cited Rachel as one of the earliest and most prominent examples of the Jewish American Princess stereotype on screen. Writing for the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Alicia R. Korenman also acknowledged Rachel's initial Jewish American Princess qualities, describing her as "spoiled, dependent on her father's money and her fiance's, is horrified at the thought of working for a living and generally inept in her attempts to do so, and is eventually revealed to have had a nose job", which she eventually overcomes as they become less "evident in later seasons of the show". In his article "Princesses, Schlemiels, Punishers and Overbearing Mothers", Evan Cooper described Rachel as a "de-semitized" Jew because, aside from her name, "there is never any discussion of experiences of growing up in a Jewish culture, no use of Yiddish, and few, if any, references to family members with distinctively Jewish surnames". Cooper continued to write that although Rachel possesses some Jewish American Princess traits, she is more similar to the "little woman" stereotype. The New York Post's Robert Rorke labeled Rachel "a rehabilitated Jewish American Princess", in contrast to her sister Amy (Christina Applegate) who remains "selfish, condescending and narcissistic". Critical response towards Rachel remained mostly positive throughout the show's ten-season run. Writing for The A.V. Club, John Reid believes that Rachel is responsible for the success of the pilot, explaining, "The story of this group of friends must start with a stranger coming to town," describing Rachel as "the perfect stranger for this plot". Reid also holds Rachel responsible for spurring character development in the show's five other main characters, calling her arrival "a catalyst for all of them to grow, because unlike the rest of them, Rachel is interested in finding meaning for her life". Also writing for The A.V. Club, Sonia Saraiya enjoyed Rachel's first awkward encounter with Ross because, for the first time, "Rachel displays a moment of true empathy for another human being". Saraiya went on to hail Rachel as "a model for women coming of age in the 1990s—the popular, pretty girl dissatisfied with where those illusions have taken her but also unwilling to embrace the more aggressively 'feminist' career-woman strategy". The New York Times' Joseph Hanania enjoyed Rachel's telephone conversation with her father during the pilot, describing it as "hilarious". The Los Angeles Times Bob Shayne admitted his attraction towards Rachel, joking, "my feelings for Rachel, I say with some embarrassment, mirror those of Gunther". Cosmopolitan touted Rachel "the best fictional gal pal we've ever had". While People called her "spoiled-but-lovable", TV Guide described Rachel as "neurotic and adorable". Writing for Heat, Ellen Kerry hailed Rachel's gradual transformation from waitress to businesswoman as arguably "the best thing on tv". USA Today's Robert Bianco credits Rachel's pregnancy storyline with saving Friends, observing that the arc increased the show's ratings while ultimately "reversing the show's decline in ways ... that no one watching 'The One with Monica and Chandler's Wedding' could ever have imagined." Bianco concluded, "Indeed, without that fortune-altering twist, Friends probably would have ended sooner". BDCwire ranked "The One with the Ball", "The One with Rachel's Inadvertent Kiss", "The One With The Football", "The One with the Fake Party" and "The One In Vegas, Part One" Rachel's five strongest episodes. Meanwhile, TVLine criticized Rachel for sleeping with ex-fiancé Barry in season one's "The One With the Evil Orthodontist", panning the episode as "cringeworthy". TVLine similarly criticized the character's role in season four's "The One With The Fake Party". At times the character would generate mild controversy, specifically the second-season episode "The One Where Dr. Ramoray Dies", during which Rachel and Monica argue over who will get to use the last remaining condom in the apartment, which Rachel ultimately wins via a game of rock-paper-scissors. Additionally, fans would often approach Aniston and scold her for decisions that Rachel makes within the show that they do not particularly agree with. Within the first two seasons of Friends, the character became extremely popular among women. Viewers' perpetual desire to see Rachel succeed helped her remain a fan favorite throughout all ten seasons of the show. Writing for TalkTalk, Dominic Wills agreed that while Rachel established herself as "the general favourite ... No one had a bad word to say about Jennifer Aniston", with whose performance audiences instantly fell in love. Aniston's performance has been consistently praised since her debut in the pilot, about which Entertainment Weekly's Ken Tucker wrote that the actress portrays Rachel with "prickly intelligence". Writing for The Baltimore Sun, David Zurawik cited Aniston among the show's "very strong cast", while Variety's Tony Scott agreed that "All six of the principals ... appear resourceful and display sharp sitcom skills"; Robert Bianco of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette praised the work of show's female cast equally. TV Guide wrote that Aniston "instantly charmed audiences with her perfect looks and endearingly flawed persona", while Kevin Fallon of The Daily Beast referred to Aniston's tenure on Friends as not "a leading lady performance" but instead "the work of a brilliant character actress". The Guardian's Ryan Gilbey highlighted Aniston as the cast member "least reliant on goofball caricature", observing that "Playing the only character with whom a sane viewer might reasonably identify also meant that she got the lion's share of attention". Writing that the actress "quickly stole our hearts as the daddy's girl and aspiring fashionista," Andrew Collins of Radio Times hailed Aniston as a "natural comic performer, as adept with a subtle nose wrinkle as a full-on pratfall, and fluent in quick-fire patter". In 2002, Aniston won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series. In 2003, the actress won the Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actress In A Television Series – Comedy Or Musical. Dominic Willis of TalkTalk believes that Aniston won these awards because of "her brilliant comic performances in the show". Rachel has had several romantic relationships throughout Friends decade-long run, the most famous and prominent of which remains her on-again, off-again relationship with friend Ross. Although wildly popular among audiences, the couple has been met with mixed reviews from critics. Katherine Hassel of the Daily Express described the characters' relationship as "the heart of the show". China Daily cited Ross and Rachel's reunion during the series finale "The Last One" among the episode's highlights, while Gary Susman of Rolling Stone believes that audiences would not have been happy had the couple not ultimately reunited. Contrastingly, The Wire's Joe Reid is of the opinion that the show's second season is "the only time Ross/Rachel was truly great". Virgin Media wrote that the couple's dynamics "had grown mightily tedious" by season ten. E! cable network ranked Rachel and Ross the ninth greatest Friends couple, writing that their relationship gave "Friends fans enough iconic quotes to fill a book", considering Phoebe's line "See? [Ross is] her lobster!" to be among show's most iconic. Ross and Rachel's season three breakup has spawned a debate among Friends fans, who continue to argue over which of the two was at fault: Rachel for suggesting that they take a break from their relationship, or Ross for sleeping with another woman immediately afterwards. Writing for E!, Jenna Mullins ruled in favor of Rachel, elaborating, "there is no excuse for Ross sleeping with someone else after his lobster suggested taking a break", concluding that Ross "blew it". The Jewish community was particularly receptive to the fact that a Jewish-American couple existed on prime time television, described by Lilith magazine as "a televisual first". Rachel and Ross are considered to be among television's greatest and most beloved couples. Ninemsn referred to them as "everyone's favourite on ... off ... on (a break!) duo," while Us Weekly and BuzzFeed ranked them the first and second best television couple, respectively. TV Guide ranked Ross and Rachel the third greatest television couple, dubbing them "the most iconic TV couple in recent memory". Extra placed the couple at number eight, writing, "Never did we want two people to get together more than Ross ... and Rachel". Refinery29 included Rachel and Ross in the website's "16 TV Couples We Want To Be Together Forever" list. The pair is also often ranked among television's greatest "will they or won't they" couples. Naming Ross and Rachel the greatest "will they, won't they" couple, Network Ten believes they defined the term, while Suggest dubbed them the "quintessential will they/won't they couple". According to Sarah Doran of Radio Times, the couple "became synonymous with the phrase 'we're on a break'". Phoebe's line, in which she refers to the couple as each other's lobsters, has become one of the show's most popular and oft-quoted. Kaitlin Reilly of Bustle magazine defined the term as "the person of whom another is meant to be with forever". Tara Aquino of Complex magazine believes that "Every other person can tell you what exactly a 'Ross and Rachel' relationship means". Ultimately, Rachel's season eight pregnancy arc is credited with reviving the show's ratings and reviews. During season ten, Rachel's brief romance with friend Joey drew strong criticism from both critics and fans, although the contested relationship did not harm viewership. Joshua Kurp of Splitsider believes that the Rachel/Joey/Ross love triangle is the main reason the show's final two seasons continued to perform well despite mediocre reviews. Eric Goldman of IGN referred to the Rachel-Joey storyline as "questionable". Entertainment Tonight Canada ranked "The One After Rachel and Joey Kiss" among the show's ten worst episodes at number five, with author I. P. Johnson panning it as "desperate", concluding, "Jeers for even conceiving this romantic plot; cheers for abandoning it". Contrarily, E! enjoyed Rachel and Joey as a couple because they brought out positive aspects in each other's personalities and share a similar sense of humor. Their relationship also spawned a debate among fans, who argued over whether making Rachel and Joey a couple was a bad idea. Jenna Mullins of E! determined that it is because "It was too far into the series to throw these two together. They didn't make sense and their romantic scenes felt forced". After Ross and Rachel's break up, there were many hints that they would eventually reunite forever, especially seasons 8–10. In the final season, Rachel wants to sleep with Ross when her father has a heart attack and wants "sympathy sex", which he turns down, not wanting to take advantage of her in the state she is in. However, Ross and Rachel do sleep together again the night before she leaves for Paris, which results in him admitting he still loves her and wants to get back together in the series finale. Rachel turns down the Paris job in order to be with Ross when she realizes she still loves him too, and the two agree "this is it", getting back together for good. Jennifer Aniston, who played Rachel, confirmed that after the series finale, Ross and Rachel got remarried, happily and had at least one more child. Rachel's popularity would establish her as the show's breakout character; she is often ranked among the greatest characters in television history. Us Weekly ranked Rachel the most beloved television character of the past two decades, citing her as "one of TV's most endearing personalities". Entertainment Weekly ranked the character sixth on a similar countdown, while AOL TV included Rachel among television's hundred "Greatest Women" at number 23, with author Kim Potts observing that "Rachel became one of viewers' favorite Friends because she grew from what could have been a one-note character ... into a more independent, caring pal". BuddyTV ranked Rachel the 15th funniest female character in sitcom history, while ChaCha collectively ranked Rachel, Monica and Phoebe 11th, 12th and 13th on the website's list of the "Top 16 Female TV Characters of All Time". According to The Hollywood Reporter, Hollywood professionals voted Rachel the 29th best female character in 2016. In 2019, Harper's Bazaar ranked Rachel the third most influential "female character who changed our TV screens". Author Olivia Blair wrote that Rachel "promote ideals of female independence, unashamedly discuss sex and female pleasure, educate the men in their lives on how to treat women throughout the ten seasons." Writing for Entertainmentwise, Georgina Littlejohn believes Rachel inspired the character Penny in the sitcom The Big Bang Theory, noting that the characters, both waitresses, are "blonde, cute, funny, likeable girls-next-door". Several baby name books and websites commonly associate the name "Rachel" with the character. Both Rachel and Aniston became fashion icons due to their combined influence on womenswear during the 1990s, particularly among British women. Vogue's Edward Barsamian credits Rachel with inspiring "the cool New York look". According to Stylist, Rachel "revived [a] love of denim shirts and dungarees", while Mahogany Clayton of StyleBlazer believes that the character "managed to dominate every fashion trend that passed by her radar in the most stylish ways possible". Hailing her as the "Fash Queen", Heat magazine observed the character's influence on plaid skirts, denim and overalls. Citing every costume the character wore during the first season of Friends, BuzzFeed determined that Rachel popularized the mullet dress. TV Guide published a list of "The 17 Ways Rachel from Friends Changed '90s Fashion". Rachel is often considered to be one of television's best dressed characters. Elle included Rachel in the magazine's "50 Best Dressed Women on TV" list. PopSugar ranked Friends 15th on the website's list of "50 TV Shows That Changed the Way We Dress", citing Rachel's "impressive" wardrobe. InStyle ranked Friends the 36th most fashionable television show of all time, praising Rachel, Monica and Phoebe's costumes. StyleCaster ranked Rachel among "The 50 Most Stylish TV Characters Of All Time" at number 28. Cosmopolitan magazine compiled a list of "16 things Rachel Green wore to work that we'd totally wear today", while Virgin Media ranked the character among television's sexiest. Brides magazine ranked Rachel's wedding dress among "The Best TV Wedding Dresses", with contributor Jane Frankfort commending the dress with "set[ting] the tone for the following 10 years together and the many milestones our favorite friends will bring". Like her character, Aniston became the show's breakout star. Karen Thomas of USA Today dubbed Aniston "our favorite Friend". According to Turner Classic Movies, Aniston ultimately became "One of the most popular television actresses of her era". According to Jennifer Aniston: From Friends to Films author Kim Etingoff, the actress' own fame "outshone" those of her co-stars, becoming the first cast member to "rise to prominence"; the actress continues to experience the most post-Friends success. Aniston's performance in Friends led to a successful film career. According to The Inquisitr News, Rachel is "the role that would end up launching [Aniston's] success", while Bradford Evans of Splitsider believes "that Jennifer Aniston likely wouldn't have become a major movie star without Friends". While ranking Aniston the most attractive sitcom star of the 1990s, Josh Robertson of Complex magazine wrote that "With the haircut, the TV fame, and a true gift for comedy ... combined, Aniston became a big star", replacing Cox as the show's "established hottie". According to Steve Charnock of Yahoo! Movies, Aniston is "the series' only main cast member to become a bona fide movie star since the end of the show". While agreeing that Aniston's film career has been successful, several critics believe that the actress' filmography remains limited to playing Rachel-like roles in romantic comedies, save for some exceptions. Ryan Gilbey of The Guardian noted that "Consequently, many of Aniston's movie roles ... have been Rachel in all but name." Andrew Collins of Radio Times agreed, writing that Aniston "seems trapped, perpetually playing variations of Rachel". According to TV Guide, Aniston is "usually called upon to play a variation of her neurotic and adorable Friends character". Aniston cites Rachel as one of three roles for which she is most grateful, to whom she "owe[s] everything". On being typecast in the aftermath of Rachel, Aniston admits that at times it "gives you more of a challenge, to shape people's perceptions of you". as audiences struggle "to lose the Rachel tag that has made her one of the world's most recognisable faces". Named after the character, the "Rachel" refers to a bouncy layered shag inspired by the way in which Aniston wore her hair on Friends between 1994 and 1996, during the first and second seasons of the series. The "Rachel" debuted in the show's 20th episode, "The One with the Evil Orthodontist". Aniston believes that her hair stylist, Chris McMillan, created the haircut while he was under the influence of marijuana. The "Rachel" immediately became popular among women, launching an international hair trend. The popularity of the "Rachel" coincided with the popularity of Friends during the mid-to-late-1990s. Marie Claire estimates that 11 million women donned the hairstyle throughout the decade, while the Daily Express determined that the hairstyle was most popular among British women, who went to hair salons "clutching magazine pictures of Aniston" and asking hairdressers to give them the look. According to Vanity Fair, the hairstyle's "widespread popularity ... in the show's very first year cemented the sitcom early on as heavily influential when it came to style". The "Rachel" remains one of the most popular hairstyles in history, and became the most popular hairstyle in the United States since actress Farrah Fawcett's. Hair stylists credit its appeal and popularity to its medium length and volume, combined with its tendency to frame the face flatteringly. Hairdresser Mark Woolley described it as "a cut that flatters almost everyone, designed to make women look beautiful". The "Rachel" is often ranked among the greatest and most iconic hairstyles of all time, with Redbook placing it at number four and Time ranking it ninth. The Huffington Post determined that the hairstyle is one of "The Most Famous TV Hairstyles Of All Time". US Weekly ranked the "Rachel" the 17th most iconic hairstyle. Glamour magazine ranked the "Rachel" fourth on the magazine's list of "The 100 Best Hairstyles of All Time". The magazine also cited it among "The very best hair to have graced the small screen", while ranking it the most memorable hairstyle in television history. The Sydney Morning Herald ranked it the second greatest television hairstyle, while Metro ranked the "Rachel" the character's second-best hairstyle. Ranked sixth on Entertainment Weekly's list of the "25 Fashion Moments That Changed Entertainment", the haircut was declared the most "desired" hairstyle of the Clinton era. Zahra Barnes of Self joked that Rachel's hair has always been the "true star of the show". Lauding the "Rachel" as one of television's greatest hairstyles, Sarah Carrillo of Elle magazine believed that its popularity "helped make Friends the phenomenon it was". Opining that Friends spawned few memorable catchphrases in comparison to its contemporaries, Tom Jicha of The Baltimore Sun attributes much of the show's legacy to the hairstyle, calling it the show's "only cultural trend". Josh Robertson of Complex magazine felt that "With the haircut, the TV fame, and a true gift for comedy ... combined, Aniston became a big star", replacing Courteney Cox. Hannah Lyons Powell of Glamour agreed that the hairstyle made Aniston "the definitive hair icon of the '90s and the proud owner of arguably the most infamous and influential hairstyle of all time". According to Jim Vorel of Paste magazine, "'the Rachel' hairstyle became the decade's defining 'do, calling it "the definition of influence". However, Rebecca Cox of Glamour is grateful that the hairstyle remained in the 1990s. In the second-season episode "The One with the Lesbian Wedding", Rachel references the popularity of her haircut when she complains that her own overbearing mother is trying to reinvent her life after hers, lamenting, "Couldn't she just copy my haircut?" Despite her association with the cut, Aniston disliked the hairstyle. She found maintaining the hairstyle without McMillan's help difficult, stating "I'd curse Chris every time I had to blowdry. It took three brushes—it was like doing surgery!" and that she would rather shave her head than have to wear it for the rest of her life. Since Aniston, several other celebrities have worn variations of the "Rachel", among them actresses Cameron Diaz, Rachel McAdams, Emma Watson, Reese Witherspoon, Julia Roberts, comedian Tina Fey, model Tyra Banks, and singer Lily Allen. List of Friends and Joey characters Tholmer, Jessica (August 12, 2013). "Everything I Need to Know, I Learned From Rachel Green". HelloGiggles. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Snetiker, Marc (February 8, 2012). "Jennifer Aniston still watches 'Friends' reruns. She IS just like us!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Galindo, Brian (April 7, 2013). "25 Fascinating Facts You Might Not Know About "Friends"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. "The Oral History of Friends: Jennifer Aniston Almost Didn't Play Rachel Green". Vanity Fair. April 4, 2012. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) David Crane & Marta Kauffman (writers); James Burrows (director) (September 22, 1994). "Pilot". Friends. Season 1. Episode 1. NBC. Chris Brown (writer); Kevin S. Bright (director) (May 18, 1995). "The One Where Rachel Finds Out". Friends. Season 1. Episode 24. NBC. David Crane & Marta Kauffman (writers); Mary Kay Place (director) (November 16, 1995). "The One with the List". Friends. Season 2. Episode 8. NBC. Gregory S. Malins & Michael Curtis (writers); Terry Hughes (director) (December 12, 1996). "The One Where Rachel Quits". Friends. Season 3. Episode 10. NBC. Yandoli, Krystie Lee (January 4, 2015). "Poll: The Hardest Question Every "Friends" Fan Needs To Answer". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Doty Abrams (writer); Robby Benson (director) (January 16, 1997). "The One with All the Jealousy". Friends. Season 3. Episode 12. NBC. Michael Borkow (writer); James Burrows (director) (February 13, 1997). "The One Where Ross and Rachel Take a Break". Friends. Season 3. Episode 15. NBC. Pang-Ni Landrum, Mark Kunerth & Adam Chase (writers); Pamela Fryman (director) (May 15, 1997). "The One at the Beach". Friends. Season 3. Episode 25. NBC. Michael Borkow, Shana Goldberg-Meehan, Scott Silveri, Jill Condon & Amy Toomin (writers); Kevin S. Bright (director) (May 7, 1998). "The One with Ross's Wedding". Friends. Season 4. Episode 23/24. NBC. Alexa Junge (writer); Gary Halvorson (director) (November 5, 1998). "The One with the Yeti". Friends. Season 5. Episode 6. NBC. Ted Cohen, Andrew Reich, Gregory S. Malins, Scott Silveri (writers); Kevin S. Bright (director) (May 20, 1999). "The One in Vegas". Friends. Season 5. Episode 23/24. NBC. Dana Klein Borkow (writer); David Schwimmer (director) (October 4, 2001). "The One with the Red Sweater". Friends. Season 8. Episode 2. NBC. Scott Silveri, Marta Kauffman & David Crane (writers); Kevin S. Bright (May 16, 2002). "The One Where Rachel Has a Baby". Friends. Season 8. Episode 23/24. NBC. Marta Kaufman & David Crane (writers); Kevin Bright (director) (May 11, 2003). "The One in Barbados: Part 2". Friends. Season 24. Episode 9. NBC. Brian Buckner (writer); Gary Halvorson (director) (October 9, 2003). "The One with Ross's Tan". Friends. Season 3. Episode 10. NBC. Marta Kauffman & David Crane (writers); Kevin S. Bright (director) (May 6, 2004). "The Last One". Friends. Season 10. Episode 17/18. NBC. Lauer, Matt (May 5, 2014). "'Friends' creators share show's beginnings". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Keck, William (September 16, 2014). "Friends: A 20th Anniversary Oral History". Emmys.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Hassell, Katherine (September 14, 2014). "Friends like these... Fun facts about the 20 year old sitcom". Daily Express. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Lusinski, Natalia (August 2, 2011). "Interview: Marta Kauffman". The Script Lab. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Pomerance, Murray (2011). Shining in Shadows: Movie Stars of the 2000s. New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press. pp. 56–63. ISBN 9780813552163. Brown, Lauren (August 19, 2016). "Weird Friends Plot Holes You Never Noticed...Until Now". Glamour. Retrieved July 7, 2018. Lyons, Margaret (December 1, 2014). "Friends Countdown: Read the Friends Pilot Script". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 21, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2015. Wightman, Catriona (August 10, 2016). "Friends: 13 ways the show could have been totally different based on the original script". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Hiltbrand, David (October 3, 1994). "Picks and Pans Main: Tube". People. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Tucker, Ken (October 21, 1994). "TV Show Review: Winning 'Friends'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Rosenberg, Howard (September 22, 1994). "TV Reviews : NBC's Strongest Evening of the Week Has Its Weak Spot". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Smith, Sean (2008). Jennifer Aniston: The Unauthorized Biography. London: Pan Macmillan. pp. 140–164. ISBN 9780283063893. Leggett, Tabatha (July 22, 2014). "61 Things You Probably Didn't Know About "Friends"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2015. Bernstein, Jonathan (September 22, 2014). "Friends at 20: how Ross and Rachel started a TV revolution". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Lyons, Margaret (December 18, 2014). "Friends Countdown: How Jane Austen Inspired 'The One Where Rachel Finds Out'". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Newcomb, Horace (2014). Encyclopedia of Television. Abingdon, England: Routledge. pp. 935–936. ISBN 9781135194727. Blair, Elaine (January 3, 2013). "Single Women and the Sitcom". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. Hodgson, Claire (September 22, 2014). "33 things you never knew about Friends". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Bauder, David (May 15, 2002). "Baby episode could make 'Friends' TV's top show". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 22, 2009. Retrieved March 3, 2015. Bianco, Robert (April 21, 2004). "Monica and Chandler's wedding kept the honeymoon going strong". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. "The Art of Saying Goodbye". Entertainment Weekly. January 17, 2015. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Snierson, Dan (January 17, 2015). "'Friends' creators Marta Kauffman and David Crane look back at the finale – and why they won't do a reunion show". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Mauney, Matt (September 24, 2015). "'Friends' at 20: Actors who didn't get the parts". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Oldenburg, Ann (February 3, 2011). "Jennifer Aniston turned down 'Saturday Night Live' job". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Rorke, Robert (January 23, 2011). "Role play". The New York Post. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Today, no one would ever think Jennifer Aniston was not born to play Rachel Green, but Tea Leoni, thought at the time to be the next Lucille Ball (as if!), was the preferred actress for the part. Miskiw, Sophie (February 21, 2014). "Friends: The Stars Who Auditioned For Monica, Ross, Rachel, Chandler and Joey". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. "Actors you didn't know auditioned for 'Friends'". AOL. September 25, 2014. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Lindsey, Kupfer. "22 Awesome Things You Definitely Didn't Know About 'Friends'". YourTango. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Danko, Meredith (September 22, 2014). "25 Things You Might Not Know About Friends". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Kolbert, Elizabeth (May 23, 1994). "A Sitcom Is Born: Only Time Will Tell The Road To Prime Time: Last of four articles on the creation of a television series". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 10, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Wild, David (May 18, 1995). "'Friends': Six Lives on Videotape". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2014. Meighan, Cate (January 21, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston Reveals That Her 'Friends' Role Almost Went to Courteney Cox". Music Times. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Shakeel, Madiha (February 2, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston was supposed to play Monica in 'Friends'". Business Recorder. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Ramsdale, Suzannah (February 2, 2015). "Friends Without Jennifer Aniston? How That Very Nearly Happened..." Marie Claire. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Etingoff, Kim (2014). Jennifer Aniston: From Friends to Films. United States: Mason Crest. ISBN 9781422293539. Harrison, Lily (October 9, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston Reveals She Was 'Asked to Step Out' of Friends Cast Photos". E!. Los Angeles, California: Entertainment Television, LLC. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Buchanan, Kyle (August 7, 2013). "The Four TV Shows Jennifer Aniston Was on Before Friends". Vulture. New York City: New York Media LLC. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston – Biography". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "Warren Littlefield Talks Jennifer Aniston's Journey To 'Friends'". The Huffington Post. May 3, 2012. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston". Lifetime UK. AETN UK. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Marks, Olivia (February 2, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston Knows How To Work The 70s Trend In Flares". InStyle. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Westbrook, Caroline (January 31, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston reveals: I was almost replaced in the cast of Friends". Metro. Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Rothman, Michael (February 2, 2015). "How Jennifer Aniston Was Almost Replaced on 'Friends'". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. "Did you know? Jennifer Aniston was almost replaced in Friends". India Today. February 2, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. "'Friends': Jennifer Aniston Was Almost Replaced As Rachel Before The Show Aired (VIDEO)". The Huffington Post. August 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved March 30, 2014. Falcone, Dana Rose (January 31, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston: I Was Almost Replaced in Friends!". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Hashmi, Tooba. "Jennifer Aniston Role in Friends, Almost Replaced Once In Past". ABC News Point. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. "I was almost replaced in 'Friends': Jennifer Aniston". Business Standard India. Press Trust of India. February 1, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Nicole, Eggenberger (October 8, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston: Friends Was My Sixth TV Pilot, Had to "Sit Out" Cast Photos". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Fashingbauer Cooper, Gael (October 10, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston: Fans don't want 'Friends' reunion". Today. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Calvo, Dana; Brownfield, Paul (May 8, 2002). "Nervous Time for the TV Set". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Award-Winner Jennifer Aniston Reveals She Almost Lost The Role Of A Lifetime". The Inquisitr. January 31, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Zumwalt, Landen (January 31, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston Was Almost Replaced on Friends". Wetpaint. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston says she was almost replaced in 'Friends'". CTV News. January 31, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston was almost replaced as Rachel in 'Friends'". The Economic Times. February 2, 2015. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved March 29, 2015. Galindo, Brian (June 11, 2014). "18 TV Roles The Cast Of "Friends" Had Before They Were Friends". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 31, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Walker-Arnott, Ellie. "Jennifer Aniston was almost replaced in Friends". Radio Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Carter, Bill (July 16, 1996). "Friends' Cast Bands Together To Demand a Salary Increase". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Jicha, Tom (May 2, 2004). "They leave as they began: With a buzz". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. "24. Friends". Writers Guild of America, West. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston – About This Person". IGN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2015. "Friends climax watched by 51m". BBC. May 7, 2004. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Kiesewetter, John (January 27, 2002). "'Friends' grows in stature, ratings". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Willis, Dominic. "Jennifer Aniston – Biography". TalkTalk. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. All the Friends would gradually perfect their styles as the show went on but, at the end of the day, it was Rachel ... who became the general favourite. Hawkins, Bennett (May 6, 2014). "10 Things You Might Not Know About The 'Friends' Finale On Its 10th Anniversary". Uproxx. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Have yourself a mocha latte and reminisce a bit". Ocala.com. May 5, 2004. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. Scott, Tony (September 22, 1994). "Review: Friends". Variety. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Epstein, Leonora (September 26, 2013). "The Original "Friends" Character Descriptions Are Spot-On". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Jennifer Aniston". People. Archived from the original on October 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Endrst, James (September 4, 1994). "Emergency! 2 Hospital Dramas! 2 Sets Of Parents Killed In Car Crashes! Lots Of Bad Shows!". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "'Friends': Where are they now? – Jennifer Aniston (Rachel Green)". Daily News. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston – Rachel Green". TV Land. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Gilbey, Ryan (January 22, 2006). "A superstar with something to prove". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2015. Power, Ed (July 29, 2008). "When stars collide: celeb smack-downs". Irish Independent. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Sandora-Nastyn, Pat. "Hollywood Archetypes: The Girl Next Door". Archetype. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Littlejohn, Georgina (April 4, 2014). "7 Reasons Why Kaley Cuoco Could Become The Next Jennifer Aniston". Entertainmentwise. Giant Digital. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2015. "The 50 most iconic fashion and beauty moments in Friends". Stylist. May 8, 2014. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Billson, Anne (February 12, 2015). "Can Jennifer Aniston ever really lose Rachel from Friends?". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 19, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Kornowski, Liat (July 10, 2013). "17 Reasons You Are So Rachel Green (GIFs)". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Happy Birthday, Jennifer Aniston". Reign Magazine. February 11, 2015. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Aniston's breakout character of Rachel Green... Dimaggio, Madeline (2008). How To Write For Television. United States: Simon and Schuster. p. 17. ISBN 9781416570455. "Jennifer Aniston". BuddyTV. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Barsamian, Edward (February 11, 2015). "Friends Forever: What We Learned From Jennifer Aniston's Cool '90s Style". Vogue. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2015. D'Avria, Mike (July 27, 2011). "The Sexual Proclivities of Friends". Splitsider. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. "Written off but she co-created Friends". Jewish Telegraph. Archived from the original on March 22, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015. And Marta, 54, confirmed that only Rachel Green (Jennifer Aniston) is Jewish according to halachic law. Pazornik, Amanda (November 11, 2010). "It's been six years, but they'll always be my Jewish 'Friends'". J. The Jewish News of Northern California. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Mark Kunerth (writer); Ben Weiss (director) (December 5, 2002). "The One With Rachel's Phone Number". Friends. Season 9. Episode 9. NBC. Weber, Lindsey (December 17, 2014). "Friends Countdown: Is Rachel Green Jewish?". Vulture. New York Media LLC. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015. Wolf, Stacy (2011). Changed for Good: A Feminist History of the Broadway Musical. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. p. 167. ISBN 9780199831234. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Frankel, Rebecca. "Reclaiming Your Inner JAP". JDate. Spark Networks USA, LLC. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Korenman, Alicia R. "Princesses, Mothers, Heroes, and Superheroes: Images of Jewish Women in Comic Books and Graphic Novels". University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Evan, Cooper. "Princesses, Schlemiels, Punishers and Overbearing Mothers". All Academic. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Rorke, Robert (April 29, 2004). "Friends of Friends — Movie Stars Moonlighted with Ross, Rachel & Co". New York Post. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Reid, John; Saraiya, Sonia (May 30, 2013). "Friends: "The Pilot"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015. Hanania, Joseph (March 7, 1999). "Television/Radio; Playing Princesses, Punishers and Prudes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2015. Shayne, Bob (June 10, 2001). "No Experience Wanted". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Jennifer Aniston says she totally gets why she's typecast". Cosmopolitan. February 19, 2015. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2021. "Jennifer Aniston". TV Guide. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Kerry, Ellen (February 10, 2015). "8 style lessons 90s Friends' babe Rachel Green taught us". Heatworld. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Leist, Christie (January 6, 2015). "A Definitive Ranking of the 5 Best 'Friends' Episodes for Each Character". BDCwire. The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on August 15, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Iannucci, Rebecca; Roots, Kimberly (January 3, 2015). "Friends on Netflix: Could These 10 Episodes Be Any More Skippable?". TVLine. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Iannucci, Rebecca; Roots, Kimberly (January 3, 2015). "Friends on Netflix: Could These 10 Episodes Be Any More Skippable?". TV Line. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Bianco, Robert (March 24, 2004). "Joey's life as a doctor is short-lived". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Snipes, Stephanie (May 3, 2004). "'Friends' to the end". CNN. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Lawrence, Cooper; Baio, Scott (2009). Cult of Celebrity: What Our Fascination with the Stars Reveals about Us. United States: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 25. ISBN 9781599217161. Fallon, Kevin (August 7, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston's New Movie Sucks. What's She Doing Wrong?". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Zurawik, David (September 22, 1994). "Good 'Friends' fits snugly into NBC's lineup". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Bianco, Robert (September 22, 1994). "Six 'Friends' sittin' around, talking". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved May 15, 2015.[permanent dead link] Collins, Andrew. "Jennifer Aniston: a career profile". Radio Times. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston, Sienna Miller, David Oyelowo, Chris Pratt, John Travolta and Kerry Washington To Present At 87th Oscars®". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. February 10, 2015. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston". Golden Globe Awards Official Website. HOLLYWOOD FOREIGN PRESS ASSOCIATION. Archived from the original on September 22, 2015. Retrieved March 31, 2015. "52 millon friends see off "Friends"". China Daily. May 8, 2004. Archived from the original on January 25, 2009. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Susman, Gary (May 14, 2013). "The Best Sitcom Finales of All-Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2015. Reid, Joe; Sims, David (May 29, 2014). "A Definitive Ranking of Every Season of Every TV Show That Mattered". The Wire. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2015. "Sexiest TV roles! – Jennifer Aniston as Friends' Rachel Green". Virgin Media. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015. Bucksbaum, Sydney (September 22, 2014). "We Ranked All the Friends Couples, and No. 1 May Shock You... – 9. Ross and Rachel". E!. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Mullins, Jenna (September 22, 2014). "7 Things Friends Fans Still Argue About After All These Years". E!. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Brook, Vincent (2003). Something Ain't Kosher Here: The Rise of the "Jewish" Sitcom. United States: Rutgers University Press. p. 127. ISBN 9780813532110. "The 20 best TV couples". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Teen, Julia. "Greatest TV couples of all time". ninemsn. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Best TV Couples of All Time – Rachel Green and Ross Geller". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Ivezaj, Flora (May 4, 2013). "50 Best TV Couples Ever". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "The Best TV Couples of All Time". TV Guide. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "20 Best TV Couples of All Time". Extra. West Coast, Inc. August 21, 2010. Archived from the original on April 13, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Weiss, Sabrina Rojas (March 26, 2015). "16 TV Couples We Want To Be Together Forever". Refinery29. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "TV's Most Beloved "Will They/Won't They" Couples". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Menza, Kaitlin (April 7, 2014). "The Best "Will They, Won't They" Couples in TV History". OK!. Odyssey Magazine Publishing Group Inc. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "TV's Greatest 'Will They or Won't They?' Couples – Friends: Rachel and Ross". Celebuzz. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "The 5 Best Will They or Won't They Couples". Network Ten. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "18 "Will They/Won't They" TV Couples We Root For". Suggest. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Doran, Sarah. "Will-they-won't-they TV couples aren't half as exciting when they get together". Radio Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Kaye, Farrah. "TV's ALL-Time Favorite Couples – TheTwoCents Staff Picks". TheTwoCents. Archived from the original on October 4, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "10 Greatest 'Will They/Won't They' TV Couples". Moviefone. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Reilly, Kaitlin (May 6, 2014). ""He's Her Lobster!" A 'Friends' Dictionary To Help You Interpret Ross, Rachel, and The Whole Gang". Bustle. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Aquino, Tara (February 26, 2013). "The 50 Funniest TV Comedies of All Time". Complex. Retrieved May 2, 2015. Kurp, Joshua (January 11, 2011). "The Legacy of Friends — Or Lack Thereof". Splitsider. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Goldman, Eric (November 19, 2012). "Friends – The Complete Series Blu-ray Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Johnson, I. P. "The Worst Of The Best: 'Friends Weakest Episodes". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Bucksbaum, Sydney (September 22, 2014). "4. Rachel and Joey". E!. Archived from the original on May 27, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston talks about Ross and Rachel". The Hollywood Reporter. February 22, 2012. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved December 18, 2016. "All About Friends". Angelfire. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. The Rachel Green role, which eventually went to Jennifer Aniston, ended up becoming the breakout character in the series. "20 Most Beloved TV Characters from the Past 20 Years". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015. Vary, Adam B. (June 1, 2010). "The 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years: Here's our full list!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2012. Potts, Kim (March 2, 2011). "TV's Greatest Women: 25-1". AOL TV. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015. Lind-Westbrook, Jennifer (February 21, 2013). "Make 'Em Laugh: TV's 50 Funniest Female Sitcom Characters of All Time". BuddyTV. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 23, 2015. "Top 16 Female TV Characters of All Time". ChaCha. ChaCha Search, Inc. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "Hollywood's 50 Favorite Female Characters". The Hollywood Reporter. December 9, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Blair, Olivia (March 8, 2019). "16 female characters who changed our TV screens". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Lansky, Bruce (2011). 5-Star Baby Name Advisor. United States: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781451620238. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Moss, Jennifer (2008). The One-in-a-million Baby Name Book: The BabyNames.com Guide to Choosing the Best Name for Your New Arrival. United Kingdom: Penguin. p. 463. ISBN 9780399534300. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Rachel". Nameberry.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. "Rachel". The Baby Name Wizard. CMI Marketing, Inc. April 9, 2015. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Sherrow, Victoria (2006). Encyclopedia of Hair: A Cultural History. United States: Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 38–39. ISBN 9780313331459. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Style Icon: Rachel Green". Budget Fashion Blog. Speak LLC. June 10, 2012. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. "Style Icon: Rachel Green". LuckyShops. 2013. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "The 50 most iconic fashion and beauty moments in Friends". Stylist. May 8, 2014. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Clayton, Mahogany (February 11, 2015). "15 Fashion Lessons We Learned From Rachel Green on 'Friends'". StyleBlazer. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Sander, Brice (September 3, 2014). "Here Are All 90 Outfits Rachel Green Wore On The First Season Of "Friends"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "The 17 Ways Rachel from Friends Changed '90s Fashion". TV Guide. Archived from the original on October 26, 2015. Retrieved September 18, 2015. McAleer, Molly (March 6, 2012). "The Best-Dressed Female Sitcom Characters of All Time". HelloGiggles. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Chernikoff, Leah (August 22, 2014). "The 50 Best Dressed Women on TV – Jennifer Aniston as Rachel Green in Friends". Elle. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Miller, Randy (May 18, 2014). "50 TV Shows That Changed the Way We Dress". PopSugar. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "The Most Fashionable TV Shows of All Time – Friends". InStyle. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2014. "The 50 Most Stylish TV Characters Of All Time: A Ranked Guide". StyleCaster. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "16 things Rachel Green wore to work that we'd totally wear today". Cosmopolitan. September 22, 2014. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Frankfort, Lauren (June 13, 2014). "The Best TV Wedding Dresses". Brides. Archived from the original on January 5, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2015. "Rachel Haircut". Encyclopedia.com. HighBeam Research, Inc. Archived from the original on June 21, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Dubbed the 'Rachel', after the name of her character, Rachel Green, on NBC's long-running hit sitcom Friends, the popular hairstyle helped Aniston emerge as the breakout star of the show's ensemble cast. Thomas, Karen (November 14, 2005). "Aniston remains our favorite Friend". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. "Jennifer Aniston". Turner Classic Movies. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2016. Nemetz, Dave (September 17, 2012). "Who's Had the Best Post-'Friends' Career?". Yahoo! TV. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Fisher, Luchina (January 25, 2010). "'Friends' Through Thick and Thin". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. "Friends: where are they now?". The Daily Telegraph. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Celebrity Readers: Famous Actresses. United States: Remedia Publications. ISBN 9781596396456. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Evans, Bradford (March 10, 2011). "Splitsider". Splitsider. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Robertson, Josh (October 18, 2012). "The 25 Hottest Sitcom Stars of the '90s". Complex. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2014. Charnock, Steve (January 25, 2015). "The Friends Cast: Who Had The Most Successful Film Career?". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Billson, Anne (February 12, 2015). "Can Jennifer Aniston ever really lose Rachel from Friends?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 19, 2015. Retrieved April 8, 2015. Bell, Amanda (November 25, 2014). "All The Times Jennifer Aniston Tried To Kill Rachel Green". MTV. Archived from the original on March 21, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Goldberg, Lesley (February 22, 2012). "Jennifer Aniston on Moving on From Friends, What it Would Take for Her to Return to TV (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. Lumsden, Lottie (January 30, 2015). "Jennifer Aniston: 'Friends Was a Blessing And A Curse'". Grazia Daily. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. "Just good Friends". TalkTalk. pp. 1–2. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. "14 Most Popular Celebrity Hairstyles of All Time – Jennifer Aniston". Good Housekeeping. July 17, 2014. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Wong, Aaron (October 2, 2013). "The 50 Most Iconic Hairstyles of All Time – Jennifer Aniston — The Rachel (1994)". New York. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015. Barnes, Zahra (January 1, 2015). "Relive Every Rachel Green Hair Moment From Friends". Self. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Takeda, Allison (May 10, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston's Stylist Was Stoned When He Gave Her the 'Rachel' Cut". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013. "Jennifer Aniston Biography". People. Archived from the original on February 28, 2011. Retrieved April 6, 2009. "The 30 most iconic hair styles – The Rachel". Stylist. Archived from the original on May 12, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2015. "10 Most Popular Haircuts of All Time – Jennifer Aniston's 'Rachel' Cut". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Roche, Elisa (May 26, 2010). "JENNIFER ANISTON'S A CUT ABOVE FOR 11 MILLION WOMEN". Daily Express. Retrieved January 19, 2011. Galvin, Nick (November 30, 2014). "Kojak, Farrah, Rachel and Bert: TV's greatest hairstyles". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on January 2, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. "7 Ways Friends Influenced 90s Fashion". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on September 16, 2015. Retrieved September 18, 2015. Cox, Rebecca (February 10, 2014). "The 100 most iconic hairstyles. Ever". Glamour. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "'Rachel' haircut named most influential hairstyle". FemaleFirst. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2015. Quaglio, Paolo (2009). Television Dialogue: The Sitcom Friends Vs. Natural Conversation. Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing. p. 12. ISBN 9789027223104. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "75 Most Iconic Hairstyles of All Time – Medium". Redbook. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Berry, Allison (June 8, 2012). "The 10 Most Iconic Hairstyles". Time. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2015. Oliver, Dana (October 10, 2014). "Behold, The Most Famous TV Hairstyles Of All Time". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "25 Most Iconic Hairstyles of All Time". Us Weekly. April 26, 2013. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Shapouri, Beth. "The 100 Best Hairstyles of All Time (a.k.a. the Hair Hall of Fame)". Glamour. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Powell, Hannah Lyons (June 25, 2013). "The very best hair to have graced the small screen". Glamour. Archived from the original on July 11, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "The Top 20 Most Memorable TV Hairstyles – Memorable TV Hairstyle #1: Rachel Green on Friends". Glamour. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Stewart, Ella (September 18, 2014). "Friends 20th anniversary: The definitive ranking of Rachel Green hairstyles". Metro. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. "25 Fashion Moments That Changed Entertainment – 6. The Rachel, 1995". Entertainment Weekly. February 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2016. Carrillo, Sarah. "The Best and Worst TV Character Hairstyles – Best: Rachel Green from "Friends"". Elle. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. Vorel, Jim (August 25, 2014). "The 90 Best TV Shows of the 1990s". Paste. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2015. Oldenburg, Ann (January 18, 2011). "Jennifer Aniston tells 'Allure' she hated her Rachel hair". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 21, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2011. Messer, Lesley (May 14, 2014). "Jennifer Aniston: I Wash My Hair Every Three Days". Good Morning America. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. Chao, Ming (June 13, 2013). "Hair Majesty: Jennifer Aniston". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. Burton, Cinya (August 13, 2013). "Jennifer Aniston on Getting 'The Rachel' Haircut Again: I'd Rather Shave My Head!". E!. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. "10 Celebs Who Rocked 'The Rachel'". The Frisky. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "10 Celebs Who Rocked 'The Rachel'". The Frisky. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "The Rachels". The Daily Beast. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "The Rachels – Looking Up to Her Big Sister". The Daily Beast. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "The Rachels – Thank You For Being on Friends". The Daily Beast. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "The Rachels – A Hollywood Split End". The Daily Beast. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "The Rachels – Tyra's Unbeweavable Transformations". The Daily Beast. January 18, 2011. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Rachel Green at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Portals:  Comedy  Fashion  Judaism  New York City  Television  United States