Latvia competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom from July 27 to August 12, 2012. This was the nation's tenth appearance at the Summer Olympics. The Latvian Olympic Committee sent a total of 46 athletes to the Games, 32 men and 14 women, to compete in 12 sports. Sixteen athletes had competed in Beijing, including silver medalist Ainārs Kovals in the men's javelin throw, and defending Olympic champion Māris Štrombergs in men's BMX cycling. Pistol shooter and Olympic gold medalist Afanasijs Kuzmins, the oldest of the team, at age 65, became the first Latvian athlete to compete in nine Olympic games (including three of his appearances under the Soviet Union), tying the record set by Austria's Hubert Raudaschl. Meanwhile, Jeļena Rubļevska, who won silver in Athens, became the first female modern pentathlete to compete at four Olympics, since the sport's introduction to women in 2000. Among the twelve sports played by the athletes, Latvia marked its Olympic debut in table tennis. Latvia left London with only one gold and one bronze medal. Māris Štrombergs, who managed to successfully defend his Olympic title in the men's BMX cycling, became the first Latvian athlete to win two Olympic gold medals in the post-Soviet era. Meanwhile, Mārtiņš Pļaviņš, who became Latvia's flag bearer at the opening ceremony, and his partner Jānis Šmēdiņš won the nation's first-ever Olympic medal in men's beach volleyball. Latvian athletes have so far achieved qualifying standards in the following athletics events (up to a maximum of 3 athletes in each event at the 'A' Standard, and 1 at the 'B' Standard): Key Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete's heat only Q = Qualified for the next round q = Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or, in field events, by position without achieving the qualifying target NR = National record N/A = Round not applicable for the event Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round Men Track & road events Field events Combined events – Decathlon Women Track & road events Field events Combined events – Heptathlon Qualification Legend: FA = Qualify to final (medal); FB = Qualify to final B (non-medal) Men Men Latvian swimmers have so far achieved qualifying standards in the following events (up to a maximum of 2 swimmers in each event at the Olympic Qualifying Time (OQT), and potentially 1 at the Olympic Selection Time (OST)): Men Women Latvia has qualified the following players. Latvia has qualified the following athletes. Latvia has qualified the following quota places. Key VT - Victory by Fall. PP - Decision by Points - the loser with technical points. PO - Decision by Points - the loser without technical points. Men's freestyle Women's freestyle "Latvijas karogu olimpiādes atklāšanā nesīs Pļaviņš" (in Latvian). Sportacentrs.com. July 17, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2012. "Maris Strombergs repeats in BMX". ESPN. 11 August 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "iaaf.org – Top Lists". IAAF. Retrieved 4 June 2011. IAAF Games of the XXX Olympiad – London 2012 ENTRY STANDARDS (PDF), IAAF, archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2012, retrieved 4 June 2011 "Swimming World Rankings". FINA. Archived from the original on 6 January 2011. Retrieved 8 June 2011. FÉDÉRATION INTERNATIONALE DE NATATION – Swimming (PDF), FINA, archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011, retrieved 8 June 2011 National Olympic committee of Latvia Wikimedia Commons has media related to Latvia at the 2012 Summer Olympics.