Bulgaria (/bʌlˈɡɛəriə, bʊl-/ ; Bulgarian: България, romanized: Bŭlgariya), officially the Republic of Bulgaria, is a country in Southeast Europe. Located west of the Black Sea and south of the Danube river, Bulgaria is bordered by Greece and Turkey to the south, Serbia and North Macedonia to the west, and Romania to the north. It covers a territory of 110,994 square kilometres (42,855 sq mi) and is the 16th largest country in Europe. Sofia is the nation's capital and largest city; other major cities include Burgas, Plovdiv, and Varna. One of the earliest societies in the lands of modern-day Bulgaria was the Neolithic Karanovo culture, which dates back to 6,500 BC. In the 6th to 3rd century BC the region was a battleground for ancient Thracians, Persians, Celts and Macedonians; stability came when the Roman Empire conquered the region in AD 45. After the Roman state splintered, tribal invasions in the region resumed. Around the 6th century, these territories were settled by the early Slavs. The Bulgars, led by Asparuh, attacked from the lands of Old Great Bulgaria and permanently invaded the Balkans in the late 7th century. They established the First Bulgarian Empire, victoriously recognised by treaty in 681 AD by the Byzantine Empire. It dominated most of the Balkans and significantly influenced Slavic cultures by developing the Cyrillic script. The First Bulgarian Empire lasted until the early 11th century, when Byzantine emperor Basil II conquered and dismantled it. A successful Bulgarian revolt in 1185 established a Second Bulgarian Empire, which reached its apex under Ivan Asen II (1218–1241). After numerous exhausting wars and feudal strife, the empire disintegrated and in 1396 fell under Ottoman rule for nearly five centuries. The Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 resulted in the formation of the third and current Bulgarian state. Many ethnic Bulgarians were left outside the new nation's borders, which stoked irredentist sentiments that led to several conflicts with its neighbours and alliances with Germany in both world wars. In 1946, Bulgaria came under the Soviet-led Eastern Bloc and became a socialist state. The ruling Communist Party gave up its monopoly on power after the revolutions of 1989 and allowed multiparty elections. Bulgaria then transitioned into a democracy and a market-based economy. Since adopting a democratic constitution in 1991, Bulgaria has been a unitary parliamentary republic composed of 28 provinces, with a high degree of political, administrative, and economic centralisation. Bulgaria has an upper-middle-income economy, ranking 68th in the Human Development Index. Its market economy is part of the European Single Market and is largely based on services, followed by industry—especially machine building and mining—and agriculture. The country faces a demographic crisis; its population peaked at 9 million in 1989, and has since decreased to 6.4 million as of 2023. Bulgaria is a member of the European Union, the Schengen Area, NATO, and the Council of Europe. It is also a founding member of the OSCE and has taken a seat on the United Nations Security Council three times. The name Bulgaria is derived from the Bulgars, a tribe of Turkic origin that founded the First Bulgarian Empire. Their name is not completely understood and is difficult to trace it back earlier than the 4th century AD, but it is possibly derived from the Proto-Turkic word bulģha ("to mix", "shake", "stir") and its derivative bulgak ("revolt", "disorder"). The meaning may be further extended to "rebel", "incite" or "produce a state of disorder", and so, in the derivative, the "disturbers". Tribal groups in Inner Asia with phonologically close names were frequently described in similar terms, as the Buluoji, a component of the "Five Barbarian" groups, which during the 4th century were portrayed as both: a "mixed race" and "troublemakers". Neanderthal remains dating to around 150,000 years ago, or the Middle Paleolithic, are some of the earliest traces of human activity in the lands of modern Bulgaria. Remains from Homo sapiens found there are dated c. 47,000 years BP. This result represents the earliest arrival of modern humans in Europe. The Karanovo culture arose c. 6,500 BC and was one of several Neolithic societies in the region that thrived on agriculture. The Copper Age Varna culture (fifth millennium BC) is credited with inventing gold metallurgy. The associated Varna Necropolis treasure contains the oldest golden jewellery in the world with an approximate age of over 6,000 years. The treasure has been valuable for understanding social hierarchy and stratification in the earliest European societies. The Thracians, one of the three primary ancestral groups of modern Bulgarians, appeared on the Balkan Peninsula some time before the 12th century BC. The Thracians excelled in metallurgy and gave the Greeks the Orphean and Dionysian cults, but remained tribal and stateless. The Persian Achaemenid Empire conquered parts of present-day Bulgaria (in particular eastern Bulgaria) in the 6th century BC and retained control over the region until 479 BC. The invasion became a catalyst for Thracian unity, and the bulk of their tribes united under king Teres to form the Odrysian kingdom in the 470s BC. It was weakened and vassalised by Philip II of Macedon in 341 BC, attacked by Celts in the 3rd century, and finally became a province of the Roman Empire in AD 45. By the end of the 1st century AD, Roman governance was established over the entire Balkan Peninsula and Christianity began spreading in the region around the 4th century. The Gothic Bible—the first Germanic language book—was created by Gothic bishop Ulfilas in what is today northern Bulgaria around 381. The region came under Byzantine control after the fall of Rome in 476. The Byzantines were engaged in prolonged warfare against Persia and could not defend their Balkan territories from barbarian incursions. This enabled the Slavs to enter the Balkan Peninsula as marauders, primarily through an area between the Danube River and the Balkan Mountains known as Moesia. Gradually, the interior of the peninsula became a country of the South Slavs, who lived under a democracy. The Slavs assimilated the partially Hellenised, Romanised, and Gothicised Thracians in the rural areas. Not long after the Slavic incursion, Moesia was once again invaded, this time by the Bulgars under Khan Asparukh. Their horde was a remnant of Old Great Bulgaria, an extinct tribal confederacy situated north of the Black Sea in what is now Ukraine and southern Russia. Asparukh attacked Byzantine territories in Moesia and conquered the Slavic tribes there in 680. A peace treaty with the Byzantine Empire was signed in 681, marking the foundation of the First Bulgarian Empire. The minority Bulgars formed a close-knit ruling caste. Succeeding rulers strengthened the Bulgarian state throughout the 8th and 9th centuries. Krum introduced a written code of law and checked a major Byzantine incursion at the Battle of Pliska, in which Byzantine emperor Nicephorus I was killed. Boris I abolished paganism in favour of Eastern Orthodox Christianity in 864. The conversion was followed by a Byzantine recognition of the Bulgarian church and the adoption of the Cyrillic alphabet, developed in the capital, Preslav. The common language, religion and script strengthened central authority and gradually fused the Slavs and Bulgars into a unified people speaking a single Slavic language. A golden age began during the 34-year rule of Simeon the Great, who oversaw the largest territorial expansion of the state. After Simeon's death, Bulgaria was weakened by wars with Magyars and Pechenegs and the spread of the Bogomil heresy. Preslav was seized by the Byzantine army in 971 after consecutive Rus' and Byzantine invasions. The empire briefly recovered from the attacks under Samuil, but this ended when Byzantine emperor Basil II defeated the Bulgarian army at Klyuch in 1014. Samuil died shortly after the battle, and by 1018 the Byzantines had conquered the First Bulgarian Empire. After the conquest, Basil II prevented revolts by retaining the rule of local nobility, integrating them in Byzantine bureaucracy and aristocracy, and relieving their lands of the obligation to pay taxes in gold, allowing tax in kind instead. The Bulgarian Patriarchate was reduced to an archbishopric, but retained its autocephalous status and its dioceses. Byzantine domestic policies changed after Basil's death and a series of unsuccessful rebellions broke out, the largest being led by Peter Delyan. The empire's authority declined after a catastrophic military defeat at Manzikert against Seljuk invaders, and was further disturbed by the Crusades. This prevented Byzantine attempts at Hellenisation and created fertile ground for further revolt. In 1185, Asen dynasty nobles Ivan Asen I and Peter IV organised a major uprising and succeeded in re-establishing the Bulgarian state. Ivan Asen and Peter laid the foundations of the Second Bulgarian Empire with its capital at Tarnovo. Kaloyan, the third of the Asen monarchs, extended his dominion to Belgrade and Ohrid. He acknowledged the spiritual supremacy of the pope and received a royal crown from a papal legate. The empire reached its zenith under Ivan Asen II (1218–1241), when its borders expanded as far as the coast of Albania, Serbia and Epirus, while commerce and culture flourished. Ivan Asen's rule was also marked by a shift away from Rome in religious matters. The Asen dynasty became extinct in 1257. Internal conflicts and incessant Byzantine and Hungarian attacks followed, enabling the Mongols to establish suzerainty over the weakened Bulgarian state. In 1277, swineherd Ivaylo led a great peasant revolt that expelled the Mongols from Bulgaria and briefly made him emperor. He was overthrown in 1280 by the feudal landlords, whose factional conflicts caused the Second Bulgarian Empire to disintegrate into small feudal dominions by the 14th century. These fragmented rump states—two tsardoms at Vidin and Tarnovo and the Despotate of Dobrudzha—became easy prey for a new threat arriving from the Southeast: the Ottoman Turks. The Ottomans were employed as mercenaries by the Byzantines in the 1340s but later became invaders in their own right. Sultan Murad I took Adrianople from the Byzantines in 1362; Sofia fell in 1382, followed by Shumen in 1388. The Ottomans completed their conquest of Bulgarian lands in 1393 when Tarnovo was sacked after a three-month siege and the Battle of Nicopolis which brought about the fall of the Vidin Tsardom in 1396. Sozopol was the last Bulgarian settlement to fall, in 1453. The Bulgarian nobility was subsequently eliminated and the peasantry was enserfed to Ottoman masters, while much of the educated clergy fled to other countries. Bulgarians were subjected to heavy taxes (including Devshirme, or blood tax), their culture was suppressed, and they experienced partial Islamisation. Ottoman authorities established a religious administrative community called the Rum Millet, which governed all Orthodox Christians regardless of their ethnicity. Most of the local population then gradually lost its distinct national consciousness, identifying only by its faith. The clergy remaining in some isolated monasteries kept their ethnic identity alive, enabling its survival in remote rural areas, and in the militant Catholic community in the northwest of the country. As Ottoman power began to wane, Habsburg Austria and Russia saw Bulgarian Christians as potential allies. The Austrians first backed an uprising in Tarnovo in 1598, then a second one in 1686, the Chiprovtsi Uprising in 1688 and finally Karposh's Rebellion in 1689. The Russian Empire also asserted itself as a protector of Christians in Ottoman lands with the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca in 1774. The Western European Enlightenment in the 18th century influenced the initiation of a national awakening of Bulgaria. It restored national consciousness and provided an ideological basis for the liberation struggle, resulting in the 1876 April Uprising. Up to 30,000 Bulgarians were killed as Ottoman authorities put down the rebellion. The massacres prompted the Great Powers to take action. They convened the Constantinople Conference in 1876, but their decisions were rejected by the Ottomans. This allowed the Russian Empire to seek a military solution without risking confrontation with other Great Powers, as had happened in the Crimean War. In 1877, Russia declared war on the Ottomans and defeated them with the help of Bulgarian rebels, particularly during the crucial Battle of Shipka Pass which secured Russian control over the main road to Constantinople. The Treaty of San Stefano was signed on 3 March 1878 by Russia and the Ottoman Empire. It was to set up an autonomous Bulgarian principality spanning Moesia, Macedonia and Thrace, roughly on the territories of the Second Bulgarian Empire, and this day is now a public holiday called National Liberation Day. The other Great Powers immediately rejected the treaty out of fear that such a large country in the Balkans might threaten their interests. It was superseded by the Treaty of Berlin, signed on 13 July. It provided for a much smaller state, the Principality of Bulgaria, only comprising Moesia and the region of Sofia, and leaving large populations of ethnic Bulgarians outside the new country. This significantly contributed to Bulgaria's militaristic foreign affairs approach during the first half of the 20th century. The Bulgarian principality won a war against Serbia and incorporated the semi-autonomous Ottoman territory of Eastern Rumelia in 1885, proclaiming itself an independent state on 5 October 1908. In the years following independence, Bulgaria increasingly militarised and was often referred to as "the Balkan Prussia". It became involved in three consecutive conflicts between 1912 and 1918—two Balkan Wars and World War I. After a disastrous defeat in the Second Balkan War, Bulgaria again found itself fighting on the losing side as a result of its alliance with the Central Powers in World War I. Despite fielding more than a quarter of its population in a 1,200,000-strong army and achieving several decisive victories at Doiran and Monastir, the country capitulated in 1918. The war resulted in significant territorial losses and a total of 87,500 soldiers killed. More than 253,000 refugees from the lost territories immigrated to Bulgaria from 1912 to 1929, placing additional strain on the already ruined national economy. Between 19 October 1925 and 29 October 1925, the Incident at Petrich, nicknamed "the War of the Stray Dog" occurred, which was a minor armed conflict. Greece invaded Bulgaria, after the killing of a Greek captain and sentry by Bulgarian soldiers. The conflict was settled by the League of Nations, and resulted in a Bulgarian diplomatic victory. The League ordered a ceasefire, Greek troops to withdraw from Bulgaria and Greece to pay £45,000 to Bulgaria. The resulting political unrest led to the establishment of a royal authoritarian dictatorship by Tsar Boris III (1918–1943). Bulgaria entered World War II in 1941 as a member of the Axis but declined to participate in Operation Barbarossa and saved its Jewish population from deportation to concentration camps. The sudden death of Boris III in mid-1943 pushed the country into political turmoil as the war turned against Germany, and the communist guerrilla movement gained momentum. The government of Bogdan Filov subsequently failed to achieve peace with the Allies. Bulgaria did not comply with Soviet demands to expel German forces from its territory, resulting in a declaration of war and an invasion by the USSR in September 1944. The communist-dominated Fatherland Front took power, ended participation in the Axis and joined the Allied side until the war ended. Bulgaria suffered little war damage and the Soviet Union demanded no reparations. But all wartime territorial gains, with the notable exception of Southern Dobrudzha, were lost. The left-wing coup d'état of 9 September 1944 led to the abolition of the monarchy and the executions of some 1,000–3,000 dissidents, war criminals, and members of the former royal elite. But it was not until 1946 that a one-party people's republic was instituted following a referendum. It fell into the Soviet sphere of influence under the leadership of Georgi Dimitrov (1946–1949), who established a repressive, rapidly industrialising Stalinist state. By the mid-1950s, standards of living rose significantly and political repression eased. The Soviet-style planned economy saw some experimental market-oriented policies emerging under Todor Zhivkov (1954–1989). Compared to wartime levels, national GDP increased five-fold and per capita GDP quadrupled by the 1980s, although severe debt spikes took place in 1960, 1977 and 1980. Zhivkov's daughter Lyudmila bolstered national pride by promoting Bulgarian heritage, culture and arts worldwide. Facing declining birth rates among the ethnic Bulgarian majority, Zhivkov's government in 1984 forced the minority ethnic Turks to adopt Slavic names in an attempt to erase their identity and assimilate them. These policies resulted in the emigration of some 300,000 ethnic Turks to Turkey. The Communist Party was forced to give up its political monopoly on 10 November 1989 under the influence of the Revolutions of 1989. Zhivkov resigned and Bulgaria embarked on a transition to a parliamentary democracy. The first free elections in June 1990 were won by the Communist Party, now rebranded as the Bulgarian Socialist Party. A new constitution that provided for a relatively weak elected president and for a prime minister accountable to the legislature was adopted in July 1991. The new system initially failed to improve living standards or create economic growth—the average quality of life and economic performance remained lower than under communism well into the early 2000s. After 2001, economic, political and geopolitical conditions improved greatly, and Bulgaria achieved high Human Development status in 2003. It became a member of NATO in 2004 and participated in the War in Afghanistan. After several years of reforms, it joined the European Union and the single market in 2007, despite EU concerns over government corruption. Bulgaria hosted the 2018 Presidency of the Council of the European Union at the National Palace of Culture in Sofia. Bulgaria is a middle-sized country situated in Southeastern Europe, in the east of the Balkans. Its territory covers an area of 110,994 square kilometres (42,855 sq mi), while land borders with its five neighbouring countries run a total length of 1,808 kilometres (1,123 mi), and its coastline is 354 kilometres (220 mi) long. Bulgaria's geographic coordinates are 43° N 25° E. The most notable topographical features of the country are the Danubian Plain, the Balkan Mountains, the Thracian Plain, and the Rila-Rhodope massif. The southern edge of the Danubian Plain slopes upward into the foothills of the Balkans, while the Danube defines the border with Romania. The Thracian Plain is roughly triangular, beginning southeast of Sofia and broadening as it reaches the Black Sea coast. The Balkan mountains run laterally through the middle of the country from west to east. The mountainous southwest has two distinct alpine type ranges—Rila and Pirin, which border the lower but more extensive Rhodope Mountains to the east, and various medium altitude mountains to west, northwest and south, like Vitosha, Osogovo and Belasitsa. Musala, at 2,925 metres (9,596 ft), is the highest point in both Bulgaria and the Balkans. The Black Sea coast is the country's lowest point. Plains occupy about one third of the territory, while plateaux and hills occupy 41%. Most rivers are short and with low water levels. The longest river located solely in Bulgarian territory, the Iskar, has a length of 368 kilometres (229 mi). The Struma and the Maritsa are two major rivers in the south. Bulgaria has a varied and changeable climate, which results from being positioned at the meeting point of the Mediterranean, Oceanic and Continental air masses combined with the barrier effect of its mountains. Northern Bulgaria averages 1 °C (1.8 °F) cooler, and registers 200 millimetres (7.9 in) more precipitation, than the regions south of the Balkan mountains. Temperature amplitudes vary significantly in different areas. The lowest recorded temperature is −38.3 °C (−36.9 °F), while the highest is 45.2 °C (113.4 °F). Precipitation averages about 630 millimetres (24.8 in) per year, and varies from 500 millimetres (19.7 in) in Dobrudja to more than 2,500 millimetres (98.4 in) in the mountains. Continental air masses bring significant amounts of snowfall during winter. Considering its relatively small area, Bulgaria has variable and complex climate. The country occupies the southernmost part of the continental climatic zone, with small areas in the south falling within the Mediterranean climatic zone. The continental zone is predominant, because continental air masses flow easily into the unobstructed Danubian Plain. The continental influence, stronger during the winter, produces abundant snowfall; the Mediterranean influence increases during the second half of summer and produces hot and dry weather. Bulgaria is subdivided into five climatic zones: continental zone (Danubian Plain, Pre-Balkan and the higher valleys of the Transitional geomorphological region); transitional zone (Upper Thracian Plain, most of the Struma and Mesta valleys, the lower Sub-Balkan valleys); continental-Mediterranean zone (the southernmost areas of the Struma and Mesta valleys, the eastern Rhodope Mountains, Sakar and Strandzha); Black Sea zone along the coastline with an average length of 30–40 km inland; and alpine zone in the mountains above 1000 m altitude (central Balkan Mountains, Rila, Pirin, Vitosha, western Rhodope Mountains, etc.). The interaction of climatic, hydrological, geological and topographical conditions has produced a relatively wide variety of plant and animal species. Bulgaria's biodiversity, one of the richest in Europe, is conserved in three national parks, 11 nature parks, 10 biosphere reserves and 565 protected areas. Ninety-three of the 233 mammal species of Europe are found in Bulgaria, along with 49% of butterfly and 30% of vascular plant species. Overall, 41,493 plant and animal species are present. Larger mammals with sizable populations include deer (106,323 individuals), wild boar (88,948), golden jackal (47,293) and red fox (32,326). Partridges number some 328,000 individuals, making them the most widespread gamebird. A third of all nesting birds in Bulgaria can be found in Rila National Park, which also hosts Arctic and alpine species at high altitudes. Flora includes more than 3,800 vascular plant species of which 170 are endemic and 150 are considered endangered. A checklist of larger fungi in Bulgaria by the Institute of Botany identifies more than 1,500 species. More than 35% of the land area is covered by forests. In 1998, the Bulgarian government adopted the National Biological Diversity Conservation Strategy, a comprehensive programme seeking the preservation of local ecosystems, protection of endangered species and conservation of genetic resources. Bulgaria has some of the largest Natura 2000 areas in Europe covering 33.8% of its territory. It also achieved its Kyoto Protocol objective of reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 30% from 1990 to 2009. Bulgaria ranks 30th in the 2018 Environmental Performance Index, but scores low on air quality. Particulate levels are the highest in Europe, especially in urban areas affected by automobile traffic and coal-based power stations. One of these, the lignite-fired Maritsa Iztok-2 station, is causing the highest damage to health and the environment in the European Union. Pesticide use in agriculture and antiquated industrial sewage systems produce extensive soil and water pollution. Water quality began to improve in 1998 and has maintained a trend of moderate improvement. Over 75% of surface rivers meet European standards for good quality. Bulgaria is a parliamentary democracy where the prime minister is the head of government and the most powerful executive position. The political system has three branches—legislative, executive and judicial, with universal suffrage for citizens at least 18 years old. The Constitution also provides possibilities of direct democracy, namely petitions and national referendums. Elections are supervised by an independent Central Election Commission that includes members from all major political parties. Parties must register with the commission prior to participating in a national election. Normally, the prime minister-elect is the leader of the party receiving the most votes in parliamentary elections, although this is not always the case. Unlike the prime minister, presidential domestic power is more limited. The directly elected president serves as head of state and commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and has the authority to return a bill for further debate, although the parliament can override the presidential veto by a simple majority vote. Political parties gather in the National Assembly, a body of 240 deputies elected to four-year terms by direct popular vote. The National Assembly has the power to enact laws, approve the budget, schedule presidential elections, select and dismiss the prime minister and other ministers, declare war, deploy troops abroad, and ratify international treaties and agreements. Overall, Bulgaria displays a pattern of unstable governments. Boyko Borisov, the leader of the centre-right, pro-EU party GERB, served three terms as prime minister between 2009 and 2021. It won the 2009 general election and formed a minority government, which resigned in February 2013 after nationwide protests over the low living standards, corruption and the perceived failure of the democratic system. The subsequent snap elections in May resulted in a narrow win for GERB, but the Bulgarian Socialist Party eventually formed a government led by Plamen Oresharski after Borisov failed to secure parliamentary support. The Oresharski government resigned in July 2014 amid continuing large-scale protests. The October 2014 elections resulted in a third GERB victory. Borisov formed a coalition with several right-wing parties, but resigned again after the candidate backed by his party failed to win the 2016 Presidential election. The March 2017 snap election was again won by GERB, but with 95 seats in Parliament. They formed a coalition with the far-right United Patriots, who held 27 seats. Borisov's last cabinet saw a dramatic decrease in freedom of the press, and a number of corruption revelations that triggered yet another wave of mass protests in 2020. GERB came out first in the regular April 2021 election, but with its weakest result so far. All other parties refused to form a government, and after a brief deadlock, another election was called for July 2021. It too failed to break the stalemate, as no political party was able to form a coalition government. In April 2023, because of the political deadlock, Bulgaria held its fifth parliamentary election since April 2021. GERB was the biggest, winning 69 seats. The bloc led by We Continue the Change won 64 seats in the 240-seat parliament. In June 2023, Prime Minister Nikolai Denkov formed a new coalition between We Continue The Change and GERB. According to the coalition agreement, Denkov will lead the government for the first nine months. He will be succeeded by former European Commissioner, Mariya Gabriel, of the GERB party. She will take over as prime minister after nine months. Freedom House has reported a continuing deterioration of democratic governance after 2009, citing reduced media independence, stalled reforms, abuse of authority at the highest level and increased dependence of local administrations on the central government. Bulgaria is still listed as "Free", with a political system designated as a semi-consolidated democracy, albeit with deteriorating scores. The Democracy Index defines it as a "Flawed democracy". A 2018 survey by the Institute for Economics and Peace reported that less than 15% of respondents considered elections to be fair. Bulgaria has a civil law legal system. The judiciary is overseen by the Ministry of Justice. The Supreme Administrative Court and the Supreme Court of Cassation are the highest courts of appeal and oversee the application of laws in subordinate courts. The Supreme Judicial Council manages the system and appoints judges. The legal system is regarded by both domestic and international observers as one of Europe's most inefficient due to a pervasive lack of transparency and corruption.[excessive citations] Law enforcement is carried out by organisations mainly subordinate to the Ministry of the Interior. The General Directorate of National Police (GDNP) combats general crime and maintains public order. GDNP fields 26,578 police officers in its local and national sections. The bulk of criminal cases are transport-related, followed by theft and drug-related crime; homicide rates are low. The Ministry of the Interior also heads the Border Police Service and the National Gendarmerie—a specialised branch for anti-terrorist activity, crisis management and riot control. Counterintelligence and national security are the responsibility of the State Agency for National Security. Bulgaria is a unitary state. Since the 1880s, the number of territorial management units has varied from seven to 26. Between 1987 and 1999, the administrative structure consisted of nine provinces (oblasti, singular oblast). A new administrative structure was adopted in parallel with the decentralisation of the economic system. It includes 27 provinces and a metropolitan capital province (Sofia-Grad). All areas take their names from their respective capital cities. The provinces are subdivided into 265 municipalities. Municipalities are run by mayors, who are elected to four-year terms, and by directly elected municipal councils. Bulgaria is a highly centralised state where the Council of Ministers directly appoints regional governors and all provinces and municipalities are heavily dependent on it for funding. Bulgaria became a member of the United Nations in 1955 and since 1966 has been a non-permanent member of the Security Council three times, most recently from 2002 to 2003. It was also among the founding nations of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) in 1975. Euro-Atlantic integration has been a priority since the fall of communism, although the communist leadership also had aspirations of leaving the Warsaw Pact and joining the European Communities by 1987. Bulgaria signed the European Union Treaty of Accession on 25 April 2005, and became a full member of the European Union on 1 January 2007. In addition, it has a tripartite economic and diplomatic collaboration with Romania and Greece, good ties with China and Vietnam and a historical relationship with Russia. Bulgaria deployed significant numbers of both civilian and military advisors in Soviet-allied countries like Nicaragua and Libya during the Cold War. The first deployment of foreign troops on Bulgarian soil since World War II occurred in 2001, when the country hosted six KC-135 Stratotanker aircraft and 200 support personnel for the war effort in Afghanistan. International military relations were further expanded with accession to NATO in March 2004 and the US-Bulgarian Defence Cooperation Agreement signed in April 2006. Bezmer and Graf Ignatievo air bases, the Novo Selo training range, and a logistics centre in Aytos subsequently became joint military training facilities cooperatively used by the United States and Bulgarian militaries. Despite its active international defence collaborations, Bulgaria ranks as among the most peaceful countries globally, tying 6th alongside Iceland regarding domestic and international conflicts, and 26th on average in the Global Peace Index. Following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine Bulgaria took the decision to assist Ukraine and in 2023, to put a stop to Russian oil and gas. The Bulgarian Armed Forces are the military of Bulgaria and they are composed of land forces, navy and an air force. The Armed Forces have 36,950 active troops, supplemented by 3,000 reservists. The land forces consist of two mechanised brigades and eight independent regiments and battalions; the air force operates 106 aircraft and air defence systems across six air bases, and the navy operates various ships, helicopters and coastal defence weapons. Military inventory mainly consists of Soviet equipment like Mikoyan MiG-29 and Sukhoi Su-25 jets, S-300PT air defence systems and SS-21 Scarab short-range ballistic missiles. Bulgaria's Armed Forces are modernizing with F-16 Block 70 fighter jets, new Multi-Purpose corvettes and other modern NATO-standard equipment. Bulgaria is in the process of buying new US built Stryker vehicles, new 155 mm Self-propelled howitzers,new 3D Early-warning radars, new Surface-to-air missiles and more. Bulgaria has an open, upper middle income range market economy where the private sector accounts for more than 70% of GDP. From a largely agricultural country with a predominantly rural population in 1948, by the 1980s Bulgaria had transformed into an industrial economy, with scientific and technological research at the top of its budgetary expenditure priorities. The loss of COMECON markets in 1990 and the subsequent "shock therapy" of the planned system caused a steep decline in industrial and agricultural production, ultimately followed by an economic collapse in 1997. The economy largely recovered during a period of rapid growth several years later, but the average salary of 2,072 leva ($1,142) per month remains the lowest in the EU. A balanced budget was achieved in 2003 and the country began running a surplus the following year. Expenditures amounted to $21.15 billion and revenues were $21.67 billion in 2017. Most government spending on institutions is earmarked for security. The ministries of defence, the interior and justice are allocated the largest share of the annual government budget, whereas those responsible for the environment, tourism and energy receive the least funding. Taxes form the bulk of government revenue at 30% of GDP. Bulgaria has some of the lowest corporate income tax rates in the EU at a flat 10% rate. The tax system is two-tier. Value added tax, excise duties, corporate and personal income tax are national, whereas real estate, inheritance, and vehicle taxes are levied by local authorities. Strong economic performance in the early 2000s reduced government debt from 79.6% in 1998 to 14.1% in 2008. It has since increased to 22.6% of GDP by 2022, but remains the second lowest in the EU. The Yugozapaden planning area is the most developed region with a per capita gross domestic product (PPP) of $29,816 in 2018. It includes the capital city and the surrounding Sofia Province, which alone generate 42% of national gross domestic product despite hosting only 22% of the population. GDP per capita (in PPS) and the cost of living in 2019 stood at 53 and 52.8% of the EU average (100%), respectively. National PPP GDP was estimated at $143.1 billion in 2016, with a per capita value of $20,116. Economic growth statistics take into account illegal transactions from the informal economy, which is the largest in the EU as a percentage of economic output. The Bulgarian National Bank issues the national currency, lev, which is pegged to the euro at a rate of 1.95583 levа per euro. After several consecutive years of high growth, repercussions of the financial crisis of 2007–2008 resulted in a 3.6% contraction of GDP in 2009 and increased unemployment. Positive growth was restored in 2010 but intercompany debt exceeded $59 billion, meaning that 60% of all Bulgarian companies were mutually indebted. By 2012, it had increased to $97 billion, or 227% of GDP. The government implemented strict austerity measures with IMF and EU encouragement to some positive fiscal results, but the social consequences of these measures, such as increased income inequality and accelerated outward migration, have been "catastrophic" according to the International Trade Union Confederation. Siphoning of public funds to the families and relatives of politicians from incumbent parties has resulted in fiscal and welfare losses to society. Bulgaria ranks 71st in the Corruption Perceptions Index and experiences the worst levels of corruption in the European Union, a phenomenon that remains a source of profound public discontent. Along with organised crime, corruption has resulted in a rejection of the country's Schengen Area application and withdrawal of foreign investment. Government officials reportedly engage in embezzlement, influence trading, government procurement violations and bribery with impunity. Government procurement in particular is a critical area in corruption risk. An estimated 10 billion leva ($5.99 billion) of state budget and European cohesion funds are spent on public tenders each year; nearly 14 billion ($8.38 billion) were spent on public contracts in 2017 alone. A large share of these contracts are awarded to a few politically connected companies amid widespread irregularities, procedure violations and tailor-made award criteria. Despite repeated criticism from the European Commission, EU institutions refrain from taking measures against Bulgaria because it supports Brussels on a number of issues, unlike Poland or Hungary. The labour force is 3.36 million people, of whom 6.8% are employed in agriculture, 26.6% in industry and 66.6% in the services sector. Extraction of metals and minerals, production of chemicals, machine building, steel, biotechnology, tobacco, food processing and petroleum refining are among the major industrial activities. Mining alone employs 24,000 people and generates about 5% of the country's GDP; the number of employed in all mining-related industries is 120,000. Bulgaria is Europe's fifth-largest coal producer. Local deposits of coal, iron, copper and lead are vital for the manufacturing and energy sectors. The main destinations of Bulgarian exports outside the EU are Turkey, China and Serbia, while Russia, Turkey and China are by far the largest import partners. Most of the exports are manufactured goods, machinery, chemicals, fuel products and food. Two-thirds of food and agricultural exports go to OECD countries. Although cereal and vegetable output dropped by 40% between 1990 and 2008, output in grains has since increased, and the 2016–2017 season registered the biggest grain output in a decade. Maize, barley, oats and rice are also grown. Quality Oriental tobacco is a significant industrial crop. Bulgaria is also the largest producer globally of lavender and rose oil, both widely used in fragrances. Within the services sector, tourism is a significant contributor to economic growth. Sofia, Plovdiv, Veliko Tarnovo, coastal resorts Albena, Golden Sands and Sunny Beach and winter resorts Bansko, Pamporovo and Borovets are some of the locations most visited by tourists. Most visitors are Romanian, Turkish, Greek and German. Tourism is additionally encouraged through the 100 Tourist Sites system. Spending on research and development amounts to 0.78% of GDP, and the bulk of public R&D funding goes to the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences (BAS). Private businesses accounted for more than 73% of R&D expenditures and employed 42% of Bulgaria's 22,000 researchers in 2015. The same year, Bulgaria ranked 39th out of 50 countries in the Bloomberg Innovation Index, the highest score being in education (24th) and the lowest in value-added manufacturing (48th). Bulgaria was ranked 38th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023. Chronic government underinvestment in research since 1990 has forced many professionals in science and engineering to leave Bulgaria. Despite the lack of funding, research in chemistry, materials science and physics remains strong. Antarctic research is actively carried out through the St. Kliment Ohridski Base on Livingston Island in Western Antarctica. The information and communication technologies (ICT) sector generates three per cent of economic output and employs 40,000 to 51,000 software engineers. Bulgaria was known as a "Communist Silicon Valley" during the Soviet era due to its key role in COMECON computing technology production. A concerted effort by the communist government to teach computing and IT skills in schools also indirectly made Bulgaria a major source of computer viruses in the 1980s and 90s. The country is a regional leader in high performance computing: it operates Avitohol, the most powerful supercomputer in Southeast Europe, and will host one of the eight petascale EuroHPC supercomputers. Bulgaria has made numerous contributions to space exploration. These include two scientific satellites, more than 200 payloads and 300 experiments in Earth orbit, as well as two cosmonauts since 1971. Bulgaria was the first country to grow wheat and vegetables in space with its Svet greenhouses on the Mir space station. It was involved in the development of the Granat gamma-ray observatory and the Vega program, particularly in modelling trajectories and guidance algorithms for both Vega probes. Bulgarian instruments have been used in the exploration of Mars, including a spectrometer that took the first high quality spectroscopic images of Martian moon Phobos with the Phobos 2 probe. Cosmic radiation en route to and around the planet has been mapped by Liulin-ML dosimeters on the ExoMars TGO. Variants of these instruments have also been fitted on the International Space Station and the Chandrayaan-1 lunar probe. Another lunar mission, SpaceIL's Beresheet, was also equipped with a Bulgarian-manufactured imaging payload. Bulgaria's first geostationary communications satellite—BulgariaSat-1—was launched by SpaceX in 2017. Telephone services are widely available, and a central digital trunk line connects most regions. Vivacom (BTC) serves more than 90% of fixed lines and is one of the three operators providing mobile services, along with A1 and Telenor. Internet penetration stood at 69.2% of the population aged 16–74 and 78.9% of households in 2020. Bulgaria's strategic geographic location and well-developed energy sector make it a key European energy centre despite its lack of significant fossil fuel deposits. Thermal power plants generate 48.9% of electricity, followed by nuclear power from the Kozloduy reactors (34.8%) and renewable sources (16.3%). Equipment for a second nuclear power station at Belene has been acquired, but the fate of the project remains uncertain. Installed capacity amounts to 12,668 MW, allowing Bulgaria to exceed domestic demand and export energy. The national road network has a total length of 19,512 kilometres (12,124 mi), of which 19,235 kilometres (11,952 mi) are paved. Railroads are a major mode of freight transportation, although highways carry a progressively larger share of freight. Bulgaria has 6,238 kilometres (3,876 mi) of railway track, with rail links available to Romania, Turkey, Greece, and Serbia, and express trains serving direct routes to Kyiv, Minsk, Moscow and Saint Petersburg. Sofia is the country's air travel hub, while Varna and Burgas are the principal maritime trade ports. According to the government's official 2022 estimate, the population of Bulgaria consists of 6,447,710 people, down from 6,519,789 according to the last official census in 2021. The majority of the population, 72.5%, reside in urban areas. As of 2019[update], Sofia is the most populated urban centre with 1,241,675 people, followed by Plovdiv (346,893), Varna (336,505), Burgas (202,434) and Ruse (142,902). Bulgarians are the main ethnic group and constitute 84.6% of the population. Turkish and Roma minorities account for 8.4 and 4.4%, respectively; some 40 smaller minorities account for 1.3%, and 1.3% do not self-identify with an ethnic group. The Roma minority is usually underestimated in census data and may represent up to 11% of the population. Population density is 55-60 per square kilometre (ultimo 2023), almost half the European Union average. Bulgaria is in a state of demographic crisis. It has had negative population growth since 1989, when the post-Cold War economic collapse caused a long-lasting emigration wave. Some 937,000 to 1,200,000 people—mostly young adults—had left the country by 2005. The majority of children are born to unmarried women. In 2018, the average total fertility rate (TFR) in Bulgaria was 1.56 children per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.1 and considerably below the historical high of 5.83 children per woman in 1905. Bulgaria thus has one of the oldest populations in the world, with an average age of 43 years. Furthermore, a third of all households consist of only one person and 75.5% of families do not have children under the age of 16. The resulting birth rates are among the lowest in the world while death rates are among the highest. Bulgaria scores high in gender equality, ranking 18th in the 2018 Global Gender Gap Report. Although women's suffrage was enabled relatively late, in 1937, women today have equal political rights, high workforce participation and legally mandated equal pay. In 2021, market research agency Reboot Online ranked Bulgaria as the best European country for women to work. Bulgaria has the highest ratio of female ICT researchers in the EU, as well as the second-highest ratio of females in the technology sector at 44.6% of the workforce. High levels of female participation are a legacy of the Socialist era. High death rates result from a combination of an ageing population, high numbers of people at risk of poverty, and a weak healthcare system. Over 80% of deaths are due to cancer and cardiovascular conditions; nearly a fifth of those are avoidable. Although healthcare in Bulgaria is nominally universal, out-of-pocket expenses account for nearly half of all healthcare spending, significantly limiting access to medical care. Other problems disrupting care provision are the emigration of doctors due to low wages, understaffed and under-equipped regional hospitals, supply shortages and frequent changes to the basic service package for those insured. The 2018 Bloomberg Health Care Efficiency Index ranked Bulgaria last out of 56 countries. Average life expectancy is 74.8 years, compared with an EU average of 80.99 and a world average of 72.38. Public expenditures for education are far below the European Union average as well. Educational standards were once high, but have declined significantly since the early 2000s. Bulgarian students were among the highest-scoring in the world in terms of reading in 2001, performing better than their Canadian and German counterparts; by 2006, scores in reading, math and science had dropped. By 2018, Programme for International Student Assessment studies found 47% of pupils in the 9th grade to be functionally illiterate in reading and natural sciences. Average basic literacy stands high at 98.4% with no significant difference between sexes. The Ministry of Education and Science partially funds public schools, colleges and universities, sets criteria for textbooks and oversees the publishing process. Education in primary and secondary public schools is free and compulsory. The process spans 12 grades, in which grades one through eight are primary and nine through twelve are secondary level. Higher education consists of a 4-year bachelor degree and a 1-year master's degree. Bulgaria's highest-ranked higher education institution is Sofia University. Bulgarian is the only language with official status. It belongs to the Slavic group of languages but has a number of grammatical peculiarities, that set it apart from other Slavic languages: these include a complex verbal morphology (which also codes for distinctions in evidentiality), the absence of noun cases and infinitives, and the use of a suffixed definite article. Bulgaria is a secular state with guaranteed freedom of religion by constitution, but Eastern Orthodox Christianity is designated as the traditional religion of the country. Approximately two-thirds of Bulgarians identify as Eastern Orthodox Christians. The Bulgarian Orthodox Church was the first church apart from the Four Ancient Patriarchates of the Eastern Orthodox Church—in Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem—and the first national church to gain autocephalous status in 927 AD. The Bulgarian Patriarchate has 12 dioceses and over 2,000 priests. Muslims are the second-largest religious community and constitute approx. 10% of Bulgaria's overall religious makeup. A 2011 survey of 850 Muslims in Bulgaria found 30% self-professing as deeply religious and 50% as just religious. According to the study, some religious teachings, like Islamic funeral, have been traditionally incorporated and are widely practiced while other major ones are less observed, such as the Muslim prayer or abstaining from drinking alcohol, eating pork, and cohabitation. Other important religions include Roman Catholicism and Judaism, whose history in Bulgaria dates back to the early Middle Ages, the Armenian Apostolic Church, as well as various Protestant denominations, all of which stand for around 2% of Bulgaria's population. An ever increasing number of Bulgarians are either irreligious or unaffiliated with any religion, a percentage that has been growing rapidly over the past 20 years, from 3.9% in 2001, through 9.3% in 2011 and all the way to 15.9% in 2021. According to the most recent census of 2021 the religious denominations of the population are, as follows: Christian (71.5%), Islam (10.8%), other religions (0.1%). Further 12.4% were unaffiliated or did not respond. Contemporary Bulgarian culture blends the formal culture that helped forge a national consciousness towards the end of Ottoman rule with millennia-old folk traditions. An essential element of Bulgarian folklore is fire, used to banish evil spirits and illnesses. Many of these are personified as witches, whereas other creatures like zmey and samodiva (veela) are either benevolent guardians or ambivalent tricksters. Some rituals against evil spirits have survived and are still practised, most notably kukeri and survakari. Martenitsa is also widely celebrated. Nestinarstvo, a ritual fire-dance of Thracian origin, is included in the list of UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage. Nine historical and natural objects are UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Pirin National Park, Sreburna Nature Reserve, the Madara Rider, the Thracian tombs in Sveshtari and Kazanlak, the Rila Monastery, the Boyana Church, the Rock-hewn Churches of Ivanovo and the ancient city of Nesebar. The Rila Monastery was established by Saint John of Rila, Bulgaria's patron saint, whose life has been the subject of numerous literary accounts since Medieval times. The establishment of the Preslav and Ohrid literary schools in the 10th century is associated with a golden period in Bulgarian literature during the Middle Ages. The schools' emphasis on Christian scriptures made the Bulgarian Empire a centre of Slavic culture, bringing Slavs under the influence of Christianity and providing them with a written language. Its alphabet, Cyrillic script, was developed by the Preslav Literary School. The Tarnovo Literary School, on the other hand, is associated with a Silver age of literature defined by high-quality manuscripts on historical or mystical themes under the Asen and Shishman dynasties. Many literary and artistic masterpieces were destroyed by the Ottoman conquerors, and artistic activities did not re-emerge until the National Revival in the 19th century. The enormous body of work of Ivan Vazov (1850–1921) covered every genre and touched upon every facet of Bulgarian society, bridging pre-Liberation works with literature of the newly established state. Notable later works are Bay Ganyo by Aleko Konstantinov, the Nietzschean poetry of Pencho Slaveykov, the Symbolist poetry of Peyo Yavorov and Dimcho Debelyanov, the Marxist-inspired works of Geo Milev and Nikola Vaptsarov, and the Socialist realism novels of Dimitar Dimov and Dimitar Talev. Tzvetan Todorov is a notable contemporary author, while Bulgarian-born Elias Canetti was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1981. А religious visual arts heritage includes frescoes, murals and icons, many produced by the medieval Tarnovo Artistic School. Like literature, it was not until the National Revival when Bulgarian visual arts began to reemerge. Zahari Zograf was a pioneer of the visual arts in the pre-Liberation era. After the Liberation, Ivan Mrkvička, Anton Mitov, Vladimir Dimitrov, Tsanko Lavrenov and Zlatyu Boyadzhiev introduced newer styles and substance, depicting scenery from Bulgarian villages, old towns and historical subjects. Christo is the most famous Bulgarian artist of the 21st century, known for his outdoor installations. Folk music is by far the most extensive traditional art and has slowly developed throughout the ages as a fusion of Far Eastern, Oriental, medieval Eastern Orthodox and standard Western European tonalities and modes. Bulgarian folk music has a distinctive sound and uses a wide range of traditional instruments, such as gadulka, gaida, kaval and tupan. A distinguishing feature is extended rhythmical time, which has no equivalent in the rest of European music. The State Television Female Vocal Choir won a Grammy Award in 1990 for its performances of Bulgarian folk music. Written musical composition can be traced back to the works of Yoan Kukuzel (c. 1280–1360), but modern classical music began with Emanuil Manolov, who composed the first Bulgarian opera in 1890. Pancho Vladigerov and Petko Staynov further enriched symphony, ballet and opera, which singers Ghena Dimitrova, Boris Christoff, Ljuba Welitsch and Nicolai Ghiaurov elevated to a world-class level.[excessive citations] Bulgarian performers have gained acclaim in other genres like electropop (Mira Aroyo), jazz (Milcho Leviev) and blends of jazz and folk (Ivo Papazov). The Bulgarian National Radio, bTV and daily newspapers Trud, Dnevnik and 24 Chasa are some of the largest national media outlets. Bulgarian media were described as generally unbiased in their reporting in the early 2000s and print media had no legal restrictions. Since then, freedom of the press has deteriorated to the point where Bulgaria scores 111th globally in the World Press Freedom Index, lower than all European Union members and membership candidate states. The government has diverted EU funds to sympathetic media outlets and bribed others to be less critical on problematic topics, while attacks against individual journalists have increased. Collusion between politicians, oligarchs and the media is widespread. Bulgarian cuisine is similar to that of other Balkan countries and demonstrates strong Turkish and Greek influences. Yogurt, lukanka, banitsa, shopska salad, lyutenitsa and kozunak are among the best-known local foods. Meat consumption is lower than the European average, given a cultural preference for a large variety of salads. Bulgaria was the world's second-largest wine exporter until 1989, but has since lost that position. The 2016 harvest yielded 128 million litres of wine, of which 62 million was exported mainly to Romania, Poland and Russia. Mavrud, Rubin, Shiroka melnishka, Dimiat and Cherven Misket are the typical grapes used in Bulgarian wine. Rakia is a traditional fruit brandy that was consumed in Bulgaria as early as the 14th century. Bulgaria appeared at the first modern Olympic games in 1896, when it was represented by gymnast Charles Champaud. Since then, Bulgarian athletes have won 55 gold, 90 silver, and 85 bronze medals, ranking 25th in the all-time medal table. Weight-lifting is a signature sport of Bulgaria. Coach Ivan Abadzhiev developed innovative training practices that have produced many Bulgarian world and Olympic champions in weight-lifting since the 1980s. Bulgarian athletes have also excelled in wrestling, boxing, gymnastics, volleyball and tennis. Stefka Kostadinova is the reigning world record holder in the women's high jump at 2.09 metres (6 feet 10 inches), achieved during the 1987 World Championships. Grigor Dimitrov is the first Bulgarian tennis player in the Top 3 ATP rankings. Football is the most popular sport in the country by a substantial margin. The national football team's best performance was a semi-final at the 1994 FIFA World Cup, when the squad was spearheaded by forward Hristo Stoichkov. Stoichkov is the most successful Bulgarian player of all time; he was awarded the Golden Boot and the Golden Ball and was considered one of the best in the world while playing for FC Barcelona in the 1990s. CSKA and Levski, both based in Sofia, are the most successful clubs domestically and long-standing rivals. Ludogorets is remarkable for having advanced from the local fourth division to the 2014–15 UEFA Champions League group stage in a mere nine years. Placed 39th in 2018, it is Bulgaria's highest-ranked club in UEFA. Bulgaria portal Outline of Bulgaria Bulgarian: Република България, romanized: Republika Bǎlgariya, IPA: [rɛˈpublikɐ bɐɫˈɡarijɐ]) The official number of Romani citizens may be lower than the actual number. See Demographics. "Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria". National Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2020. "Преброяване 2021: Етнокултурна характеристика на населението" [2021 Census: Ethnocultural characteristics of the population] (PDF). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2022. Penin, Rumen (2007). Природна география на България [Natural Geography of Bulgaria] (in Bulgarian). Bulvest 2000. p. 18. ISBN 978-954-18-0546-6. "Field listing: Area". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 31 January 2014. Retrieved 9 October 2018. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Bulgaria)". International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income – EU-SILC survey". ec.europa.eu. Eurostat. Archived from the original on 20 March 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "Human Development Report 2023/24" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Golden 1992, pp. 103–104. Bowersock, Glen W. (1999). Late Antiquity: a Guide to the Postclassical World. Harvard University Press. p. 354. ISBN 978-0-674-51173-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Chen 2012, p. 97. Petersen, Leif Inge Ree (2013). Siege Warfare and Military Organization in the Successor States (400–800 AD): Byzantium, the West and Islam. Brill. p. 369. ISBN 978-9004254466. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Golden 1992, p. 104. Chen 2012, pp. 92–95, 97. Tillier, Anne-Marie; Sirakov, Nikolay; Guadelli, Aleta; Fernandez, Philippe; Sirakova, Svoboda (October 2017). "Evidence of Neanderthals in the Balkans: The infant radius from Kozarnika Cave (Bulgaria)". Journal of Human Evolution. 111 (111): 54–62. doi:10.1016/j.jhevol.2017.06.002. PMID 28874274. Fewlass, H, Talamo, S, Wacker, S, et al. (2020). "A 14C chronology for the Middle to Upper Palaeolithic transition at Bacho Kiro Cave, Bulgaria". Nature Ecology & Evolution. 4 (6): 794–801. Bibcode:2020NatEE...4..794F. doi:10.1038/s41559-020-1136-3. hdl:11585/770560. PMID 32393865. S2CID 218593433. Hublin, J, Sirakov, N, Aldeias, V, et al. (2020). "Initial Upper Palaeolithic Homo sapiens from Bacho Kiro Cave, Bulgaria" (PDF). Nature. 581 (7808): 299–302. Bibcode:2020Natur.581..299H. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2259-z. hdl:11585/770553. PMID 32433609. S2CID 218592678. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Gimbutas, Marija A. (1974). The Gods and Goddesses of Old Europe: 7000 to 3500 BC Myths, Legends and Cult Images. University of California Press. pp. 29–32. ISBN 978-0-520-01995-9. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Roberts, Benjamin W.; Thornton, Christopher P. (2009). "Development of metallurgy in Eurasia". Antiquity. 83 (322). Department of Prehistory and Europe, British Museum: 1015. doi:10.1017/S0003598X00099312. S2CID 163062746. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. In contrast, the earliest exploitation and working of gold occurs in the Balkans during the mid-fifth millennium BC, several centuries after the earliest known copper smelting. This is demonstrated most spectacularly in the various objects adorning the burials at Varna, Bulgaria (Renfrew 1986; Highamet al. 2007). In contrast, the earliest gold objects found in Southwest Asia date only to the beginning of the fourth millennium BC as at Nahal Qanah in Israel (Golden 2009), suggesting that gold exploitation may have been a Southeast European invention, albeit a short-lived one. de Laet, Sigfried J. (1996). History of Humanity: From the Third Millennium to the Seventh Century BC. UNESCO / Routledge. p. 99. ISBN 978-92-3-102811-3. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. The first major gold-working centre was situated at the mouth of the Danube, on the shores of the Black Sea in Bulgaria Grande, Lance (2009). Gems and Gemstones: Timeless Natural Beauty of the Mineral World. University of Chicago Press. p. 292. ISBN 978-0-226-30511-0. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. The oldest known gold jewelry in the world is from an archaeological site in Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, and is over 6,000 years old (radiocarbon dated between 4,600 BC and 4,200 BC). Anthony, David W.; Chi, Jennifer, eds. (2010). The Lost World of Old Europe: The Danube Valley, 5000–3500 BC. Institute for the Study of the Ancient World. pp. 39, 201. ISBN 978-0-691-14388-0. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. grave 43 at the Varna cemetery, the richest single grave from Old Europe, dated about 4600–4500 BC. "The Gumelnita Culture". Government of France. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2011. The Necropolis at Varna is an important site in understanding this culture. "Bulgaria Factbook". United States Central Command. December 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2018. Schoenberger, Erica (2015). Nature, Choice and Social Power. Routledge. p. 81. ISBN 978-0-415-83386-8. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. The graves at Varna range from poor to richly endowed, suggesting a rather high degree of social differentiation. Their discovery has led to a re-evaluation of the form of social organization characteristic of the Varna culture and of the onset of social stratification in Neolithic cultures. Crampton 1987, p. 1. "Bulgar". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Boardman, John; Edwards, I.E.S.; Sollberger, E. (1982). The Cambridge Ancient History – part 1: The Prehistory of the Balkans, the Middle East and the Aegean World, Tenth to Eighth Centuries BC. Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. p. 53. ISBN 978-0-521-22496-3. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Yet we cannot identify the Thracians at that remote period, because we do not know for certain whether the Thracian and Illyrian tribes had separated by then. It is safer to speak of Proto-Thracians from whom there developed in the Iron Age Allcock, John B. "Balkans". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 16 August 2018. Kidner, Frank (2013). Making Europe: The Story of the West. Cengage Learning. p. 57. ISBN 978-1-111-84131-7. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Roisman 2011, pp. 135–138, 343–345. Nagle, D. Brendan (2006). Readings in Greek History: Sources and Interpretations. Oxford University Press. p. 230. ISBN 978-0-19-997845-8. However, one of the Thracian tribes, the Odrysians, succeeded in unifying the Thracians and creating a powerful state Ashley, James R. (1998). The Macedonian Empire: The Era of Warfare Under Philip II and Alexander the Great, 359–323 B.C. McFarland & Company, Inc. pp. 139–140. ISBN 978-0-7864-1918-0. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. O Hogain, Daithi (2002). The Celts: A History. The Boydell Press. pp. 69–71. ISBN 978-0-85115-923-2. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Gagarin, Michael, ed. (2010). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece and Rome. Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-19-517072-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Ulfilas". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. Bell, John D. "The Beginnings of Modern Bulgaria". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 9 October 2018. Singleton, Fred; Fred, Singleton (1985). A Short History of the Yugoslav Peoples. Cambridge University Press. pp. 13–14. ISBN 978-0-521-27485-2. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Fouracre, Paul; McKitterick, Rosamond; Reuter, Timothy; Abulafia, David; Luscombe, David Edward; Allmand, C.T.; Riley-Smith, Jonathan; Jones, Michael (1995). The New Cambridge Medieval History: Volume 1, c. 500 – c. 700. Cambridge University Press. p. 524. ISBN 978-0-521-36291-7. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Curta, Florin (2001). The Making of the Slavs: History and Archaeology of the Lower Danube Region, c. 500–700 (PDF). Cambridge University Press. pp. 311–334. ISBN 978-1-139-42888-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2018. MacDermott 1998, p. 19. Detrez, Raymond (2014). Historical Dictionary of Bulgaria. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-4422-4179-4. Parry, Ken, ed. (2010). The Blackwell Companion to Eastern Christianity. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 48. ISBN 978-1-4443-3361-9. The conquest of the Balkans and the rise of the Bulgarian Empire was not a disaster for the indigenous population and its material and spiritual culture. The settlers and the local Romanised or semi-Romanised Thraco-Illyrian Christians influenced each other's way of life and socio-economic organization, as well as each other's cultures, language and religious outlook. Wolfram, Herwig (1990). History of the Goths. University of California Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-520-06983-1. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Zlatarski, Vasil (1938). Istorija 1A – b1 – 1 История на Първото българско Царство. I. Епоха на хуно–българското надмощие (679–852) [History of the First Bulgarian Empire. Period of Hunnic-Bulgarian domination (679–852)] (in Bulgarian). Marin Drinov Publishing House. p. 188. ISBN 978-9544302986. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 23 May 2012. Fine, John Van Antwerp (1991). The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century. University of Michigan Press. pp. 68–70. ISBN 978-0-472-08149-3. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Vlasto, Alexis P. (1970). The Entry of the Slavs Into Christendom: An Introduction to the Medieval History of the Slavs. Cambridge University Press. p. 157. ISBN 978-0-521-07459-9. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Krum". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Bell, John D. "The Spread of Christianity". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Crampton 2007, pp. 12–13. Bell, John D. "Reign of Simeon I". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Bulgaria's conversion had a political dimension, for it contributed both to the growth of central authority and to the merging of Bulgars and Slavs into a unified Bulgarian people. The First Golden Age. Browning, Robert (1975). Byzantium and Bulgaria. Temple Smith. pp. 194–195. ISBN 978-0-520-02670-4. "Samuel". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 January 2008. Retrieved 20 January 2012. Scylitzae, Ioannis, ed. (1973). Synopsis Historiarum. Corpus Fontium Byzantiae Historiae, vol. 5. De Gruyter. p. 457. ISBN 978-3-11-002285-8. Crampton 1987, p. 4. Cameron, Averil (2006). The Byzantines. Blackwell Publishing. p. 170. ISBN 978-1-4051-9833-2. Ostrogorsky, Georgije (1969). History of the Byzantine State. Rutgers University Press. p. 311. ISBN 978-0-8135-1198-6. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Second Bulgarian Empire". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2018. Bourchier, James (1911). "History of Bulgaria" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 779–784. Crampton 1987, p. 6. Martin, Michael (2017). City of the Sun: Development and Popular Resistance in the Pre-Modern West. Algora Publishing. p. 344. ISBN 978-1-62894-279-8. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Ottoman rule". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2011. The Bulgarian nobility was destroyed—its members either perished, fled, or accepted Islam and Turkicization—and the peasantry was enserfed to Turkish masters. Guineva, Maria (10 October 2011). "Old Town Sozopol – Bulgaria's 'Rescued' Miracle and Its Modern Day Saviors". Novinite. Archived from the original on 18 March 2022. Retrieved 16 November 2018. Jireček, K.J. (1876). Geschichte der Bulgaren [History of the Bulgarians] (in German). Nachdr. d. Ausg. Prag. p. 88. ISBN 978-3-487-06408-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Minkov, Anton (2004). Conversion to Islam in the Balkans: Kisve Bahası – Petitions and Ottoman Social Life, 1670–1730. Brill. p. 193. ISBN 978-9004135765. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Detrez, Raymond (2008). Europe and the Historical Legacies in the Balkans. Peter Lang Publishers. p. 36. ISBN 978-9052013749. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Fishman, Joshua A. (2010). Handbook of Language and Ethnic Identity: Disciplinary and Regional Perspectives. Oxford University Press. p. 276. ISBN 978-0-19-537492-6. Retrieved 30 September 2018. There were almost no remnants of a Bulgarian ethnic identity; the population defined itself as Christians, according to the Ottoman system of millets, that is, communities of religious beliefs. The first attempts to define a Bulgarian ethnicity started at the beginning of the 19th century. Roudometof, Victor; Robertson, Roland (2001). Nationalism, Globalization, and Orthodoxy: The Social Origins of Ethnic Conflict in the Balkans. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 68–71. ISBN 978-0-313-31949-5. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Crampton 1987, p. 8. Carvalho, Joaquim (2007). Religion and Power in Europe: Conflict and Convergence. Edizioni Plus. p. 261. ISBN 978-8884924643. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Ottoman administration". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2012. The Final Move to Independence. "Reminiscence from Days of Liberation". Novinite. 3 March 2011. Archived from the original on 16 June 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Shipka Pass". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2018. San Stefano, Berlin and Independence. Blamires, Cyprian (2006). World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9. The "Greater Bulgaria" re-established in March 1878 on the lines of the medieval Bulgarian empire after liberation from Turkish rule did not last long.[permanent dead link] "On March 3 Bulgaria celebrates National Liberation Day". Radio Bulgaria. 3 March 2017. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2019. "Timeline: Bulgaria – A chronology of key events". BBC News. 6 May 2010. Archived from the original on 7 March 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Historical Setting. Crampton 2007, p. 174. Pinon, Rene (1913). L'Europe et la Jeune Turquie: Les Aspects Nouveaux de la Question d'Orient [Europe and Young Turkey: The new aspects of the Eastern Question] (in French). Perrin et cie. p. 411. ISBN 978-1-144-41381-9. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. On a dit souvent de la Bulgarie qu'elle est la Prusse des Balkans Tucker, Spencer C; Wood, Laura (1996). The European Powers in the First World War: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. p. 173. ISBN 978-0-8153-0399-2. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Broadberry, Stephen; Klein, Alexander (8 February 2008). "Aggregate and Per Capita GDP in Europe, 1870–2000: Continental, Regional and National Data with Changing Boundaries" (PDF). Centre for Economic Policy Research. p. 18. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 24 May 2012. "WWI Casualty and Death Tables". PBS. Archived from the original on 3 October 2016. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Mintchev, Veselin (October 1999). "External Migration in Bulgaria". South-East Europe Review (3/99): 124. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2018. Chenoweth, Erica (2010). Rethinking Violence: States and Non-State Actors in Conflict. Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-262-01420-5. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Bulgaria in World War II: The Passive Alliance. Wartime Crisis. Pavlowitch, Stevan K. (2008). Hitler's New Disorder: The Second World War in Yugoslavia. Columbia University Press. pp. 238–240. ISBN 978-0-19-932663-1. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. When Bulgaria switched sides in September The Soviet Occupation. Valentino, Benjamin A. (2005). Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century. Cornell University Press. pp. 91–151. ISBN 978-0-8014-3965-0. Stankova, Marietta (2015). Bulgaria in British Foreign Policy, 1943–1949. Anthem Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-1-78308-430-2. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Neuburger, Mary C. (2013). Balkan Smoke: Tobacco and the Making of Modern Bulgaria. Cornell University Press. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-8014-5084-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Crampton 2005, p. 271. Domestic Policy and Its ResultsQuote: "real wages increased 75 percent, consumption of meat, fruit, and vegetables increased markedly, medical facilities and doctors became available to more of the population" After Stalin. The Economy. Stephen Broadberry; Alexander Klein (27 October 2011). "Aggregate and per capita GDP in Europe, 1870–2000" (PDF). pp. 23, 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. Vachkov, Daniel; Ivanov, Martin (2008). Българският външен дълг 1944–1989: Банкрутът на комунистическата икономика [Bulgarian Foreign Debt 1944–1989]. Siela. pp. 103, 153, 191. ISBN 978-9542803072. The Political Atmosphere in the 1970s. Bulgaria in the 1980s. Bohlen, Celestine (17 October 1991). "Vote Gives Key Role to Ethnic Turks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. in 1980s ... the Communist leader, Todor Zhivkov, began a campaign of cultural assimilation that forced ethnic Turks to adopt Slavic names, closed their mosques and prayer houses and suppressed any attempts at protest. One result was the mass exodus of more than 300,000 ethnic Turks to neighboring Turkey in 1989 Mudeva, Anna (31 May 2009). "Cracks show in Bulgaria's Muslim ethnic model". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2011. Government and Politics. "Bulgarian Politicians Discuss First Democratic Elections 20y After". Novinite. 5 July 2010. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "National Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria – Constitution". www.parliament.bg. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2019. Prodanov, Vasil (1 October 2007). Разрушителният български преход [The destructive Bulgarian transition]. Le Monde diplomatique (in Bulgarian). Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Library of Congress 2006, p. 16. "Human Development Index Report" (PDF). United Nations. 2005. p. 224. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 March 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "NATO Update: Seven new members join NATO". NATO. 29 March 2004. Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Castle, Steven (29 December 2006). "The Big Question: With Romania and Bulgaria joining the EU, how much bigger can it get?". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2018. "Bulgaria Absolutely Ready to Take Over EU Presidency, Minister Says". Bulgarian Telegraph Agency. 2 August 2017. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Library of Congress 2006, p. 4. "Bulgaria". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 4 December 2011. (Archived 2011 edition) Topography. NSI Brochure 2018, pp. 2–3. "Bulgaria Second National Communication" (PDF). United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2018. Climate. Donchev & Karakashev 2004, p. 52 Donchev & Karakashev 2004, pp. 59–61 "Характеристика на флората и растителността на България". Bulgarian-Swiss Program For Biodiversity. Archived from the original on 27 April 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013. Видово разнообразие на България [Species biodiversity in Bulgaria] (PDF) (in Bulgarian). UNESCO report. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2018. NSI Brochure 2018, p. 29. Belev, Toma (June 2010). "Бъдещето на природните паркове в България и техните администрации" [The future of Bulgaria's natural parks and their administrations]. Gora Magazine. Archived from the original on 2 November 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Europe & North America: 297 biosphere reserves in 36 countries". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 5 August 2015. Retrieved 4 April 2016. "Bulgaria's biodiversity at risk" (PDF). IUCN Red List. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2018. NSI Brochure 2018, p. 3. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria: Plant and animal life". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Denchev, Cvetomir. "Checklist of the larger basidiomycetes ın Bulgaria" (PDF). Institute of Botany, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "Bulgaria – Environmental Summary, UNData, United Nations". United Nations. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Biodiversity in Bulgaria". GRID-Arendal. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "Report on European Environment Agency about the Nature protection and biodiversity in Europe". European Environment Agency. Archived from the original on 22 March 2014. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Bulgaria Achieves Kyoto Protocol Targets – IWR Report". Novinite. 11 August 2009. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Bulgaria". Environmental Performance Index/Yale University. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2018. Hakim, Danny (15 October 2013). "Bulgaria's Air Is Dirtiest in Europe, Study Finds, Followed by Poland". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 15 October 2013. "High Air Pollution to Close Downtown Sofia". Novinite. 14 January 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Bulgaria's Sofia, Plovdiv Suffer Worst Air Pollution in Europe". Novinite. 23 June 2010. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Industrial facilities causing the highest damage costs to health and the environment". European Environment Agency. Archived from the original on 12 December 2018. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Bulgaria's quest to meet the environmental acquis". European Stability Initiative. 10 December 2008. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Report on European Environment Agency about the quality of freshwaters in Europe". European Environment Agency. Archived from the original on 16 April 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "Overview of direct democratic instruments in Bulgaria". Navigator to Direct Democracy. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 25 July 2018. Library of Congress 2006, p. 17. Library of Congress 2006, pp. 16–17. "Fitch: Early Bulgaria Elections Would Create Fiscal Uncertainty". Reuters. 23 November 2016. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Bulgarian Cabinet Faces No-Confidence Vote Over Atomic Plant". Bloomberg Businessweek. 6 April 2012. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2012. Cage, Sam. "Bulgarian government resigns amid growing protests". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013. Petkova, Mariya (21 February 2013). "Protests in Bulgaria and the new practice of democracy". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2013. Tsolova, Tsvetelia (12 May 2013). "Rightist GERB holds lead in Bulgaria's election". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2013. "PM Hopeful: New Bulgarian Cabinet Will Be 'Expert, Pragmatic'". Novinite. 25 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 12 March 2014. Buckley, Neil (29 May 2013). "Bulgaria parliament votes for a 'Mario Monti' to lead government". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Seiler, Bistra (26 June 2013). "Bulgarians protest government of 'oligarchs'". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Timeline of Oresharski's Cabinet: A Government in Constant Jeopardy". Novinite. 24 July 2014. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Petrov, Angel (6 October 2014). "Bulgaria's Grand Parliament Chessboard Might Be Both Ailment and Cure". Novinite. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2014. Tsolova, Tsvetelia (6 November 2014). "Bulgaria's Borisov plasters together coalition government". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Barzachka, Nina (25 April 2017). "Bulgaria's government will include far-right nationalist parties for the first time". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Todorov, Svetoslav (10 July 2020). "Fresh Protest Wave Gains Momentum in Bulgaria." Archived 16 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine BalkanInsight.com. Retrieved 20 July 2021. "Bulgaria: Anti-Government Protests Continue for a Ninth Day" Archived 16 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine (18 July 2020). DW.com. Retrieved 20 July 2021. "Bulgaria election: PM Borissov's party wins but falls short of majority | DW | 05.04.2021". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2021. "Reuters". Reuters. May 2021. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2021. "Bulgaria faces fresh elections as Socialists refuse to form a government". Reuters. 2 September 2021. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Bulgaria's parliament elects new government led by PM Denkov". Reuters. 6 June 2023. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. Zankina, Emilia. "Bulgaria Country Profile". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 24 July 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2018. "Democracy Index 2017: Free speech under attack". The Economist Intelligence Unit. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2018. "Global Peace Index 2019" (PDF). Institute for Economics and Peace. pp. 8, 41, 96. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "The Bulgarian Legal System and Legal Research". Hauser Global Law School Program. August 2006. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Съдебната ни система – първенец по корупция [Our justice system – a leader in corruption] (in Bulgarian). News.bg. 3 June 2010. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Brunwasser, Matthew (5 November 2006). "Questions arise again about Bulgaria's legal system". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Transparency International report: Bulgaria perceived as EU's most corrupt country". Bulgarian National Radio. 1 December 2012. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012. Konstantinova, Elizabeth (17 February 2011). "Bulgaria Sets Up Anti-Corruption Unit; Security Chief Steps Down". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Interpol entry on Bulgaria". Interpol. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "National Police Service". Ministry of the Interior of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 3 October 2012. Retrieved 25 May 2012. Справка за щатната численост и незаетите бройки в структурите на МВР към 31 May 2018 г. [Summary of staff and vacancies in structures of the Ministry of the Interior as of 31 May 2018] (PDF) (in Bulgarian). Ministry of the Interior. 31 May 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018. NSI Brochure 2018, p. 27. "State Agency for National Security Official Website". State Agency for National Security. Archived from the original on 19 December 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Local Structures in Bulgaria". Council of European Municipalities and Regions. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 11 April 2012. Историческо развитие на административно–териториалното устройство на Република България [Historical development of the administrative and territorial division of the Republic of Bulgaria] (in Bulgarian). Ministry of Regional Development. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Областите в България. Портрети" [The oblasts in Bulgaria. Portraits]. Ministry of Regional Development. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "The United Nations Security Council". The Green Papers Worldwide. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 4 December 2011. Бай Тошовият блян – България в ЕС през '87 [Todor Zhivkov's dream – Bulgaria in the EC in '87] (in Bulgarian). Dnes.bg. 15 August 2008. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Дойче веле": Тодор Живков искал България да стане член на ЕС ["Deutsche Welle": Todor Zhivkov wanted Bulgaria to join the EC]. Vesti (in Bulgarian). 3 September 2008. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "European Commission Enlargement Archives: Treaty of Accession of Bulgaria and Romania". European Commission. 25 April 2005. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Bulgaria – relations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Greece. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2012. "Bulgaria – Bilateral Relations". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the PRC. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Vietnam Thanks Bulgaria for University Graduates". Novinite. 28 October 2010. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 31 March 2012. "Russia's borders: old ties pull Bulgaria in two directions". The Conversation. 22 October 2014. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Modern relations between Bulgaria and Russia began about two centuries ago... Arms Sales. Foreign Affairs in the 1960s and 1970s. "Bulgaria Factbook". Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 18 March 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "US, Bulgaria sign defence co-operation agreement". Southeast European Times. 28 April 2006. Archived from the original on 25 January 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Bulgaria's Parliament votes additional military aid for Ukraine, possibility of air space for F-16 training". 8 December 2023. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "Bulgaria Strikes Back After Gazprom Suspended Gas Supplies Last Year". 26 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. International Institute for Strategic Studies (25 February 2021). The Military Balance 2021. London: Routledge. p. 89. ISBN 978-1-03-201227-8. "Armed Forces Development Plan" (PDF). Ministry of Defence of Bulgaria. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2012. Palowski, Jakub (6 October 2015). "Bulgaria Will Modernize Its Army. "Fighters, infantry fighting vehicles"". Defence24. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "S-300 Surface-to-air Missile System" (PDF). Aerospace Daily & Defense Report. 6 August 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2018. Roblin, Sebastien (12 September 2016). "SS-21 Scarab: Russia's Forgotten (But Deadly) Ballistic Missile". The National Interest. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Ракети, радари, бронирани машини. Как България се разбърза да превъоръжи армията заради агресията на Русия". Свободна Европа (in Bulgarian). 12 September 2023. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "World Bank Country and Lending Groups". The World Bank Group. 2018. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Bulgaria Overview". USAID. 2002. Archived from the original on 10 July 2011. Retrieved 2 November 2011. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Late Communist rule". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Bulgaria gave the highest priority to scientific and technological advancement and the development of trade skills appropriate to an industrial state. In 1948 approximately 80 percent of the population drew their living from the soil, but by 1988 less than one-fifth of the labour force was engaged in agriculture, with the rest concentrated in industry and the service sector. "The economies of Bulgaria and Romania". European Commission. January 2007. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. OECD Economic Surveys: Bulgaria. OECD. 1999. p. 24. ISBN 9789264167735. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2018. The previous 1997 Economic Survey of Bulgaria documented how a combination of difficult initial conditions, delays in structural reforms, ... culminated in the economic crisis of 1996–97. "Средната заплата в България в края на септември стигна 2072 лв". Hawkesworth, Ian (2009). "Budgeting in Bulgaria" (PDF). OECD Journal on Budgeting (3/2009): 137. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Field listing: Budget". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. Denizova, Vera (23 October 2017). Бюджет 2018: Повече за заплати, здраве и пенсии [2018 Budget: More for salaries, health and pensions] (in Bulgarian). Kapital Daily. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Field listing: Taxes and other revenue". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "These are the 29 countries with the world's lowest levels of tax". Business Insider. 15 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 January 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Structure of Bulgarian Tax System". Ministry of Finance of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Брутен държавен дълг". www.nsi.bg. Archived from the original on 6 December 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Regional gross domestic product (PPS per inhabitant), by NUTS 2 regions". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 12 March 2017. БВП – регионално ниво [GDP – regional level] (in Bulgarian). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. NSI Census data 2017. "GDP per capita in PPS". ec.europa.eu/eurostat. Eurostat. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Comparative price levels". ec.europa.eu/eurostat. Eurostat. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Bulgaria". International Monetary Fund. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2017. "EU: Countries to Begin Counting Drugs, Prostitution in Economic Growth". Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Shadow Economy" (PDF). Eurostat. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2012. Курсове на българския лев към еврото и към валутите на държавите, приели еврото [Exchange rates of the lev to the euro and Eurozone currencies replaced by the euro] (in Bulgarian). Bulgarian National Bank. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Bulgaria: GDP growth (annual %)". The World Bank. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Bulgaria: Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (modeled ILO estimate)". The World Bank. 2018. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Harizanova, Tanya (17 June 2010). "Inter-company debt – one of Bulgarian economy's serious problems". Bulgarian National Radio. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 10 July 2012. Бизнесът очерта уникална диспропорция в България [Business points to a major disproportion in Bulgaria] (in Bulgarian). Dir.bg. 14 January 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "ITUC Frontlines Report 2012: Section on Bulgaria". Novinite. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 10 October 2012. "Bulgaria, Romania Rapped for Public Procurement Fraud". Novinite. 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. Center for the Study of Democracy (2007). Anti-corruption Reforms in Bulgaria: Key Results and Risks. Center for the Study of Democracy. p. 44. ISBN 9789544771461. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Corruption Perceptions Index: Transparency International". Transparency International. 2017. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. Rankin, Jennifer (28 December 2017). "Cloud of corruption hangs over Bulgaria as it takes up EU presidency". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Bulgarian corruption at 15-year high". The Telegraph. 12 December 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Bulgarian border officers suspended over airport security lapse". Reuters. 24 March 2018. Archived from the original on 16 April 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Macdonald, Alastair (11 January 2018). "Bulgaria savors EU embrace despite critics". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 April 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Krasimirov, Angel (17 January 2018). "Bulgaria's government faces no-confidence vote over corruption". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "US State Dept criticises Bulgaria on prisons, judiciary, corruption, people-trafficking and violence against minorities". The Sofia Globe. 21 April 2018. Archived from the original on 6 November 2020. Retrieved 9 July 2018. 10 млрд. лв. годишно се харчат с обществени поръчки [10 bln. leva are spent on public procurement every year]. 24 Chasa (in Bulgarian). 21 February 2016. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2018. Stanchev, Ivaylo (29 December 2017). Рекорд при обществените поръчки: открити са търгове за почти 14 млрд. лв. [A record in public procurement: tenders worth nearly 14 billion lv unveiled] (in Bulgarian). Kapital Daily. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2018. Stefanov, Ruslan (2015). "The Bulgarian Public Procurement Market: Corruption Risks and Dynamics in the Construction Sector" (PDF). Government Favouritism in Europe: The Anticorruption Report 3 (3/2015): 35. doi:10.2307/j.ctvdf0g12.6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Public procurement in Bulgaria" (PDF). European Commission. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Field listing: Labor force". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 7 March 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Field listing: Labor force by occupation". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Manufacturing". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Field listing: Industries". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Bulgaria: Selling off steel". Oxford Business Group. 31 August 2011. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Mining Industry Accounts for 5% of Bulgaria's GDP – Energy Minister". Novinite. 29 August 2015. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2018. "Bulgaria's ore exports rise 10% in H1 2011 – industry group". The Sofia Echo. 18 August 2011. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Total Primary Coal Production (Thousand Short Tons)". U.S. Energy Information Administration. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Resource Base. "Trade In Goods of Bulgaria With Third Countries In the Period January – October 2019 (Preliminary Data)" (PDF). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. November 2019. pp. 7, 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Agricultural Policies in non-OECD countries: Monitoring and Evaluation" (PDF). OECD. 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Bulgaria – Natural conditions, farming traditions and agricultural structures". Food and Agriculture Organization. Archived from the original on 28 March 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2011. "Bulgaria – Economic Summary, UNData, United Nations". United Nations. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Experts: Bumper Year for Wheat Producers in Dobrich Region". Bulgarian Telegraph Agency. 4 August 2017. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2018. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Agriculture". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Ivanova, Miglena (31 May 2017). "Bulgarian rose oil keeps its top place on world market". Bulgarian National Radio. Archived from the original on 16 April 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2018. "Bulgaria is Again the World's First Producer of Lavender Oil". Novinite. 30 November 2017. Archived from the original on 30 April 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2018. "Bulgaria tops lavender oil production, outpacing France". Fox News. 16 July 2014. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "Europe (without the euro)". The Guardian. 20 April 2009. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Tourism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Посещения на чужденци в България по месеци и по страни [Arrivals of foreigners in 2017 by month and country of origin] (in Bulgarian). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 15 February 2019. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. Markov, Alexander (3 October 2011). "100 Tourist Sites of Bulgaria". Bulgarian National Radio. Archived from the original on 15 December 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. NSI Brochure 2018, p. 19. "EU Presidency Puts Lagging Bulgarian Science in the Spotlight". Novinite. 22 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 July 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "R&D Spending in Bulgaria Up in 2015, Mostly Driven by Businesses". Novinite. 31 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "The 2015 Bloomberg Innovation Index". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 25 December 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2018. WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". www.wipo.int. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Shopov, V. (2007). "The impact of the European scientific area on the 'Brain leaking' problem in the Balkan countries". Nauka (1/2007). St. Kliment Ohridski Base. Archived 19 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine SCAR Composite Antarctic Gazetteer Ivanov, Lyubomir (2015). General Geography and History of Livingston Island. Archived 8 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine In: Bulgarian Antarctic Research: A Synthesis. Eds. C. Pimpirev and N. Chipev. Sofia: St. Kliment Ohridski University Press. pp. 17–28. ISBN 978-954-07-3939-7 Hope, Kerin (17 October 2016). "Bulgaria strives to become tech capital of the Balkans". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Bulgaria's ICT Sector Turnover Trebled over Last Seven Years – Deputy Economy Minister". Bulgarian Telegraph Agency. 12 March 2018. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. McMullin, David (2 October 2003). "The Great Bulgarian BrainDrain". Delft Technical University. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. Petrov, Victor (30 September 2021). "Socialist Cyborgs". Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Zapryanov, Yoan (22 June 2018). Малката изчислителна армия на България [Bulgaria's small computing army] (in Bulgarian). Kapital Daily. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Digital Single Market: Europe announces eight sites to host world-class supercomputers". European Commission. 7 June 2019. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2019. Burgess, Colin; Vis, Bert (2016). Interkosmos: The Eastern Bloc's Early Space Program. Springer. pp. 247–250. ISBN 978-3-319-24161-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Cosmonauts Eager, Hopeful for Reboot of Bulgaria's Space Program". Novinite. 17 April 2011. Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2018. Ivanova, Tanya (1998). "Six-month space greenhouse experiments—a step to creation of future biological life support systems". Acta Astronautica. 42 (1–8): 11–23. Bibcode:1998AcAau..42...11I. doi:10.1016/S0094-5765(98)00102-7. PMID 11541596. Harland, David M.; Ulivi, Paolo (2009). Robotic Exploration of the Solar System: Part 2: Hiatus and Renewal, 1983–1996. Springer. p. 155. ISBN 978-0-387-78904-0. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Dimitrova, Milena (2008). Златните десятилетия на българската електроника [The Golden Decades of Bulgarian Electronics]. Trud. pp. 257–258. ISBN 9789545288456. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Badescu, Viorel; Zacny, Kris (2015). Inner Solar System: Prospective Energy and Material Resources. Springer. p. 276. ISBN 978-3-319-19568-1. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Semkova, Jordanka; Dachev, Tsvetan (2015). "Radiation environment investigations during ExoMars missions to Mars – objectives, experiments and instrumentation". Comptes Rendus de l'Académie Bulgare des Sciences. 47 (25): 485–496. ISSN 1310-1331. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Radiation Dose Monitor Experiment (RADOM)". ISRO. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Dachev, Ts.; Dimitrov, Pl.; Tomov, B.; Matviichuk, Yu.; Spurny, F.; Ploc, O. (2011). "Liulin-type spectrometry-dosimetry instruments". Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 144 (1–4): 675–679. doi:10.1093/rpd/ncq506. ISSN 1742-3406. PMID 21177270. "Bulgarian Camera Flies to the Moon". Darik News. 22 March 2019. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "BulgariaSat-1 Mission". SpaceX. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. Library of Congress 2006, p. 14. "Bulgaria: 2011 Telecommunication Market and Regulatory Developments" (PDF). European Commission. 2011. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2013. "Bulgaria Opens Tender for Fourth Mobile Operator". Novinite. 3 October 2011. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Individuals regularly using the Internet (Every day or at least once a week)". National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 27 February 2021. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Households with Internet access at home". National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 27 February 2021. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Energy Hub". Oxford Business Group. 13 October 2008. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. NSI Brochure 2018, p. 47. Krasimirov, Angel (7 June 2018). "Bulgaria must work to restart Belene nuclear project: parliament". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2018. "Bulgaria – Power Generation". International Trade Administration. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. "Country comparison: Total road length". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 15 June 2018. "Trains in Bulgaria". EuRail. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. National Statistical Institute (2022). "Population by Ethnic Group, Statistical Regions, Districts and Municipalities as of 07/09/2021". Archived from the original on 12 February 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2023. National Statistical Institute (24 November 2022). "Ethno-Cultural Characteristics of the Bulgarian Population as at 7 September 2021" (PDF) (in Bulgarian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022. "Population and demographic processes in 2022" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 April 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. NSI Census data 2011, p. 3. "Bulgarians unfazed by anti-Roma hate speech from deputy prime minister". Deutsche Welle. 31 October 2017. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. "Field listing: Ethnic Groups". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Population density (people per sq. km of land area)". The World Bank. 2018. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "World Bank: The demographic crisis is Bulgaria's most serious problem". Klassa. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Demographic crisis in Bulgaria deepening". Bulgarian National Radio. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Will EU Entry Shrink Bulgaria's Population Even More?". Deutsche Welle. 26 December 2006. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2016. Roth, Klaus; Lauth Bacas, Jutta (2004). Migration In, From, and to Southeastern Europe. The British Library. p. 188. ISBN 978-3-643-10896-8. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Eurostat – Tables, Graphs and Maps Interface (TGM) table". Eurostat. 17 October 2013. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. "Population and Demographic Processes in 2018". Nsi.bg. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2020. Max Roser (2014), "Total Fertility Rate around the world over the last centuries", Our World In Data, Gapminder Foundation, archived from the original on 10 May 2022, retrieved 6 May 2019 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain: "World Factbook EUROPE : BULGARIA", The World Factbook, 12 July 2018, archived from the original on 20 April 2021, retrieved 23 January 2021 "Country Comparison: Population growth rate". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Country Comparison: Birth rate". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Country Comparison: Death rate". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. The Global Gender Gap Report (PDF). World Economic Forum. 2018. pp. 10, 45, 46. ISBN 978-2-940631-00-1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2019. "The best countries in Europe for women to work". Yahoo! Finance. 6 March 2021. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021. "Girls and women under-represented in ICT". Eurostat. 25 April 2018. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. Hope, Kerin (9 March 2018). "Bulgaria builds on legacy of female engineering elite". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2018. https://nsi.bg/bg/content/2981/%D0%BD%D0%B0%D1%81%D0%B5%D0%BB%D0%B5%D0%BD%D0%B8%D0%B5-%D0%BF%D0%BE-%D0%B3%D1%80%D0%B0%D0%B4%D0%BE%D0%B2%D0%B5-%D0%B8-%D0%BF%D0%BE%D0%BB Hope, Kerin (11 January 2018). "Bulgaria battles to stop its brain drain". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2018. But a sharp decline in the quality of state healthcare and high poverty rates—42% of the population are at risk of poverty in old age, according to Eurostat—gives Bulgaria the second-lowest life expectancy in the EU after Lithuania. Country Health Profile, p. 1 Georgieva, Lidia; Salchev, Petko (2007). "Bulgaria Health system review" (PDF). Health Systems in Transition. 9 (1): xvi, 12. ISSN 1817-6127. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Country Health Profile, p. 7 Country Health Profile, pp. 8, 11, 12. Guineva, Maria (7 January 2013). "The Bulgaria 2012 Review: Health and Healthcare". Novinite. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2013. Miller, Lee J (19 September 2018). "These Are the Economies With the Most (and Least) Efficient Health Care". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "Country Comparison: Life Expectancy". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 1 February 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Life expectancy at birth, total (years)". The World Bank. 2019. Archived from the original on 15 December 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Education in Bulgaria" (PDF). UNICEF. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 March 2013. Library of Congress 2006, p. 6. Dimitrov, Deyan (3 December 2019). "PISA 2018: Българските ученици покоряват ново дъно" [PISA 2018: Bulgarian pupils reach new lows]. Kapital Daily. Archived from the original on 4 December 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Field Listing: Literacy". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 29 March 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Structure of the Education System in Bulgaria". Ministry of Education, Youth and Science of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Bulgaria: University Ranking". Times Higher Education. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Study in Bulgaria". Times Higher Education. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018. NSI Census data 2011, p. 5 In the 2011 census, the language question was optional and it was answered by 90.2% of those surveyed. "The introduction of the definite article, which appears in the form of a suffix, and the almost total disappearance of the ancient declensions, for which the use of prepositions has been substituted, distinguish the Bulgarian from all the other members of the Slavonic family" (Bourchier, James (1911). "Bulgaria/Language" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp. 784–785.). "The Bulgarian Constitution". Parliament of Bulgaria. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Kiminas, D. (2009). The Ecumenical Patriarchate. Wildside Press LLC. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-4344-5876-6. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Carvalho, Joaquim (2007). Religion and power in Europe: conflict and convergence. Pisa University Press. p. 258. ISBN 978-88-8492-464-3. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Bulgarian Orthodox Church". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 8 October 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Bulgaria's Muslims not deeply religious: study". Hürriyet Daily News. 9 December 2011. Archived from the original on 18 March 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Religious demography in the censuses of 1887, 1905, 1926, 1946, 1992, 2001 and 2011". Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. "2001 Census: Population by districts and religious groups". Archived from the original on 23 February 2017. "Преброяване 2011: Население по местоживеене, възраст и вероизповедание" [2011 Census: Population by place of residence, age and religion]. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. staff, The Sofia Globe (24 November 2022). "Census 2021: Close to 72% of Bulgarians say they are Christians". The Sofia Globe. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. National Statistical Institute (2022). "Population by Religious Denomination, Statistical Regions and Districts as of 07/09/2021". Archived from the original on 21 October 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2023. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – The arts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 28 July 2018. The early impetus of Bulgarian traditions in the arts was cut short by the Ottoman occupation in the 14th century, and many early masterpieces were destroyed. ... the foundations were laid for later artists such as Vladimir Dimitrov, an extremely gifted painter specializing in the rural scenes of his native country ... At the beginning of the 21st century, the best-known contemporary Bulgarian artist was Christo, an environmental sculptor known for wrapping famous structures MacDermott 1998, pp. 64–70. Creed, Gerald W. (2011). Masquerade and Postsocialism: Ritual and Cultural Dispossession in Bulgaria. Indiana University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-253-22261-9. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "The Bulgarian Tradition of Martenitsa". Bulgarian National Television. 1 March 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. MacDermott 1998, p. 226. "Nestinarstvo, messages from the past: the Panagyr of Saints Constantine and Helena in the village of Bulgari". UNESCO. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Bulgaria – Profile". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 4 December 2011. Brisby, Liliana. "Bulgarian Literature". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 20 July 2018. Giatzidis, Emil (2002). An Introduction to post-Communist Bulgaria: Political, Economic and Social Transformation. Manchester University Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-7190-6094-6. Thus, with its early emphasis on Christian Orthodox scholarship, Bulgaria became the first major centre of Slavic culture Riha, Thomas (1964). Readings in Russian Civilization. University of Chicago Press. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-7190-6094-6. And it was mainly from Bulgaria that a rich supply of literary monuments was transferred to Kiev and other centres. McNeill, William Hardy (1963). The Rise of the West. University of Chicago Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-112-69531-5. Accordingly, when Bulgaria was converted to Christianity (after 865), bringing massive Slavic-speaking populations within the pale of Christendom, a new literary language, Old Church Slavonic, directly based upon Bulgarian speech, developed for their use. Curta, Florin (2006). Southeastern Europe in the Middle Ages, 500–1250. Cambridge University Press. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-521-81539-0. "French-Bulgarian Theorist Tzvetan Todorov Wins Top Spanish Award". Novinite. 18 June 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Lorenz, Dagmar C.G. (17 April 2004). "Elias Canetti". The Literary Encyclopedia. Vol. 1.4.1. ISSN 1747-678X. Grabar, André (1928). La Peinture Religieuse en Bulgarie [Religious Visual Arts in Bulgaria]. P. Geuthner. p. 95. ASIN B005ZI4OV8 Kremenliev, Boris A. (1952). Bulgarian-Macedonian Folk Music. University of California Press. p. 52. Bulgaria's scales are numerous, and it may be demonstrated that they are a fusion of Eastern and Western influences. ... first, Oriental scales; second, church modes: the osmoglasie ... third, the conventional scales of Western Europe. ... Among the scales which have come to the Balkans from Asia, the pentatonic is one of the most widely used in Bulgaria. Whether it came from China or Japan, as Dobri Hristov suggests[permanent dead link] "32nd Grammy Awards Winners". Grammy Awards. 28 November 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Lang, David Marshall (1976). The Bulgarians: From Pagan Times to the Ottoman Conquest. Westview Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-89158-530-5. John Kukuzel, the eminent Bulgarian/born reformer of Byzantine music. Tzvetkova, Elena (25 October 2011). "The 2011/2012 season of the National Opera and Ballet House". Bulgarian National Radio. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Obituary: Ghena Dimitrova". The Telegraph. 13 June 2005. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Forbes, Elizabeth (29 June 1993). "Obituary: Boris Christoff". The Independent. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Forbes, Elizabeth (9 September 1996). "Obituary: Ljuba Welitsch". The Independent. Retrieved 4 October 2018. Kozinn, Allan (29 June 1993). "Boris Christoff, Bass, Dies at 79; Esteemed for His Boris Godunov". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Midgette, Anne (3 June 2004). "Nicolai Ghiaurov, Operatic Bass, Dies at 74". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 December 2013. "Bulgaria profile – Media". BBC News. 13 July 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Library of Congress 2006, pp. 18, 23. "Bulgaria". Reporters Without Borders. Retrieved 20 May 2018. Greenslade, Roy (23 September 2014). "Why Bulgaria is the EU's lowest ranked country on press freedom index". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 May 2018. Albala, Ken (2011). Food Cultures of the World Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. pp. 61, 62. ISBN 978-0-313-37626-9. Bruce-Gardyne, Tom (7 February 2012). "Bulgaria Bounces Back". Novinite. Retrieved 7 February 2012. "Bulgaria Ranks 22nd in World Wine Production". Novinite. 21 October 2016. Mihaylov, Ivaylo (14 February 2017). "Bulgaria wine production 2016". SEE News. "Wines of Bulgaria". ChicagoNow. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2018. "Archeological Find Proves Rakia Is Bulgarian Invention". Novinite. 10 October 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Athens 1896". Bulgarian Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Bulgaria". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 5 October 2018. Bell, John D. "Bulgaria – Sport and recreation". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 22 July 2018. In international sports competition, Bulgarians have excelled in tennis, wrestling, boxing, and gymnastics, but the country's greatest repute may be in weight-lifting. ... Fans of football (soccer), the most popular sport in Bulgaria, were buoyed by the success of the national team in the 1994 World Cup, when it advanced to the semi-final match under the leadership of forward Hristo Stoichkov. The premier league in Bulgaria has 16 teams, of which four play in Sofia: CSKA, Levski, Slavia, and Lokomotiv. "Highest high jump (female)". The Guinness World Records. 30 August 1987. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Buddell, James (7 July 2014). "Dimitrov Breaks Into Top 10 of Emirates ATP Rankings". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 9 October 2018. "Hristo Stoichkov". FC Barcelona. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Hristo Stoichkov – Bulgarian League Ambassador". Professional Football Against Hunger. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Eternal+Derby" "Levski, CSKA Score Emphatic Wins Before "Eternal Derby"". Novinite. 1 April 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Ames, Nick (16 September 2014). "Plucky Ludogorets' rise to the Champions League group stage". ESPN. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Club Coefficients". UEFA. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Население по области, общини, местоживеене и пол [Population by Province, Municipality, Address and Sex as of 31 December 2017] (in Bulgarian). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Преброяване 2011 (окончателни данни) [Final Results of the 2011 census] (PDF) (in Bulgarian). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Bulgaria 2018" (PDF) (in Bulgarian and English). National Statistical Institute of Bulgaria. 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2018. Curtis, Glenn (20 October 2006). Country Profile: Bulgaria (PDF) (Report). Federal Research Division. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2024. Retrieved 3 January 2024 – via Library of Congress. "State of Health in the EU. Country Health Profile: Bulgaria 2017" (PDF). European Commission. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2018. Bell, John (1998). Bulgaria in Transition: Politics, Economics, Society, and Culture after Communism. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-9010-9. Chen, Sanping (2012). Multicultural China in the Early Middle Ages. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-4370-3. Crampton, R. J. (1987). A Short History of Modern Bulgaria. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-25340-6. Crampton, R. J. (2005). A Concise History of Bulgaria. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-61637-9. Crampton, R. J. (2007). Bulgaria. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-954158-4. Curtis, Glenn E.; Mitova, Pamela; Marsteller, William; Soper, Karl Wheeler (1992). Country Study: Bulgaria. Library of Congress. Retrieved 6 August 2018 – via Library of Congress Country Studies. "Historical Setting". Chapter 1. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "The First Golden Age". Chapter 1. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2012. "The Final Move to Independence". The Bulgarian Independence Movement. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "San Stefano, Berlin, and Independence". The Bulgarian Independence Movement. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Bulgaria in World War II: The Passive Alliance". World War II. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Wartime Crisis". World War II. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "The Soviet Occupation". World War II. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "After Stalin". Communist Consolidation. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "Domestic Policy and Its Results". Communist Consolidation. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Foreign Affairs in the 1960s and 1970s". The Zhivkov Era. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "The Political Atmosphere in the 1970s". The Zhivkov Era. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Bulgaria in the 1980s". The Zhivkov Era. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 27 July 2018. "Topography". The Society and its Environment. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Climate". The Society and its Environment. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "The Economy". Chapter 3. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Resource Base". The Economy. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Government and Politics". Chapter 4. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Arms Sales". National Security. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 4 December 2011. "Military Personnel". National Security. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2011. Ghodsee, Kristen R. (2011). Lost in Transition: Ethnographies of Everyday Life After Communism. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-5102-3. Ghodsee, Kristen R. (2009). Muslim Lives in Eastern Europe: Gender, Ethnicity and the Transformation of Islam in Postsocialist Bulgaria. Princeton University Press. ASIN B015X41JMA. Ghodsee, Kristen R. (2005). The Red Riviera: Gender, Tourism and Postsocialism on the Black Sea. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-3662-4. Golden, Peter Benjamin (1992). An Introduction to the History of the Turkic Peoples: Ethnogenesis and State Formation in Medieval and Early Modern Eurasia and the Middle East. Otto Harrassowitz. ISBN 978-3-447-03274-2. Grogan, Elinor F. B. (1922). "Bulgaria" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.). London & New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company. MacDermott, Mercia (1998). Bulgarian Folk Customs. Jessica Kingsley Publishers. pp. 19, 64–70, 226. ISBN 978-1-85302-486-3. Roisman, Joseph; Worthington, Ian (2011). A Companion to Ancient Macedonia. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-5163-7. Дончев (Donchev), Дончо (Doncho); Каракашев (Karakashev), Христо (Hristo) (2004). Теми по физическа и социално-икономическа география на България (Topics on Physical and Social-Economic Geography of Bulgaria) (in Bulgarian). София (Sofia): Ciela. ISBN 954-649-717-7. Bulgaria at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Bulgaria at Curlie Bulgaria at UCB Libraries GovPubs. Wikimedia Atlas of Bulgaria Geographic data related to Bulgaria at OpenStreetMap Bulgaria Profile from Balkan Insight President of The Republic of Bulgaria