Man of Steel is a 2013 superhero film based on the DC Comics character Superman. Produced by Warner Bros. Pictures, Legendary Pictures, DC Entertainment, and Syncopy, it was directed by Zack Snyder from a screenplay written by David S. Goyer who developed the story with producer Christopher Nolan. The film is a reboot of the Superman film series, depicting the character's origin story, and it is the first installment in the DC Extended Universe (DCEU). Man of Steel stars Henry Cavill in the title role along with Amy Adams, Michael Shannon, Kevin Costner, Diane Lane, Laurence Fishburne, and Russell Crowe. In the film, Clark Kent learns that he is a superpowered alien from the planet Krypton. He assumes the role of mankind's protector as Superman, making the choice to face General Zod and prevent him from destroying humanity. Development began in 2008 when Warner Bros. took pitches from comic book writers, screenwriters, and directors, opting to reboot the franchise. In 2009, a court ruling resulted in Jerry Siegel's family recapturing the rights to Superman's origins and Siegel's copyright. The decision stated that Warner Bros. did not owe the families additional royalties from previous films, but if they did not begin production on a Superman film by 2011, then the Shuster and Siegel estates would be able to sue for lost revenue on an unproduced film. Nolan pitched Goyer's idea after a story discussion on The Dark Knight Rises, and Snyder was hired as the film's director in October 2010. Principal photography began in August 2011 in West Chicago, Illinois, before moving to Vancouver and Plano, Illinois. Man of Steel premiered in the Alice Tully Hall in New York City on June 10, 2013, and was released by Warner Bros. Pictures in the United States on June 14, 2013. Critics felt the film's visually-appealing action sequences were not enough to overcome its descent into "generic blockbuster territory", and they were divided over Cavill's performance as Superman. It grossed $668 million worldwide, becoming the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2013. A follow-up, titled Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, was released on March 25, 2016. The planet Krypton is destabilizing from the mining of the planetary core. Just before the planet explodes, Krypton's top scientist, Jor-El, steals and infuses the genetics codex into his infant son, Kal-El, the first naturally born Kryptonian child in centuries. Jor-El manages to send Kal-El in a spacecraft toward Earth before being killed by General Zod during a coup d'état. Kal-El lands in Kansas, where he is adopted by Jonathan and Martha Kent and named Clark. As he grows older, due to his Kryptonian physiology and Earth's yellow sun, he develops superhuman powers that Jonathan urges him to keep hidden, even refusing Clark's help years later during a tornado storm where he loses his life. Burdened with guilt over Jonathan's death, Clark travels the globe hiding under various aliases seeking a purpose in life. Daily Planet reporter Lois Lane receives an assignment to investigate the discovery of a Kryptonian scout ship in the Arctic. Clark enters the ship disguised as a worker and learns from its artificial intelligence modeled after his father Jor-El about his origins, and that Clark was sent to Earth to guide its people. While following Clark, Lois inadvertently triggers the ship's security system, and he uses his powers to rescue Lois from its defenses. He wears a uniform provided by the ship's AI and begins testing his abilities. Unable to convince supervisor Perry White to publish an article on the incident, Lois tracks down Clark in Smallville, with the intent of exposing him. However, Lois drops the story upon hearing of Jonathan Kent's sacrifice, keeping Clark's identity safe while fueling Perry's suspicions. Zod and his crew escape the Phantom Zone, where they were imprisoned for treason for their actions against Krypton. They travel to Earth to turn it into a new Krypton, possessing several terraforming devices salvaged from Kryptonian outposts. Following Clark and Lois' capture, Zod's science officer, Jax-Ur, extracts Clark's genes to create new Kryptonians who will build a society based on Zod's ideals of genetic purity. Using the Jor-El AI to take over the ship, Clark and Lois flee and warn the U.S. military of Zod's plan, resulting in a confrontation between Clark and Zod's troops. Zod deploys his most powerful terraforming device, the World Engine, which severely damages Metropolis and risks humanity's extinction. Clark destroys the terraforming platform while the military launches an attack on the World Engine, sending Zod's troops back to the Phantom Zone. With the ship destroyed and Krypton's only hope of revival gone, Zod vows to destroy Earth and its inhabitants out of revenge. The two Kryptonians engage in a lengthy battle across Metropolis, which concludes when Clark is forced to kill Zod as the latter attacks a family trapped in a train station. Sometime later, Clark adopts the moniker "Superman" and persuades the government to let him act independently, under the condition he does not turn against humanity. To gain covert access to dangerous situations, he takes a job under his civilian identity, Clark Kent, as a reporter for the Daily Planet. Henry Cavill as Kal-El / Clark Kent: A Kryptonian with superhuman powers and abilities, sent by his parents to Earth as an infant to escape the destruction of his homeworld, Krypton, and raised under the mental guidance of farmers in Smallville, Kansas, until he is inspired by the holographic message from his late father to become Earth's greatest protector. Cavill is the first non-American actor to play the character. He was previously cast in Superman: Flyby, which was ultimately shelved, and was considered for the role in the 2006 film Superman Returns, but lost to Brandon Routh. Cavill stated, "There's a very real story behind the Superman character." He explained that everyone's goal has been to explore the difficulties his character faces as a result of having multiple identities—including his birth name, Kal-El, and his alter ego, Clark Kent. Cavill also stated that "He's alone and there's no one like him," referring to Superman's vulnerabilities. "That must be incredibly scary and lonely, not to know who you are or what you are, and trying to find out what makes sense. Where's your baseline? What do you draw from? Where do you draw a limit with the power you have? In itself, that's an incredible weakness." In an interview with Total Film magazine, Cavill stated he had been consuming nearly 5,000 calories a day, training for over two hours daily and plowing protein to pack on the muscle mass. Tyler Hoechlin (who would later play the character in the Arrowverse and Superman & Lois), Matthew Goode, Armie Hammer, Jamie Dornan, Joe Manganiello and Colin O'Donoghue were also considered for the role. Manganiello was subsequently cast as Deathstroke in Justice League. Cavill cited his inspiration for his portrayal for Superman was by four comics The Death of Superman, The Return of Superman, Superman: Red Son and Superman/Batman: The Search for Kryptonite. Cooper Timberline was cast as the 9-year-old Clark Kent, and Dylan Sprayberry was cast as the 13-year-old Clark Kent. Amy Adams as Lois Lane: A reporter for the Daily Planet newspaper and the love interest of Clark Kent. Adams was selected from a list of actresses that included Kristen Stewart, Zoe Saldaña, Olivia Wilde, and Mila Kunis. "There was a big, giant search for Lois," Snyder said. "For us, it was a big thing and obviously a really important role. We did a lot of auditioning, but we had this meeting with Amy Adams and after that I just felt she was perfect for it." Adams auditioned for the role three times: once for the unproduced Superman: Flyby, and the second time for Superman Returns before landing the current role. Adams was confirmed to play Lois Lane in March 2011. While announcing the role, Snyder said in a statement, "We are excited to announce the casting of Amy Adams, one of the most versatile and respected actresses in films today. Amy has the talent to capture all of the qualities we love about Lois: smart, tough, funny, warm, ambitious and, of course, beautiful." On portraying Lois Lane, Adams stated that the film would feature a Lois Lane who is an "independent, feisty woman ... but set in a more identifiable world." Adams said that "She has become more of a free-ranging journalist, someone who likes to be hands-on. The nature of the newspaper business has changed so much. There is so much more pressure." Michael Shannon as General Zod: A Kryptonian general with the same superpowers as Superman, bent on transforming Earth into a new Krypton under his reign. Viggo Mortensen and Daniel Day-Lewis were also considered for the role. Snyder stated, "Zod is not only one of Superman's most formidable enemies, but one of the most significant because he has insights into Superman that others don't. Michael is a powerful actor who can project both the intelligence and the malice of the character, making him perfect for the role." When Goyer was asked about why Zod was chosen as the villain, he stated, "The way (Christopher) Nolan and I have always approached movies as well is you never say, 'Hey, which villain would be cool for this movie?' You start with the story first. What kind of story? What kind of theme do you want to tell? So we worked that out. Then, usually the villain becomes obvious in terms of who's going to be the appropriate antagonist for that. When you guys see the movie, the only villain we could've used was Zod and the Kryptonians. I mean, when you see what the whole story is, nothing else would have even made sense." Kevin Costner as Jonathan Kent: Clark's adoptive father. Snyder explained his reason for his casting the on-screen couple is solely for the realism: "I think the thing you realize when you look at Diane and Kevin, in our decision to cast them so far, you sort of get a sense of how tonally we're looking at the movie, and what you realize is that those guys are serious actors, and we're taking this movie very seriously in terms of the tone of having those guys. You're talking about having a situation where whatever the action is or whatever the drama of the movie is, our first priority is to make sure it's rendered in the most realistic way we can get at." Diane Lane as Martha Kent: Clark's adoptive mother. Lane was the first cast member to join the film after Cavill. "This was a very important piece of casting for me because Martha Kent is the woman whose values helped shape the man we know as Superman," Snyder said in the release. "We are thrilled to have Diane in the role because she can convey the wisdom and the wonder of a woman whose son has powers beyond her imagination." Laurence Fishburne as Perry White: Editor-in-chief of the Daily Planet and the boss of Lois Lane. Fishburne is the first African-American to play Perry White in a live-action film. Fishburne remarked of his role: "[M]y inspiration really is the late Ed Bradley, who was a CBS correspondent on 60 Minutes for many years ... [The] legendary Ed Bradley ... was a friend, a mentor, and a role model for me, particularly because he worked in journalism, and he was the kind of guy who walked with kings, but he had the common touch. And so he was my inspiration for Perry." Antje Traue as Faora-Ul: General Zod's sub-commander and a commander of the Kryptonian military, who is completely devoted and loyal to Zod. Gal Gadot was offered the role but declined because she was pregnant at that time; this allowed her to be later cast as Wonder Woman in the film's sequel. Alice Eve, Diane Kruger and Rosamund Pike were also considered for the role. About the role of Faora, Traue said in an interview: "What I liked about her was that as a woman, we have certain doubts and we think too much sometimes about ourselves and all these things, they're not there for Faora. She's a bred warrior. So to really focus on that aspect, that fear is a chemical reaction and that it was bred out of her and she doesn't have it, it's liberating when you actually think about it. That you're just a one-track mind, there's no filter, there's no double meaning. She gets orders and she answers those orders without a question." Ayelet Zurer as Lara Lor-Van: Kal-El's biological mother and loyal wife to Jor-El. Julia Ormond had previously been announced as cast, but dropped out. Connie Nielsen was in negotiations for the role before Zurer was cast. Nielsen was subsequently cast as Queen Hippolyta in Wonder Woman. Christopher Meloni as Col. Nathan Hardy: A United States Air Force officer, call sign "Guardian", assigned to the United States Northern Command. Russell Crowe as Jor-El: A Kryptonian scientist who is Kal-El's biological father. Sean Penn and Clive Owen were also considered for the role. Crowe incorporates how his own fatherhood informed his reading of the script to portray Jor-El, stating that "... it was one of those things where that's how it was connecting me. That's the question that Jor-El faces, that's the situation that he's in." Crowe also comments on his preparation for the film stating that: "When I signed on ... well, one, I didn't realize that I would be wearing Spandex—'cause you know that's Superman's costume—I didn't realize that I'd have to fit into it as well," Crowe said. "But, I also didn't realize the type of organiser that Zack Snyder is, 'cause this was really old-school prep. This is sort of David Lean-level preparation, and I really appreciated him. And I was on the movie for three and a half or four months before I even got in front of the camera." Additionally, Harry Lennix plays Lieutenant General Calvin Swanwick, a United States Army general officer and the deputy commander of United States Northern Command. Christina Wren plays Capt. Carrie Ferris, a United States Air Force officer and the assistant to General Swanwick. Richard Schiff plays Dr. Emil Hamilton, a scientist who works with the United States Armed Forces for DARPA. Carla Gugino portrays the voice of Kelor, the Kryptonian AI service-robot. Mackenzie Gray plays Jax-Ur, a Kryptonian scientist who is one of General Zod's followers. Michael Kelly plays Steve Lombard, an employee of the Daily Planet, and Rebecca Buller plays Jenny Jurwich, an intern of the Daily Planet. Jadin Gould, Rowen Kahn, and Jack Foley, respectively, play Lana Lang, Kenny Braverman, and Pete Ross, classmates of Clark Kent in high school. Joseph Cranford portrays Ross as an adult. Richard Cetrone, Samantha Jo, Revard Dufresne and Apollonia Vanova, respectively, play Tor-An, Car-Vex, Dev-Em II and Nadira, Kryptonian soldiers that follow General Zod. He basically told me, 'I have this thought about how you would approach Superman', I immediately got it, loved it and thought: That is a way of approaching the story I've never seen before that makes it incredibly exciting. I wanted to get Emma Thomas and I involved in shepherding the project right away and getting it to the studio and getting it going in an exciting way. —Christopher Nolan, recalling the moment when Goyer presented the idea of a modernized Superman. In June 2008, Warner Bros. took pitches from comic book writers, screenwriters and directors on how to successfully reboot the Superman film series. Comic book writers Grant Morrison, Mark Waid, Geoff Johns and Brad Meltzer were among those who pitched their ideas for a reboot: "I told them, it's not that bad. Just treat Superman Returns as the Ang Lee Hulk", Morrison said. Waid said: "The Incredible Hulk has proven the audience will forgive you and let you redo the franchise". Morrison's idea was similar to their work on All-Star Superman, while Waid's was akin to Superman: Birthright. Mark Millar, teaming with director Matthew Vaughn, also planned an epic eight-hour Superman trilogy, each installment released a year apart, similar to The Lord of the Rings. Millar compared it to The Godfather trilogy, in which it would chronicle the entire life of Superman, from the early days of Krypton, where little Kal-El witnesses his father's tireless struggle to save the planet, to the finale where Superman loses his powers as the Sun starts to go supernova. According to Millar, Vaughn suggested his Stardust actor Charlie Cox as a Golden-Age inspired Superman "when he was a bit more of a regular person". Vaughn would later say his pitch for a trilogy film would have been to a similar tone to Richard Donner's 1978 film, and would have included villains such as Zod, Brainiac, and Lex Luthor. In August 2008, Warner Bros. suggested that the planned sequel to Superman Returns, subtitled Man of Steel by director Bryan Singer, would now be a reboot of the film series. Studio executive Jeff Robinov planned to have the film released either by 2010 or 2011, explaining that "Superman Returns didn't quite work as a film in the way that we wanted it to. It didn't position the character the way he needed to be positioned. Had Superman worked in 2006, we would have had a movie for Christmas of this year or 2009. Now the plan is just to reintroduce Superman without regard to a Batman and Superman movie at all." Paul Levitz stated in an interview that Batman holds the key to the Superman reboot. He elaborated: "Everyone is waiting for Nolan to sign on for another Batman, once that happens, the release date for Superman and all other future projects will follow." In February 2009, McG, who previously planned to direct Superman: Flyby, expressed interest in returning to the Superman franchise. August 2009 saw a court ruling in which Jerry Siegel's family recaptured 50% of the rights to Superman's origins and Siegel's share of the copyright in Action Comics #1. In addition, a judge ruled that Warner Bros. did not owe the families additional royalties from previous films. However, if they did not begin production on a Superman film by 2011, then the Siegel estate would have been able to sue for lost revenue on an unproduced film. The plot of Man of Steel employs a nonlinear narrative, and tells parts of the story in flashbacks. During story discussions for The Dark Knight Rises in 2008, David S. Goyer told Christopher Nolan his idea regarding how to present Superman in a modern context. Impressed with Goyer's concept, Nolan pitched the idea to the studio, who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of The Dark Knight. Nolan admired Singer's work on Superman Returns for its connection to Richard Donner's version, stating that "a lot of people have approached Superman in a lot of different ways. I only know the way that has worked for us that's what I know how to do", emphasizing the idea that Batman exists in a world where he is the only superhero and a similar approach to the Man of Steel would assure the integrity needed for the film. Nolan, however, clarified that the new film would not have any relationship with the previous film series, in which he commented: "Each serves to the internal logic of the story. They have nothing to do with each other". Robinov spoke to Entertainment Weekly, and allowed a peek over the wall of secrecy surrounding their DC Comics plans: "It's setting the tone for what the movies are going to be like going forward. In that, it's definitely a first step." Plans included for the film to contain references to the existence of other superheroes, alluding to the possibility of a further DC Universe, and setting the tone for a shared fictional universe of DC Comics characters on film. Guillermo del Toro, with whom Goyer worked on Blade II, turned down the director's position on the reboot because of his commitment on a film adaptation of At the Mountains of Madness, while Robert Zemeckis was also approached. Ben Affleck (who would eventually be cast as Bruce Wayne/Batman in the film's sequel), Darren Aronofsky, Duncan Jones, Jonathan Liebesman, Matt Reeves (who would later direct a Batman reboot), and Tony Scott were considered as potential directors, before Zack Snyder was hired in October 2010. Casting began the following November. Snyder confirmed both Booster Gold and Batman references in the film, indicating their presence in the DC shared film universe. When Zod destroys a satellite, the words "Wayne Enterprises" are scrolled on the satellite. Snyder and Nolan considered having Man of Steel share continuity with the Dark Knight trilogy, but ultimately decided against it. The film's storyboard was created by storyboard artist Jay Oliva, in his first live-action feature film project, along with Snyder. Oliva has cited the Japanese anime shows Dragon Ball Z and Birdy the Mighty as an inspiration for the film's epic battle scenes. During the film's brainstorming, Oliva pitched the idea as "I could come up with something I've never seen in live-action American cinema and only in anime". Principal photography began on August 1, 2011, at an industrial park near DuPage Airport under the codename "Autumn Frost". Zack Snyder expressed reluctance to shooting the film in 3-D, due to the technical limitations of the format, and instead chose to shoot the film two-dimensionally and convert the film into 3-D in post-production, for a 2-D, 3-D, and IMAX 3-D release. Snyder also chose to shoot the film on film instead of digitally, because he felt it would make the film "a big movie experience". Cinematographer Amir Mokri shot the film with Panavision Panaflex Millennium XL2 cameras and C-Series anamorphic lenses. Filming was expected to last for two to three months. Production took place in Plano, Illinois on August 22 to 29. According to an interview with Michael Shannon, filming would continue until February 2012. Man of Steel filmed in the Chicago area, California, and Burnaby's Mammoth Studios in Vancouver, which was used as a set for Krypton and the extraterrestrial aircraft portrayed in the film. Vancouver's North Shore waterfront area was also used for the oil rig rescue scene where Superman is first introduced. Ucluelet and Nanaimo, British Columbia, feature prominently in the film's first hour—the trademark winter mist and rough seas are passed off as Alaska in the film. Filming took place in the Chicago Loop from September 7 to 17. The Chicago shoot was a unit project, meaning that filming would partake numerous establishing shots as well as cutaways and might not necessarily include principal cast members. Man of Steel features a redesigned Superman costume by James Acheson and Michael Wilkinson. The costume preserves the color scheme and "S" logo, but adopts darker tones, and notably does not feature the red trunks usually worn by Superman. Zack Snyder said the costume is "a modern aesthetic". He and the producers attempted to devise a suit featuring the red trunks, but could not design one that fit into the tone of the film, leading to their removal from the suit. Because of Wilkinson's unavailability, Snyder chose Acheson to design the suit; however, he only started developing it, and Wilkinson finished the development when he returned, and designed the other character's costumes as well. Due to the substantial weight a practical suit would yield, the Kryptonian armor for General Zod was constructed through CGI to allow Shannon "freedom of movement". In a March 2014 interview with Esquire, Wilkinson explained the reason for the look of Superman's redesigned suit: A lot of the efforts we took in the film were to explain why the suit looks the way it does. We didn't want it to be a random, ornamental decision. We start the film on the planet of Krypton, which is where the suit comes from, and we go to great pains to show the suit fitting into the culture. All of the people you see on Krypton are wearing this chainmail-like suit, with the same detailing as the Superman suit. Everyone has their family crests on their chests. The cuff and the boot details are shared through all of the different characters we meet on Krypton. So by the time we see Superman in his suit we understand why it looks the way it looks. John "DJ" Desjardin served as the visual supervisor for Man of Steel, with Weta Digital, MPC and Double Negative providing the visual effects for the film. Zack Snyder wanted the film to "appear very natural because there's some very fantastical things in there and he wanted people to suspend their disbelief, and we the visual effects team had to make it as easy as possible for them to do so." Desjardin noted that the intent in shooting the film was to use handheld devices to make the film feel like a "documentary-style" film. Desjardin said: "We had to think about what that would mean, since we also had to photograph some crazy action. So for a lot of the previs we did, we'd start to think where our cameras were and where our cameraman was. A lot of the rules are the Battlestar Galactica rules for the space cams that Gary Hurtzel [sic] developed for that miniseries, where we want to make sure if we're translating the camera at all it makes sense. Unless the action is so over the top, like in the end where Superman is beating up Zod—we had to break it a bit." For the first act of the film taking place on the planet Krypton, Weta Digital placed alien-like planet environments, creatures and the principal means of display—a technology the filmmakers called "liquid geometry". Weta Digital visual effects supervisor Dan Lemmon explained that "it's a bunch of silver beads that are suspended through a magnetic field, and the machine is able to control that magnetic field so that the collection of beads behave almost like three-dimensional pixels, and they can create a surface that floats in the air and describes whatever the thing is you're supposed to be seeing." The beads of the display, which up close would appear to be pyramids with a slight bevel, were designed to create a surface of the object to depict inside a "console-like" figure. In the modeling and animation aspect of the liquid geometry, Goodwin explained: "We had to develop a pipeline to bring in assets, so instead of going through the route of reducing the polygon count to something usable what we would then do—you would take the model in whatever way it was made and just scatter discrete points onto it, and extract the matrix onto the animation and copy these points onto the matrix and have these sparse points behaving in a way that the model would." After the animation, artists duplicated the beads onto the animated geometry for a pre-simulated lighting version to get approval on how the object would read. Sims were then run "on all the targets which would be discrete beads floating around on top of the surface which would have its own set of parameters", in which Goodwin further explained: "The bead size or the turbulence that would crawl along the surface constantly updating the orientation was based on the normal provided by the surface. That was then saved to disk and we would use that sim as the final target for the simulation." After the simulation process, Weta Digital ran every bead through a temporal filter to remove jitter to control the noise. Lighting solutions directly worked on the set. Weta used RenderMan to take advantage of improved ray tracing and instancing objects. The sequences where Superman uses close-combat fight scenes with the other Kryptonians proved to be a major challenge for the filmmakers and the visual effects crew. Desjardin explained: "When we do these fights and these hyper-real things, we don't want to do the traditional, 'OK I'm a cameraman, I'm shooting a clean plate, I'm going to pan over here to follow the action that's not really there yet but we'll put the action in later. Because that's us animating the characters to the camera. So we would do that animation with the characters—grappling, punching or flying away—and we would take the real guys up until the point until they were supposed to do that and we'd cut. Then we'd put an environment camera there and take the environment. And then a camera for reference of the actors and get each moment. So then we had a set of high-res stills for the environment and the characters. Then, in post, we take the digi-doubles and animate them according to the speeds we want them to move in our digital environment." MPC handled the visual effects for the "Smallville encounter" sequence. Before providing the visual effects, the shots were previsualized for the fight choreography. After the previsualizations, live action portions of the scene would be filmed in small pieces: "If say Superman was being punched and would land 50 meters away, we would shoot our start position and end position, and then bridge that gap with the CG takeovers", says Guillaume Rocheron, the MPC visual effects supervisor. A camera rig would then obtain key frames of the choreographed actor; Desjardin said "it's a six-still camera rig that's built on a pipe rig so that you can run it in at the end of a setup and get stills of key frames of a performance or an expression, and then we could use those hi-res stills to project onto the CG double and get really accurate transition lighting and color—right from the set." On set, a camera rig was used to capture the environment of the sequence. Dubbed "enviro-cam", the visual effects crew would mount a Canon EOS 5D and a motorized nodal head, allowing the crew to capture the environment at a 360-degree angle with 55K resolution for every shot, the process would take approximately two to four minutes. The set capture resulted in lighting and textures that could be reprojected onto geometry. Full-screen digital doubles were a major component for the fighting sequences. Digital armor was also added, along with the energy-based Kryptonian helmets. Cyberscan and FACS were conducted with the actors, and polarized and non-polarized reference photos were taken. Superman's cape and costume were scanned in high detail—the cape in particular became a direct extension of Superman's actions. For the sequences involving the terraforming of the city Metropolis, Double Negative handled the visual effects for the sequence. To construct a Metropolis that seemed convincing and realistic, Double Negative used Esri's CityEngine to help procedurally deliver the city. According to Ged Wright, a Double Negative visual effects supervisor, it was a much more sci-fi based role, "so we took what they had done and extended it a great deal. The work we were doing was based around the Downtowns for New York, L.A. and Chicago and that gave us the building volumes for heights. We'd skin those volumes with kit parts, but most of it then had to fall down! So we had to rig it for destruction and use it for other aspects of the work as well." For the destruction of the buildings, the studio rewrote its own asset system to focus towards its dynamic events. The Bullet physics software was a heavily impacted component for the use of the destruction. Wright said that "we wanted to be able to run an RBD event and trigger all these secondary events, whether it was glass or dust simulations—all of those things needed to be chained up and handled in a procedural way. One of the advantages of this was that, because it was all based around a limited number of input components, you can make sure they're modeled in a way they're usable in effects—you can model something but they'll be another stage to rig it for destruction." Fire, smoke, and water stimulation tools were developed at the Double Negative studio. The studio transitioned between the existing proprietary volume rendering software to rendering in Mantra for elements such as fireball sims. Double Negative also used the in-house fluids tool "Squirt" to handle larger-scale sims and interaction for more tightly coupled volumes and particles. Regarding the battle between Superman and Zod, Double Negative implemented real photography onto its digital doubles. Hans Zimmer initially denied popular rumors that he would be composing the film's score, but in June 2012, it was confirmed that Zimmer would, in fact, be doing so after all. To completely distinguish Man of Steel from the previous films, the iconic "Superman March" by John Williams was not used. Hans Zimmer's soundtrack for Man of Steel was released publicly on June 11, 2013. An unofficial rip of the musical score from the third trailer, entitled "An Ideal of Hope", confirmed to be a cut-down version of the track "What Are You Going to Do When You Are Not Saving the World?", was released on April 19. In late April, the official track listing of the two-CD deluxe edition was revealed. Many reviewers interpreted Man of Steel as a religious allegory, especially since Warner Bros. set up a website that contains "a nine-page pamphlet entitled Jesus: The Original Superhero". Justin Craig compares Kal-El's struggle to the Passion of Christ, stating that "Kal-El is more than willing to sacrifice himself to save the people of Earth. Originally reluctant to reveal his identity and powers to the world, Superman decides to turn himself over to Zod to save humanity from annihilation." Craig also states that there is an allegory to the Trinity within Man of Steel: "Jor-El returns to Kal-El on Earth as a ghost, guiding his budding superhero son on his journey to salvation. Before Jor-El sends his son off to Earth baby Moses-style, he tells his wife that, like Jesus, 'He'll be a god to them.'" Paul Asay of The Washington Post writes that "Superman floats in space with his arms splayed out as if nailed to an invisible cross," a fact that Craig also mentioned in his assessment of the film. The protagonist of the film is also 33 years old and seeks "counsel at a church." Writing for The Huffington Post, Colin Liotta compared Zod to Adolf Hitler, citing: "He feels his vision for a pure Krypton (i.e. a society like the one Hitler envisioned with his eugenics program) is the only answer for survival." The sequence where a young Clark's powers overwhelm him in grade school, leading to him shutting himself in a closet, has led many to speculate that DC Extended Universe Superman is either autistic or meant to represent the struggles of autism. Many noted that when Martha comforts him, she encourages him to hone out the world by focusing on her voice, an example of hyperfocus; a necessary tool for many autistics to reduce overstimulation. Warner Bros. and DC Comics won the rights to the domain name manofsteel.com, in use by a member of the public, for use for the film's official website. On November 20, 2012, for the release of The Dark Knight Rises DVD and Blu-ray, Warner Bros. launched a countdown on the film's website where fans could share the countdown on websites like Facebook or Twitter to unlock an "exclusive reward". On December 3, 2012, the "exclusive reward" was revealed to be an official Man of Steel teaser poster. The poster, which depicts Superman being arrested, generated a positive response and much speculation about the film's story. On December 10, 2012, a website appeared at dsrwproject.com that provided audio signals to be decoded by viewers. It was discovered to be related to the film due to the copyright on the website. By December 11, 2012, the decoded message led readers to another website with a countdown that led to the public release of the trailer. In anticipation of the film, Mattel unveiled a toy line which includes Movie Masters action figures. In addition, Lego released three Man of Steel sets, inspired by scenes from the film; Rubie's Costume Co. also released a new line of Man of Steel-inspired costumes and accessories for both kids and adults. The film has reportedly earned over $160 million from promotional tie-ins. Viral marketing campaigns for the film began when the official website was replaced by "deep space radio waves". The message was decoded to reveal a voice that said "You Are Not Alone". The official site continued to be updated with new static files that slowly revealed the symbol for the film's villain, General Zod. Shortly after, the website was replaced with a "message" from Zod, who requested that Earth must return Kal-El to his custody and told Kal-El to surrender within 24 hours or the world would suffer the consequences. A viral site called "IWillFindHim.com" was released that showed a countdown to the third trailer for the film. Warner Bros. enlisted Christian-based marketing firm Grace Hill Media to help spread the Christian themes of the film to the religious demographics. Special trailers were created outlining the religious tones, due to Hollywood studios frequently marketing movies to specific religious and cultural groups. Warner Bros. previously marketed films such as The Blind Side, The Notebook, The Book of Eli and the Harry Potter series to faith-based groups. Warner Bros. also asked Professor Craig Detweiler of Pepperdine University to "create a Superman-centric sermon outline for pastors titled Jesus: The Original Superhero." Regarding this, Paul Asay of The Washington Post wrote that "the religious themes keep coming: Free will. Sacrifice. God-given purpose. Man of Steel isn't just a movie. It's a Bible study in a cape. The messages are so strong that its marketers been [sic] explicitly pushing the film to Christian audiences." Man of Steel held a red carpet premiere at the Lincoln Center's Alice Tully Hall in New York City on June 10, 2013, which featured the attendance of the principal cast members. The film received a wide release on June 14, 2013. The film was originally slated for release in December 2012, but it was pushed to the June 14, 2013, date to avoid competition with Warner Bros's other film The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, which was released on December 14, 2012. It was released as a single-disc DVD (feature film only), on two-disc DVD with bonus features, and respective Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D combo packs on November 12, 2013, and in the United Kingdom on December 2, 2013. As of January 2019, Man of Steel has sold more than 2.3 million DVDs along with an estimated of 3.3 million Blu-ray Discs totaling $44.4 million and $76.2 million, respectively, for a total of $120.7 million in sales. The film was later released in 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray format on July 19, 2016. Man of Steel grossed $291 million in the United States and Canada, and $377 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $668 million, making it the highest-grossing solo Superman film of all time and the second-highest when adjusting for inflation. It is also the second-highest-grossing reboot of all time behind The Amazing Spider-Man. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $42.7 million, when factoring together all expenses and revenues, making it the ninth most profitable release of 2013. The film earned $116.6 million on its opening weekend, including $17.5 million from IMAX theaters. Man of Steel earned an additional $120 million from DVD and Blu-ray sales. Man of Steel made $12 million from a Thursday night Walmart screening program, and an additional $9 million from midnight shows. This marked Warner Bros.' third-highest advance night/midnight opening, and the biggest advance night/midnight debut for a non-sequel. The film eventually earned $44 million during its opening Friday (including midnight grosses) and $56.1 million when the Thursday night showings are included. The opening-day gross was the second-highest for a non-sequel, and the 20th-largest overall. Its opening weekend gross of $116.6 million was the third-highest of 2013, behind Iron Man 3 ($174.1 million) and The Hunger Games: Catching Fire ($158.1 million), and the third-highest among non-sequels, behind Marvel's The Avengers ($207.4 million) and The Hunger Games ($152.5 million). It also broke Toy Story 3's record ($110.3 million) for the highest weekend debut in June (the record was again broken two years later by Jurassic World's opening gross of $208.8 million). However, on its second weekend, Man of Steel's box office fell almost 65%–68% if the Thursday night gross is included—putting it in third place, behind Monsters University and World War Z. Box Office Mojo called it an "abnormally large drop," close to the second-weekend decline for Green Lantern. Man of Steel earned $73.3 million on its opening weekend from 24 countries, which includes $4.2 million from 79 IMAX theaters, setting a June opening-weekend record for IMAX. The film set an opening-day record in the Philippines with $1.66 million. In the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta, the film earned $5.6 million on its opening day and £11.2 million ($17.47 million) on its opening weekend. Its biggest opener outside the United States was in China, with $25.9 million in four days (Thursday to Sunday). In total earnings, its three largest countries after North America are China ($63.4 million), the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta ($46.2 million) and Australia ($22.3 million). On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 56% based on 344 reviews and an average rating of 6.2/10. The site's consensus reads, "Man of Steel's exhilarating action and spectacle can't fully overcome its detours into generic blockbuster territory." On Metacritic, the film received a weighted score of 55 out of 100 based on 47 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audience polls in North America from CinemaScore for the film tallied an average grade of an "A−" on an A+ to F scale, with those under the age of 18 and older than 50 giving it an "A". Cavill's performance as Superman earned mixed reviews, with some critics commenting on perceived stiffness and a lack of charisma. Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times said that Man of Steel covered no new ground with regard to Superman films, and instead, "we're plunged back into a mostly-underwhelming film, with underdeveloped characters and supercharged-fight scenes that drag on and offer nothing new in the way of special-effects creativity". The Boston Globe's Ty Burr wrote, "What's missing from this Superman saga is a sense of lightness, of pop joy". The Washington Post's Ann Hornaday stated that with "Hans Zimmer's turgid, over-produced score", the film "is an exceptionally-unpleasant viewing experience". For The Denver Post's Lisa Kennedy, the chief problem with Man of Steel is the "rhythm and balance in the storytelling and directing" which resulted in a film that swings "between destructive overstatement and flat-footed homilies." Kofi Outlaw, Editor-in-Chief at Screen Rant, gave Man of Steel a 4-out-of-5-star review, stating that "Man of Steel has more than earned its keep, and deserves to be THE iconic Superman movie for a whole new generation". He would go on to name Man of Steel the best superhero movie of 2013. Jim Vejvoda of IGN gave Man of Steel a 9 out of 10 while praising the action sequences and the performances of Kevin Costner, Russell Crowe and Michael Shannon. The performance of Antje Traue as Superman's adversary Faora-Ul, particularly in the Smallville battle scenes, has also been lauded. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave it 3 stars out of 4, saying, "Caught in the slipstream between action and angst, Man of Steel is a bumpy ride for sure. But there's no way to stay blind to its wonders." Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said rebooting the franchise was unnecessary, but that the film was confident enough and Snyder's attention to detail careful enough that audiences could overlook another reboot. PopMatters journalist J.C. Maçek III, wrote, "The path of this flawed savior isn't quite the one that we have been led to expect and many fans will love that and many fans will decry its comic book-divergent choices. On the other hand, barring Lois Lane's own knowledge of the dual nature of Clark and Superman (thus depriving one of fiction's greatest reveals), the hero we see in the final moments of Man of Steel is nothing if not the character Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster created ... with just a bit more in the 'imperfections' column." Steve Persall of the Tampa Bay Times stated that, "Man of Steel is more than just Avengers-sized escapism; it's an artistic introduction to a movie superhero we only thought we knew." Time magazine's Richard Corliss said, "The movie finds its true, lofty footing not when it displays Kal-El's extraordinary powers, but when it dramatizes Clark Kent's roiling humanity. The super part of Man of Steel is just okay, but the man part is super." In a review on Roger Ebert's website, Matt Zoller Seitz awarded the film three out of four stars, calling it an "astonishing movie" and praising the conflict between Clark and Zod. But he criticized the film for not having more personal and intimate moments between Clark and Lois. In 2014, Empire ranked Man of Steel the 286th-greatest film ever made on their list of "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time" as voted by the magazine's readers. Speaking to Fox Business Channel, Grae Drake, senior editor of Rotten Tomatoes, expressed dismay over the critical reception, stating, "As much as I love and respect our critics at Rotten Tomatoes, I've got to say I am shocked. Listen, the movie's not perfect but ... I just cannot fathom it. It was a good movie, you guys." Reaction to the film among comics creators was mixed. Those who enjoyed it include Jeff Parker, Heidi MacDonald, Ethan Van Sciver, Christos Gage and former Superman writer Dan Jurgens. Among its detractors were Joe Keatinge, Sean McKeever, Gabriel Hardman and Mark Waid. MacDonald praised the film's action, drama and leads Henry Cavill and Amy Adams. Van Sciver singled out Cavill in particular for praise. Gage called it the best Superman film since 1980's Superman II. Hardman said that he liked a lot of the mechanics but did not connect with the characters, which robbed the story of tension. Waid, who wrote the origin miniseries Superman: Birthright, criticized the film for its overall "joyless" tone, and for Superman's decision to kill Zod, a criticism echoed by other creators. Writer Grant Morrison, who wrote the critically acclaimed miniseries All-Star Superman, expressed mixed reaction to the film, saying that while they "kinda liked it and kinda didn't", it did not present anything new, as they would have preferred a "second act" type story with Lex Luthor instead of re-establishing the character by presenting information Morrison is already familiar with. Morrison also questioned the need for a superhero to kill, as did artist Neal Adams. Adams suggested that other alternatives were open to Superman when Zod threatened innocent people with his heat vision, such as covering his eyes. He also criticized Superman for not moving the battle away from Metropolis as the character did at the end of Superman II. Jim Lee had a positive opinion: "It's epic. It's got a lot of heart, but one of the things that was kind of missing from the last Superman movie I think was the action, and this movie has it in spades. I mean it is a visual thrill ride. It is amazing. You get to see all the powers of Superman, and in all its glory, and I think people are going to be blown away." Warner Bros. began planning a cinematic universe featuring other DC Comics characters following the release of Man of Steel. In June 2013, Goyer was hired to write the film's sequel, along with the script for Justice League. Zack Snyder revealed at San Diego Comic-Con International the following month that Superman and Batman would appear in the sequel to Man of Steel, with Cavill, Adams, Lane and Fishburne set to reprise their roles. The film's title, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, was revealed in May 2014, and it was theatrically released on March 25, 2016. A full slate of upcoming DC Comics-based films was announced by Warner Bros. Pictures in October 2014. The company also confirmed that a Superman film was in development, with Henry Cavill set to reprise his lead role. Zack Snyder contemplated the inclusion of Brainiac, the Kryptonians, and even Metallo as possible antagonists for the sequel, but they were ultimately scrapped by April 2013 in favor of a plot with Batman as the villain. The film, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, was released in 2016. In August 2016, TheWrap reported that a sequel to Man of Steel had entered active development. Cavill's manager, Dany Garcia, confirmed that the actor would be involved. The screenplay was still being developed that November according to Amy Adams. Matthew Vaughn was Warner Bros.' top choice to direct the film as of March 2017. Vaughn previously pitched an idea for a new Superman trilogy with comic book writer Mark Millar prior to the development of Man of Steel, in which the destruction of Krypton would take place after Superman had already grown-up on the planet. The troubled production and lackluster box office earnings of Justice League (2017) led to a shake-up at Warner Bros., as the studio chose to rethink its approach to future DC projects. By late 2017, the script for a Man of Steel sequel was still incomplete according to Justice League producer Charles Roven. In July 2018, prior to the release of Mission: Impossible – Fallout, director Christopher McQuarrie and co-star Cavill pitched their take on a new Superman film, but Warner Bros. did not pursue the idea. James Gunn was approached later that year to write and direct a Superman film, but he chose instead to move forward with The Suicide Squad (2021). Following contract issues with Cavill's scheduled cameo appearance in Shazam! (2019), as well as scheduling conflicts with his Fallout commitment, it was reported that the actor may be parting ways with the studio. In November 2019, however, Cavill maintained that he still had interest in reprising his role. Warner Bros. remained unsure of the direction the character was heading and was in contact with "high-profile talent", including J. J. Abrams and Michael B. Jordan, with the latter pitching a Black version of the character. Development on a Man of Steel sequel was abandoned by May 2020, though Cavill remained in talks to appear in a future DC film. Warner Bros. revealed in October 2022 that a sequel to Man of Steel was being revisited, with Roven serving as a producer and Cavill reprising his role. The studio was still searching for writers, and McQuarrie was still on a list of possible directors. Cavill then appeared in the post-credits scene of the DCEU film Black Adam (2022), and the potential for his return in future projects became more favorable. Shortly after, Cavill's return as Superman in a future film was officially confirmed. Steven Knight had written a script treatment around that time, which reportedly included Brainiac as the antagonist. However, there was a lack of interest in the script by Warner Bros. executives. The following month, TheWrap reported that newly-appointed co-chairmen and co-CEOs of DC Studios James Gunn and Peter Safran were developing new plans for the DC Universe. Gunn later revealed in December 2022 that the next Superman film would not include Cavill and would instead focus on a younger Superman. He revealed more details in January 2023. List of films featuring extraterrestrials "Man of Steel (2013)". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved December 24, 2021. "MAN OF STEEL (2013)". American Film Institute. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Foundas, Scott (June 10, 2013). "Film Review: Man of Steel'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2015. A Warner Bros. release presented with Legendary Pictures of a Syncopy production "Man of Steel". British Board of Film Classification. May 21, 2013. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2015. "Film: Man of Steel". Lumiere. European Audiovisual Observatory. Archived from the original on June 24, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "Man of Steel (2013)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2013. Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 21, 2014). "2013 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament Tip-Off – #1 'Iron Man 3' Vs. #16 'The Conjuring'; #8 'Gravity' Vs. #9 'Man Of Steel'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Wade, Jessie (July 21, 2018). "DC Finally Names Its Movie Brand – Comic-Con 2018". IGN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved July 22, 2018. Barr, Merrill (April 9, 2014). "Will Warner Brothers & DC Ever Catch Up To Marvel Television After Last Night's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'?". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved March 29, 2018. "Man of Steel". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Duca, Lauren (June 14, 2013). "What Critics Are Saying About Henry Cavill's Superman in Man of Steel". New York. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2020. "Henry Cavill to Play Superman!!". Superhero Hype!. January 30, 2011. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Saunders, Emma (February 1, 2011). "Film invasion of the Super-Brits". BBC. Archived from the original on February 2, 2011. Retrieved February 2, 2011. Paatsch, Leigh (June 26, 2013). "Super surprising: the actors you didn't know donned the Spandex to play Superman". News.com.au. Archived from the original on June 13, 2017. Retrieved July 10, 2013. Singh, Anita (January 30, 2011). "Another British superhero: Henry Cavill to play Superman". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 1, 2011. Retrieved March 27, 2011. Goldberg, Matt (April 11, 2012). "Zack Snyder Making Man of Steel "Edgy" Like The Dark Knight". Collider. Archived from the original on April 13, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Doty, Meriah (May 8, 2013). "Superman's Weakness: Henry Cavill Reveals the New Kryptonite in 'Man of Steel'". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2013. Wales, George (August 3, 2011). "Henry Cavill talks Man Of Steel and James Bond". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2013. "Superman & Lois Star Tyler Hoechlin Auditioned for Zack Snyder's Man of Steel". Den of Geek. February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2022. Kit, Borys (January 30, 2011). "How Henry Cavill Beat Matthew Goode and Others to Land 'Superman'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 26, 2022. Buchanan, Kyle (November 18, 2021). "Jamie Dornan Goes Back to 'Belfast,' but Not Without Worry". The New York Times. "Before Joe Manganiello Was Deathstroke, He Nearly Played Superman". April 7, 2017. "'Man of Steel': The four 'Superman' comics that inspired Henry Cavill". Entertainment Weekly. Roop, Jason (January 31, 2012). "Richmond Fifth-Grader Lands Superman Movie Role". Style Weekly. Archived from the original on February 6, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Arrant, Chris (March 29, 2011). "Is Superman's New Lois Lane Really Too Old for the Man of Steel?". MTV. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Vilkomerson, Sara (March 27, 2011). "Amy Adams to play Lois Lane in 'Superman'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 22, 2015. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Schaefer, Sandy (May 20, 2019). "Zack Snyder Almost Cast Zoe Saldana As Lois Lane in Man of Steel". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 26, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2019. Lussier, Germain (February 2, 2011). "Kristen Stewart Will Not Be Lois Lane In Zack Snyder's 'Superman' (Updated)". /Film. Archived from the original on February 4, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Jagernauth, Kevin (February 2, 2011). "Updated: Olivia Wilde & Mila Kunis Also In The Mix For Lois Lane; Kristen Stewart Not Approached". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved December 25, 2019. "Director Zack Snyder feels 'slighted' after Kristen Stewart turns down role in 'Superman' reboot". Daily News. New York. February 2, 2011. Saad, Nardine (March 27, 2011). "Amy Adams cast as Lois Lane in Zack Snyder's 'Superman' revival". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2013. Sacks, Ethan (June 11, 2013). "'Man of Steel' star Amy Adams' super thrill: Getting dream role of Lois Lane she'd imagined since childhood". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2013. Mullins, Jenna (March 26, 2011). "Amy Adams Cast as Lois Lane". E!. Archived from the original on September 3, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2011. Paur, Joey (April 28, 2013). "Amy Adams discusses her take on Lois Lane". Geek Tyrant. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2013. Hyde, David (April 10, 2011). "Michael Shannon To Star As General Zod in 'Man Of Steel' from Warner Bros. Pictures and Legendary Pictures". DC Comics. Archived from the original on May 28, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014. Kit, Borys (February 25, 2011). "Viggo Mortensen on Warners' Radar for 'Superman' Villain (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 26, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Lovett, Jamie (March 22, 2021). "Justice League Director Zack Snyder Wanted Daniel Day-Lewis to Play Zod in Man of Steel". ComicBook.com. Retrieved March 24, 2021. Chitwood, Scott (May 30, 2013). "From the Set of Man of Steel". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2013. Moore, Bo (March 18, 2011). "Kevin Costner Joins Zack Snyder's Superman Reboot". Paste. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Wilkins, Alasdair (March 21, 2011). "Zack Snyder explains to us why his Superman movie will be the most realistic yet". i09. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2013. Bettinger, Brendan (March 2, 2011). "Diane Lane Will Play Martha Kent in Superman". Collider. Archived from the original on April 8, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Ditzian, Eric (March 8, 2011). "'Man Of Steel' Taps Laurence Fishburne As News Chief Perry White". MTV. Archived from the original on August 3, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Johnson, Scott (June 10, 2013). "Man Of Steel: Laurence Fishburne Modeled Perry White After Ed Bradley". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013. Bugley, Chris (September 17, 2015). "Gal Gadot is Wonder Woman because she turned down a major 'Man of Steel' role". Batman News. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Kroll, Justin (February 4, 2011). "3 considered for 'Superman' female lead". Variety. Retrieved May 26, 2022. "News: Exclusive: Superman's Undisclosed Character Revealed | Latino Review". February 5, 2011. Archived from the original on February 5, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Laufer, Bonnie Krebs (June 10, 2013). "Antje Traue – Man of Steel interview". Tribute. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2018. "Julia Ormond Out As Man of Steel's Biological Mom!!". Ain't It Cool News. September 25, 2011. Archived from the original on December 26, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Schaeffer, Sandy (June 15, 2011). "Connie Nielsen & Harry Lennix Rumored For 'Man of Steel' [Updated]". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Goldberg, Matt (August 4, 2011). "First Official Image of Henry Cavill as Superman in Zack Snyder's Man of Steel". Collider. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Greco, Patti (June 25, 2011). "Chris Meloni Is Playing a General in Superman, Not Lex Luthor". New York. Archived from the original on July 26, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2011. Kit, Borys (June 15, 2011). "Russell Crowe Eyes 'Superman' Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 18, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Leston, Ryan (June 5, 2013). "Man of Steel: Russell Crowe on playing Jor-El". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2013. "Russell Crowe Discusses 'Massive' & 'Intense' Training for Man of Steel" – via YouTube. Kit, Borys (July 8, 2011). "'Dollhouse' Actor Joins 'Man of Steel'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 10, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2011. Collier, Sean (February 9, 2015). "Exclusive: Pittsburgh Native Christina Wren to Appear in "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice"". Pittsburgh Magazine. Archived from the original on December 26, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2015. "Richard Schiff joins 'Man of Steel'". Variety. January 9, 2012. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Bettinger, Brendan (January 9, 2012). "Richard Schiff to Play Dr. Hamilton in Man of Steel". Collider. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Philbrick, Jami (January 11, 2012). "IAR Exclusive Interview: Richard Schiff Talks 'Man of Steel'". iamROGUE. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Chipman, Bob (February 29, 2016). "Batman V Superman: Carla Gugino to Reprise Kryptonian Voice Role?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 1, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2019. McGloin, Matt (June 1, 2013). "First Look at Mackenzie Gray in Man of Steel". Cosmic Book News. Archived from the original on December 26, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Johnson, Scott (September 6, 2017). "Man Of Steel: The Unrecognizable Daily Planet Staff". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Burlingame, Russ (September 6, 2017). "Man of Steel: Jenny Olsen is Not Jenny Olsen". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Fischer, Russ (January 24, 2012). "'Man of Steel' Adds Jadin Gould as Young Lana Lang". /Film. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Chapman, Tom (May 29, 2017). "15 Wasted Cameos In DC Movies". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 31, 2017. Retrieved December 26, 2019. McGloin, Matt (January 25, 2012). "Superman: The Man of Steel (2013): Jack Foley Cast as Young Pete Ross". Cosmic Book News. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2019. "# 107 Joseph Cranford". BlogTalkRadio. June 23, 2013. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Johnson, Scott (September 6, 2017). "Man Of Steel Exclusive: Two New Villains Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2019. Dyce, Andrew (March 22, 2018). "Krypton Premiere: Every Superman Easter Egg You Missed". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved December 26, 2019. McGloin, Matt (May 15, 2013). "One More Female Kryptonian Revealed in Man of Steel with Watchmen's Apollonia Vanova". CosmicBookNews. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2019. "Christopher Nolan on Batman and Superman". Superhero Hype!. June 4, 2010. Archived from the original on June 7, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Outlaw, Kofi (March 10, 2010). "Chris Nolan Talks Superman Reboot & Batman 3". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Wigler, Josh (March 26, 2009). "Mark Millar On His 'Superman' Movie Trilogy: "Nothing Is Happening"". MTV. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Vineyard, Jennifer (August 11, 2008). "How To Reboot The Superman Movie Franchise-Comic Writers Chime In". MTV. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2008. Anderson, Martin (July 20, 2008). "The Den Of Geek interview: Mark Millar". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2008. Wigler, Josh (March 26, 2010). "Matthew Vaughn Says 'Superman' Movie Discussions Were "Very Brief"". MTV. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Goodswen, Dan (October 29, 2008). "Exclusive: Mark Millar Talks Superman". Empire. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2008. Chang, Tom (May 14, 2020). "Daredevil's Charlie Cox Once Considered for Superman". Bleeding Cool. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Sharf, Zack (October 19, 2023). "Matthew Vaughn Details Failed Superman Trilogy Pitch, Says 'Star Wars' Has 'Gone Wrong' and He'd Reboot Luke Skywalker: Everyone Will Go 'Bats— Crazy'". Variety. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Schuker, Lauren A. E. (August 22, 2008). "Warner Bets on Fewer, Bigger Movies". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2008. Parker, Cat (October 10, 2008). "Paul Levitz Chats Batman, Superman: The Man of Steel, and More". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2013. Woerner, Meredith (February 7, 2009). "McG's 20,000 Leagues Under The Sea Trumps His Superman Movie". io9. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Alt URL Graser, Marc (August 13, 2009). "Superman co-creator's family given rights". Variety. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved August 29, 2009. McNary, Dave (July 8, 2009). "Warner Bros. wins 'Superman' case". Variety. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Finke, Nikki; Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 9, 2010). "It's A Bird! It's A Plane! It's Chris Nolan! He'll Mentor Superman 3.0 And Prep 3rd Batman". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Boucher, Geoff (March 10, 2010). "Christopher Nolan takes flight with Superman: 'We have a fantastic story' [Updated]". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Baldwin, Kristen (April 11, 2013). "'Man of Steel' will open door for more DC Comics superhero movies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 3, 2013. Begley, Chris (April 23, 2013). "'Man of Steel' director Zack Snyder promises references to DC Universe". Batman News. Archived from the original on April 26, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 13, 2010). "Toronto Q&A: Guillermo Del Toro About Producing 'Julia's Eyes' And 'Biutiful'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Wigler, Josh (November 1, 2010). "Robert Zemeckis On 'Superman' Reboot: 'I Passed On That Faster Than A Speeding Bullet'". MTV. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 23, 2010). "Chris Nolan Looking for 'Superman' Directors". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 4, 2010). "Scoop: Zack Snyder Directing 'Superman'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 5, 2010. Retrieved October 4, 2010. Snider, Mike (November 26, 2010). "Q&A: Screenwriter David Goyer on 'Call of Duty: Black Ops'". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Reynolds, Simon (October 4, 2010). "Affleck 'was Nolan's choice for Superman' – Movies News". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Weintraub, Steve (November 5, 2012). "Spoiler: Awesome Man of Steel Easter Egg Revealed; Has Possible Repercussions for Man of Steel 2". Collider. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Couch, Aaron (May 26, 2021). "Setting 'Man of Steel' in 'Dark Knight' Universe "Was Not 100 Percent Off the Table"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 26, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2023. "Man of Steel Exclusive: Storyboard Artist Jay Oliva, Part 1". Voices from Krypton. July 9, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Peters, Megan (June 4, 2018). "DCEU Storyboard Artist Reveals 'Dragon Ball' Inspired 'Man of Steel'". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2018. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Merrion, Paul (July 28, 2011). "Superman flying into Chicago in August for filming". Crain's Chicago Business. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2011. Moore, Ben (November 7, 2012). "'Man of Steel' Being Post-Converted to 3D". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved April 20, 2013. Bowels, Scott (April 13, 2013). "'Gatsby,' Superman make their introduction at CinemaCon". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 18, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013. "Zack Snyder's "Man of Steel" in Theaters". Panavision. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2019. Merrion, Paul (March 28, 2011). "Super summer". Crain's Chicago Business. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2011. Guzzardi, Will (March 28, 2011). "'Superman: Man Of Steel' Filming In Chicago, According To Industry Sources". HuffPost. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2011. Radish, Cristina (October 31, 2011). "Michael Shannon Talks Boarwalk Empire, Man of Steel, and Future Projects". Collider. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2012. Barrett, Jessica (June 13, 2013). "Why Vancouver was passed over to play Metropolis in Man of Steel". The Vancouver Sun. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Lederman, Marsha (December 17, 2010). "Next Superman film to be shot in Vancouver". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2010. Kendrick, Ben (March 31, 2011). "'Superman: Man of Steel' Flying to Chicago for Shooting; Military Equipment". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 25, 2018. Retrieved June 3, 2013. Sacks, Ethan; McClear, Sheila (June 9, 2013). "In 'Man of Steel,' Superman's costume gets 2013 makeover for director Zack Snyder's update". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Zemler, Emily (March 12, 2014). "Inside the Evolution of Superman's Look". Esquire. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2014. Wales, George (April 23, 2013). "Michael Shannon talks Man Of Steel: the CGI suit and Goyer's script". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2013. Gilchrist, Todd (December 17, 2011). "Effects Supremo Joe Letteri Says Zack Snyder Is Placing Emphasis On In-Camera Effects In 'Man of Steel'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved July 17, 2012. "Double Negative: Full Project list". DNEG. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2012. "Man of Steel vfx milestones". FX Guide. June 24, 2013. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2013. Ames, Jeff (December 6, 2010). "Hans Zimmer Debunks Superman Rumor". Collider. Archived from the original on December 24, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2011. Eisenberg, Eric (June 18, 2012). "Man Of Steel To Feature The Music Of Hans Zimmer". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on June 20, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Perry, Spencer (August 13, 2012). "John Williams' Superman Theme NOT in Man of Steel". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Man of Steel: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". WaterTower Music. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "Hans Zimmer's 'Man of Steel' Trailer Song Available To Stream In Full: "An Ideal of Hope"". Flicks and Bits. April 20, 2013. Archived from the original on April 23, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013. "Man of Steel Two-Disc Soundtrack Featuring Original Music by Hans Zimmer Set for Release June 11th" (Press release). WaterTower Music. April 30, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2019 – via Business Wire. Child, Ben (June 19, 2013). "Man of Steel marketing campaign seeks to align Superman with Jesus". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2014. Hollywood studio Warner Bros is targeting Christian audiences in the US with a campaign for its superhero blockbuster Man of Steel that explicitly compares Superman to Jesus. The studio has teamed up with a specialist marketing firm with the aim of encouraging pastors to utilise Zack Snyder's comic book reboot in sermons. It has set up a special website touting a nine-page pamphlet entitled Jesus – the Original Superhero. Marrapodi, Eric (June 14, 2013). "Superman: Flying to a church near you". CNN. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2014. Warner Bros. Studios is aggressively marketing "Man of Steel" to Christian pastors, inviting them to early screenings, creating Father's Day discussion guides and producing special film trailers that focus on the faith-friendly angles of the movie. The movie studio even asked a theologian to provide sermon notes for pastors who want to preach about Superman on Sunday. Titled "Jesus: The Original Superhero," the notes run nine pages. Craig, Justin (June 14, 2013). "'Man of Steel' filled with Jesus, Christianity references". Fox News. Archived from the original on February 12, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2014. Asay, Paul (June 18, 2013). "'Man of Steel,' man of God?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 25, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Lang, Derrik J. (June 19, 2013). "'Man of Steel' promoted from the pulpit". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 31, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2014. Liotta, Collin (June 6, 2013). "Theory on the Man of Steel Plot". HuffPost. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2015. "What does Superman mean to me as a man on the Autism Spectrum". September 16, 2020. "Does Superman Help Explain the Experience of Autism?". October 5, 2018. "Superman: Diagnosing aliens | Embrace Autism". "DC Comics wins dispute over ManofSteel.com domain name". Fusible. July 20, 2011. Archived from the original on December 17, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2011. Collura, Scott (November 20, 2012). "Dark Knight Rises Blu-ray Countdown Leads to Man of Steel "Reward"". IGN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Kendrick, Ben (December 3, 2012). "New 'Man of Steel' Poster: Can You Arrest Superman?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved December 3, 2012. Warren, Christina (December 10, 2012). "Is This the Next Big Viral Movie Campaign?". Mashable. Archived from the original on February 14, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Reynolds, Simon (December 11, 2012). "'Man of Steel': Kryptonian symbol viral counts down to trailer launch". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Franich, Darren (December 11, 2012). "New Man of Steel trailer — Video". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Cochran, Jay (January 30, 2013). "More Mattel 6" Man Of Steel Movie Masters Figures Revealed – Superman & Jor-El". Toy News International. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Superman Reboot 'Man of Steel' Snares $160M in Promotions". Advertising Age. June 3, 2013. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Update #5: The Man of Steel Viral Marketing Continues". ComingSoon.net. April 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Man of Steel's General Zod Delivers a Message!". ComingSoon.net. April 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2013. "Warner Bros. and Christian-focused marketing firm promoting 'Man of Steel' from the pulpit". Fox News. June 19, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2013. "'Man of Steel' Premiere: Superman Takes Off in New York City". The Hollywood Reporter. June 11, 2013. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2014. McNary, Dave (June 10, 2013). "Man of Steel Live Stream: Watch the Red Carpet Premiere". Variety. Archived from the original on June 9, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2013. "'Man of Steel' to Soar into Theaters Next Summer in 3D" (Press release). Warner Bros. Pictures. November 7, 2012. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved June 3, 2013 – via MarketWatch. "Update: Warner Bros. and IMAX Sign Up to 20 Picture Deal!". ComingSoon.net. April 28, 2010. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2010. "'Superman' movie 'Man of Steel' pushed back to avoid 'Hobbit' clash". Digital Spy. July 21, 2011. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "Man of Steel Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2013. "Man of Steel DVD & Blu-ray release date". ReleasedateUSA.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved September 19, 2013. "Man of Steel (2013) Weekly US DVD Sales". The Numbers. Archived from the original on June 13, 2019. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Duarte, M. Enois (July 26, 2016). "Man of Steel – Ultra HD Blu-ray". Hi-Def Digest. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2017. Moore, Rose (August 2, 2006). "The Highest Grossing DC Comics Movies Of All Time (Adjusted For Inflation)". Screen Rant. Retrieved May 19, 2021. "Updated Global: 'Man Of Steel' Breaks $200M In Opening Weekend". Boxoffice Pro. June 16, 2013. Archived from the original on June 19, 2013. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Subers, Ray (June 13, 2013). "Forecast: 'Man of Steel' Sets Sights on June Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Mendelson, Scott (June 15, 2013). "Thursday Box Office: 'Man Of Steel' Grosses Super $21 Million". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Subers, Ray (June 16, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Man of Steel' Soars, Scores New June Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Coggan, Devan (June 14, 2015). "Box office report: Jurassic World roars to biggest global opening of all time". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 14, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2015. Subers, Ray (June 23, 2013). "Weekend Report: 'Monsters' and Zombies Both Win On Busy Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020. Finke, Nikki (June 16, 2013). "'Man Of Steel' Soars To $200.3M Worldwide In First 4 Days As #1: Record June Domestic Opening Of $128.7M, International $71.6M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved June 17, 2013. Reynolds, Simon (June 19, 2013). "Man of Steel has second-biggest opening of 2013 – UK box office top 10". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2013. "China: 'Man Of Steel' Leads The Week With $25M Premiere". Boxoffice Pro. June 25, 2013. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2013. "Man of Steel (2013) – International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020. "Man of Steel Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved March 5, 2018. Roeper, Richard (June 13, 2013). "Superman does not mean super movie". The Aspen Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020. Burr, Ty (June 12, 2013). "A no-nonsense Superman in 'Man of Steel'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Hornaday, Ann (June 12, 2013). "'Man of Steel': Henry Cavill stars as Superman in this bombastic reboot". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Kennedy, Lisa (June 14, 2013). "Movie review: The "S" does not stand for soar in "Man of Steel"". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Outlaw, Kofi (June 14, 2013). "Man of Steel: Film Review". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013. Outlaw, Kofi (December 10, 2013). "Why 'Man of Steel' is the Best Superhero Movie of 2013". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 11, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2013. Vejvoda, Jim Fashion (June 11, 2013). "Superman's Reborn in Grand". IGN. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Ali, Azhan (May 18, 2018). "9 DC Extended Universe Moments That Blew Our Minds!". Animated Times. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2018. "Ten moments that mattered: Antje Traue as Faora in Man of Steel". dccomics.com. December 23, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2018. Travers, Peter (June 13, 2013). "Man of Steel". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2020. McCarthy, Todd (June 10, 2013). "Man of Steel: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 12, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2013. Maçek III, J.C. (July 10, 2013). "Reboot to the Head: A Comicbook-based Analysis of Zack Snyder's Man of Steel". PopMatters. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2013. Persall, Steve (June 12, 2013). "Review: 'Man of Steel' revitalizes the Superman legend". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Corliss, Richard (June 12, 2013). "'Man of Steel': Super Man ... or Human God?". Time. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Seitz, Matt Zoller (June 14, 2013). "Man of Steel movie review & film summary (2013)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Green, Willow (June 2, 2014). "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2015. Burlingame, Russ (September 6, 2017). "Man of Steel: Rotten Tomatoes Editor Shocked At Low Critic Rating". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2020. "'Man of Steel' Divides Comics Community". MTV. June 17, 2013. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Waid, Mark (June 14, 2013). "Man of Steel, since you asked". Thrillbent. Archived from the original on June 17, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Truitt, Brian (July 28, 2013). "Sunday Geekersation: Grant Morrison switches superheroes". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 4, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2020. "Neal Adams Slams Man of Steel & Superman Returns". Cosmic Book News. January 7, 2014. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Johnson, Scott (September 6, 2017). "Man of Steel Movie Made Jim Lee Cry". ComicBook. Retrieved October 1, 2020. "41st Annual Annie Awards Categories". Annie Awards. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2014. "2013 Children's BAFTA Kids' Vote - Feature Film". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Denham, Jess (January 17, 2014). "Critics Choice Awards 2014: Winners list in full". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved January 6, 2020. "Disney, Iron Man 3 Dominate 2013 Golden Trailer Awards". Deadline Hollywood. May 5, 2013. Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Wolfe, Jennifer (May 7, 2014). "Golden Trailer Award Nominees Announced". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (May 30, 2014). "Golden Trailer Awards: Gravity Wins Best Of Show; Warner Bros Tops Studios". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Stone, Sasha (February 17, 2014). "12 Years a Slave wins Pic, Cuaron Director for Houston Film Critics". Awards Daily. Archived from the original on December 31, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Spargo, Chris (March 15, 2013). "2013 Logo NewNowNext Awards: And The Nominees Are…". NewNowNext. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Spargo, Chris (April 15, 2013). "Logo NewNowNext Awards Winners". NewNowNext. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2020. "MTV Movie Awards: Winners List". Variety. April 13, 2014. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2014. "People's Choice Awards 2014: The winners list". Entertainment Weekly. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Johns, Nikara (February 25, 2014). "'Gravity,' 'The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug' Lead Saturn Awards Noms". Variety. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Maglio, Tony (July 16, 2013). "'Man of Steel,' 'The Heat' Lead Third Wave of Teen Choice Awards Nominations". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 8, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Pond, Steve (January 14, 2014). "'Gravity' Soars in Visual Effects Society Nominations". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 7, 2015. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Finke, Nikki (June 10, 2013). "'Man Of Steel' Sequel Underway With Zack Snyder And David S. Goyer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Kit, Borys (July 20, 2013). "Superman and Batman Film Set for Comic-Con Reveal". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Sperling, Nicole (July 20, 2013). "Comic-Con 2013: 'Superman & Batman' movie will follow 'Man of Steel'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Anders, Charlie Jane (July 20, 2013). "They're doing a Superman/Batman movie... but that's not the big news". io9. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (May 21, 2014). "Warner Bros. Unveils Title of New Batman-Superman Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2014. Sneider, Jeff; Cunningham, Todd (August 6, 2014). "Warner Bros. Blinks in Marvel Showdown: 'Batman v Superman' Avoids 'Captain America 3'". TheWrap. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Franich, Darren (October 15, 2014). "Warner Bros. announces 10 DC movies, including 'Wonder Woman'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2017. Katz, Brandon (May 10, 2021). "Zack Snyder Reveals Who Would Have Fought Superman in 'Man of Steel 2'". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Jagernauth, Kevin (July 6, 2015). "Metallo Would've Been The 'Man Of Steel 2' Villain". IndieWire. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Jay Oliva [@jayoliva1] (April 22, 2018). "Okay school is in session... Back in April 2013 (before MoS released in June) I was tasked with doing the Superman 75 short. I met with Zack who was the exec producer on it and he showed me storyboards of BvS with Batman already in it. AND it was a Batman from DKR" (Tweet). Retrieved March 4, 2023 – via Twitter. Hughes, Mark. "Exclusive Interview With Zack Snyder, Director Of 'Batman Vs. Superman'". Forbes. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Gonzalez, Umberto (August 8, 2016). "Warner Bros. Puts 'Man of Steel' Sequel Into Active Development (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Ahmed, Tufayel (September 15, 2016). "Dwayne Johnson's Rock: Meet Dany Garcia, the Woman Behind Hollywood's Highest Earner". Newsweek. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Melrose, Kevin (November 6, 2016). "Amy Adams Confirms Man of Steel 2 Script is 'in the Works'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Chitwood, Adam (March 13, 2017). "Exclusive: Warner Bros. Eyeing Matthew Vaughn to Direct 'Man of Steel 2'". Collider. Archived from the original on June 19, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018. Han, Karen (May 30, 2019). "Rocketman producer Matthew Vaughn explains what his Man of Steel 2 may have looked like". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 30, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Lang, Brent (December 7, 2017). "DC Shake-Up in the Works After 'Justice League' Stumbles (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Coyle, Jake (November 14, 2017). "In 'Justice League,' DC looks beyond Batman and Superman". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (July 5, 2019). "Looks Like Christopher McQuarrie Pitched Both Superman And Green Lantern Movies To DC". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. Crow, David (April 27, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn Talks the Creative Freedom of That R-Rating". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Kaye, Don (February 4, 2019). "Report: Before The Suicide Squad, James Gunn was offered Superman". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (September 12, 2018). "Henry Cavill Out as Superman Amid Warner Bros.' DC Universe Shake-Up (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Raftery, Brian (November 19, 2019). "Henry Cavill Won't Back Down". Men's Health. Archived from the original on November 19, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Brent, Lang; Kroll, Justin (November 26, 2019). "DC Films Plots Future With Superman, Green Lantern and R-Rated Movies". Variety. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 27, 2020). "We Haven't Seen the Last of Henry Cavill's Man of Steel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Henry Cavill in Talks to Return as Superman in Upcoming DC Movie". Variety. May 27, 2020. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Kit, Borys (October 17, 2022). "DC at a Turning Point: James Gunn Pitches Secret Movie, Dwayne Johnson Flexes His Superman Power (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (October 21, 2022). "Heat Vision Newsletter". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (December 16, 2022). "Behind the Fall of Henry Cavill's Superman". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 16, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (October 24, 2022). "Henry Cavill Confirms He Is "Back as Superman" for Future DC Movies". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 24, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (December 9, 2022). "Heat Vision Newsletter". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Gonzalez, Umberto (November 18, 2022). "Henry Cavill's Superman Encounters Setbacks to Possible DC Return (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Kit, Borys (December 7, 2022). "Patty Jenkins' 'Wonder Woman 3' Not Moving Forward as DC Movies Hit Turning Point (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (December 14, 2022). "James Gunn Writing Superman Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 15, 2022. Retrieved December 14, 2022. Kit, Borys (January 31, 2023). "DC Slate Unveiled: New Batman, Supergirl Movies, a Green Lantern TV Show, and More from James Gunn, Peter Safran". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Marrapodi, Eric. "Superman: Flying to a church near you Archived August 10, 2018, at the Wayback Machine". CNN. June 14, 2013. Greg Cox (writer): Man of Steel (2013), ISBN 9781781165997 (Novelization) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Man of Steel (film). Wikiquote has quotations related to Man of Steel (film). Official website Man of Steel at IMDb Man of Steel title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Man of Steel at AllMovie Portals:  Film  United States  Canada  United Kingdom  Speculative fiction  Comics  2010s