The men's tournament in volleyball at the 2012 Summer Olympics was the 13th edition of the event at the Summer Olympics, organised by the world's governing body, the FIVB, in conjunction with the IOC. It was held in London, United Kingdom from 29 July to 12 August 2012. Russia won the gold medal in a 3–2 victory against Brazil. * The Asian Qualifier was combined with the 1st World Qualifier. The first place team of the tournament qualified as the 1st World Qualifier winners, while the best Asian team except the 1st World Qualifier winners qualified as the Asian Qualifier winners. Teams were seeded following the serpentine system according to their FIVB World Ranking as of 4 January 2012. FIVB reserved the right to seed the hosts as head of pool A regardless of the World Ranking. Rankings are shown in brackets except the hosts who ranked 92nd. Match points Number of matches won Sets ratio Points ratio Result of the last match between the tied teams Match won 3–0 or 3–1: 3 match points for the winner, 0 match points for the loser Match won 3–2: 2 match points for the winner, 1 match point for the loser All times are British Summer Time (UTC+01:00). The top four teams in each pool qualified for the quarterfinals. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] All times are British Summer Time (UTC+01:00). The first ranked teams of both pools played against the fourth ranked teams of the other pool. The second ranked teams faced the second or third ranked teams of the other pool, determined by drawing of lots. The drawing of lots was held after the last match in the preliminary round. Most valuable player Murilo Endres Best scorer Maksim Mikhaylov Best spiker Maksim Mikhaylov Best blocker Max Gunthor Best server Cristian Savani Best digger Teodor Salparov Best setter Georgi Bratoev Best receiver Krzysztof Ignaczak Best libero Markus Steuerwald Volleyball at the 2012 Summer Olympics – Women's tournament "Volleyball at the 2012 London Summer Games: Men's Volleyball". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. "FIVB Senior World Ranking - Men (as of 4 January 2012)". FIVB. 4 January 2012. Official website Final Standing Awards Statistics Results at Todor66.com Results at Sports123.com[dead link]