Chittagong (/ˈtʃɪtəɡɒŋ/ CHIT-ə-gong), officially Chattogram (Bengali: চট্টগ্রাম, romanized: Côṭṭôgrām [ˈtʃɔʈːoɡram], Chittagonian: চাটগাঁও romanized: Chāṭgão), is the second-largest city in Bangladesh. Home to the Port of Chittagong, it is the busiest port in Bangladesh and the Bay of Bengal. It is the administrative seat of an eponymous division and district. The city is located on the banks of the Karnaphuli River between the Chittagong Hill Tracts and the Bay of Bengal. The Greater Chittagong Area had a population of more than 5.2 million in 2022. In 2020, the city area had a population of more than 3.9 million. The city is home to many large local businesses and plays an important role in the Bangladeshi economy. One of the world's oldest ports with a functional natural harbor for centuries, Chittagong appeared on ancient Greek and Roman maps, including on Ptolemy's world map. It was located on the southern branch of the Silk Road. In the 9th century, merchants from the Abbasid Caliphate established a trading post in Chittagong. The port fell to the Muslim conquest of Bengal during the 14th century. It was the site of a royal mint under the Delhi Sultanate, Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Empire. Between the 15th and 17th centuries, Chittagong was also a center of administrative, literary, commercial and maritime activities in Arakan, a narrow strip of land along the eastern coast of the Bay of Bengal which was under strong Bengali influence for 350 years. During the 16th century, the port became a Portuguese trading post and João de Barros described it as "the most famous and wealthy city of the Kingdom of Bengal". The Mughal Empire expelled the Portuguese and Arakanese in 1666. The Nawab of Bengal ceded the port to the British East India Company in 1793. The Port of Chittagong was re-organized in 1887 and its busiest shipping links were with British Burma. In 1928, Chittagong was declared a "Major Port" of British India. During World War II, Chittagong was a base for Allied Forces engaged in the Burma Campaign. The port city began to expand and industrialize during the 1940s, particularly after the Partition of British India. The city was the historic terminus of the Assam Bengal Railway and Pakistan Eastern Railway. During the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, Chittagong was the site of the Bangladeshi declaration of independence. The port city has benefited from the growth of heavy industry, logistics, and manufacturing in Bangladesh. Trade unionism was strong during the 1990s. Chittagong accounts for 12% of Bangladesh's GDP, including 40% of industrial output, 80% of international trade, and 50% of tax revenue. The port city is home to many of the oldest and largest companies in the country. The Port of Chittagong is one of the busiest ports in South Asia. The largest base of the Bangladesh Navy is located in Chittagong, along with an air base of the Bangladesh Air Force, garrisons of the Bangladesh Army and the main base of the Bangladesh Coast Guard. The eastern zone of the Bangladesh Railway is based in Chittagong. The Chittagong Stock Exchange is one of the twin stock markets of Bangladesh with over 700 listed companies. The Chittagong Tea Auction is a commodity exchange dealing with Bangladeshi tea. The CEPZ and KEPZ are key industrial zones with foreign direct investments. The city is served by Shah Amanat International Airport for domestic and external flights. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Tunnel, the first and only underwater tunnel of South Asia, is located in Chittagong. The city is the hometown of prominent Bengali economists, a Nobel laureate, scientists, freedom fighters and entrepreneurs. Chittagong has a high degree of religious and ethnic diversity among Bangladeshi cities, despite having a great Bengali Muslim majority. Minorities include Bengali Hindus, Bengali Christians, Bengali Buddhists, Chakmas, Marmas, Tripuris, Garos and others. The etymology of Chittagong is uncertain. The port city has been known by various names in history, including Chatigaon, Chatigam, Chattagrama, Islamabad, Chattala, Chaityabhumi and Porto Grande De Bengala. The Bengali word for Chittagong, Chattogram (চট্টগ্রাম), has the suffix "-gram" (গ্রাম) meaning village in Standard Bengali. A legend dates the name to the spread of Islam when a Muslim lit a chati (lamp) at the top of a hill in the city and called out Azaan for people. The city was renamed Islamabad (City of Islam) during the Mughal era. The name continues to be used in the old city. In April 2018, the Cabinet Division of the Government of Bangladesh decided to change the city's name to Chattogram, based on its Bengali spelling and pronunciation; the move was criticized in the Bangladeshi media. Chittagong is also known as Baro Auliyar Desh (Land of twelve Sufi saints). One explanation credits the first Arab traders for shatt ghangh (Arabic: شط غنغ) where shatt means "delta" and ghangh stood for the Ganges. The Arakanese chronicle that a king named Tsu-la-taing Tsandaya (Sula Taing Chandra), after conquering Bengal, set up a stone pillar as a trophy/memorial at the place since called Tst-ta-gaung as the limit of conquest. Stone Age fossils and tools unearthed in the region indicate that Chittagong has been inhabited since Neolithic times. It is an ancient port city, with a recorded history dating back to the 4th century BC. Its harbour was mentioned in Ptolemy's world map in the 2nd century as one of the most impressive ports in the East. The region was part of the ancient Bengali Samatata and Harikela kingdoms. The Chandra dynasty once dominated the area and was followed by the Varman dynasty and Deva dynasty. Chinese traveller Xuanzang described the area as "a sleeping beauty rising from mist and water" in the 7th century. Arab Muslim traders frequented Chittagong from the 9th century. In 1154, Al-Idrisi wrote of a busy shipping route between Basra and Chittagong, connecting it with the Abbasid capital of Baghdad. Many Sufi missionaries settled in Chittagong and played an instrumental role in the spread of Islam. Sultan Fakhruddin Mubarak Shah of Sonargaon conquered Chittagong in 1340, making it a part of Sultanate of Bengal. It was the principal maritime gateway to the kingdom, which was reputed as one of the wealthiest states in the Indian subcontinent. Medieval Chittagong was a hub for maritime trade with China, Sumatra, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, the Middle East, and East Africa. It was notable for its medieval trades in pearls, silk, muslin, rice, bullion, horses, and gunpowder. The port was also a major shipbuilding hub. Ibn Battuta visited the port city in 1345. Niccolò de' Conti, from Venice, also visited around the same time as Battuta. Chinese admiral Zheng He's treasure fleet anchored in Chittagong during imperial missions to the Sultanate of Bengal. Dhaniya Manikya conquered Chittagong in 1513. Hossain Shah sent his noble commander Gorai Mallik to attack Tripura. Gorai Mallik recaptured the territories lost. But the following year Dhaniya Manikya again conquered Chittagong. Chittagong featured prominently in the military history of the Bengal Sultanate, including during the Reconquest of Arakan and the Bengal Sultanate–Kingdom of Mrauk U War of 1512–1516. During the 13th and 16th centuries, Arabs and Persians heavily colonized the port city of Chittagong, initially arriving for trade and to spread Islam. Most Arab settlers arrived from the trade route between Iraq and Chittagong and were perhaps the prime reason for the spread of Islam to Bangladesh. The first Persian settlers also arrived for trade and religious purposes, with the possible goal of Persianisation as well. Persians and other Iranic peoples have deeply affected the history of the Bengal Sultanate, with Persian being one of the main languages of the Muslim state, as well as also influencing the Chittagonian language and writing scripts. It has been affirmed that much of the Muslim population in Chittagong are descendants of the Arab and Persian settlers. Two decades after Vasco Da Gama's landing in Calicut, the Bengal Sultanate permitted the Portuguese settlement in Chittagong to be established in 1528. It became the first European colonial enclave in Bengal. The Bengal Sultanate lost control of Chittagong in 1531 after Arakan declared independence and the established Kingdom of Mrauk U. This altered geopolitical landscape allowed the Portuguese unhindered control of Chittagong for over a century. Portuguese ships from Goa and Malacca began frequenting the port city in the 16th century. The cartaz system was introduced and required all ships in the area to purchase naval trading licenses from the Portuguese settlement. Slave trade and piracy flourished. The nearby island of Sandwip was conquered in 1602. In 1615, the Portuguese Navy defeated a joint Dutch East India Company and Arakanese fleet near the coast of Chittagong. In 1666, the Mughal government of Bengal led by viceroy Shaista Khan moved to retake Chittagong from Portuguese and Arakanese control by launching the Mughal conquest of Chittagong. The Mughals attacked the Arakanese from the jungle with a 6,500-strong army, which was further supported by 288 Mughal naval ships blockading the Chittagong harbor. After three days of battle, the Arakanese surrendered. The Mughals expelled the Portuguese from Chittagong. Mughal rule ushered a new era in the history of Chittagong territory to the southern bank of Kashyapnadi (Kaladan River). The port city was renamed Islamabad. The Grand Trunk Road connected it with North India and Central Asia. Economic growth increased due to an efficient system of land grants for clearing hinterlands for cultivation. The Mughals also contributed to the architecture of the area, including the building of Fort Ander and many mosques. Chittagong was integrated into the prosperous Bengali economy, which also included Orissa and Bihar. Shipbuilding increased dramatically under the Mughal rule, and the Ottoman Sultans had many Ottoman warships built in Chittagong during this period. In 1685, the British East India Company sent out an expedition under Admiral Nicholson with the instructions to seize and fortify Chittagong on behalf of the English; however, the expedition proved abortive. Two years later, the company's Court of Directors decided to make Chittagong the headquarters of their Bengal trade and sent out a fleet of ten or eleven ships to seize it under Captain Heath. However, after reaching Chittagong in early 1689, the fleet found the city too strongly held and abandoned their attempt at capturing it. The city was possessed by the Nawab of Bengal until 1793 when East India Company took complete control of the former Mughal province of Bengal. The First Anglo-Burmese War in 1823 threatened the British hold on Chittagong. There were several rebellions against British rule, notably during the Indian rebellion of 1857, when the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th companies of the 34th Bengal Infantry Regiment revolted and released all prisoners from the city's jail. In a backlash, the rebels were suppressed by the Sylhet Light Infantry. Arakan was annexed in 1829 and incorporated into the Bengal Presidency. Agriculturalists from Chittagong played a key role in the development of the rice economy in Arakan. The economy of northern Arakan was integrated with the Chittagong economy. During this period, Arakan Division became one of the top rice exporters in the world. Bengalis from Chittagong were vital to the success of Arakan's rice industry. Railways were introduced in 1865, beginning with the Eastern Bengal Railway connecting Chittagong to Dacca and Calcutta. Chittagong became the main gateway to Eastern Bengal and Assam. In the 1890s, Chittagong became the terminus of Assam Bengal Railway. The hinterland of Chittagong Port covered the tea and jute producing regions of Assam and Bengal, as well as Assam's oil industry. Chittagong was also linked to the crucial oil and gas industry in Burma. Chittagong was a major center of trade with British Burma. It hosted many prominent companies of the British Empire. The Chittagong armoury raid by Bengali revolutionaries in 1930 was a major event in British India's anti-colonial history. During World War II, Chittagong became a frontline city in the Southeast Asian Theater. It was a critical air, naval and military base for Allied Forces during the Burma Campaign against Japan. The Imperial Japanese Army Air Force carried out air raids on Chittagong in April and May 1942, in the run-up to the aborted Japanese invasion of Bengal. After the Battle of Imphal, the tide turned in favor of the Allied Forces. Units of the United States Army Air Forces' 4th Combat Cargo Group were stationed in Chittagong Airfield in 1945. Commonwealth forces included troops from Britain, India, Australia, and New Zealand. The war had major negative impacts on the city, including the growth of refugees and the Great Famine of 1943. Many wealthy Chittagonians profited from wartime commerce. 715 soldiers are buried at the Chittagong War Cemetery, which is maintained by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission. Allied soldiers constitute the bulk of burials in the cemetery. A few Japanese soldiers are also buried. Remembrance Day services are held each year at the cemetery, with diplomats from Commonwealth countries like the UK, Bangladesh, Australia, India and Pakistan, as well as the United States and Japan, usually in attendance. The Partition of British India in 1947 made Chittagong the chief port of East Pakistan. By March 1948, the Chittagong harbour became a bustling port for international shipping. The Chittagong Tea Auction was set up in 1949. The port city had branches of the Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China, Burmah Oil (known locally as Burmah Eastern), and the James Finlay shipping business. Wealthy Muslim families from British India and British Burma shifted their corporate headquarters to Chittagong. The Ispahani family shifted the head office of M. M. Ispahani Limited from Calcutta to Chittagong. The Ispahanis also relocated the Eastern Federal Insurance Company from Calcutta to Chittagong. The Ispahanis set up the Victory Jute Mills, the Chittagong Jute Manufacturing Company, and the Pahartali Textile Mills. The Africawala brothers set up the first steel re-rolling mills in Chittagong in 1952, which eventually became BSRM. Banks, shipping companies and insurance firms proliferated the city. The Agrabad area emerged as the central business district in the 1950s and 1960s, with many corporate offices. The Ispahani Building and Jamuna Bhaban are some of the corporate buildings from this period. The Karnaphuli Paper Mills were built in 1959. The project to build the Eastern Refinery was started in 1963; and was partly funded by the last Shah of Iran. The Agrabad Chamber of Commerce was formed in 1963. It later became the Foreign Investors' Chamber of Commerce and Industry in Bangladesh. The Chittagong Development Authority (CDA) was created by the government to promote urban planning; while wealthy families like the Ispahanis contributed to social welfare by setting up schools and hospitals. The lawyer and industrialist A K Khan, who set up A K Khan & Company in the aftermath of World War II, represented Chittagong in the federal cabinet of East and West Pakistan. However, East Pakistanis complained of a lack of investment in Chittagong in comparison to Karachi in West Pakistan, even though East Pakistan generated more exports and had a larger population. The Awami League demanded that the country's naval headquarters be shifted from Karachi to Chittagong. During the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971, which was waged under the leadership of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Chittagong witnessed heavy fighting between rebel Bengali military regiments and the Pakistan Army. It covered Sector 1 in the Mukti Bahini chain of command. Major Ziaur Rahman was the sector commander. The Bangladeshi Declaration of Independence was broadcast from Kalurghat Radio Station and transmitted internationally through foreign ships in Chittagong Port. Ziaur Rahman and M A Hannan announced the independence declaration from Chittagong. A K Khan drafted the English version of Zia's broadcast. These radio broadcasts began the journey of Swadhin Bangla Betar Kendra, which contributed heavily towards the Liberation. The Pakistani military, and supporting Razakar militias, carried out widespread atrocities against civilians in the city. Mukti Bahini naval commandos drowned several Pakistani warships during Operation Jackpot in August 1971. In December 1971, the Bangladesh Air Force and the Indian Air Force carried out the heavy bombing of facilities occupied by the Pakistani military. A naval blockade was also enforced. After the war, the Soviet Union offer to clear mines in Chittagong Port at free of cost, while Sweden offered to clear mines in Mongla port. 22 vessels of the Soviet Pacific Fleet sailed from Vladivostok to Chittagong in May 1972. The process of clearing mines in the dense water harbor took nearly a year and claimed the life of Soviet marine Yuri V Redkin. Chittagong soon regained its status as a major port, with cargo tonnage surpassing pre-war levels in 1973. In the immediate aftermath of 1971, many industries were nationalized. But in Chittagong, factories and business properties were given back to their private owners. The Ispahani family had to write only one letter in order to get back all their properties from the Awami League government of Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. In free market reforms launched by President Ziaur Rahman in the late 1970s, the city became home to the first export processing zones in Bangladesh. Zia was assassinated during an attempted military coup in Chittagong in 1981. The 1991 Bangladesh cyclone inflicted heavy damage on the city. The Japanese government financed the construction of several heavy industries and an international airport in the 1980s and 1990s. Bangladeshi private sector investments increased since 1991, especially with the formation of the Chittagong Stock Exchange in 1995. A new airport opened in 2000. The port city has been the pivot of Bangladesh's emerging economy in recent years, with the country's rising GDP growth rate. Chittagong has seen several infrastructure projects taken up by the government of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, including the Chittagong Elevated Expressway, the first underwater tunnel in South Asia, the expansion of its port, and new parks, power plants and flyovers. Hasina's government has planned several new economic zones around the city, including the flagship Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Industrial City of the Bangladesh Economic Zones Authority. Chittagong lies at 22°20′06″N 91°49′57″E﻿ / ﻿22.33500°N 91.83250°E﻿ / 22.33500; 91.83250. It straddles the coastal foothills of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in southeastern Bangladesh. The Karnaphuli River runs along the southern banks of the city, including its central business district. The river enters the Bay of Bengal in an estuary located 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) west of downtown Chittagong. Mount Sitakunda is the highest peak in Chittagong District, with an elevation of 351 metres (1,152 ft). Within the city itself, the highest peak is Batali Hill at 85.3 metres (280 ft). Chittagong has many lakes that were created under the Mughal rule. In 1924, an engineering team of the Assam Bengal Railway established the Foy's Lake. Major sediment outflows from the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers form tidal flats around the city. The Chittagong Division is known for its rich biodiversity. Over 2000 of Bangladesh's 6000 flowering plants grow in the region. Its hills and jungles are laden with waterfalls, fast flowing river streams and elephant reserves. St. Martin's Island, within the Chittagong Division, is the only coral island in the country. The fishing port of Cox's Bazar is home to one of the world's longest natural beaches. In the east, there are the three hill districts of Bandarban, Rangamati, and Khagrachari, home to the highest mountains in Bangladesh. The region has numerous protected areas, including the Teknaf Game Reserve and the Sitakunda Botanical Garden and Eco Park. Patenga beach in the main seafront of Chittagong, located 14 kilometres (8.7 mi) west of the city. Under the Köppen climate classification, Chittagong has a tropical monsoon climate (Am). Chittagong is vulnerable to North Indian Ocean tropical cyclones. The deadliest tropical cyclone to strike Chittagong was the 1991 Bangladesh cyclone, which killed 138,000 people and left as many as 10  million homeless. The Chittagong City Corporation (CCC) is responsible for governing municipal areas in the Chittagong Metropolitan Area. It is headed by the mayor of Chittagong. The mayor and ward councillors are elected every five years. The mayor is Rezaul Karim Chowdhury, as of August 2023. The city corporation's mandate is limited to basic civic services, however, the CCC is credited for keeping Chittagong one of the cleaner and most eco-friendly cities in Bangladesh. Its principal sources of revenue are municipal taxes and conservancy charges. The Chittagong Development Authority is responsible for implementing the city's urban planning. The deputy commissioner and district magistrate are the chiefs of local administration as part of the Government of Bangladesh. Law enforcement is provided by the Chittagong Metropolitan Police and the Rapid Action Battalion-7. The district and sessions judges are the heads of the local judiciary on behalf of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh. The Divisional Special Judge's Court is located in the colonial-era Chittagong Court Building. Chittagong is a strategically important military port on the Bay of Bengal. The Chittagong Naval Area is the principal base of the Bangladesh Navy and the home port of most Bangladeshi warships. The Bangladesh Naval Academy and the navy's elite special force- Special Warfare Diving and Salvage (SWADS) are also based in the city. The Bangladesh Army's 24th Infantry Division is based in Chittagong Cantonment, and the Bangladesh Air Force maintains the BAF Zahurul Haq Air Base in Chittagong. The city is also home to the Bangladesh Military Academy, the premier training institute for the country's armed forces. In the 1860s, the American consulate-general in the Bengal Presidency included a consular agency in Chittagong. Today, Chittagong hosts an assistant high commission of India and a consulate general of Russia. The city also has honorary consulates of Turkey, Japan, Germany, South Korea, Malaysia, Italy, and the Philippines. A substantial share of Bangladesh's national GDP is attributed to Chittagong. The port city contributes 12% of the nation's economy. Chittagong generates for 40% of Bangladesh's industrial output, 80% of its international trade and 50% of its governmental revenue. The Chittagong Stock Exchange has more than 700 listed companies, with a market capitalisation of US$32 billion in June 2015. The city is home to many of the country's oldest and largest corporations. The Port of Chittagong handled US$60 billion in annual trade in 2011, ranking 3rd in South Asia after the Port of Mumbai and the Port of Colombo. The port is part of the Maritime Silk Road that runs from the Chinese coast via the Suez Canal to the Mediterranean and on to the Upper Adriatic region of Trieste with rail connections to Central and Eastern Europe. The Agrabad area is the main central business district of the city. Major Bangladeshi conglomerates headquartered in Chittagong include M. M. Ispahani Limited, BSRM, A K Khan & Company, PHP Group, James Finlay Bangladesh, the Habib Group, the S. Alam Group of Industries, Seamark Group, KDS Group and the T. K. Group of Industries. Major state-owned firms headquartered there include Pragati Industries, the Jamuna Oil Company, the Bangladesh Shipping Corporation, and the Padma Oil Company. The Chittagong Export Processing Zone was ranked by the UK-based magazine, Foreign Direct Investment, as one of the leading special economic zones in the world, in 2010. Other SEZs include the Karnaphuli Export Processing Zone and Korean EPZ. The city's key industrial sectors include petroleum, steel, shipbuilding, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, textiles, jute, leather goods, vegetable oil refineries, glass manufacturing, electronics and motor vehicles. The Chittagong Tea Auction sets the price of Bangladesh Tea. The Eastern Refinery is Bangladesh's largest oil refinery. GlaxoSmithKline has had operations in Chittagong since 1967. Western Marine Shipyard is a leading Bangladeshi shipbuilder and exporter of medium-sized ocean-going vessels. In 2011–12, Chittagong exported approximately US$4.5  billion in ready-made garments. The Karnaphuli Paper Mills were established in 1953. International banks operating in Chittagong include HSBC, Standard Chartered and Citibank NA. Chittagong is often called Bangladesh's commercial capital due to its diversified industrial base and seaport. The port city has ambitions to develop as a global financial center and regional transshipment hub, given its proximity to North East India, Burma, Nepal, Bhutan and Southwest China. By 2024, the Chittagong-based S Alam Group emerged as one of Bangladesh's most powerful conglomerates, with interests in energy, commodities, infrastructure, economic zones, healthcare, textiles and fintech. S Alam's projects include a $640 million steel plant, a $2.6 billion power plant and a $3 billion renewable energy plant. It is investing 580 billion BDT in two industrial zones in Chittagong. S Alam also has substantial offshore assets, including a billion dollars worth of real estate in Singapore. Its portfolio in Singapore includes the city-state's Hilton Garden Inn Serangoon hotel. The S Alam Group enjoys close ties with the ruling Awami League party in Bangladesh. The group has been subjected to intense media scrutiny. Chittagong Stock Exchange Chittagong Tea Auction Chittagong Chamber of Commerce & Industry Chittagong Export Processing Zone Karnaphuli Export Processing Zone Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Shilpa Nagar, Mirsarai Korean Export Processing Zone, Anwara Chinese Economic and Industrial Zone, Anwara Maheshkhali Economic Zone, Matarbari Kalurghat Heavy Industrial Area The Anderkilla Shahi Jame Mosque is a well-known Mughal property in Chittagong. Anderkilla means "inner fort". The mosque was built in 1667 by Umed Khan, the son of Shaista Khan, after the Mughal conquest of Chittagong. The mosque is the only surviving part of a hilltop Mughal fort. A surviving remnant of the 17th century Portuguese presence is Darul Adalat in the premises of Government Hazi Mohammad Mohsin College, Chittagong. The Kadam Mubarak Mosque in Jamal Khan was built in 1723 by a faujdar during the reign of the Nawabs of Bengal. During British rule, colonial officials lived in hilltop bungalows, which would feature a spacious balcony or verandah, chimneys, fireplaces and big gardens. The Firingi Bazaar has many colonial houses which belonged to rich local residents. The well-known buildings from the British colonial period include the Battali Railway Station, Central Railway Building, Chittagong Circuit House and Chittagong Court Building. The old Circuit House was originally built in the style of Tudor revival architecture. The Chittagong Court Building exhibits influence of neoclassical architecture from the late 19th century. JM Sen Hall was a town hall built in 1920. One of the grand old mansions of Chittagong is the PK Sen Bhaban. The First Karnaphuli Bridge, which was a steel bridge, was built in 1930. The Kalurghat Bridge was completed in 1931. Stripped Classicism and elements of art deco can be seen in Agrabad. M. M. Ispahani Limited relocated its head office to Chittagong from Calcutta after the partition of India; the Ispahani building in Agrabad was influenced by the art deco style. Another building with 1930s classical and art deco elements is the headquarters of the Jamuna Oil Company. The building has a dome and modernist columns inspired by the style of the 1930s and 1940s. An inhabitant of Chittagong is called Chittagonian in English. For centuries, the port city has been a melting pot for people from all over the world. Its historic trade networks have left a lasting impact on its language, culture, and cuisine. The Chittagonian language, although identified as a nonstandard dialect of Bengali, is considered to be a separate language by many linguists. The Chittagonian language has many Arabic, Persian, English and Portuguese loanwords. The popular traditional feast of Mezban features the serving of hot beef dish with white rice. Another dish named kala-bhuna of Chittagong, made with traditional spices, mustard oil, and beef through a special cooking style, is also renowned all over Bangladesh. The cultivation of pink pearls is a historic activity in Chittagong. Its Mughal-era name, Islamabad (City of Islam), continues to be used in the old city. The name was given due to the port city's history as a gateway for early Islamic missionaries in Bengal. Notable Islamic architecture in Chittagong can be seen in the historic Bengal Sultanate-era Hammadyar Mosque and the Mughal Fort of Anderkilla. Chittagong is known as the Land of the Twelve Saints due to the prevalence of major Sufi Muslim shrines in the district. Historically, Sufism played an important role in the spread of Islam in the region. Prominent dargahs include the mausoleums of Shah Amanat, Badr Auliya, Miskin Shah, Garibullah Shah and the shrine of Bayazid Bastami among many others. The Bastami shrine hosts a pond of black softshell turtles, a critically endangered species of freshwater turtle. During the medieval period, many poets thrived in the region when it was part of the Bengal Sultanate and the Kingdom of Mrauk U. Under the patronage of Sultan Alauddin Husain Shah's governor in Chittagong, Kabindra Parameshvar wrote his Pandabbijay, a Bengali adaptation of the Mahabharata. Daulat Qazi lived in the region during the 17th-century reign of the Kingdom of Mrauk U. Chittagong is home to several important Hindu temples, including the Chandranath Temple on the outskirts of the city, which is dedicated to the Hindu goddess Sita. The city also hosts the country's largest Buddhist monastery and council of monks. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Chittagong is the oldest catholic mission in Bengal. Major cultural organizations in the city include the Theatre Institute Chittagong and the Chittagong Performing Arts Academy. The city has a vibrant contemporary art scene. Being home to the pioneering rock bands in the country like Souls and LRB, Chittagong is regarded as the "birthplace of Bangladeshi rock music". At the 2011 Census, Chittagong had a population of more than 2.5 million, and its Metropolitan Area had a population of 4,009,423. By gender, the population was 54.36% male and 45.64% female, and the literacy rate in the city was approximately 72 percent, in 2020. Muslims, numbering approximately 3.44 million, form the overwhelming majority of the city's population, with the rest being predominantly Hindus, numbering approximately 480,000, and the remaining 2% belonging to other religions, such as Buddhism and Christianity. Chittagong was a melting pot of ethnicities during the Bengal Sultanate and Mughal Bengal periods. Muslim immigration started as early as the seventh century, and significant Muslim settlements occurred during the medieval period. Muslim traders, rulers, and preachers from Persia and Arabia were the early Muslim settlers, and their descendants are the majority of the current Muslim population of the city. The city has a relatively wealthy and economically influential Shia Muslim community, including Ismailis and Twelver Shias. The city also has many ethnic minorities, especially members of indigenous groups from the frontier hills of Chittagong Division, including Chakmas, Rakhines and Tripuris; as well as Rohingya refugees. The Bengali-speaking Theravada Buddhists of the area, known as Baruas, are one of the oldest communities in Chittagong and one of the last remnants of Buddhism in Bangladesh. Descendants of Portuguese settlers, often known as Firingis, also live in Chittagong, as well as Catholics, who largely live in the old Portuguese enclave of Paterghatta. There is also a small Urdu-speaking Bihari community living in the ethnic enclave known as Bihari Colony. Like other major urban centres in South Asia, Chittagong has experienced steady growth in its informal settlements as a result of the increasing economic activities in the city and emigration from rural areas. According to a poverty reduction publication of the International Monetary Fund, there were 1,814 slums within the city corporation area, inhabited by about 1.8  million slum dwellers, the second highest in the country after the capital, Dhaka. The slum dwellers often face eviction by the local authorities, charging them with illegal abode on government lands. In the early 1990s, Chittagong had a population of just over 1.5 million, of which there were an estimated 66,676 squatters living in 69 areas. Various newspapers, including daily, opposition, and business newspapers, are based in Chittagong. Daily newspapers include Dainik Azadi, Peoples View, The Daily Suprobhat Bangladesh, Daily Purbokone, Life, Karnafuli, Jyoti, Rashtrobarta and Azan. Furthermore, there are several weekly and monthly newspapers. These include weeklies such as Chattala, Jyoti, Sultan, Chattagram Darpan, and the monthlies such as Sanshodhani, Purobi, Mukulika, and Simanto. The only press council in Chittagong is the Chittagong Press Club. Government-owned Bangladesh Television, with its Chittagong station, and Bangladesh Betar have transmission centres in the city. A local online news & media Channel based on the Chittagonian language was launched in 2016 called CplusTv, gained vast popularity. The channel is YouTube- and social network-based, and it reached the 1  million followers milestone on Facebook.[citation needed] Chittagong has been featured in all aspects of Bangladeshi popular culture, including television, movies, journals, music, and books. Nearly all televisions and radios in Bangladesh have coverage in Chittagong. Renowned Bollywood film director Ashutosh Gowariker directed a movie based on the 1930s Chittagong Uprising, Movie's name is Khelein Hum Jee Jaan Sey in which Abhishek Bachchan played the lead role. The southern zone of the Bangladesh Power Development Board is responsible for supplying electricity to city dwellers. The fire services are provided by the Bangladesh Fire Service & Civil Defence department, under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Total Electricity Consumption is approximately 1000 megawatts in the city proper. But in the whole Chittagong urban and city proper, it will be 1300 megawatts plus-minus. Ss power plant will be in production next year and its production power is 1320 megawatts And it creates Chittagong City as the energy production hub of Bangladesh The water supply and sewage systems are managed by the Chittagong Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (Chittagong WASA). Water is primarily drawn from Karnaphuli River and then purified in the Mohra Purification Plant. Chittagong has extensive GSM and CDMA coverage, served by all the major mobile operators of the country, including Grameenphone, Banglalink, Citycell, Robi, TeleTalk and Airtel Bangladesh. However, landline telephone services are provided through the state-owned Bangladesh Telegraph and Telephone Board (BTTB), as well as some private operators. BTTB also provides broadband Internet services, along with some private ISPs, including the 4G service providers Banglalion and Qubee. The education system of Chittagong is similar to that of rest of Bangladesh, with four main forms of schooling. The general education system, conveyed in both Bangla and English versions, follows the curriculum prepared by the National Curriculum and Textbook Board, part of the Ministry of Education. Students are required to take two major board examinations:the Secondary School Certificate (SSC) and the Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSC) before moving onto higher education. The Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Chittagong is responsible for administering SSC and HSC examinations within the city. The Madrasah education system is primarily based on Islamic studies, though other subjects are also taught. Students are prepared according to the Dakhil and Alim examinations, which are controlled by the Bangladesh Madrasah Education Board and are equivalent to SSC and HSC examinations of the general education system respectively. There are also several private schools in the city, usually referred to as English medium schools, which follow the General Certificate of Education. The British Council supervises the O Levels and A levels examinations, conducted twice a year, through the Cambridge International and Edexcel examination boards. The Technical and Vocational education system is governed by the Directorate of Technical Education (DTE) and follow the curriculum prepared by Bangladesh Technical Education Board (BTEB). Chittagong College, established in 1869, is the earliest modern institution for higher education in the city. Chittagong Veterinary and Animal Sciences University is the only public university located in Chittagong city. Chittagong Medical College is the only government medical college in Chittagong. University of Chittagong is located 22 kilometres (14 miles) north and Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology is located 25 kilometres (16 miles) north of the Chittagong city. The University of Chittagong, established in 1966 is one of the largest universities in Bangladesh. Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology, established in 1968, is one of the five public engineering universities in Bangladesh and the only engineering university in the Chittagong Division. The city also hosts several other private universities and medical colleges. The BGC Trust University Bangladesh, Chittagong Independent University (CIU), Asian University for Women, Port City International University, East Delta University, International Islamic University, Premier University, Southern University, University of Information Technology and Sciences and the University of Science & Technology Chittagong are among them. Chittagong has public, denominational, and independent schools. Public schools, including pre-schools, primary and secondary schools, and special schools are administered by the Ministry of Education and Chittagong Education Board. Chittagong has governmental and non-governmental primary and higher secondary schools, international schools, and English medium schools, such as CDA Public School and College.Southeast Public School & College Jamia Ahmadiyya Sunnia Kamil Madrasa is also a famous Islamic University which situated in Chittagong. Bangladesh Forest Research Institute Bangladesh Institute of Tropical and Infectious Diseases Bangladesh Tea Board The Chittagong Medical College Hospital is the largest state-owned hospital in Chittagong. The Chittagong General Hospital, established in 1901, is the oldest hospital in the city. The Bangladesh Institute of Tropical and Infectious Diseases (BITID) is based the city. Other government-run medical centers in the city include the Family Welfare Centre, TB Hospital, Infectious Disease Hospital, Diabetic Hospital, Mother and Children Hospital, and the Police Hospital. Among the city's private hospitals are the Bangabandhu Memorial Hospital (BBMH), Chittagong Metropolitan Hospital, Chevron Clinic, Surgiscope Hospital, CSCR, Centre Point Hospital, Park View Hospital, Max Hospital & diagnosis, Imperial Hospital LTD., Evercare Hospital Ltd., National Hospital and Mount Hospital Ltd. Private Medical Colleges: University of Science & Technology Chittagong BGC TRUST Medical College Chittagong Chittagong Ma o Shishu Hospital Southern Medical College Marine City Medical College Army Medical College Poly Clinic CSCR Hospital Transport in Chittagong is similar to that of the capital, Dhaka. large avenues and roads are present throughout the metropolis. There are various bus systems and taxi services, as well as smaller 'baby' or 'CNG' taxis, which are tricycle-structured motor vehicles. Foreign and local ridesharing companies like Uber and Pathao are operating in the city. There are also traditional manual rickshaws, which are very common. As the population has risen extensively, the Chittagong Development Authority (CDA) has undertaken some transportation initiatives aimed at easing the traffic congestion in Chittagong. Under this plan, the CDA, along with the Chittagong City Corporation, has constructed some flyovers and expanded the existing roads within the city. There are also some other major expressways and flyovers under construction, most notably the Chittagong City Outer Ring Road, which runs along the coast of Chittagong City. This ring road includes a marine drive along with five feeder roads and is also meant to strengthen the embankment of the coast.[need quotation to verify] The authority has also began the construction of a 9.3 kilometres (5.8 mi) underwater expressway tunnel through the Karnaphuli river to ensure better connectivity between the northern and southern parts of Chittagong. This tunnel will be the first of its kind in South Asia. The N1 (Dhaka-Chittagong Highway), a major arterial national highway, is the only way to access the city by motor vehicle from most other parts of the country. It is considered a crowded and dangerous highway. This highway is also part of AH41 route of the Asian Highway Network. It has been upgraded to 4 lanes. The N106 (Chittagong-Rangamati Highway) is another major national highway that connects the Chittagong Hill Tracts with the Oxygen Square. Chittagong can also be accessed by rail. It has a station on the metre gauge, the eastern section of the Bangladesh Railway, whose headquarters are also located within the city. There are two main railway stations, on Station Road and in the Pahartali Thana. Trains to Dhaka, Sylhet, Comilla, and Bhairab are available from Chittagong. The Chittagong Circular Railway was introduced in 2013 to ease traffic congestion and to ensure better public transport service for commuters within the city. The railway includes high-speed DEMU trains with a carrying capacity of 300 passengers. These DEMU trains also travel on the Chittagong-Laksham route which connects the city with Comilla. The Shah Amanat International Airport (IATA: CGP, ICAO: VGEG), located at South Patenga, serves as Chittagong's only airport. It is the second busiest airport in Bangladesh. The airport is capable of annually handling 1.5  million passengers and 6,000 tonnes of cargo. Known as Chittagong Airfield during World War II, the airport was used as a supply point by the United States Army Air Forces' Tenth Air Force during the Burma Campaign 1944–45. It officially became a Bangladeshi airport in 1972 after Bangladesh's liberation war. International services fly to major cities of the Arabian Peninsula as well as to Indian city of Kolkata. At present, Middle Eastern airlines like Air Arabia, Flydubai, Jazeera Airways, Oman Air and SalamAir operate flights from the city to these destinations along with airlines of Bangladesh. All Bangladeshi airlines operate regular domestic flights to Dhaka. The airport was formerly known as MA Hannan International Airport but was renamed after a famous Sufi saint Shah Amanat on 2 April 2005 by the Government. Chittagong has produced numerous cricketers, footballers, and athletes, who have performed at the national level. Tamim Iqbal, Akram Khan, Minhajul Abedin, Aftab Ahmed, Nafees Iqbal, Nazimuddin, Faisal Hossain, Tareq Aziz, Mominul Haque, Nayeem Hasan, Mamunul Islam, Ashish Bhadra, Shahidul Alam Sohel are some of the most prominent figures among them. Cricket is the most popular sport in Chittagong, while football, tennis and kabaddi are also popular. Several stadiums are located in Chittagong with the main one being the multipurpose MA Aziz Stadium, which has a seating capacity of 20,000 and hosts football matches in addition to cricket. MA Aziz Stadium was the stadium where Bangladesh achieved its first-ever Test cricket victory, against Zimbabwe in 2005. The stadium now focuses only on football, and is currently the main football venue of the city. Zohur Ahmed Chowdhury Stadium, is currently the main cricket venue of the city, which was awarded Test status in 2006, hosting both domestic and international cricket matches. The city hosted two group matches of the 2011 ICC Cricket World Cup, both taking place in Zohur Ahmed Chowdhury Stadium. It also co-hosted 2014 ICC World Twenty20 along with Dhaka and Sylhet, Zohur Ahmed Chowdhury Stadium hosted 15 group stage matches. Other stadiums in Chittagong include the Women's Complex Ground. Major sporting clubs such as, Mohammedan Sporting Club and Abahani Chittagong are also located in the city. Chittagong is also home to the Bangladesh Premier League franchise, the Chattogram Challengers. Chattogram Challengers – BPL (Cricket) Chittagong Abahani Limited – BPL (Football) Acme Chattogram – HCT (Field hockey) Goiânia, Brazil Kunming, China Jamboree Park Portals:  Asia  Geography  Bangladesh Conquest of Chittagong Station ID for Chittagong (Patenga) is 41978 Use this station ID to locate the sunshine duration "Protect the Queen of the East". The Daily Star. 10 July 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Chittagong Population 2023". Retrieved 16 June 2023. "History of Chittagong City Corporation". Chittagong City Corporation. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "Area, Population and Literacy Rate by Paurashava −2001" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2007. Retrieved 18 September 2009. "Sub-national HDI – Area Database – Global Data Lab". hdi.globaldatalab.org. Retrieved 11 July 2021. "Economics Landscape of Chittagong". chittagongchamber.com. Chittagong Chamber. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Definition of Chittagong". Dictionary.com. Retrieved 23 February 2022. "Mixed reactions as govt changes English spellings of 5 district names". Dhaka Tribune. 2 April 2018. "Pangaon container terminal to get a boost". The Daily Star. 3 January 2016. "Chittagong · Population". population.city. Retrieved 30 April 2022. "Chattogram, Bangladesh Population (2023) – Population Stat". populationstat.com. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Ring, Trudy; Watson, Noelle; Schellinger, Paul (12 November 2012). Asia and Oceania: International Dictionary of Historic Places. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-63979-1. "Arabs, The". Banglapedia. Retrieved 23 February 2022. Islam, Shariful; Hoque, Muhammad Manirul. "Unpublished Umayyad and Abbasid Silver Coins in the Bangladesh National Museum" (PDF). Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bangladesh (Hum.). 62 (2): 205–231. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Mint Towns". Banglapedia. 5 August 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2022. "Chittagong | History, Population, & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 23 February 2022. O'Malley, L.S.S. (1908). Chittagong. Eastern Bengal District Gazetteers. Vol. 11A. Calcutta: The Bengal Secretariat Book Depot. p. 1. Retrieved 8 August 2015. "Bangladesh changes English spellings of five districts". bdnews24.com. "Experts warn of trade hits from renaming Chittagong". The Financial Express. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 21 March 2019. Chowdhury, Umran (5 April 2018). "From a commercial capital to a village". Dhaka Tribune (Opinion). Osmany, Shireen Hasan (2012). "Chittagong City". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Bernoulli, Jean; Rennell, James; Anquetil-Duperron, M.; Tieffenthaller, Joseph (1786). Description historique et géographique de l'Inde (in French). Vol. 2. Berlin: C. S. Spener. p. 408. Retrieved 8 August 2015. Quanungo, Suniti Bhushan (1988). A History of Chittagong. Vol. 1. Chittagong: Dipanka Quanungol Billan Printers. p. 17. Khan, M. Morshed (1994). Bangladesh Towards 21st Century. Ministry of Information. OCLC 34115814. "Custom House Chittagong". Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. "Past of Ctg holds hope for economy". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2013. Trudy, Ring; M. Salkin, Robert; La Boda, Sharon; Edited by Trudy Ring (1996). International dictionary of historic places. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers. ISBN 1-884964-04-4. Retrieved 21 June 2015. "District LGED". lged.gov.bd. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2013. Donkin, R. A. (1998). Beyond Price. American Philosophical Society. ISBN 9780871692245. Dunn, Ross E. (1986). The Adventures of Ibn Battuta, a Muslim Traveler of the Fourteenth Century. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05771-5. Ray, Aniruddha (2012). "Conti, Nicolo de". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Sen, Dineshchandra (1988). The Ballads of Bengal. Mittal Publications. pp. xxxiii. Eaton, Richard Maxwell (1996). The Rise of Islam and the Bengal Frontier, 1204–1760. University of California Press. pp. 234, 235. ISBN 0-520-20507-3. Munishi, Nayem. "Historical Muslim Monuments in Comilla". Fateh24. "The Role of the Persian Language in Bengali and the World Civilization: An Analytical Study" (PDF). uits.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2018. Eaton, Richard M. (1994). The rise of Islam and the Bengal frontier, 1204–1760. Delhi: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195635867. "Bangladesh – Ethnic groups". Encyclopædia Britannica. 6 February 2024. Dasgupta, Biplab (2005). European trade and colonial conquest. London: Anthem Press. ISBN 1-84331-029-5. Pearson, M.N. (2006). The Portuguese in India. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-02850-7. Chittagong, Asia and Oceania: International Dictionary of Historic Places [1] "Shipbuilding Industry – Banglapedia". Osmany, Shireen Hasan; Mazid, Muhammad Abdul (2012). "Chittagong Port". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Hunter, William Wilson (1908). Imperial Gazetteer of India. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. pp. 308, 309. /https://www.networkmyanmar.org/ESW/Files/PS_40,_Chapter_6,_Leider_Chittagonians.pdf Georg Hartwig (1863). The Tropical World: a Popular Scientific Account of the Natural History of the Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms in the Equatorial Regions. Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green. p. 159. Cheng Siok Hwa, 'The Development of the Burmese Rice Industry in the Late Nineteenth Century' (1965) 6 Journal of Southeast Asian History. https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/op-ed/339699/indo-bangla-economic-relations "Nippon Bombers Raid Chittagong". The Miami News. Associated Press. 9 May 1942. "Japanese Raid Chittagong: Stung By Allied Bombing". The Sydney Morning Herald. 14 December 1942. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Maurer, Maurer, ed. (1983) [First published 1961]. Air Force Combat Units of World War II (PDF). Office of Air Force History. p. 35. ISBN 0-912799-02-1. https://www.daily-sun.com/post/582794/Remembrance-of-Commonwealth-War-Cemetery-Chittagong/1000 https://www.jinnahpk.com/2010/04/development-of-chittagong-port-29th-mar.html?m=1 https://en.prothomalo.com/business/a-202-year-old-iconic-family-business https://en.prothomalo.com/business/a-202-year-old-iconic-family-business https://en.prothomalo.com/business/a-202-year-old-iconic-family-business https://business-america.com/alihussain-akberali/ https://static.theceomagazine.com/content/downloads/pdf/EMEA_2016_March_Aameir_Alihussain_BSRM_Manufacturing.pdf https://en.banglapedia.org/index.php?title=Eastern_Refinery_Limited https://www.ficci.org.bd/page/Souvenir-pbQ0h Osmany, Shireen Hasan (2012). "Chittagong City". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Mannan, Abdul (25 June 2011). "Rediscovering Chittagong – the gateway to Bangladesh". Daily Sun (Editorial). Dhaka. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. "Operation Jackpot". Banglapedia. https://www.thedailystar.net/zias-declaration-19001 Administrator. "Muktijuddho (Bangladesh Liberation War 1971) part 37 – Bangladesh Biman Bahini (Bangladesh Air Force or BAF) – History of Bangladesh". Archived from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 11 October 2015. Rao, K. V. Krishna (1991). Prepare Or Perish: A Study of National Security. Lancer Publishers. ISBN 9788172120016 – via Google Books. Kamal Hossain, Bangladesh: Quest for Freedom and Justice (UPL) "In the Spirit of Brotherly Love". The Daily Star. 29 May 2014. "Rescue Operation on Demining and Clearing of Water Area of Bangladesh Seaports 1972–74". Consulate General of the Russian Federation in Chittagong. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/longform/320294/yuri-redkin-a-martyr-in-salvaging-chittagong-port https://en.prothomalo.com/business/a-202-year-old-iconic-family-business https://www.tbsnews.net/bangladesh/ctg-port-gets-new-terminal-after-15-years-532846 https://www.thedailystar.net/supplements/bangabandhu-sheikh-mujibur-rahman-tunnel/news/the-inauguration-south-asias-first-underwater-tunnel-3454781 https://www.tbsnews.net/bangladesh/ctg-port-gets-new-terminal-after-15-years-532846 https://bsmsn.gov.bd/ "About Chittagong". muhammadyunus.org. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015. Murray, N.J.; Clemens, R.S.; Phinn, S.R.; Possingham, H.P.; Fuller, R.A. (2014). "Tracking the rapid loss of tidal wetlands in the Yellow Sea" (PDF). Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 12 (5): 267–272. Bibcode:2014FrEE...12..267M. doi:10.1890/130260. "Flora and Fauna – Bangladesh high commission in India". bdhcdelhi.org. Archived from the original on 20 August 2013. "Protected Areas". bforest.gov.bd. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Peel, M. C.; Finlayson, B. L.; McMahon, T. A. (2007). "Updated world map of the Köppen–Geiger climate classification" (PDF). Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 11 (5): 1633–1644. Bibcode:2007HESS...11.1633P. doi:10.5194/hess-11-1633-2007. ISSN 1027-5606. "NOAA's Top Global Weather, Water and Climate Events of the 20th Century" (PDF). NOAA Backgrounder. 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2012. "Climate of Bangladesh" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. pp. 19–23. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2018. "Normal Monthly Rainy Day" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 24 December 2018. "Normal Monthly Humidity" (PDF). Bangladesh Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2018. "Bangladesh - Chittagong" (in Spanish). Centro de Investigaciones Fitosociológicas. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "Station 41978 Chittagong (Patenga)". Global station data 1961–1990—Sunshine Duration. Deutscher Wetterdienst. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2016. "CCC mayor Nasir vows to fulfil pre-election pledges". Daily Sun. Dhaka. 10 May 2015. Karim, A.K.M. Rezaul (2006). "Best Practice: A Perspective of 'Clean and Green' Chittagong" (PDF). The First 2006 Workshop Population and Environmental Protection in Urban Planning. Kobe, Japan: Asian Urban Information Centre of Kobe. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. Roberts, Brian; Kanaley, Trevor, eds. (2006). Urbanization and Sustainability in Asia: Case Studies of Good Practice. Asian Development Bank. p. 58. ISBN 978-971-561-607-2. Raihan Islam. "CCNA :: Chittagong Naval Area". ccna.mil.bd. Archived from the original on 6 June 2015. "Special Warfare Diving and Salvage (SWADS)". ShadowSpear. 22 August 2010. Archived from the original on 6 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "PM awards National Standard to BAF Base Zahurul Haque". New Age. "Indo-American Relations: From Emergence into Strength" (PDF). span.state.gov. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2011. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Mustafa Osman Turan Ambassador. "T.C. Dışişleri Bakanlığı – Embassy Of The Republic Of Türkiye In Dhaka – Büyükelçilik". Dhaka.emb.mfa.gov.tr. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Let's make a prosperous future for Chittagong industries | Bangladesh | Countries & Regions". JICA. 7 November 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Honorary Consul Mirza Shakir Ispahani – Federal Foreign Office". Dhaka.diplo.de. 24 November 2017. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Appointment Ceremony of Honorary Consul for Chittagong". Embassy of the Republic of Korea in People's Republic of Bangladesh. "Honorary Consulate of Malaysia in Chittagong". High Commission of Malaysia, Dhaka. "Consular Network". Ambdhaka.esteri.it. 31 March 2005. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Philippines opens visa centre in Ctg". The Financial Express. Dhaka. 11 February 2019. "Chittagong Stock Exchange". Chittagong Stock Exchange Limited. "Lack of requisite infrastructure". The Daily Star. 9 April 2012. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. Ethirajan, Anbarasan (4 September 2012). "Bangladesh pins hope on Chittagong port". BBC News. "BRI and S Asian geopolitics: the Bangladesh factor". Asia Times. "Maritime Silk Road and Economic Belt: Emerging opportunities for Bangladesh". The Daily Star. "China's 'maritime Silk Road' to focus on infrastructure". The Hindu. "Ctg EPZ 4th in global ranking". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. "GSK looks to fortify its Bangladesh presence". The Daily Star. "Ctg's share in garment exports on the decline". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. "The region is Ctg's oyster". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2013. Shariful. "Growing Up With Two Giants". muhammadyunus.org. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. "S Alam Group contributing to the country's economy with mega investments". 5 January 2024. "S Alam Group set to invest Tk 580b in two special industrial zones". "S Alam's Aladdin's lamp". 4 August 2023. "Bangladeshi group pays S$135m for Centrium Square's retail space, Property – THE BUSINESS TIMES". 9 July 2016. "অনুরণন: Revival of Anderkilla Shahi Jame Mosque". 2 March 2020. "Kadam Mubarak Mosque – Banglapedia". "JM Sen Hall stands witness to an eventful century in Chittagong". "Storied tale of PK Sen Sattala: The grand old building of Chattogram". 4 October 2022. "'Preserve PK Sen Bhaban as heritage'". 4 November 2010. "An old demand for a new bridge over Karnaphuli". "Kalurghat Bridge – Banglapedia". "A 202-year-old iconic family business | Ispahani Group of Companies". "Majestic Mezban". The Daily Star. 10 October 2013. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Harder, Hans (2011). Sufism and Saint Veneration in Contemporary Bangladesh: The Maijbhandaris of Chittagong. Routledge. ISBN 9781136831898. Sen, Sukumar (1991, reprint 2007). Bangala Sahityer Itihas, Vol.I, (in Bengali), Kolkata: Ananda Publishers, ISBN 81-7066-966-9, pp. 208–11 "Of Shiva Chaturdashi and Sitakunda". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Chronicle/Snippets". ctgdiocese.com. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2016. "Bangladesh band SOULS: The idea of co-existence is central to our music". The Times of India. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. Imran, Nadee Naboneeta (11 October 2012). "Ayub Bachchu The rock guru". New Age. Archived from the original on 3 September 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "Concert: 'Rise of Chittagong Kaos'". The Independent. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "Warfaze and Nemesis perform Friday in Ctg". Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "Rocking concert: Rise of Chittagong Kaos". The Daily Star. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "Population & Housing Census-2011: Union Statistics" (PDF). Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. p. 39. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 15 December 2015. "Bangladesh: Districts and Cities". citypopulation.de. "Chittagong district – Zila statistics" (PDF). bbs.gov.bd. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. "Census of India 1931" (PDF). pp. 192–193. Chakma, Niru Kumar (2012). "Buddhism". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Singh, N. K. (2008). Contemporary Indian Buddhism: Tradition and Transformation. Global Vision Publishing House. p. 16. ISBN 9788182202474. Hattaway, Paul (2004). Peoples of the Buddhist World:A Christian Prayer Diary. William Carey Library. p. 9. ISBN 9780878083619. "Motif artisans in Ctg race against time as Eid nears". The Daily Star. Retrieved 31 August 2013. "Bihari colony buzzes with Eid activities". Daily Sun. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2013. International Monetary Fund. Asia and Pacific Dept (2013). Bangladesh: Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. IMF. p. 213. ISBN 978-1-4755-4352-0. "Slum-dwellers living in fear of eviction". Daily Sun. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2013. "Illegal structures close in on Ctg railway". New Age. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2013. Chowdhury, Iftekhar Uddin. "Problems of Squatter Settlements in Bangladesh : A Case of Chittagong City". DainikAzadi.net, Daily Azadi official website Peoples-View.org, Peoples-View official website Cplustv, Cplustv Wikipedia Site "Gowariker's next based on Chittagong Uprising". AbhishekBachchan.org. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2009. "Gowarikar launches new film venture". BBC Shropshire. Retrieved 22 December 2009. "My movies are about books that influence me: Ashutosh Gowariker". Mid Day. Mumbai. Indo-Asian News Service (IANS). 9 October 2009. Retrieved 22 December 2009. "PDB Ctg". Bangladesh Power Development Board. Retrieved 31 August 2013. "Electricity". National Web Portal of Bangladesh. Retrieved 31 August 2013. ফায়ার সার্ভিস ও সিভিল ডিফেন্স অধিদপ্তর [Fire Service and Civil Defence Department]. Bangladesh Fire Service & Civil Defence (in Bengali). Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2013. "$170m World Bank support to improve Ctg water supply". The News Today. Archived from the original on 22 February 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2013. "Second Karnaphuli water supply project launched". Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved 1 September 2013. Rahman, Md Moksedur (2012). "WASA Chittagong". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. "Coverage Map". Banglalion. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "Coverage". Qubee. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2013. Mokhduma, Tabassum. "Profile of Some Schools in Chittagong". The Daily Star. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Activities". Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education, Chittagong. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Primary completion exams duration increased". New Age. Dhaka. 5 August 2013. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. "Activities of Board". Bangladesh Madrasah Education Board. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "O-Level Exams". British Council. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "A-level exams". British Council. Archived from the original on 28 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Functions of DTE". Directorate of Technical Education. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Activities". Bangladesh Technical Education Board. Archived from the original on 4 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. Ullah Khan, Sadat (2012). "Chittagong College". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. "Chittagong General Hospital needs care". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015. "Quality healthcare needed to make Chittagong global city". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "Ctg General Hospital turns into 250-bed institution". Daily Sun. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "JICA to support CCC dev projects". The Financial Express. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "Transforming ride-sharing into sustainable business". The Daily Star. Dhaka. Retrieved 29 October 2019. "CDA's mega project of outer ring road". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Chittagong City Outer Ring Road project". Chittagong Development Authority. Archived from the original on 24 April 2013. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Plethora of CDA projects, port city to see dev not found in last 50 yrs". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Primary alignment design of Tk 100b Ctg Marine Drive prepared". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Construction of flyover, marine drive this year". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "First ever river tunnel under Karnaphuli planned". The Financial Express. Dhaka. Retrieved 8 April 2013. "Work on Karnaphuli tunnel to begin this FY: Minister". Dhaka Tribune. Archived from the original on 8 August 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "Karnaphuli tunnel construction to start this fiscal". The Daily Star. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "Part of the 4-lane highway to be ready by June". The Daily Star. "DEMU trains begin debut run in Ctg". Bdnews24.com. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "Commuter trains hit tracks in Ctg". The Daily Star. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "SAIA needs proper facilities to harness it's [sic] potential & to get out of trouble". Bangladesh Monitor. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2014. "Chittagong Airport Development Project". Civil Aviation Authority of Bangladesh. Retrieved 22 November 2013. "Chittagong Shah Amanat International Airport Departures". Flightradar24. Retrieved 2 June 2023. Bangladesh "MA Aziz Stadium". Cricinfo.com. Retrieved 20 December 2009. "MA Aziz Stadium Chittagong". Warofcricket.com. Archived from the original on 13 February 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2009. "Zohur Ahmed Chowdhury Stadium, Chittagong". Warofcricket.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2011. Retrieved 20 December 2009. "Lei Nº 10.155, de 23 de Abril de 2018". leismunicipais.com.br (in Portuguese). Leis Municipais. 23 April 2018. Retrieved 15 October 2020. "Sister Cities". kunming.cn. Kunming. Retrieved 16 June 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chittagong. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Chittagong. Official Web Portal of Chittagong Chittagong City Corporation Chittagong Development Authority Chittagong Metropolitan Police  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Chittagong". Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.