Ülemiste railway station (Estonian: Ülemiste raudteejaam) is a railway station in the Ülemiste sub-district of Tallinn, the capital city of Estonia. It is located approximately 500 metres from Tallinn Airport, to which it has been connected by a tramline since 2017. The station is served by the trains of the Estonian government-owned passenger train operator, Elron. Express trains from Tallinn Baltic Station stop at Ülemiste on the way to Tartu and Narva, and there is a commuter service to stations on the line to Aegviidu. Ülemiste station will be the location of Rail Baltica's Tallinn terminus, which is planned to open in 2030. High-speed trains on Rail Baltica will connect the three Baltic capitals to Poland using the new standard-gauge railway. An international competition was held to find a design for the new terminal with "Light Stream" by Zaha Hadid Architects being declared as the winner. The new station will be directly linked to Tallinn Airport by a pedestrian bridge. Tallinn Ülemiste List of railway stations in Estonia Rail transport in Estonia Pärnu railway station "Network and Stations". Elron. Retrieved 2 February 2023. Rail.cc. Ülemiste train station / Tallinn. ERR News. Tallinn airport tram line to enter into service at end of August. Rail Baltica. Rail Baltica Unveils Winning Designs for Ülemiste Terminal in Tallinn, Estonia. ERR News. Laying down Rail Baltic in Estonia could start within two years, says CEO. ERR News. Zaha Hadid Architects win design competition for Ülemiste terminal. Lonely Planey. A futuristic station will make Eastern Europe more accessible than ever Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ülemiste railway station. (in Estonian, English, and Russian) Official website of Eesti Raudtee (EVR) – the national railway infrastructure company of Estonia responsible for most of the Estonian railway network (in Estonian, English, and Russian) Official website of Elron – the national passenger train operating company of Estonia operating all domestic passenger train services ERR News: Rail Baltica announces terminal building architecture competition. Architects' Journal: ZHA wins contest for Rail Baltica terminal in Tallinn. Rail Baltic Estonia: RAIL BALTICA ÜLEMISTE JOINT TERMINAL.