Grey's Anatomy is an American medical drama television series focusing on the personal and professional lives of surgical interns, residents, and attendings at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital, later named the Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital. The series premiered on March 27, 2005, on ABC as a mid-season replacement. The show's title is an allusion to Gray's Anatomy, a classic human anatomy textbook. Writer Shonda Rhimes developed the pilot and served as showrunner, head writer, and executive producer until stepping down in 2015.[better source needed] Set in Seattle, Washington, the series is filmed primarily in Los Angeles, California, and Vancouver, British Columbia. The original cast consisted of nine star-billed actors: Ellen Pompeo, Sandra Oh, Katherine Heigl, Justin Chambers, T. R. Knight, Chandra Wilson, James Pickens Jr., Isaiah Washington, and Patrick Dempsey. For most of its run, the series revolves around Dr. Meredith Grey (Pompeo), chronicling her progression from surgical intern to fully-qualified doctor to the hospital's chief of general surgery. The cast has undergone major changes throughout the series' run, with only three original members remaining by the 19th season – Pompeo, Wilson, and Pickens. Pompeo stepped back from the series in its 19th season, at which point the show shifted to more of an ensemble format. As of February 13, 2023[update], the show has been picked up for a 20th season, which premiered on March 14, 2024. It has not yet been renewed for a 21st season. Grey's Anatomy has two spin-off series: Private Practice (2007–2013) and Station 19 (2018–2024). Other shows which may parallel in plotline and medical dramatics would be programs like ER, which ran from 1994 to 2009, overlapping early seasons of Grey's Anatomy. Grey's Anatomy is the longest-running scripted primetime show currently airing on ABC, and the longest scripted primetime series carried by ABC. Its success catapulted many series regulars including Pompeo, Dempsey, and Oh to worldwide recognition; they were among the top five highest-earning television actors in 2013. Once among the overall top-ten shows in the United States, the show's ratings have fallen, although as of 2017[update] it was still one of the highest-rated shows among the 18–49 demographic. The show also does well on streaming television; as of February 2023[update], Grey's Anatomy was ranked the 10th most popular on-demand program. Grey's Anatomy has been well received by critics throughout much of its run and has been included in various critics' year-end top 10 lists. Since its inception, the show has been described by the media outlets as a television "phenomenon" or a "juggernaut", owing to its longevity and dominant ratings. It is considered to have had a significant effect on popular culture and has received numerous awards, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama and a total of 38 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including two for Outstanding Drama Series. The cast members have also received accolades for their individual performances. The series follows the life of Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo), the daughter of the famous general surgeon Ellis Grey (Kate Burton), starting from her acceptance into the surgical residency program at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital (later named Seattle Grace Mercy West and finally, Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital). During her time as an intern, Grey works alongside fellow physicians Cristina Yang (Sandra Oh), Izzie Stevens (Katherine Heigl), Alex Karev (Justin Chambers) and George O'Malley (T. R. Knight), who each struggle to balance their personal lives with hectic schedules and stressful residency requirements. During their internship, they are overseen by Miranda Bailey (Chandra Wilson), a senior resident, who works with attending physicians Derek Shepherd (Patrick Dempsey), head of neurosurgery and Meredith's love interest, and Preston Burke (Isaiah Washington), head of cardiothoracic surgery, who becomes Yang's fiancé. Richard Webber (James Pickens Jr.), Chief of Surgery and attending general surgeon, is the former lover of Ellis Grey. During the first 6 seasons, Burke, O'Malley, and Stevens all depart the series. The series also shows drama and emotions focused on Meredith's life. In addition to Webber, Burke, and Shepherd, the surgical wing is primarily supervised by Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh), Shepherd's ex-wife and the head of OB/GYN, neonatal and fetal surgery who leaves for Los Angeles at the end of season 3; Mark Sloan (Eric Dane), head of plastic surgery and also certified in ENT surgery; Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez), a resident who later becomes head of orthopedic surgery and leaves Seattle for New York at the end of the 12th season; Erica Hahn (Brooke Smith), as head of cardiothoracic surgery, who leaves Seattle Grace in season 5 after a disagreement with Torres, with whom she shared a brief relationship; Owen Hunt (Kevin McKidd), as head of trauma surgery who later marries and divorces Yang; Arizona Robbins (Jessica Capshaw), as head of pediatric surgery, and later head of maternal / fetal surgery who marries Torres; Teddy Altman (Kim Raver), as head of cardiothoracic surgery who departs at the end of season 8 but returns in season 14; and Amelia Shepherd (Caterina Scorsone), Derek's sister, who is hired to replace him as head of neurosurgery. Lexie Grey (Chyler Leigh), Meredith's paternal half-sister, joins the residency program in season 4 until her death with her love-interest Mark Sloan in the plane crash at the end of season 8, after which Seattle Grace is renamed Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital in their memory. Former Mercy-West residents April Kepner (Sarah Drew) and Jackson Avery (Jesse Williams) join Seattle Grace following an administrative merger in season 6. Other additions include Leah Murphy (Tessa Ferrer), who departs at the end of season 10 but returns during season 13; Shane Ross (Gaius Charles), who leaves with Yang for Zurich, Switzerland, in the season 10 finale; Stephanie Edwards (Jerrika Hinton), who resigns at the end of season 13; Jo Wilson (Camilla Luddington), who marries Karev; Andrew DeLuca (Giacomo Gianniotti), the former love interest of Meredith's maternal half sister Maggie Pierce (Kelly McCreary) who also served as head of cardiothoracic surgery; and Ben Warren (Jason George), an anesthesiologist-turned resident-turned firefighter who marries Bailey. Season 11 sees the death of Derek Shepherd, and in season 12, attending cardiovascular surgeon Nathan Riggs (Martin Henderson) joins the show, and later briefly becomes Meredith's love interest. In the early episodes of season 14, Thomas Koracick (Greg Germann), an attending neurosurgeon, begins making appearances and Riggs leaves the series to start a life with Owen's long-lost sister Megan (Abigail Spencer); by the season finale, Robbins, Kepner and Warren also depart the show. Midway through the 16th season, Cormac Hayes (Richard Flood) becomes the new chief of pediatric surgery and Karev departs to reunite with Stevens. During the 17th season, DeLuca is stabbed while chasing a child abductor and despite the efforts of Hunt and Altman, he dies. Avery and Koracick also depart in season 17, with Avery moving to Boston to take over his family's Foundation and Koracick leaving to assist him. In Season 18, Hayes moves back to his home country, Hunt and Altman flee the country, Marsh returns to Minnesota, Webber and Fox go on sabbatical, and Bailey resigns as chief of surgery, leaving Grey as chief of surgery of Grey-Sloan Memorial. In Season 19, new interns Simone Griffith (Alexis Floyd), Benson "Blue" Kwan (Harry Shum Jr.), Jules Millin (Adelaide Kane), Mika Yasuda (Midori Francis) and Lucas Adams (Niko Terho), Derek and Amelia's nephew, join the program; Meredith moves to Boston and Pierce departs to move to Chicago. Grey's Anatomy follows the lives of surgical interns, residents, and attendings at the fictional Grey-Sloan Memorial Hospital (formerly Seattle Grace Hospital, Season 1–6, Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital, Season 6–9, and then Grey-Sloan Memorial Hospital, Season 9–present), as the interns gradually develop into seasoned doctors through the mentoring of their residents, attendings, and chiefs of surgery. Each installment typically begins with a voice-over narrative from Meredith Grey or a season regular, foreshadowing the theme of the episode. Each season tends to represent the physicians' academic year, with each completed year qualifying the residents at a level higher in the surgical field. The season typically ends with a dramatic event such as a death or character departure. Most installments revolve around the doctors' everyday lives as surgeons, but the show also emphasizes their personal, as well as their professional, lives. The series often sets aside medical ethics concerns in order to foreground character development and relationships. While the physicians treat the illnesses of their patients, often through complex surgeries, they also display a competitive spirit and seek praise. After arriving at the hospital each morning, residents may argue over who gets the challenge of a certain patient who has arrived that day. A hospital superior assigns cases, often generating tension between the residents and their superiors. Within each episode, there are shifts from the doctors interacting with their patients, to scenes with their co-workers. Once assigned a case, each doctor diagnoses the patient, with the help of his or her attending physician, which usually leads to surgery. The surgeons tend to form personal connections with their patients, with a patient often conveying a message to his or her doctor, which unintentionally relates to the doctor's private life. The show displays the growth of relationships between the doctors, either friendly or romantic, which may produce conflicts between their personal and professional lives. Emotional scenes are often accompanied by an indie rock background song, something that has become a hallmark of the series. At the conclusion of each episode, one of the characters delivers another voiceover, typically contrasting or following up on the initial one. List indicator(s) This section includes characters who have appeared in the series as credited cast. An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the season.  D indicates that the character appeared with the use of a body double replacing the credited actor. Legend   = Main cast (credited)   = Recurring cast (3+)   = Guest cast (1–2) The five characters who are first introduced in the series premiere as surgical interns are Meredith Grey, Cristina Yang, Izzie Stevens, Alex Karev, and George O'Malley. They are initially mentored by Dr. Miranda Bailey, a senior resident who becomes the hospital's Chief Resident, and later an attending general surgeon, in season 6. The surgical program is initially headed by Richard Webber, the Chief of Surgery, who has a pre-existing personal relationship with Meredith, having had an affair with her mother when Meredith was a child. In Webber's employ are attending neurosurgeon Derek Shepherd, dubbed 'McDreamy' by the residents, and attending cardiothoracic surgeon Preston Burke. Shepherd is introduced as Meredith's love-interest, while Burke begins a relationship with Yang. Introduced in the show's second season are obstetrician-gynecologist and neonatal surgeon, Addison Montgomery, plastic and ENT surgeon Mark Sloan (nicknamed 'McSteamy' by the interns), from New York, and orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres. Montgomery is Shepherd's estranged wife who arrives in Seattle seeking reconciliation with him, Sloan is Shepherd's former best-friend, who aided the breakdown of his marriage by having an affair with Montgomery, while Torres is introduced as a love-interest, and eventual wife for O'Malley. The penultimate episode of season 3 introduces Lexie Grey, Meredith's half-sister who unexpectedly decides to pursue her internship at Seattle Grace Hospital after her mother's sudden death, and begins an on-again, off-again relationship with Sloan. Burke and Yang, having been engaged, endeavor to plan their wedding, while Montgomery departs the show in the season 3 finale, relocating to California, seeking a new life, thus becoming the lead character of the spin-off Private Practice. The season 3 finale also shows Burke's exit from the show, after leaving Yang at the altar on their wedding day. Grey, Yang, Stevens, and Karev are all promoted to residents in the season 4 premiere, while O'Malley is forced to repeat his internship year, following his failing of the intern exam. Subsequently, Torres and O'Malley divorce, due to him having an affair with Stevens, initially concealing it from Torres. Early in the fourth season, cardiothoracic surgeon Erica Hahn becomes Torres's love-interest. During the fifth season, Hahn departs from the series after a disagreement with Torres, and O'Malley retakes his intern exam, passes and joins his fellow physicians as a resident. Two new characters are introduced, former United States Army trauma surgeon Dr. Owen Hunt, and pediatric surgeon Dr. Arizona Robbins. Hunt becomes a love-interest for Yang, while Robbins begins a relationship with Torres. When Stevens is diagnosed with stage IV metastatic melanoma, she and Karev get married at the conclusion of the fifth season. In addition, Meredith and Shepherd marry, with their vows written on a blue post-it note. O'Malley dies in the premiere of the sixth season, due to injuries sustained from saving a woman from being hit by a bus, and Stevens later departs Seattle following a communication breakdown with her then-husband Karev following the Seattle Grace merger with Mercy West Hospital. New characters are introduced as Seattle Grace Hospital merges with Mercy West Hospital. Residents April Kepner and Jackson Avery transfer to Seattle Grace Hospital from Mercy West Hospital, and Avery has a brief relationship with Lexie, until she reunites with Sloan. Subsequently, Teddy Altman is introduced as the new Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery. Ben Warren is also introduced in the sixth season, who becomes a romantic interest for Bailey throughout the series, eventually marrying her. In the season 6 finale, a deceased patient's grieving husband embarks on a shooting spree at the hospital, injuring Karev, Shepherd, and Hunt. In the shooting's emotional reverberations, Yang and Hunt abruptly marry, not wanting to risk separation. Torres and Robbins eventually wed, officiated by Bailey. In season 8, Webber steps down as Chief of Surgery and allocates his job to Hunt. As the final year of residency for Meredith, Yang, Karev, Kepner and Avery is coming to a close, the doctors are all planning to relocate to different hospitals to pursue their specialty careers. However, all plans are put on hold when several doctors from Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital are engaged in a plane crash, which kills Lexie and endangers Meredith, Shepherd, Yang, Sloan and Robbins in the season 8 finale. The season finale also sees Altman being courteously fired by Hunt as she struggles to decide whether or not to take the job as Chief at the United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM). In the season 9 premiere, Sloan dies due to sustained injuries from the plane crash following a brief relapse of temporary health ("the surge") and the remaining characters work through their post traumatic stress and Arizona Robbins's loss of limb by way of suing Seattle Grace Mercy West, as the hospital was responsible for putting the surgeons on the plane. Meanwhile, Jo Wilson, Stephanie Edwards, Leah Murphy and Shane Ross are introduced as a new group of interns. The season continues with the struggle of the lawsuit and the animosity that it creates within the hospital, Yang and Hunt eventually divorce in order to help the lawsuit. The doctors who were on the plane win the lawsuit, but the payout bankrupts the hospital. They all club together and buy Seattle Grace Mercy West, with the help of the Harper Avery Foundation, and they become the Board of Directors, once being called the "Grey-Sloan 7". One of the changes they implement is renaming the hospital to Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital in memory of Lexie Grey and Mark Sloan. Robbins cheats on Torres with a visiting facial reconstruction surgeon and Webber gets electrocuted in the season 9 finale, although survives the incident. Grey's Anatomy saw the departure of one of its major players, Cristina Yang, played by Sandra Oh, as well as the departure of interns Murphy and Ross, in the season 10 finale. Amelia Shepherd, the sister of Derek, joined the main cast in Season 11, transitioning over from being a main character of the spin-off series, Private Practice which had recently ended. The 11th season also saw the introduction of the new Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Maggie Pierce, Richard's secret daughter with Ellis Grey. Towards the end of the 11th season, Derek Shepherd witnesses a car accident and pulls over to help the injured, but his car is hit by a truck with him inside as he attempts to leave the scene. He later dies at another hospital following the doctors' mishandling of his injuries. The twelfth season saw Andrew DeLuca join the main cast as a new intern at the hospital, as well as Nathan Riggs as a new cardiothoracic surgeon with a pre-existing off-screen history with Hunt. The season 12 finale saw the departure of one of the show's longest-running characters, Callie Torres, played by Sara Ramirez. Edwards departed at the end of the thirteenth season, deciding to quit her job as a surgeon after surviving a major fire at the hospital. Riggs departed and Altman returned to Seattle toward the beginning of the 14th season. The fourteenth season also saw the introduction of Tom Koracick who worked as a new neurosurgeon alongside Amelia Shepherd, Levi Schmitt who is a new intern at the hospital, as well as Andrew's sister, Carina DeLuca, an obstetrician who enters into a relationship with Robbins. During the fourteenth season, Warren transitions out to become a main character of the series' second spin-off, Station 19, after his character decides to quit working at the hospital to become a firefighter. Carina DeLuca eventually joins him as a main character of that spin-off series. Long-time characters, Robbins and Kepner depart the series in the season finale to pursue other career opportunities. The fifteenth season saw the introduction of Atticus "Link" Lincoln, as a new orthopedic surgeon, while the sixteenth season saw the introduction of Cormac Hayes, a new pediatric surgeon, and Winston Ndugu, a new cardiothoracic surgeon. Season 16 was the last to feature Alex Karev, who moved to Kansas to reunite with Stevens, leaving Grey as the last remaining intern from the original cast. Season 17 saw Nick Marsh, a transplant surgeon, join the ensemble of main characters as a new romantic interest for Meredith Grey. The seventeenth season also saw the departure of Andrew DeLuca, after he was stabbed and ultimately died after pursuing a sex trafficker, and was also the last season to feature both Jackson Avery, who moved to Boston in order to run a family foundation and Koracick, who also moved to Boston to assist Avery, as main characters. Hayes departed the series in its 18th season after deciding to return to Ireland with his kids. Season 19 saw the introduction of five new interns with Simone Griffith, Mika Yasuda, Benson Kwan, Jules Millin and Lucas Adams, the latter of which is revealed to be a nephew of Amelia and Derek Shepherd. Meredith Grey, one of the last remaining original characters of the series, as well as Pierce, both depart Seattle during the course of the nineteenth season. With the drama's setting being a hospital, numerous medical personnel appear regularly on the show, as well as several other recurring characters. Joe (Steven W. Bailey), is first shown as the owner of the Emerald City Bar and Grill, across the street from the hospital, which is a common relaxation area for the physicians. Also introduced in the pilot, is the legendary former general surgeon, Dr. Ellis Grey (Kate Burton), Meredith's Alzheimer's-stricken mother, who appeared on the show until her death in season 3. In the first season, Olivia Harper (Sarah Utterback), a nurse who appeared on the show occasionally until getting laid off in the merger with Mercy West, engages in a sexual relationship with O'Malley, giving him syphilis. Serving as an assistant and secretary to the Chief of Surgery, former nurse Patricia (Robin Pearson Rose), has appeared on the show since its debut. Tyler Christian (Moe Irvin), a hospital nurse, makes occasional appearances throughout the series. Within the second season, Bailey becomes pregnant by her husband, Tucker Jones (Cress Williams), who makes frequent appearances on Grey's Anatomy, until their divorce in season 5. While Bailey takes a sabbatical, due to her pregnancy, the cheerful Dr. Sydney Heron (Kali Rocha), fills her position as the resident supervising Grey, Yang, Stevens, Karev and O'Malley, and makes occasional appearances until the fifth season. Thatcher and Susan Grey (Jeff Perry and Mare Winningham), Meredith's estranged father and step-mother, are introduced in season 2, with Susan making appearances until her death in season 3, and Thatcher continuing to appear in the series until his death in season 15. Adele Webber (Loretta Devine), is introduced as Richard's wife, who eventually acquires Alzheimer's, in the seventh season, and continued to make appearances until her death in season 9. Introduced as Preston's mother, Jane Burke (Diahann Carroll) makes occasional appearances until the fourth season. Denny Duquette (Jeffrey Dean Morgan), a patient with congestive heart failure, originates as one of Burke's patients, who goes on to propose to Stevens, after weeks of bonding between the two. Facing death, Stevens cuts Duquette's left ventricular assist device (LVAD), to elevate his position on the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) transplant list. This ultimately ends in his death season 2 finale, marking his initial departure from the show, and placing Stevens on disciplinary probation. Initially conceived as a veterinarian hired for Shepherd's dog, Doc, Dr. Finn Dandridge (Chris O'Donnell) soon becomes a love-interest for Meredith, while Shepherd is with Montgomery. Dandridge is included in a multi-episode story arc in seasons 2 and 3, consisting of 9 episodes, ending when Meredith reunites with Shepherd. In season 3, George's father, Harold O'Malley (George Dzundza), is diagnosed with cancer and dies, with his wife Louise (Debra Monk) and George's brothers Jerry (Greg Pitts) and Ronny (Tim Griffin) by his side. Louise goes on to appear occasionally, and was last seen in season 8. A ferryboat accident brings along Rebecca Pope (Elizabeth Reaser), who is initially introduced as a pregnant amnesiac Jane Doe patient. Pope eventually embarks on a relationship with Karev, until she is diagnosed with a personality disorder in season 4, and makes her final departure. Amidst the crisis of the ferryboat crash, Meredith falls into the water at the disaster site. Although rescued, she goes into cardiac arrest, waking up in what appears to be limbo. Within the limbo, Meredith is entertained by deceased acquaintances Duquette and Dylan Young (Kyle Chandler), who was killed during a bomb crisis in the second season, until eventually being resuscitated. Seeking a cure to her depression, Meredith undergoes therapy sessions with the hospital psychiatrist, Dr. Katharine Wyatt (Amy Madigan), who in addition, serves as a psychiatrist to Hunt. The season 4 premiere introduces several new interns, to be trained under Meredith, Yang, Stevens, Karev, and eventually O'Malley. Among them are Dr. Steve Mostow (Mark Saul) who continues to make appearances, and Dr. Sadie Harris (Melissa George) who formed a friendship with Meredith while the two were in college. Harris is fired in the fifth season, due to not actually having a medical degree, and departs the show immediately after. Meredith and Shepherd's relationship reaches a crisis, and the two separate, leaving Shepherd to entertain a relationship with Rose (Lauren Stamile), a nurse. Rose appears frequently until season 5, when Derek and Meredith decide to rekindle their flame. Throughout the fifth season, Stevens experiences full-out hallucinations of Duquette, signaling that she is ill, and once she is lucid, he departs, marking his final appearance. Following the announcement of her relationship with Robbins (Jessica Capshaw), Callie's father Carlos Torres (Hector Elizondo) initially contests his daughter's concurrence in homosexuality, but eventually accepts it, and he reappears several times throughout the series. The hospital's merging with Mercy West introduces new residents: Dr. Reed Adamson (Nora Zehetner) and Dr. Charles Percy (Robert Baker), but the two are both murdered in the season 6 finale. Also introduced in the sixth season is Dr. Ben Warren (Jason George), an anesthesiologist and eventual husband to Dr. Miranda Bailey, as well as Sloan Riley (Leven Rambin), Dr. Mark Sloan's estranged pregnant daughter who seeks kinship with him. Robbins receives a grant to aid children in Malawi, which leads to a falling-out between her and Torres. While in Malawi, Robbins is replaced by Dr. Robert Stark (Peter MacNicol), a pediatric surgeon with an interest in Dr. April Kepner, who appears occasionally until season 8. Following the breakdown of Dr. Torres's relationship with Dr. Robbins, Dr. Torres becomes pregnant with Dr. Sloan's baby. Torres's relationship with Robbins is subsequently mended, and the couple endeavors to raise their new daughter, Sofia Robbin Sloan Torres, with the help of Dr. Sloan. Dr. Lucy Fields (Rachael Taylor), an obstetrician-gynecologist, is introduced in the seventh season, and serves as a love-interest for Dr. Alex Karev, until eventually taking up Robbins' job in Africa. Shepherd and Meredith also become new parents, with their adoption of Zola, a baby girl from Malawi. Conceived as a patient with a tumor condition who later develops diabetes, Henry Burton (Scott Foley) befriends Dr. Altman and eventually joins her in marriage only to get treated using her medical insurance, until he dies while undergoing heart surgery in season 8. Dr Catherine Avery (played by Debbie Allen), a urologist, is introduced in the show's eighth season and subsequently makes recurring appearances in all subsequent seasons thus far. Her character becomes a romantic interest for Dr Richard Webber, and eventually his second wife following the death of his first wife, Adele. In the season 9 premiere, interns Dr. Jo Wilson (Camilla Luddington), Dr. Shane Ross (Gaius Charles), Dr. Stephanie Edwards (Jerrika Hinton), Dr. Leah Murphy (Tessa Ferrer) and Dr. Heather Brooks (Tina Majorino) are introduced. Steven Culp and William Daniels play Dr. Parker and Dr. Craig Thomas, respectively. Dr. Parker is Chief of Cardiothoracic Surgery and Dr. Craig Thomas (William Daniels) is an attending cardiothoracic surgeon at Mayo Clinic, where Cristina worked temporarily. Dr. Alana Cahill (Constance Zimmer) introduced in season 9 is appointed to cut costs at the hospital and she eventually decides the best course of action would be to seek out a new buyer until the 4 crash survivors and Torres on the behalf of Sloan pool their money together in a bid to purchase the hospital themselves. Kepner starts dating a paramedic named Matthew Taylor (Justin Bruening) and they form a deep relationship over the course of seasons 9 and 10 and she eventually agreed to marry before reconciling with Avery in the middle of her wedding ceremony to Matthew. Lauren Boswell (Hilarie Burton) is introduced as a craniofacial surgeon consulting on a case at Grey Sloan Memorial who showed romantic interest in Arizona and eventually ended up having a one-night stand with her. Dr. Heather Brooks dies in the premiere of season 10. She goes to search for Dr. Webber and finds him lying in the basement of the hospital. Trying to save Dr. Webber, she accidentally steps into a puddle and electrocutes herself while hitting her head as she falls. Also introduced in season 10 was Dr. Karev's estranged father Jimmy Evans (James Remar) who tries to form a relationship with his son but fails repeatedly, and dies in a botched surgery. The conclusion of season 10 has Cristina leaving Grey Sloan for Dr. Burke's job as head of Klausman Institute for Medical Research in Zurich, while Dr. Ross makes a last-minute decision to follow her in order to study under her. Dr. Maggie Pierce (Kelly McCreary) unknowingly drops a bombshell that she is the child of Dr. Webber and the late Dr. Grey, and was given up at birth for adoption. Dr. Meredith Grey has to accommodate another half-sister in her life. Also, Dr. Yang privately gives her shares in the hospital to Dr. Karev, also giving him her seat on the board. But Dr. Webber all but promises the seat to Dr. Bailey, so the board has to decide between them. Season 11 begins with new surgical residents coming to the hospital. Introduced in season 11 is Dr. Nicole Herman (Geena Davis), who is Chief of Fetal Surgery at Grey Sloan Memorial. Dr. Herman selects Robbins for a fetal surgery fellowship and becomes her mentor. Herman features in a 12-episode arc before departing in episode 14. Season 14 sees the introduction of Taryn Helm (played by Jaicy Elliot), a new intern who eventually becomes a resident, with recurring appearances in the series in all subsequent seasons thus far. Shonda Rhimes wanted to make a show that she would enjoy watching, and thought it would be interesting to create a show about "smart women competing against one another". When asked how she decided to develop a medical drama, Rhimes responded: I was obsessed with the surgery channels... My sisters and I would call each other up and talk about operations we'd seen on the Discovery Channel. There's something fascinating about the medical world—you see things you'd never imagine, like the fact that doctors talk about their boyfriends or their day while they're cutting somebody open. So when ABC asked me to write another pilot, the [operating room] seemed like the natural setting. The series was pitched to ABC Entertainment, who gave the green light. The show was picked up as a mid-season replacement for Boston Legal in the 2005 television season. Francie Calfo, executive vice president of development at ABC Entertainment, commented that ABC was looking for a medical show that was unlike the others airing at the time. She pointed out: Medical shows are hard, and it was hard trying to figure out where ours could be different. But where everybody else is speeding up their medical shows, [Rhimes] found a way to slow it down, so you get to know the characters. There's definitely a strong female appeal to it. ER is high-speed medicine. The camera flies around, adrenaline is rushing. My show is more personal. The idea for the series began when a doctor told me it was incredibly hard to shave her legs in the hospital shower. At first, that seemed like a silly detail. But then I thought about the fact that it was the only time and place this woman might have to shave her legs. That's how hard the work is. —Rhimes on the creation of Grey's Anatomy While creating characters, as well as writing the first script, the series' writers had no character descriptions in mind, and hoped to cast the best actor available for each part. Rhimes has said that if the network had not allowed her to create characters this way, she would have been hesitant about moving forward with the series. Female roles, in particular, were developed as multi-faceted characters. Rhimes offered her insight: I wanted to create a world in which you felt as if you were watching very real women. Most of the women I saw on TV didn't seem like people I actually knew. They felt like ideas of what women are. They never got to be nasty or competitive or hungry or angry. They were often just the loving wife or the nice friend. But who gets to be the bitch? Who gets to be the three-dimensional woman? The show's title, Grey's Anatomy, was devised as a play on words: a reference to both Henry Gray's classic English medical textbook, Gray's Anatomy (first published in 1858 and still in print), and the title character Dr. Meredith Grey (Ellen Pompeo). Almost all episodes are titled after songs. Notable examples include "Into You Like a Train", "Drowning on Dry Land", and "How to Save a Life". However, the episode titled "1-800-799-7233", breaks from this pattern, referencing the National Domestic Violence Hotline. This change was suggested by actor Giacomo Gianniotti, according to showrunner Krista Vernoff. Before the series debuted on March 27, 2005, a few early releases were shown to close friends and family of the producers and actors. The show was scheduled to run in the Boston Legal time slot for 4 weeks. The show's high ratings and viewership resulted in ABC keeping it in that slot for the remainder of the season. ABC Entertainment President, Steve McPherson, commented on the scheduling change: "Ultimately we decided that, without having adequate lead time or marketing dollars to devote to moving either show so late in the season, we'd continue to let [Grey's Anatomy] build on its tremendous momentum through May." Prior to broadcast, it was announced that the show's title would be changed from Grey's Anatomy to Complications, although this did not take place. List of showrunners throughout the series' run: Season 1–5: Shonda Rhimes Season 6–7: Shonda Rhimes & Krista Vernoff Season 8: Shonda Rhimes, Tony Phelan & Joan Rater Season 9–10: Tony Phelan & Joan Rater Season 11–13: Stacy Mckee & William Harper Season 14–15: William Harper & Krista Vernoff Season 16–19: Krista Vernoff Season 20: Meg Marinis Grey's Anatomy is produced by ShondaLand, in association with The Mark Gordon Company, and ABC Studios (formerly Touchstone Television). Rhimes, Betsy Beers, Krista Vernoff, Mark Gordon, Rob Corn, and Mark Wilding have all served as executive producers throughout the course of the series. In subsequent seasons, Steve Mulholland, Kent Hodder, Nancy Bordson, James D. Parriott, and Peter Horton have also been executive producers, with Allan Heinberg joining the show in 2006 in this role. As of season eight, the executive producers were Rhimes, Beers, Gordon, Vernoff, Corn, Wilding, and Heinberg. Rhimes is the series head writer, or its most prolific writer. In its early years, she often promoted the show by answering fan questions on her Twitter account. Other members of the writing staff are Vernoff, Wilding, Peter Nowalk, Stacy McKee, William Harper, Zoanne Clack, Tony Phelan, Joan Rater, and Debora Cahn. From the second through seventh seasons, the writers maintained a blog entitled Grey Matter, where the writer of an episode discussed background of the writing. Directors vary by episode, with Rob Corn directing most frequently, followed by Tom Verica. Horton, Edward Ornelas, and Jessica Yu have also directed a substantial number of episodes. Cast members Chandra Wilson, Debbie Allen, and Kevin McKidd have each directed multiple episodes. Grey's Anatomy has been edited by Susan Vaill since the show's inception, and David Greenspan was named an editor in 2006. Casting directors Linda Lowy and John Brace have been a part of the production team since 2005. The production design is led by Donald Lee Harris, assisted by art director Brian Harms, and costume design is led by Mimi Melgaard. Working alongside Melgaard, Thomas Houchins supervises costumes, Ellen Vieira is the makeup artist, and Jerilynn Stevens serves as a hairstylist. The Director of Photography is Herbert Davis. The music coordinator is Danny Lux. Karen Lisa Pike, M.D. is the on-set medical consultant, alongside Linda Klein, an RN. In an interview, Ellen Pompeo (Meredith Grey) stated "We always ask Linda, you know, what is this procedure, what is this surgery, when is this performed, what happens"- various members of the cast spoke of the importance of having real surgeons around especially in learning how to properly hold instruments, how to accurately use medical language and develop their characters in an authentic way; most of the cast members observed real surgery in real life as preparation for their roles. The production staff is part of a Grey's Anatomy softball team that competes against other television shows, such as CSI: Crime Scene Investigation. She brought this energy that felt very fresh. From the beginning, I've been shaping Cristina around Sandra a little bit. One of my favorite things to do is take as much of her dialogue out of a scene as possible because she does so much nonverbally. Then I just watch what she manages to do without having a word to say. —Rhimes on Oh's audition Grey's Anatomy used a color-blind casting technique, resulting in a racially diverse ensemble. Each role was cast without the character's race being pre-determined, keeping Rhimes's vision of diversity. The production staff began casting with the program's title character, Dr. Meredith Grey, which Rhimes said was a challenging role to cast. "I kept saying we need a girl like that girl from Moonlight Mile (2002)," said Rhimes, "and after a while, they were like, 'We think we can get that girl from Moonlight Mile." The next to be cast, Sandra Oh (Dr. Cristina Yang), was initially invited to audition for the character of Bailey, but pressed to read for the role of Cristina instead. Many actors read for the role of Dr. Derek Shepherd. Rob Lowe was offered the role, but turned it down as he had already agreed to star in another medical drama Dr. Vegas. When Patrick Dempsey read for the part, "he was just perfect," according to Rhimes. The only character developed with a racial description in mind was Dr. Miranda Bailey, who is portrayed by Chandra Wilson. Her character was first described as a tiny blonde with curly hair, but when Wilson began speaking, Rhimes reported: "[Wilson] is exactly who Miranda is." James Pickens Jr. was selected to appear as Dr. Richard Webber in the series' pilot and first season. Katherine Heigl wanted to portray Dr. Izzie Stevens as a brunette but was requested to retain her natural blonde for the part. Isaiah Washington, who portrayed Dr. Preston Burke, initially read for the role of Shepherd but was cast as Burke, because the original actor to play Burke had to withdraw. T. R. Knight signed on for the pilot as Dr. George O'Malley, expecting that the role might be short-lived, because he liked that the character was multi-faceted. Rounding out the season 1 cast was Justin Chambers as Dr. Alex Karev, a character who was not originally included in the show's pilot, but added through digital editing and additional scenes. Rhimes later shifted focus away from physical descriptions of characters, instead emphasizing the feelings and qualities they conveyed. Season 2 marked the introduction of attending doctors Mark Sloan (Eric Dane) and Callie Torres (Sara Ramirez). They were initially cast as recurring characters, but both were given star billing at the opening of season 3. Ramirez was cast after ABC executives offered them a role in the network show of their choice; Dane had previously auditioned unsuccessfully for a role in the pilot episode. Dr. Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh) also joined the show in season 2, after making a guest appearance in the season 1 finale In October 2006, Washington allegedly insulted Knight with a homophobic slur, during an on-set altercation with Dempsey, and ABC terminated Washington's contract at the end of season 3. Washington returned for a guest appearance in season 10. At the conclusion of season 3, Walsh departed the show to pursue the Grey's Anatomy spin-off, Private Practice, but continues to make guest appearances. Chyler Leigh joined the cast as a main character in season 4 as Dr. Lexie Grey, Meredith's half-sister. Leigh had appeared as a guest-star in the final 2 episodes of season 3. On the selection of Leigh for the role of Lexie, Rhimes said: "Chyler stood out ... It felt like she could be Meredith's sister, but she had a depth that was very interesting." Dr. Erica Hahn (Brooke Smith), who first appeared on Grey's Anatomy in season 2, returned as a series regular in season 4. Shortly after the announcement that Smith would be a regular member of the cast, Entertainment Weekly's Michael Ausiello, reported that her character, Hahn, would depart from Grey's Anatomy on November 6, 2008. E! Online's Kristin Dos Santos asserted that Smith's dismissal from the show had been forced by the ABC network, as part of an attempt to "de-gay" Grey's Anatomy. Rhimes countered these claims, saying that "we did not find that the magic and chemistry with Brooke's character would sustain in the long run". Season 5 introduced actor Kevin McKidd (Dr. Owen Hunt), who was signed as a series regular after originally being cast for a specific story-arc. In addition, Jessica Capshaw (Dr. Arizona Robbins) was originally introduced for a 3-episode arc, but her contract was extended until the end of the season; she became a series regular in the sixth season. Knight departed the show at the conclusion of season 5, citing an unhappiness with the development and lack of screen-time for his character. Directly following Knight's departure, Entertainment Weekly reported that Heigl had not returned to the set as scheduled after her maternity leave. It was later confirmed that Heigl would not return to the show at all. Kim Raver, who was cast as recurring character Dr. Teddy Altman in season 6, was given star billing later in the season. Sarah Drew (Dr. April Kepner) and Jesse Williams (Dr. Jackson Avery), who both made their series debuts as recurring characters in the sixth season, and received star-billing in the seventh. The 6 original actors' contracts expired after season 8, but in May 2012, Pompeo, Oh, Chambers, Wilson, Pickens Jr. and Dempsey renewed their contracts with the show for another 2 years. At the conclusion of season 8, Leigh's character Lexie Grey departed from the show at Leigh's request, and with Rhimes's agreement. Raver's character Teddy Altman was also written out of the show during the season 8 finale. Rhimes said that Raver had been offered a contract renewal, but declined. In July 2012, Dane (Sloan) confirmed that he was departing the show to pursue other projects; he made his final appearances in the first 2 episodes of season 9. With the start of season 10, Camilla Luddington, Gaius Charles, Jerrika Hinton and Tessa Ferrer were introduced to the show as series regulars. They were first introduced to the show in season 9 as the new interns. On August 13, 2013, Oh (Cristina) announced that the show's tenth season would be her final one because she had decided to pursue more diverse career opportunities. In March 2014, it was announced that Isaiah Washington, who portrayed Preston Burke in the first 3 seasons of the show, would make a guest appearance to coincide with the departure of series regular Sandra Oh, his former on-screen love-interest. Neither Charles's nor Ferrer's contracts were renewed for season 11. On May 2, 2014, it was announced that, in addition to Pompeo and Dempsey, all the original remaining cast members—apart from Oh—signed 2-year deals, extending their contracts through seasons 11 and 12. Despite joining the series in season 2, Sara Ramirez was on the same negotiation schedule as the season 1 cast and also signed a new 2-year deal. On April 23, 2015, Dempsey departed the show during the show's 11th season, despite the fact that he still had a year left in his contract. Dempsey decided to leave because the show was too time consuming. He wanted to spend more time with his family, so in season 11 his character died. In the show he was brain dead from a car accident and then his wife decided to pull the plug on him. On the night of the season 12 finale, May 19, 2016, Sara Ramirez announced that they would be leaving the show following the decision not to renew their contract. On January 17, 2018, it was announced by ABC that Ellen Pompeo's contract had been renewed through season 16. Not only did the contract renewal insure that Pompeo will return as Meredith Grey, but it made her a producer of Grey's Anatomy and a co-executive producer of Station 19. The deal made Pompeo the highest-paid actress currently on a dramatic TV series, with her making $575,000 per episode and over $20 million yearly. On March 8, 2018, it was announced that series regulars Jessica Capshaw and Sarah Drew would not be returning for season 15 after executive producers decided to let them go. In May 2018, it was confirmed that Kim Raver, who made returning guest appearances in season 14, would once again become a series regular, beginning with season 15. In January 2020, Justin Chambers announced that he had departed the series to pursue more diverse career opportunities and that his final episode had aired on November 14, 2019. In March 2021, Giacomo Gianniotti departed the series after wanting to pursue new things such as directing. In May 2021, Jesse Williams and Greg Germann both left the main cast, although Germann is expected to remain on the show in a guest capacity. In September 2021, it was announced that Kate Walsh would be returning as Addison Montgomery for multiple episodes in season 18. In July 2022, it was announced that Alexis Floyd, Niko Terho, Adelaide Kane, Midori Francis and Harry Shum Jr. joined the cast as series regular for the nineteenth season. In August 2022, it was announced that Ellen Pompeo will appear in only eight episodes of the upcoming nineteenth season, but that she will continue to narrate the episodes and will remain an executive producer. Rhimes considered setting the medical drama in her hometown, Chicago, but eventually decided to go with Seattle, to distinguish Grey's Anatomy from the Chicago-based series ER. Fisher Plaza, which is the headquarters building of the former Fisher Communications (since merged into Sinclair Broadcasting Group) and SBG's ABC-affiliated KOMO radio and television stations in Seattle, is used for some exterior shots of Grey-Sloan Memorial Hospital. In particular, air ambulances land on the KOMO-TV news copter's helipad. This suggests the hospital is close to the Space Needle (which is directly across the street from Fisher Plaza), the Seattle Monorail, and other local landmarks. However, the hospital used for most other exterior and a few interior shots is not in Seattle; these scenes are shot at the VA Sepulveda Ambulatory Care Center in North Hills, California, and occasional shots from an interior walkway above the lobby show dry California mountains in the distance. The exterior of Meredith Grey's house, also known as the Intern House, is real. In the show, the address of Grey's home is 613 Harper Lane, but this is not an actual address. The physical house is located at 303 W. Comstock St., on Queen Anne, Seattle, Washington. Most scenes are taped at The Prospect Studios in Los Feliz, just east of Hollywood, where the Grey's Anatomy set occupies 6 sound stages. Some outside scenes are filmed at the Warren G. Magnuson Park in Seattle. Several props used are working medical equipment, including the MRI machine. When asked about operating room scenes, Sarah Drew said: We work with bovine organs, which is cow's organs, The smell is repulsive and makes us all gag. And we use an actual soldering tool to solder the organs. It smells like burning flesh. There's also a lot of silicone and blood matter, red jello mixed with blood and chicken fat. It's pretty gross. Costumes are used to differentiate between attending surgeons, who wear navy blue scrubs, and residents, who wear light blue scrubs. The series is filmed with a single-camera setup, as are many dramas. Grey's Anatomy is often filmed using the "walk-and-talk" filming technique, popularized on television by series such as St. Elsewhere, ER, and The West Wing. Grey's Anatomy's first season commenced airing as a mid-season replacement to Boston Legal on March 27, 2005, and concluded on May 22, 2005. The 9-episode season aired on Sundays in the 10:00pm EST time slot, following Desperate Housewives, although it had initially been slated for a January 2005 debut in the Monday 10:00pm EST time slot. The show was renewed by ABC for a second season, that aired in the same time slot as season 1. Premiering on September 25, 2005, and concluding on May 15, 2006, the season consisted of 27 episodes. As the original first season order was for 13 episodes, 5 episodes were held for season 2, as ABC decided to close the first season of Grey's Anatomy on the same night as Desperate Housewives' finale. During season 2, Grey's Anatomy produced 2 specials recapping the events of recent episodes, narrated by Bailey, entitled "Straight to the Heart" and "Under Pressure". The show was renewed for a third season, which was relocated to the coveted Thursday 9:00 pm EST time slot. The show has remained on Thursdays since then. Commencing on September 21, 2006, and ending on May 17, 2007, season 3 consisted of 25 episodes. 2 more specials were produced during the show's third season, entitled "Complications of the Heart" and "Every Moment Counts", which were narrated by Bailey and Morgan, respectively. ABC renewed Grey's Anatomy for a fourth season, which aired from September 27, 2007, to May 22, 2008, and ultimately consisted of 17 episodes. Season 4 had a reduced number of episodes, due to the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike, which caused production to cease from February to April, leaving the show with no writing staff during that time. At the beginning of season 4, the show aired its final special entitled "Come Rain Or Shine", created to transition viewers from Grey's Anatomy to Private Practice, which was narrated by the editors of People magazine. The show received a renewal for a fifth season, which premiered on September 25, 2008, and concluded on May 14, 2009, consisting of 24 episodes. The series was renewed for a sixth season consisting of 24 episodes, which commenced on September 24, 2009, and ended on May 20, 2010. During season 6, Grey's Anatomy aired a series of webisodes entitled Seattle Grace: On Call at ABC.com. ABC renewed the show for a seventh season, which premiered on September 23, 2010, and concluded on May 19, 2011, consisting of 22 episodes. This was followed up with Seattle Grace: On Call, Seattle Grace: Message of Hope, aired during the beginning of season 7. Also during season 7, the series produced a musical episode entitled "Song Beneath the Song", featuring songs that became famous through their use in Grey's Anatomy. The show received a 24-episode eighth season renewal, which commenced on September 22, 2011, with a 2-hour episode, and ended on May 17, 2012. Grey's Anatomy was renewed for a ninth season, which premiered on September 27, 2012, and ended on May 16, 2013. Grey's Anatomy was renewed for a tenth season on May 10, 2013 and premiered on September 27, 2013, with a 2-hour episode, and ended on May 15, 2014. On May 8, 2014, ABC renewed the series for an 11th season that aired from September 25, 2014, to May 14, 2015. In addition, the show was relocated to the Thursday 8:00 pm EST time slot. After four seasons outside the Top 25 rated shows, Grey's Anatomy was the No. 15 show in the 2013–2014 season, the show's tenth. The show also re-entered the Top 5 shows in the 18–49 viewer demographic. On May 7, 2015, ABC renewed the series for a 12th season that premiered on September 24, 2015, and concluded on May 19, 2016. The 13th season aired from September 22, 2016, to May 18, 2017. The 14th season aired from September 28, 2017, to May 17, 2018. The 15th season aired from September 27, 2018, to May 16, 2019. The 16th season aired from September 26, 2019, to April 9, 2020. The 17th season aired from November 12, 2020, to June 3, 2021. On May 10, 2021, the series was renewed for an 18th season, which premiered on September 30, 2021. On January 10, 2022, the series was renewed for a 19th season, which premiered on October 6, 2022. On March 24, 2023, ABC renewed the series for a 20th season with Meg Marinis now serving as the showrunner. The 20th season premiered on March 14, 2024. Grey's Anatomy episodes appear regularly on ABC in the United States. All episodes are approximately 43 minutes and broadcast in both high-definition and standard. The series' episodes are also available for download at the iTunes Store in standard and high-definition qualities, and Amazon Video. ABC Video-On-Demand also releases recent episodes of the show for temporary viewing. Recent episodes are also available at ABC's official Grey's Anatomy website, and on Hulu and Xfinity. In 2009, ABC signed a deal allowing Grey's Anatomy episodes to be streamed on Netflix. Grey's Anatomy is syndicated on Lifetime, with one hour blocks weekdays at 1:00 pm, 2:00 pm, and 3:00 pm EST. In some territories, including Germany and the United Kingdom, the full show is available on Disney+. Since its debut, Buena Vista Home Entertainment has released the first 13 seasons on DVD to regions 1, 2, and 4. The season 1 DVD, released on February 14, 2006, features an alternate title sequence, bloopers, behind-the-scenes footage, audio commentaries, and an extended edition of the pilot episode. The season 2 DVD, released on September 12, 2006, which includes extended episodes, an interview with Wilson, deleted scenes, a set tour, a "Q&A" with the cast, and a segment on the special effects creation. The season 3 DVD was released on September 11, 2007, with bonus features including extended episodes, an interview with star Dempsey, audio commentaries, and bloopers. The season 4 DVD released on September 9, 2008, features an interview with Heigl and Chambers, extended episodes, bloopers, and deleted scenes. The season 5 DVD was released on September 15, 2009, and includes unaired scenes, bloopers, and extended episodes. The season 6 DVD, released on September 14, 2010, features deleted scenes, an extended finale, and bloopers. The season 7 DVD, released on September 13, 2011, includes an extended edition of and a behind-the-scenes featurette on the musical episode, bloopers, as well as deleted scenes. In addition, the season 8 DVD was released on September 4, 2012, with several bonus features and deleted scenes. The season 9 DVD released on August 27, 2013, with several bonus features and deleted scenes. The season 10 DVD was released on September 2, 2014, with new several bonus features and deleted scenes. The season was officially released on DVD as a 6-disc box-set under the title of Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Tenth Season – Live For The Moments on September 2, 2014. In view of the departure of the character of Cristina Yang in the season finale, the DVD set featured an extended episode Do You Know? and a special feature from Sandra Oh titled "An Immeasurable Gift". Season 11 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 18, 2015, with interviews with new series regular Caterina Scorsone and a special feature for Dempsey's departure, titled "How To Say Goodbye Dr. Derek Shepherd". Season 12 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 30, 2016. Season 13 released on DVD as a 6-disc box set on August 29, 2017. Grey's Anatomy offers a different and perhaps more valuable idea of what it means to be strong: the capacity to suffer terribly, break down completely, and then get up again, confident that you're bigger than the sum of the tragedies you've suffered—because everyone else is, too. The layers of history have grown pretty dense and rich, and the friendships that form around them as the characters suffer and survive is the glue of the series, and what—despite a few inevitable hit-or-miss patches—elevates it to something special. —Laura Hudson of Wired Grey's Anatomy has been well received among critics. As of August 2023, the show holds an average score of 84% on Rotten Tomatoes. Emily VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave an insight on the series' overwhelming success and the lows, writing that the quality arc is "all over the place". She noted the steady build-up in the first season; the series skyrocketing into a phenomenon in the second season; the gradual dip in season three; and "some seriously bumpy moments" in the fourth and the fifth season, which was interrupted by the writers' strike. VanDerWerff felt that the "climb begins again in season six". Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly in a review wrote, "I believe the show's best season to date is season 2. Let me make it clear that I'm not saying seasons 3 through 9 were bad. In my opinion, there have only been a few lulls in the show's history, and most of them didn't last a full season." adding, "I still enjoy the show, and I'll honestly never stop watching. By any standards, Grey's Anatomy has been successful television, ranking highly in the ratings for nine seasons and entering the cultural lexicon via phrases as cloying yet catchy as 'McDreamy', the show has had its periods of being intensely irritating, and it has had its periods when it seems as if Shonda Rhimes has taken leave of her faculties, but it's also got an amazingly high batting average, particularly with every solid season that passes along in this second act of its run." The site lauded the show saying, "On average, it's been very good TV, filled with interesting, driven characters who run the gamut of professions within the show's hospital setting. It's been, by turns, a good soap, a good romantic comedy, a good medical drama, and a good interpersonal show about an unexpected workplace family." The first season received positive reviews which steadily built up, with Gary Levin of USA Today calling Grey's Anatomy one of the top shows on television. The New York Daily News named Grey's Anatomy a "winner", whereas Newsday expressed a positive opinion by stating "You simply can't stop watching." The Washington Post's Tom Shales was critical of season one, finding it reminiscent of ER and commenting that: "The show is much more a matter of commercial calculation than an honest attempt to try something fresh and different." Shortly after its initial airing, the Chicago Tribune's Maureen Ryan called Grey's Anatomy the new Friends (a concluded National Broadcasting Company (NBC) sitcom following the lives of a group of young adults, that for all of its 10-year run was in the top-5 for viewer ratings). The second season received high critical acclaim: top critics like Emily VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called the show a "phenomenon", adding the show was, "one of the best TV shows around", while Samantha Highfill of Entertainment Weekly later during the tenth season called the second "the show's best season to date". However, Kevin Carr of 7M Pictures opined that Grey's Anatomy is a mere combination of Scrubs, ER, Sex and the City and The Love Boat. It further garnered positive reviews: Christopher Monfette of IGN added "The second season of this medical drama expertly wove its signature elements of complex relationships, whimsical banter and challenging life-lessons; all to a montage-fetish, indie-rock soundtrack." Todd Gilchrist, also from IGN, called the season "terrific" adding, "Indeed, one of the best currently on television. While it remains to be seen what the creators do with it, now that it's become an outright event program, the season demonstrates that Rhimes and co. know what to do with the opportunities presented them. whether you're male or female, this is the kind of entertainment that small-screen devotees and folks fed up with television need to see." The title character of Grey's Anatomy, Meredith, has received both widespread critical acclaim and weary feedback by critics along the course of the show, with the development of the character garnering praise from majority critics. Earlier reactions for Meredith were mixed; in a 2006 review, Alessandra Stanley of The New York Times dubbed to her as "the heroine of Grey's Anatomy". A reviewer for BuddyTV praised the distinct uniqueness in the character calling Meredith an "unconventional heroine" adding that the character was, "Neither black nor white but always ... wait for it ... many shades of grey. The reviewer and to add that even in her lighter moments, she has still been "dark and twisty." The sentiment was shared by Glenn Diaz who remarked, "You gotta love Mer when she's gloomy." When Pompeo did not receive a nomination at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards, for her work as Meredith. Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times suggested that Pompeo, "has worked very hard ... to make Meredith Grey an interesting character", and should have received a nomination. IGN's Monfette, less impressed by the character, criticized her storyline as "some bizarrely under-developed sub-plot about depression and giving Derek a season's worth of reconsidering to do." Robert Rorke of the New York Post was critical of Meredith's relationship with Derek Shepherd, writing: "She used to be the queen of the romantic dilemmas, but lately, she's been a little dopey, what with the endless 'McDreamy' soliloquies." The development of the character has received praise from critics. Reviewing the first part of the eighth season, TV Fanatic wrote: "this season belongs to Meredith Grey. She is the heart and soul of the show and has been outstanding. This is a character that used to be so dark and twisty and has now grown into a more mature woman. Ellen Pompeo has been at the top of her game this season." Rick Porter reviewing the episode "How to Save a Life" from the 11th season for Zap2it wrote, "Without Meredith, and without one of Pompeo's strongest performances in her long time on the show, "How to Save a Life" would have run the risk of coming across as a baldly manipulative death episode, the likes of which the show has done several times before. He added "'How to Save a Life" may not be the ideal Emmy-submission episode for Ellen Pompeo, considering Meredith is off screen for more than half of it. But it's among the best work she's ever done on the show." Janalen Samson of BuddyTV lauded the Meredith's development throughout the series saying, "When one considers how this character has grown over eleven seasons, it really is amazing. Kudos to Ellen Pompeo for her fine work. She's actually done the impossible, because I actually care what happens to Meredith Grey." Reviewing the season 12 premiere, "Sledgehammer", critics including Alex Hawkins of the Western Gazette again highlighted Pompeo's being due for an Emmy Award. The majority of the supporting cast of Grey's Anatomy have been well received as well, with the New York Post's Rorke deeming Stevens to be "the heart-and-soul" of Grey's Anatomy, whereas Eyder Peralta of the Houston Chronicle was critical of her character development, stating: "[She's] the reason I don't watch Grey's Anatomy anymore." Kelli Catana of The Huffington Post named Yang "the best damn character" and deemed "the Meredith/Yang relationship the most true friendship on network television." Television Without Pity writer Lauren Shotwell claimed Yang is "the only one of these five [residents] that regularly acts like an actual doctor". Analyzing Alex Karev, Rachel Simon called him "underrated", and she pointed out that his personal growth never seems to get acknowledged, as "Alex has evolved, slowly and realistically, into a genuinely good person whose faults don't miraculously disappear, but take a backseat to much better qualities." Robert Bianco of USA Today said Dempsey has a "seemingly effortless way of humanizing Derek's 'dreamy' appeal with ego and vanity". His friendship with Mark Sloan has been well received. Victor Balta said "they've demonstrated an easy chemistry that makes for some of the great comic relief around Seattle Grace Hospital." Addison Montgomery was deemed "sassy and bright and interesting." TV Guide said of Walsh's stint on Grey's Anatomy that she "adds spice to an already hot show." Callie Torres, after having previously received mixed reviews, was praised for her bisexual storyline. Critics added that the character was anchored by stellar performances by Sara Ramirez. Lexie Grey, having initially been criticized, became a critics' favorite in the series. Alex Keen of The Trades wrote that Lexie's "presence and confidence have increased quite a bit ... and actress, Chyler Leigh, does a fantastic job of making this progression feel seamless. Since the series has defused the tension between Little Grey and Big Grey (aka Meredith), Lexie has clear sailing through the season and steals the show as one of the best current characters on the series." With the departure of several cast members throughout the seasons, many new characters have been added to the drama's ensemble. McKidd and Capshaw were referred to as "fresh additions" to the series, by Monfette of IGN. Matt Roush of TV Guide commented: "Hunt is the most encouraging thing to happen to Grey's Anatomy in quite a while." Matt Mitovich of TV Guide noted that Robbins "quickly established herself as a fan favorite", describing her as "a breath of fresh air in the often-angsty halls of Seattle Grace. On April Kepner and Jackson Avery, Courtney Morrison of TVFanatic wrote, "April has grown since her character was introduced ... she's honest. A girl with principles is a girl you want to do well." He described her and Avery as "a couple for whom viewers can root". Speaking of the new cast members, in addition to the remaining original ones, Robert Bianco from USA Today called them the show's "best ensemble in years". Regarding season three, Bill Carter of The New York Times called Grey's Anatomy "television's hottest show", adding: "[No show] is expected to challenge Grey's Anatomy for prime-time pre-eminence." Contrasting with Carter's view, Monfette of IGN said that it speedily found itself "mired in the annoying and absurd", adding: "This third season may very well represent a case of over-writing a concept that has, perhaps tragically, run bone-dry on narrative fuel." At the conclusion of season three, Entertainment Weekly's Gregory Kirschling said "the show lacked a defining happy, warm-gooseflesh moment", adding that the season "didn't leave you dying for the [next] season premiere". Speaking of the fourth season, Laura Burrows of IGN said the series became "a little more than mediocre, but less than fantastic", adding: "This season proved that even strong chemistry and good acting cannot save a show that suffers from the inevitable recycled plot." In contrast to the moderately negative feedback the third and fourth seasons received, Alan Sepinwall of The Star-Ledger said of the fifth season: "Overall, it feels more like the good old days than Grey's Anatomy has in a long time." Misha Davenport from the Chicago Sun-Times said season five "hits on all the things the show does so well", adding: "There is romance, heartbreak, humor and a few moments that will move fans to tears." Brian Lowry of Variety, less impressed, opinionated that the season five displayed the show running out of storylines. Speaking of the sixth season, Bianco of USA Today wrote: "Grey's has always loved grand gestures. You like them or you don't; the only real question is whether the show pulls them off or it doesn't. This year, it did." The series has a score of 66 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on five reviews for season seven. In response to the season, Bianco from USA Today commented: "Happily, it now seems to have landed on solid ground." Also of the seventh season, Entertainment Weekly's Jennifer Armstrong said: "It's in the shooting's emotional reverberations that the show is regenerating after the past few hit-and-miss seasons," whereas Verne Gay of Newsday commented: "Unfortunately, they've settled on far-too-easy and facile answers for the most part." HitFix gave a positive review saying that, "season seven overall has been one of the show's strongest ever." and added, "There was a time when Grey's Anatomy was this show where I suffered through a lot of stuff that made me cringe to get to those genius melodrama moments it could do so well. Over the last couple of years, it's evolved into a show that's much more consistent in tone, where it may not move me as often as it did in the early years but also very rarely makes me question my reasons for watching." Speaking of season eight, Entertainment Weekly's Mandi Bierly called it a "so-so season", and Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter called it "emotional". Also acknowledging the fan base, Verne Gay of Newsday wrote "Grey's has had a good season and has an intensely loyal fan base to prove it" regarding the eighth season. The ninth season received more positive reviews, Rob Salem of Toronto Star called it "a solid return to form." Praising the friendship between Meredith and Cristina of Entertainment Weekly wrote, "There's still one good reason to keep watching: Where else can you find such deep friendships between female co-workers". The tenth season was also marked with praise, Annie Barrett for Entertainment Weekly wrote "There's true sorrow here along with the passion, which keeps their dynamic so intriguing to me." Caroline Siede from The A.V. Club wrote in her review for the tenth season "At its best, Grey's Anatomy is about everyday bravery, sacrifice, and courage. At its worst, it's a melodramatic, moralizing soap opera. Both sides are on display as the show heads confidently into its 10th season." Many sources, including Rachel Simon of Bustle and Nicole Pomarico of Wetpaint, claimed that Sandra Oh's performance during her final season on Grey's Anatomy is worthy of an Emmy nomination. Bryce Olin of Netflix ranked Grey's 9th among the 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix stating, "It's a tough call, but based on Grey's casting choices and revolutionary portrayals of female doctors in the series, I'm willing to argue that Grey's Anatomy is the best medical drama of all time. Obviously, Shonda Rhimes didn't reinvent the wheel with the series, but there's no denying its popularity." adding, "I understand its significance in the pop culture sphere." He also stated that the show could go higher in the ranks with the upcoming season stating, "Apparently, Grey's Anatomy fans are passionate about their show, although it seems like they've been closeted for the last few years. I'd love to move Grey's Anatomy even higher on the ranking, but I'll have wait until the eleventh season comes to Netflix." The show was criticized for its handling of a controversy: the Grey's Anatomy scandal revolved around actor Isaiah Washington using a homophobic slur on set. Mainstream media coverage scapegoated this scandal as "black masculinity for perpetrating homophobia, thus containing both sexual and racial difference in the name of tolerance." Critics included Grey's Anatomy in top ten lists for five of its 14 seasons; these are listed below in order of rank. Grey's Anatomy makes an impact on how people's perception of the world is created. —Brian Quick, University of Illinois Grey's Anatomy has been considered impactful on culture by Entertainment Weekly's executive editor, Lori Majewski, with her writing: "Grey's Anatomy isn't just a show, it's a phenomenon. When [the] final shows air, every place in New York City is empty. You could get a table at the best restaurants." The Daily Beast's Jace Lacob also considered the show an impact, comparing its success to that of Friends, and calling it a "cultural phenomenon". Steve Sternberg, a media analyst with Magna Global USA explained that the show appeals to a broad audience, writing: "Roughly 80 percent of households during prime time only have one TV set on. People are looking for shows they can watch with other household members." In its initial seasons, Grey's Anatomy introduced a "Mc-labeling" surge, which started when various characters dubbed Dempsey's character "McDreamy". Canadian newspaper the National Post considers this trend a "phenomenon". Analyzing the show's impact on culture, Dessylyn Arnold of Yahoo! Voices noted that the "Mc-labeling" trend has been parodied on other shows including ER and Degrassi: The Next Generation. Mark Lawson of The Guardian has credited Grey's Anatomy with popularizing the "songtage", or musical montage segments. Parodying this, MADtv spoofed the show in 2006, making fun of the series' emotional scenes including those accompanied by a musical montage. Grey's Anatomy has also been credited to helping redefine "good" television; The A.V. Club writes, "Since The Sopranos burst onto the scene, we've too often classified a show as "good" based on how closely it adhered to the dark, violent, male-centric template set out by that particular show. It's time for that to end. At its best, Grey's Anatomy has been among the very best shows on TV, and at its worst, it's been at least fascinating to watch. To write it off is to unnecessarily narrow the definition of what good TV can be, to limit what the medium is capable of. TV is at its best when it emotionally connects, and even when it seems to be otherwise merrily hurtling off a cliff, Grey's Anatomy is nothing but emotional connection, which is more than other, more consistently better shows can say." The series placed at No. 66 on Entertainment Weekly's "New TV Classics" list in 2007, and was declared the third-highest rated show for the first ten years of the IMDb (2002–2012). The show's premise has inspired the creation of A Corazón Abierto, a Colombian adaptation of Grey's Anatomy, which in turn spawned a Mexican version of the same name. An additional study conducted by Brian Quick of the University of Illinois indicated that the show's portrayal of doctors being "smart, good looking, capable, and interesting", leads viewers to associating real-world doctors to be that way. Surgical resident Karen Zink, M.D., deemed the show's portrayal of interns inaccurate, adding: "None of [the characters] have bags under their eyes. They all leave the hospital dressed cute, with their hair done and makeup on. That is so far away from the reality of interns. You are just dragging your butt, trying to stay alive. You don't have time to do your hair. You don't have time to put on makeup. Every surgical intern has bags under their eyes." In 2011, a woman residing in Sheboygan, Wisconsin became unresponsive due to an asthma attack. Unable to wait for an ambulance, her daughter and a friend performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on her, which they learned from Grey's Anatomy. In 2017, an Israeli woman saved her husband by performing cardiac massage she learned from Grey's Anatomy, The woman performed cardiac massage for 20 minutes before medical personal arrived and transferred the husband to Shaare Zedek Medical Center. The mid-season premiere of the 14th season was entitled "1-800-799-7233", the National Domestic Violence Hotline; upon release on January 18, 2018, the move was received favorably and viewers variously changed their Twitter usernames to the same and used the platform to bring awareness to both the hotline and the issue of domestic abuse. Grey's Anatomy has received high viewership and ratings since its debut. The first 4 seasons of the program each ranked in the top 10 among all viewers, reaching its peak Nielsen ratings in the second season, attracting an average of 19.44 million viewers per episode, and ranking at No. 5 overall. Following the show's time-slot being relocated, overall rankings steadily declined, dropping below the top 10 in its fifth season. Grey's Anatomy made its greatest fall from its sixth to seventh season, slipping from #16 to No. 31. The series is on a steady decline in terms of overall viewership and rankings, yet Grey's Anatomy still holds value in charts when numbers are pulled from the digital video recorder (DVR). It was the most recorded show between 2007 and 2011, based on cumulative totals, and has been for several years in a row. The most-watched episode of the series is "It's the End of the World", with 37.88 million viewers, aided by a lead-in from Super Bowl XL. Grey's Anatomy was the most expensive program on television in the 2007–08 season measured by advertising revenue, with earnings of US$400,000 per 30 seconds. The show was named the fourth (behind Desperate Housewives, Two and a Half Men, and American Idol), and the fifth-highest (behind Glee, Two and a Half Men, The X Factor and American Idol) revenue-earning show, with the earnings of US$2.67 million and US$2.75 million per half hour in 2011 and 2012 respectively. While Grey's Anatomy is no longer ranked in the top numbers for overall ratings, the show's ranking in the key 18–49 demographic has remained high. As of season 8, the series is the highest-rated drama on television in the target demographic. In 2016, a New York Times study of the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook Likes found that Grey's Anatomy was "most popular in a swath of the middle of the country, particularly in areas with a lower percentage of college graduates". Below is a table of Grey's Anatomy's seasonal rankings in the U.S. television market, based on average total viewers per episode. Each U.S. network television season starts in September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps. Grey's Anatomy has received numerous awards and nominations. The show has been nominated for 39 Primetime Emmy Awards, having been nominated for at least one every year until 2013. At the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2005, Oh was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series, which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009, and Horton was nominated for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series. The following year, at the 58th Primetime Emmy Awards, the series received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series, which they were nominated for again in 2007. Also in 2006, Wilson was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series, which she went on to be nominated for every year until 2009, and Kyle Chandler was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series. The 58th ceremony also honored Rhimes and Vernoff, who were both nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series. Rhimes, whose career kicked off in 1995, has since produced yet another ABC series, Scandal, which began on air in 2012 and ended in 2019. Beginning in 2005, Rhimes has been continually nominated for numerous awards, including 3 Emmy Awards: first in 2006 for a dramatic series and a separate nomination for writing a dramatic series, followed by a third nomination in 2007 for a dramatic series. In 2007, at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards, Heigl won the award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series, while Knight was nominated for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series. Numerous guest actresses have been nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, including Burton in 2006 and 2007, Christina Ricci in 2006, Reaser in 2007, Diahann Carroll in 2008, and Sharon Lawrence in 2009, but the only actress to have won the award is Devine in 2011, who was nominated again in 2012. The show has also been nominated for 13 Creative Arts Emmy Awards, having won 3 of them: Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series, Outstanding Makeup for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic), and Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series, Miniseries, Movie or a Special. The show has received 10 Golden Globe Award nominations since its premiere. At the 63rd Golden Globe Awards, in 2006, the series was nominated for Best Drama Series, Dempsey was nominated for Best Actor in a Drama Series, which he was nominated for again in 2007, and Oh won the award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television Film. The following year, at the 64th Golden Globe Awards, in 2007, Pompeo was nominated for Best Actress in a Drama Series, and the show won Best Drama Series. At the 65th Golden Globe Awards, in 2008, Heigl was nominated for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television Film, while the series in whole was nominated for Best Drama Series. The series has won People's Choice Awards for Best Drama 5 times in 2007, 2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017 and has been nominated for several other People's Choice Awards, with nominations received by Oh as well as multiple wins from Dempsey, Pompeo winning in recent years 2013 and 2015, Heigl, Wilson, Demi Lovato, for guest starring, and the drama in whole for Favorite TV Drama. In 2007, Rhimes and the female cast were the recipient of the Women in Film Lucy Award, in recognition of the excellence and innovation in the show as a creative work that has enhanced the perception of women through the medium of television. The series has been honored with numerous NAACP Image Award nominations, many having been won, including 5 awards for Outstanding Drama Series. Grey's Anatomy has also received several Screen Actors Guild Awards, with nominations received by Dempsey, as well as wins from Oh, Wilson, and the main cast for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series. The series won a GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 2012, and has received nominations for 8 consecutive years from 2010 to 2017, 2019, 2022, 2023, 2024. Grey's Anatomy has spawned several spin-offs and adaptations. On February 21, 2007, The Wall Street Journal reported that ABC was pursuing a spin-off medical drama television series for Grey's Anatomy featuring Walsh's character, Addison Montgomery. Subsequent reports confirmed the decision, stating that an expanded two-hour broadcast of Grey's Anatomy would serve as a backdoor pilot for the proposed spin-off. The cast of Grey's Anatomy was reportedly unhappy about the decision, as all hoped the spin-off would have been given to them. Pompeo commented that she felt, as the star, she should have been consulted, and Heigl disclosed that she had hoped for a spin-off for Stevens. The backdoor pilot that aired on May 3, 2007, sees Montgomery take a leave of absence from Seattle Grace Hospital, to visit her best-friend from Los Angeles, Naomi Bennett (Merrin Dungey, later Audra McDonald), a reproductive endocrinology and infertility specialist. While in Los Angeles, she meets Bennett's colleagues at the Oceanside Wellness Center. The two-hour broadcast entitled "The Other Side of This Life" served as the twenty-second and twenty-third episodes of the third season, and was directed by Michael Grossman, according to Variety. The cast included Amy Brenneman, Paul Adelstein, Tim Daly, Taye Diggs, Chris Lowell, and Merrin Dungey. KaDee Strickland's character, Charlotte King, who would be introduced in the spin-off's first-season premiere, did not appear in the backdoor pilot. Her addition to the main cast was announced on July 11, 2007, prior to the commencement of the first season. She did not have to audition for the role, but was cast after a meeting with Rhimes. Also not present in the backdoor pilot was McDonald, due to her character, Naomi Bennett, being portrayed by a different actress, Merrin Dungey. However, on June 29, 2007, ABC announced that Dungey would be replaced, with no reason given for the change. The drama was titled Private Practice, and its premiere episode followed the second part of the season debut of Dancing with the Stars, and provided a lead-in to fellow freshman series Dirty Sexy Money. Pushing Daisies, a third new series for the evening, rounded out the lineup as a lead-in to Private Practice. The series ended its run on January 22, 2013, after 6 seasons. On May 16, 2017, Channing Dungey announced at the ABC Upfronts that the network ordered another Grey's Anatomy spin-off, this one focusing on firefighters in Seattle. The series premiered mid-season in 2018. Stacy McKee, long-term Grey's writer and executive producer, serves as the spin-off's showrunner. The new show was introduced Season 14, Episode 13, when a house fire brings the firefighters to Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital. In July 2017, it was announced that Jaina Lee Ortiz was the first actress cast in the spin-off series. In September 2017, it was announced that Jason George, who has played Dr. Ben Warren since season 6, would be leaving Grey's Anatomy to move to the spin-off. He continued to be a series regular on Grey's Anatomy until the spin-off began production. In October 2017, it was announced that 5 new series regulars for the spin-off had been cast being Grey Damon, Jay Hayden, Okieriete Onaodowan, Danielle Savre and Barrett Doss. It was also announced that the spin-off had a 10-episode order for the first season. Later in October 2017, it was announced that Miguel Sandoval was cast as the Captain of the firehouse. On January 9, 2018, it was announced by Sarah Drew on her Instagram page that a 6-episode spin-off series following the new interns of Grey Sloan Memorial would be released for streaming on the ABC app and abc.com on Thursday, January 11, 2018. Grey's Anatomy: B-Team stars Sophia Taylor Ali (Dahlia Qadri), Jake Borelli (Levi Schmitt), Alex Blue Davis (Casey Parker), Jaicy Elliot (Taryn Helm), Rushi Kota (Vik Roy) and Jeanine Mason (Samantha "Sam" Bello) with special guest appearances made by Justin Chambers (Alex Karev), Kelly McCreary (Maggie Pierce), Kevin McKidd (Owen Hunt) and James Pickens Jr. (Richard Webber). The 6 episodes in this series were written by Barbara Kaye Friend with Grey's Anatomy series regular Sarah Drew (April Kepner) making her directorial debut directing each of them. Grey's Anatomy has several crossover storylines with both spin-offs Private Practice and Station 19 throughout its run. In 2006, Doktorlar ("Doctors") an adaptation of the series, was made by the Turkish network Show TV. It aired for 4 seasons. In 2010, A Corazón Abierto ("An Open Heart"), an adaptation of the series, was made by the Colombian network RCN TV. It aired for 2 seasons. In 2011, A Corazón Abierto ("An Open Heart"), an adaptation of the series, was made by the Mexican network TV Azteca. It aired for 2 seasons. The American Broadcasting Company has partnered with J. Larson CafePress and Barco Uniforms to provide the series' branded merchandise through an online store. The products available include shirts, sweatshirts, kitchenware, homeware, and bags, with the Grey's Anatomy logo on it. Also available are custom unisex scrubs and lab coats in a variety of colors and sizes, designed by Barco. The merchandise released by the company is available for purchase at the Grey's Anatomy official website, and US$1 from every purchase is donated to Barco's Nightingales Foundation. Five volumes of the Grey's Anatomy Original Soundtrack have been released as of 2011[update]. For the first 2 seasons, the show's main title theme was an excerpt from "Cosy in the Rocket", by British duo Psapp; it is featured on the first soundtrack album released via ABC's corporate cousin, Hollywood Records, on September 27, 2005. The second soundtrack, featuring songs from the series' second season, was released on September 12, 2006, followed by a third soundtrack with music from the third season. Following the seventh season musical episode "Song Beneath the Song", "Grey's Anatomy: The Music Event" soundtrack was released, with volume 4 of the soundtrack released subsequently. In January 2009, Ubisoft announced that it had signed a licensing agreement with ABC Studios to develop a video game based on Grey's Anatomy. Designed for the Wii, Nintendo DS and PC, Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game was released on March 10, 2009. The game lets the player assume the role of one of the main characters, making decisions for the character's personal and professional life, and competing in a number of minigames. It has been criticized by reviewers because of the simplicity of the mini-games and voice actors who do not play the same characters on the series, with Jason Ocampo of IGN giving it a 6/10 overall rating. The Wii release received mixed reviews, and the Windows release received generally unfavorable reviews. ABC and Nielsen partnered in 2011 to create a Grey's Anatomy application for Apple's iPad. The application was designed to allow viewers to participate in polls and learn trivial facts as they watch a live episode. It uses Nielsen's Media-Sync software to listen for the episode and to post features as the episode progresses. The creators of the show set up a real online wedding registry to mark the wedding of Meredith Grey and Derek Shepherd. Instead of buying gifts fans were encouraged to donate money to the American Academy of Neurology Foundation. also credited as The Mark Gordon Company (2005–2018) and Entertainment One (2018–2024) also credited as Touchstone Television (2005–2007) and ABC Studios (2007–2020) Ellen Pompeo makes her last regular appearance in 19x07. She continues to narrate most episodes and appears sporadically in the following episodes and subsequent seasons. Pompeo continues to receive top billing in any episodes in which she appears and/or provides narration for. Patrick Dempsey is credited as a guest star for his appearances with exception of 17x13 where he is credited as a special guest star. Kate Walsh was originally set to appear as a recurring character in six episodes of the first season. However, after the season was cut short, Walsh's remaining five appearances aired in the second season before she was promoted to the main cast in what would have been the second episode of season two. Kate Walsh is initially credited as a special guest star in season two before being promoted to main cast in 2x07. Kate Walsh is credited as a special guest star in a recurring capacity. In season three, Eric Dane credited as a series regular from 3x03 onwards but is uncredited in 3x02. Eric Dane only appears in the first two episodes of season nine, although credited as a series regular. Brooke Smith is the only series regular to not hold the role for a full season. She was credited as a series regular from 4x5 to 5x7 Kevin McKidd is initially credited as a guest star in season five before being promoted to main cast in 5x14. Kim Raver is initially credited as guest star in season six before being promoted to main cast in 6x19. Kelly McCreary is initially credited as a guest star in season eleven before being promoted to main cast in 11x11. Giacomo Gianniotti is initially credited as a guest star in season twelve before being promoted to main cast in 12x10. Jake Borelli is initially credited as a co-star in recurring capacity before being upgraded to a guest star in season fifteen. Television portal United States portal a Pompeo starred as the leading role in Moonlight Mile, which explains the significance of her being cast as Meredith. b The character of O'Malley failed his intern test, which is why he was not initially a resident along with Meredith, Yang, Stevens and Karev. c Meredith and Shepherd had decided to adopt, due to Meredith's infertility, which was diagnosed in season 7. d The Chicago Tribune list is not ranked—it consists of 10 shows in alphabetical order. e The Grey's Anatomy logo can be seen in the infobox, above. "Gray's Anatomy: an iconic medical textbook". Medicographia. November 8, 2017. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. "Shonda Rhimes Talks About Leaving ABC for New Netflix Deal". Distractify. October 22, 2020. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2021. Pomarico, Nicole (May 14, 2015). "How Much Does The 'Grey's Anatomy' Cast Make? Being A TV Doctor Has Its Benefits". Bustle. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2017. Newcomb, Tim (September 21, 2013). "Which TV Stars Pull in the Most Dollars Per Episode?". Time. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2017. "'Grey's Anatomy,' 'Scandal,' 'How to Get Away with Murder' Renewed". The Hollywood Reporter. February 10, 2017. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. "Watch Grey's Anatomy TV Show". ABC. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016. Santucci, Pieracarla. "Grey's Anatomy Made Simple". Yahoo! Voices. Yahoo Inc. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Grey's Anatomy of the Narrative Analysis | Media and Cultural Analysis, Spring 2014 Archived December 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Karanovic.org (March 5, 2014). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Each season, with the exception of one, two, and three show the doctors' residency year (first year, second year, etc.) being one older than the previous season. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (May 17, 2012). "Flight". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 24. American Broadcasting Company. Gilbert, Matthew (May 7, 2006). "'Anatomy' of a hit". Boston.com. Boston Globe Electronic Publishing Inc. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Goldwyn, Tony (April 10, 2005). "Winning a Battle, Losing the War". Grey's Anatomy. Season 1. Episode 3. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Phelan, Tony, and Rater, Joan. Director: Robinson, Julie Ann (February 1, 2007). "Wishin' and Hopin'". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 14. American Broadcasting Company. Each episode typically features scenes of a surgery, towards the center of the episode. Writers: Phelan, Tony, and Rater, Joan. Director: Deitch, Donna (January 21, 2010). "I Like You So Much Better When You're Naked". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 12. American Broadcasting Company. Lawson, Mark (February 8, 2009). "Top of the docs". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved May 18, 2010. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Horton, Peter (March 27, 2005). "A Hard Day's Night". Grey's Anatomy. Season 1. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Wilding, Mark. Director: Corn, Rob (November 15, 2007). "Forever Young". Grey's Anatomy. Season 4. Episode 8. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Vernoff, Krista. Director: Ornelas, Ed (September 24, 2009). "Good Mourning". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Hamilton, Ann. Director: Coles, John David (April 24, 2006). "Shake Your Groove Thing". Grey's Anatomy. Season 1. Episode 5. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Stanton, Gabrielle and Werksman, Harry. Director: Stanzler, Wendey (May 22, 2005). "Who's Zoomin' Who?". Grey's Anatomy. Season 1. Episode 9. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Schmir, Mimi. Director: Corn, Rob (February 19, 2006). "Yesterday". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 18. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: McKee, Stacy. Director: Stanzler, Wendey (February 26, 2006). "What Have I Done to Deserve This?". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 19. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: McKee, Stacy. Director: Horton, Peter (September 25, 2005). "Raindrops Keep Falling On My Head". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Vernoff, Krisa. Director: Davidson, Adam (October 9, 2005). "Make Me Lose Control". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 3. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Heinberg, Allan. Director: Misiano, Christopher (May 10, 2007). "Testing 1–2–3". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 24. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Buchman, Eric. Director: Grossman, Michael (January 25, 2007). "Great Expectations". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 13. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Phelan, Tony and Rater, Joan. Director: Corn, Rob (May 10, 2007). "Didn't We Almost Have It All?". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 25. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (September 27, 2007). "A Change Is Gonna Come". Grey's Anatomy. Season 4. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Frawley, James (March 15, 2007). "Scars and Souvenirs". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 18. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Rhimes, Shonda and Vernoff, Krista. Directors: Grossman, Michael and Yu, Jessica (November 22, 2007). "Crash Into Me (Part 1)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 4. Episode 9. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (May 22, 2008). "Freedom (Part 2)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 4. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Harper, William. Director: Kerns, Joanna (November 6, 2008). "Rise Up". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 7. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Stoltz, Eric (October 16, 2008). "Brave New World". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 4. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (September 25, 2008). "Dream a Little Dream of Me (Part 1)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Corn, Rob (January 8, 2009). "Wish You Were Here". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 11. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (September 25, 2008). "Dream a Little Dream of Me (Part 2)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 2. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Nowalk, Peter. Director: Zisk, Randy (February 19, 2009). "An Honest Mistake". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 16. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Bans, Jenna. Director: Corn, Rob (March 12, 2009). "I Will Follow You Into the Dark". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (May 7, 2009). "What a Difference a Day Makes". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 22. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Corn, Rob (May 14, 2009). "Now or Never". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 24. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Phelan, Tony and Rater, Joan. Director: Pressman, Michael (October 1, 2009). "I Always Feel Like Somebody's Watchin' Me". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 3. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Wilding, Mark. Director: Phelan, Tony (October 15, 2009). "Invasion". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 5. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Heinberg, Allan. Director: Corn, Rob (November 12, 2009). "New History". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 9. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Cragg, Stephen (May 20, 2010). "Sanctuary". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 23. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (May 20, 2012). "Death and All His Friends". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 24. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Vernoff, Krista. Director: Corn, Rob (September 23, 2010). "With You I'm Born Again". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 1. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: McKee, Stacy. Director: Wilson, Chandra (May 5, 2011). "White Wedding". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 20. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Harper, William. Director: Wilson, Chandra (September 29, 2011). "Take the Lead". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 3. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Wilding, Mark and Bans, Jenna. Director: Cragg, Stephen (May 10, 2012). "Migration". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 23. American Broadcasting Company. 'Grey's Anatomy' Recap: Nothing Says 'I Love You' Like Asking for a Divorce Archived October 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Buddytv.com (November 29, 2012). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (May 23, 2013). "'Grey's Anatomy's' Shonda Rhimes: 'There's Something Great' About Cristina and Owen's Struggle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. 'Grey's Anatomy' Recap: How to Buy a Hospital Archived October 25, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Buddytv.com (February 15, 2013). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. 'Grey's Anatomy' Recap: Avery's In Charge Now — Season 9 Episode 16 Archived December 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Hollywood Life (February 21, 2013). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Patrick, Andy. (March 14, 2013) 'Grey's Anatomy' Season 9 Recap — Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital Archived February 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. TVLine. Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Writer: Schmir, Mimi. Director: Glatter, Lesli Linka (November 13, 2005). "Let It Be". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 8. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Clack, Zoanne. Director: Paymer, David (January 29, 2006). "Break on Through". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 15. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Robe, Blythe. Director: Mann, Seith (April 2, 2006). "The Name of the Game". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 22. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Grossman, Michael (May 3, 2007). "The Other Side of This Life (Part 2)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 23. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Guzman, Austin. Director: Robin, Steve (February 10, 2011). "P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 14. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Tinker, Mark (May 15, 2006). "Losing My Religion". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 27. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Nowalk, Peter. Director: Ornelas, Edward (March 24, 2011). "This Is How We Do It". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Nowalk, Peter. Director: Underwood, Ron (April 19, 2012). "The Girl With No Name". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 20. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Koenig, Kip. Director: Yu, Jessica (January 15, 2006). "Begin the Begin". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 13. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Phelan, Tony and Rater, Joan. Director: Corn, Rob (May 15, 2006). "Deterioration of the Fight or Flight Response". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 26. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Wilding, Mark. Director: Minahan, Dan (May 14, 2006). "17 Seconds". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 25. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: McKee, Stacy. Director: Yu, Jessica (November 2, 2006). "Let the Angels Commit". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 6. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Schmir, Mimi. Director: Goldwyn, Tony (May 7, 2006). "Damage Control". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 24. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Heinberg, Allan. Director: Lerner, Dan (October 12, 2006). "What I Am". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 4. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Vernoff, Krista. Director: Yaitaines, Greg (January 18, 2007). "Six Days (Part 2)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 12. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Guzman, Austin. Director: Yu, Jessica (November 3, 2011). "Heart-Shaped Box". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 8. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (February 8, 2007). "Walk on Water". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 15. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Corn, Rob (February 15, 2007). "Drowning on Dry Land". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 16. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Horton, Peter (February 12, 2006). "As We Know It". Grey's Anatomy. Season 2. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Rhimes, Shonda and Noxon, Marti. Director: Arkin, Adam (February 22, 2007). "Some Kind of Miracle". Grey's Anatomy. Season 3. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Clack, Zoanne. Director: Corn, Rob (April 24, 2008). "Where the Wild Things Are". Grey's Anatomy. Season 4. Episode 12. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Heinberg, Allan. Director: D'Elia, Bill (May 14, 2009). "Here's to Future Days". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 23. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: McKee, Stacy. Director: Stoltz, Eric (November 13, 2008). "These Ties That Bind". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 8. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Wilding, Mark. Director: Liddi Brown, Allison (January 22, 2009). "Stairway to Heaven". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 13. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Washington, Sonay. Director: Phelan, Tony (April 23, 2009). "Sweet Surrender". Grey's Anatomy. Season 5. Episode 20. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Wilson, Chandra (March 11, 2012). "Push". Grey's Anatomy. Season 6. Episode 17. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Guzman, Austin. Director: Phelan, Tony (November 4, 2010). "That's Me Trying". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 7. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Harper, William. Director: Szwarc, Jeannot (November 11, 2010). "Something's Gotta Give". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 8. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Allen, Debbie (February 24, 2011). "Not Responsible". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 16. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Krinsky, Natalie. Director: Jackson, Mark (January 13, 2011). "Start Me Up". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 12. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Wilding, Mark. Director: McKidd, Kevin (February 3, 2011). "Don't Deceive Me (Please Don't Go)". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 13. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Harper, William. Director: Robin, Steve (April 28, 2011). "It's a Long Way Back". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 19. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Rhimes, Shonda. Director: Phelan, Tony (March 31, 2011). "Song Beneath the Song". Grey's Anatomy. Episode 18. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Corn, Rob (May 19, 2011). "Unaccompanied Minor". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 22. American Broadcasting Company. Writers: Phelan, Tony and Rater, Joan. Director: Liddi-Brown, Allison (December 2, 2010). "Adrift and at Peace". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 10. American Broadcasting Company. Writer: Cahn, Debora. Director: Liddi-Brown, Allison (November 10, 2011). "Dark Was the Night". Grey's Anatomy. Season 8. Episode 9. American Broadcasting Company. Abrams, Natalie (August 16, 2012). "Exclusive: True Blood, Veronica Mars Alum Tina Majorino Lands a Grey's Gig". TV Guide. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Mitovich, Matt Webb (September 7, 2012). "Matt's Inside Line: Exclusive Fringe First Look! Plus Scoop on Grey's, Glee, Covert and More". TVLine. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Stanhope, Kate (August 23, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy Admits Newcomer Tessa Ferrer for Recurring Role". TV Guide. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. Mitovich, Matt (August 31, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy: Desperate Housewives' Steven Culp to Play Doctor". TVLine. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 10, 2012). "The Doctors Must Pick Up The Pieces After a Tragic Plane Crash on The Season 9 Premiere of 'Grey's Anatomy'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved August 16, 2013. "Constance Zimmer Talks Shaking Up 'Grey's,' Playing The Bitch & More". HuffPost. February 7, 2013. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Natalie Abrams (November 16, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy Scoop: Entourage's Constance Zimmer Checks In to Seattle Grace". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy' Spoilers Justin Bruening for Recurring Role". The Hollywood Reporter. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Natalie Abrams (September 29, 2013). "A Grey's Anatomy Wedding and More Scoop on Season 10". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Matt Webb Mitovich (May 8, 2013). "'Grey's Anatomy' Season 9 Preview — Hilarie Burton on Arizona, Lauren, Callie – TVLine". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy' Season 10 Spoilers: Hilarie Burton Returns to Ruin Callie & Arizona's Marriage?". ENSTARZ. June 21, 2013. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy's' Hilarie Burton on Lauren and Arizona's Growing Flirtation". The Hollywood Reporter. May 8, 2013. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Andy Patrick (September 27, 2013). "'Grey's Anatomy': Heather Brooks Dies In Season 10 Premiere — Recap – TVLine". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy' season 10: James Remar to play a surgeon's father". Hypable. September 13, 2013. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy' Season 10: James Remar reveals his top-secret character". Zap2It. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. "Dexter' Star Joins 'Grey's Anatomy". HuffPost. August 18, 2013. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Abrams, Natalie (March 18, 2015). "On this week's 'Grey's Anatomy,' Kelly McCreary gets sucker punched – and she enjoys it!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Nellie Andreeva (October 23, 2014). "Kelly McCreary Upped To Regular On 'Grey's Anatomy'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy': Geena Davis Joins Season 11". The Hollywood Reporter. August 8, 2014. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Liz Raftery (March 6, 2015). "Grey's Anatomy: Was Dr. Herman's Operation a Success?". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Lauren Cox (March 6, 2015). "'Grey's Anatomy': Amelia Saves Dr. Herman In Surgery — Season 11, Episode 14 – Hollywood Life". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Ryan, Maureen (December 21, 2005). "Shonda Rhimes, creator of 'Grey's Anatomy' and a Chicagoan of the Year". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 21, 2009. Retrieved May 24, 2012. Rhodes, Joe (April 14, 2005). "Thriving Ratings for a New Patient on ABC". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Winfrey, Oprah (December 2006). "Oprah Talks to Shonda Rhimes". O, The Oprah Magazine. Harpo Productions, Inc. Archived from the original on July 2, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Collier, Aldore (October 2005). "Shonda Rhimes: the force behind Grey's Anatomy". Business Library. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on June 2, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2012. Roschke, Ryan (November 30, 2017). "In Case You Didn't Know, This Is How Grey's Anatomy Got Its Title" Archived January 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. PopSugar. Standring, Susan (November 2005). "Gray's Anatomy, 39th Edition: The Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice" Archived January 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. American Journal of Neuroradiology. 26 (10) 2703–2704. Holtz, Andrew (January 5, 2010). The Real Grey's Anatomy: A Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Real Lives of Surgical Residents Archived January 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. "Introduction". Penguin. Google Books. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Horbury, Alison (July 28, 2015). Post-feminist Impasses in Popular Heroine Television: The Persephone Complex Archived January 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Palgrave Macmillan. Google Books. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Looper (June 27, 2022). "Title". "'Grey's Anatomy' Keeps Sunday Time Slot". Fox News. April 11, 2005. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Breaking News – Development Updates: February 4". The Futon Critic. February 4, 2005. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Grey's Anatomy Cast and Details". TV Guide. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2012. "About the Show". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Rhimes, Shonda. "Shonda Rhimes on Twitter". Twitter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved July 1, 2012. "Grey Matter: From the Writers of Grey's Anatomy". Grey Matter. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved July 1, 2012. It was later moved to blogs.abc.com Archived July 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Goldberg, Lesley (March 9, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy's' Kevin McKidd, Chandra Wilson to Direct Again (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Seattle Grace: Message of Hope". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2012. Greenspan, David. "David Greenspan". LinkedIn. Retrieved July 5, 2012. Marsi, Steve (February 28, 2006). "How Grey's Anatomy Keeps it Real". TV Fanatic. SheKnows Entertainment. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Vernoff, Krista (September 25, 2009). "Krista Vernoff on 'Good Mourning' and 'Goodbye' ..." Grey Matter. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2012. Oakley, Colleen (April 9, 2007). "Interview with Shonda Rhimes". Marie Claire. Hearst Communication, Inc. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Fogel, Matthew (May 8, 2005). "'Grey's Anatomy' Goes Colorblind". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved June 27, 2012. Ryan, Maureen (September 30, 2005). "Chicago as a 'Grey' area?". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 9, 2008. Retrieved January 23, 2012. Sandra Oh (2007). Grey's Anatomy – Sandra Oh Audition. Paley Center. Event occurs at 0:05–0:15. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Richard Webber (James Pickens, Jr.) Bio". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Bardin, Brantley (November 2006). "Katherine Heigl Gives Us Fever". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on March 12, 2013. Retrieved May 9, 2009. T.R. Knight (2007). Grey's Anatomy – T.R. Knight On Auditioning. Paley Center. Event occurs at 0:30–1:20. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Alex Karev (Justin Chambers) Bio". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2012. Cronin, Brian (February 3, 2016). "TV Legends Revealed: Which 'Grey's Anatomy' Actor Was Added to the Pilot With CGI?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2021. https://www.thewrap.com/greys-anatomy-30-facts-you-probably-didnt-know-in-honor-of-its-300th-episode/ Yuan, Jada (September 18, 2006). "Belle Curves: Sara Ramirez". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on August 10, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Marsi, Steve (February 22, 2007). "Q & A With Eric Dane". TV Fanatic. SheKnows Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "On Location: Oprah on the Set of 'Grey's Anatomy'". The Oprah Winfrey Show. Season 21. Episode 45. November 17, 2006. "Addison Montgomery (Kate Walsh) Bio". Private Practice. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "ABC drops Washington from Grey's Anatomy". CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. June 8, 2007. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2012. Wyatt, Edward (April 28, 2007). "Well-Known Secret: 'Grey's Anatomy' Spinoff for ABC". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved August 26, 2012. "Production Begins On New Season Of 'Grey's Anatomy;' Chyler Leigh Joins The Cast". StarPulse. July 12, 2007. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Keeps, David A. (September 27, 2007). "Nine Things You Don't Know about Grey's Chyler Leigh". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Claustro, Lisa (December 13, 2007). "Smith 'Didn't Really Think' Grey's Anatomy Stint Would 'Work Out'". BuddyTV. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2008. Ausiello, Michael (November 2, 2008). "Grey's Anatomy Discharges Dr. Hahn". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Dos Santos, Kristin (November 3, 2008). "Grey's De-Gayed: Brooke Smith Axed; Melissa George's Role Rewritten". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on November 7, 2008. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Kevin McKidd Joins 'Grey's Anatomy' Cast As Series Regular". Access Hollywood. NBCUniversal. November 12, 2008. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012. Ausiello, Michael (June 17, 2009). "Exclusive: 'Grey's Anatomy' promotes Jessica Capshaw". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 6, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Malkin, Marc (May 27, 2009). "T.R. Knight: A Grey's Anatomy Goner". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on May 29, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "'Grey's Anatomy' exclusive: Katherine Heigl is (almost) outta there!". Entertainment Weekly. March 11, 2010. Archived from the original on March 13, 2010. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Sources Confirm: Katherine Heigl is Leaving "Grey's Anatomy"". E! Online. NBCUniversal. March 15, 2010. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (October 23, 2009). "Kim Raver becomes series regular on 'Grey's Anatomy'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Ausiello, Michael (June 8, 2010). "'Grey's Anatomy' exclusive: Jesse Williams gets full-time upgrade". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 9, 2010. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Ausiello, Michael (June 9, 2010). "Exclusive: 'Grey's Anatomy' promotes Sarah Drew". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 15, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Andreeva, Nellie (May 9, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy' Stars Patrick Dempsey, Ellen Pompeo, Sandra Oh And Justin Chambers Close Deals To Return". Deadline Hollywood. PMC. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012. Mitovich, Matt (June 2012). "Grey's Anatomy Exclusive: Chyler Leigh Breaks Her Silence About Shocking Departure". TVLine. PMC. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2012. Wieselman, Jarett (May 18, 2012). "'Grey's' Creator Defends Finale Death". The Insider. CBS. Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2012. Gonzalez, Sandra (May 18, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy' season finale: Boss explains two shocking exits". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 19, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Ausiello, Michael (July 26, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy Exclusive: Eric Dane Checks Out!". TVLine. PMC. Archived from the original on July 28, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2012. Goldberg, Lesley (August 13, 2013). "Sandra Oh to Exit 'Grey's Anatomy' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 15, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Bibel, Sara (August 13, 2013). "Sandra Oh Will Leave 'Grey's Anatomy' at the End of the Tenth Season". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on August 17, 2013. Retrieved August 16, 2013. "Isaiah Washington set for Grey's Anatomy return". BBC. March 7, 2014. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. "'Grey's Anatomy' Season 10 Spoilers: Leah And Shane To Leave Hospital Along With Cristina? [VIDEO]". ENSTARZ. March 26, 2014. Archived from the original on April 9, 2014. Gonzalez, Sandra. (August 13, 2013) 'Grey's Anatomy': Ellen Pompeo and Patrick Dempsey renew contracts Archived March 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Ausiello, Michael. (May 2, 2014) 'Grey's Anatomy' Season 11: Justin Chambers, Sara Ramirez Sign New Contracts Archived May 3, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. TVLine. Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Grey's Anatomy Star Sara Ramirez Talks Expiring Contract and Potential Departure Archived December 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Wetpaint (November 13, 2013). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (April 23, 2015). "'Grey's Anatomy' Shocker: Star Patrick Dempsey Exits". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Sara Ramirez Leaving 'Grey's Anatomy' After More Than 10 Years". May 19, 2016. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved June 3, 2018. Rose, Lacey (January 17, 2018). "Ellen Pompeo, TV's $20 Million Woman, Reveals Her Behind-the-Scenes Fight for "What I Deserve"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "'Grey's Anatomy' Shocker: Jessica Capshaw & Sarah Drew To Exit ABC Medical Drama After Season 14". March 8, 2018. Archived from the original on October 10, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2018. Abrams, Natalie. "Grey's Anatomy promotes Kim Raver to series regular again". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Andreeva, Nellie (January 10, 2020). "Justin Chambers Leaving 'Grey's Anatomy' After 15 Years". Deadlien Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Kinane, Ruth (March 12, 2021). "Giacomo Gianniotti on his devastating Grey's Anatomy departure: 'It was totally DeLuca'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (May 6, 2021). "Jesse Williams Leaving 'Grey's Anatomy' After 12 Seasons". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 20, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Mitovich, Matt Webb (May 20, 2021). "Grey's Anatomy: Greg Germann Exits as Series Regular Ahead of Season 18". TVLine. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 22, 2021. Petski, Denise (September 2, 2021). "'Grey's Anatomy': Kate Walsh To Return In Season 18 As Addison". Deadlien Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (September 6, 2022). "'Grey's Anatomy' Gives First Look At New Season 19 Cast Members & More In 'Meet The Interns' Video". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Andreeva, Nellie (August 3, 2022). "Ellen Pompeo To Reduce 'Grey's Anatomy' On-Screen Presence In Season 19 As She Takes On Hulu Series Role". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Grey's Anatomy Season One DVD: Commentary Feature. Buena Vista Home Entertainment. 2005. Clarendon, Dan (December 20, 2010). "Where Is Grey's Anatomy Filmed, Anyway?". Wetpaint. The Cambio Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy star signals more laughs". RTÉ ten. September 20, 2010. Archived from the original on December 20, 2010. Retrieved May 24, 2012. Writer: Tanen, Brian. Director: Wilson, Chandra (October 21, 2010). "Almost Grown". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 5. American Broadcasting Company. "Grey's Anatomy". Emmy Awards. Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2012. Eric Dane and Patrick Dempsey (2008). Grey's Anatomy Season Four DVD: On Set With Patrick and Eric Additional Feature. Buena Vista Home Entertainment. Bordwell, David (February 9, 2007). "Walk the Talk". Observations on Film Art. David Bordwell's Website on Cinema". Archived from the original on August 21, 2007. Retrieved January 6, 2009. Andreeva, Nellie (November 4, 2023). "2023-24 Episode Count & Production Start Plans Tweaked For Series Like 'Grey's Anatomy', 'CSI: Vegas' & Wolf Entertainment Dramas As Strike Goes On>". Deadline. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Highfill, Samantha. "Grey's Anatomy season 20 gets March premiere date". Entertainment Weekly. Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Elliott, Stuart (June 1, 2005). "ABC's Sales for the Fall Nearly Done". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 2)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Breaking News - 2004 Broadcast Upfront Presentations: Abc, Part 1 | TheFutonCritic.com". www.thefutoncritic.com. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Rhimes, Shonda (November 9, 2005). "From Shonda Rhimes, creator, Executive Producer and writer of 'Bring the Pain'". Grey Matter. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on May 15, 2009. Retrieved May 11, 2012. Berman, Craig (September 24, 2006). "Can 'Grey's' rise to challenge of Thursdays?". Today. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 3)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "ABC 2007–08 Primetime Schedule" (PDF). Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 24, 2009. Retrieved December 5, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 4)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Levine, Stuart (October 18, 2007). "Writers strike could pull plug on TV favorites". Today. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "TV Listings for – September 19, 2007 – TV Tango". Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Serpe, Gina (February 11, 2008). "ABC Reups Nine for '09". E! Online. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on June 17, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 5)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Fienberg, Daniel (April 23, 2009). "'Ugly Betty' leads a dozen ABC renewals". HitFix. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 6)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "ABC.com to Premiere 'Seattle Grace: On Call', a New Original Webisode Series Featuring Characters from 'Grey's Anatomy'". The Futon Critic. November 19, 2009. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "ABC Unveils 2010–11 Primetime Schedule". The Futon Critic. May 18, 2010. Archived from the original on April 25, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 7)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Rhimes, Shonda (March 31, 2011). "Shonda Rhimes on "Song Beneath The Song"." Grey Matter. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on April 7, 2011. Retrieved April 12, 2011. Hibberd, James (January 10, 2011). "'Grey's Anatomy,' 'Modern Family,' 'Castle' plus three more ABC shows get early renewals". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 17, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy: Episode Recap Guide (Season 8)". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "'Once Upon A Time' Renewed Along With 'Revenge,' 'Grey's Anatomy' And More By ABC". The Huffington Post. AOL Inc. May 11, 2012. Archived from the original on May 28, 2012. Retrieved May 28, 2012. Webb Mitovich, Matt (July 26, 2012). "Fall TV: ABC Announces Premiere Dates — Which Launches Are Being Held for October?". TVLine. PMC. Archived from the original on July 28, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2012. Michael Ausiello (May 10, 2013). "ABC Renewed Shows 2013 — Scandal, Grey's, Nashville and More!". TVLine. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2014. Bricker, Tierney (May 8, 2014). "ABC Renews Scandal, Grey's Anatomy, Revenge and 2 More Shows". E! Online. Archived from the original on May 11, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014. Ausiello, Michael (May 7, 2015). "ABC Renews Castle, Secrets and Lies, Nashville, Galavant, S.H.I.E.L.D., Agent Carter and 16 Other Series". TVLine. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Abrams, Natalie (March 3, 2016). "Grey's Anatomy, Quantico, and more renewed at ABC". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (May 10, 2021). "'Grey's Anatomy' Renewed For Season 18 With Ellen Pompeo, Chandra Wilson & James Pickens Jr. Set To Return". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2021. Donnelly, Jim (July 15, 2021). "ABC's Fall 2021 Premiere Dates & TV Schedule: See All the New and Returning Shows 2021–2022". ABC.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2021. Retrieved July 24, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (January 10, 2022). "Grey's Anatomy Renewed For Season 19 By ABC; Ellen Pompeo Closes Deal To Continue As Meredith". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Schwartz, Ryan (June 16, 2022). "ABC Announces Fall Premiere Dates: Grey's, Abbott Elementary and More". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Nemetz, Dave (March 24, 2023). "Grey's Anatomy Renewed for Season 20 at ABC, Names New Showrunner". TVLine. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Petski, Denise (November 16, 2023). "ABC Midseason Premiere Dates: 'The Bachelor', '9-1-1', 'Abbott Elementary', 'Grey's Anatomy', More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Seidman, Robert (September 24, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy' Full Season 8 Available Online at ABC.com/GreysAnatomy Through October 6". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 4, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy, Season 8". iTunes. Apple. March 26, 2005. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Season 7, Ep. 3 'Superfreak'". Amazon Video. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Steinberg, Brian (February 26, 2008). "Watch 'Grey's Anatomy' When You Want, Just Don't Skip Ads". Advertising Age. Crain Communications, Inc. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Video and Full Episodes". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on February 13, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Full Episodes and Clips streaming online". Hulu. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on May 29, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. McMillan, Graeme (December 8, 2010). "Netflix Adds More ABC, Disney Shows For Instant Streaming". Time. Time Warner Inc. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Johns, Anna (July 24, 2006). "And the Grey's Anatomy reruns go to." HuffPost. AOL Inc. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Eighth Season". Amazon. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete First Season". Amazon. February 14, 2006. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Second Season". Amazon. September 12, 2006. Archived from the original on October 29, 2006. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Third Season". Amazon. September 11, 2007. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Fourth Season". Amazon. September 9, 2008. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Fifth Season". Amazon. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Sixth Season". Amazon. September 14, 2010. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Seventh Season". Amazon. September 14, 2010. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Buy Grey's Anatomy: Season 10 on DVD-Video from EzyDVD.com.au". ezydvd.com.au. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Lambert, David (November 16, 2005). "Grey's Anatomy – Season 1 Press Release Shows Several Extras!". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on October 27, 2007. Retrieved November 16, 2005. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 1 DVD". Amazon UK. July 10, 2006. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 1". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (April 28, 2006). "Grey's Anatomy – Extended Episodes on Season 2 Set – With Cover Art!". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on October 21, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2006. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 2 DVD". Amazon UK. May 28, 2007. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 2". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (May 30, 2007). "Grey's Anatomy – Seriously! We've Got the 3rd Season DVD Street Date! **Large Art, Extras Added*". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on September 20, 2007. Retrieved May 30, 2007. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 3 DVD". Amazon UK. September 15, 2008. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 3". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on March 23, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (April 28, 2008). "Grey's Anatomy – It's a Full Staff from Seattle Grace on the Cover of Grey's 4th Season DVDs!". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 4 DVD". Amazon UK. November 23, 2009. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 4". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (March 13, 2009). "Grey's Anatomy – DVD & High-Def Blu-ray Releases of The Complete 5th Season Announced **UPDATE: New Info, Extras, Packages**". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on March 15, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2009. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 5 DVD". Amazon UK. August 23, 2010. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 5". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (June 4, 2010). "Grey's Anatomy – Finalized Package Art for The Complete 6th Season!". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on June 7, 2010. Retrieved June 4, 2010. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 6 DVD". Amazon UK. December 5, 2011. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 6". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (March 31, 2011). "Grey's Anatomy – Early Info with Release Date, Cost and Box Cover for 'The Complete 7th Season' **UPDATE: Extras!**". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on April 3, 2011. Retrieved March 31, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 7 DVD". Amazon UK. May 28, 2012. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 7". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on March 4, 2012. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Lambert, David (May 4, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy – DVD Set is Scheduled for 'The Complete 8th Season'". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 8 [DVD]". Amazon UK. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved October 2, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 8". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on November 29, 2012. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Lambert, David (May 14, 2013). "Grey's Anatomy – Completely Revised Box Art, Possible Earlier Date for 'The Complete 9th Season'". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 14, 2013. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 9 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved August 21, 2013. "Upcoming Australian Releases: TV on DVD & Blu-ray". Stack Magazine. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Lambert, David (June 6, 2014). "Grey's Anatomy – ABC/Disney Announces The Complete 10th Season on DVD". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on June 9, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2014. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 10 [DVD]". amazon.co.uk. June 16, 2014. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2014. "Grey's Anatomy: Season 10 [DVD]". ezydvd.com.au. August 16, 2014. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 16, 2014. Lambert, David (June 22, 2015). "Grey's Anatomy – ABC/Disney's Official Press Release for 'The Complete 11th Season'". TV Shows on DVD. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 11 [DVD]". amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2015. Lambert, David (May 13, 2016). "Grey's Anatomy – Street Date for 'The Complete 12th Season' Announced by ABC/Disney". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 12 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. October 3, 2016. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "Grey's Anatomy: Season 12 (DVD)". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2016. Lambert, David (July 17, 2017). "Grey's Anatomy – The Studio Cracks Open the Press Release for 'The Complete 13th Season'". TVShowsOnDVD. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 13 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. October 23, 2017. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Grey's Anatomy: Season 13 (DVD)". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 14 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. October 22, 2018. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 15 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on March 22, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 16 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. November 30, 2020. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 17 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 18 [DVD]". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Hudson, Laura (June 24, 2015). "WIRED Binge-Watching Guide: Grey's Anatomy". Wired. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. "Grey's Anatomy (2005 – )" Archived August 25, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved September 03, 2023. VanDerWerff, Emily (June 24, 2013). "Sure, Grey's Anatomy was a big hit, but was it good TV?". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Highfill, Samantha (February 28, 2014). "'Grey's Anatomy': What season 10 could learn from season 2". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Levin, Gary (May 17, 2005). "ABC seeks to build on momentum". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 23, 2006. Retrieved August 16, 2012. Shales, Tom (March 26, 2005). "'Grey's Anatomy': No Heart, No Brain". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 17, 2005. Retrieved November 4, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 2 (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster, Inc. Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy: Season 3 Review". IGN. News Corporation. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 12, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy – Season 2 Uncut". IGN. September 14, 2006. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Emmy Awards 2015 Snubs: 'Outlander,' 'Jane the Virgin,' 'Daredevil' And More Overlooked For Nominations Archived September 23, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Ibtimes.com (July 16, 2015). Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Stanley, Alessandra (September 12, 2006). "TV Review: Men In Trees". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2012. "'Grey's Anatomy' Season 11 Finale Recap: Shiny, Happy People". buddytv.com. May 14, 2015. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2015. McNamara, Mary (July 17, 2009). "Seven Emmy nods a good fit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Rorke, Robert (November 12, 2006). "Heart Throb – Grey's Anatomy's Katherine Heigl on Sex Love, and Cupcakes". New York Post. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "'Grey's Anatomy': Ellen Pompeo totally saved 'How to Save a Life'". Zap2It. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Peralta, Eyder (February 16, 2007). "Tsk. Tsk. Ethics these days". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved July 21, 2009. Catana, Kelli (May 18, 2012). "The Grey's Anatomy Season Finale Sucks Me in Again". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Simon, Rachel (October 17, 2012). "y's Anatomy's Alex Karev Is Totally Underrated". Bustle. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Bianco, Robert (May 15, 2013). "The cure for bromidic TV: 'Grey's Anatomy,' 'House'". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2015. Balta, Victor (November 13, 2008). "How adorable! TV's best bromances". Today. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. "Why Grey's Anatomy Needs Addison Back – Vulture". Vulture. January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. "I would like first to clarify ..." TV Guide. September 26, 2005. Archived from the original on April 29, 2010. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Keen, Alex (September 21, 2009). "DVD Review: Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Fifth Season". The Trades. Burlee LLC. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2018. Monfette, Chris (May 29, 2009). "Grey's Anatomy: Season 5 Review". IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on June 24, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Roush, Matt (November 14, 2008). "Ask Matt: Will Big Bang Make an Emmy Splash? What's Next for Ghost Whisperer and More!". TV Guide. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Matt Mitovich (June 17, 2009). "Grey's Anatomy Status Report: Knight's Fate Revealed, and More". TVGuide.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. ""ABC Makes It Official: Heigl Is Staying on Grey's". Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2016. Bianco, Robert (October 6, 2010). "These TV series are back, but are they better than ever?". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 20, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Carter, Bill (October 9, 2006). "In TV Land This Season, a Few Happy Surprises but No Breakthrough Hits". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved August 16, 2012. Kirschling, Gregory (May 20, 2007). "The Grey's Anatomy finale: I do's and don'ts". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy: Season 4 Review". IGN. May 27, 2008. Archived from the original on June 18, 2009. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy Season 5 Critic Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 3, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2011. Lowry, Brian (September 24, 2008). "Grey's Anatomy". Variety. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Bianco, Robert (May 21, 2010). "'Grey's Anatomy' ends season with a bang". USA Today Company. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Season 7". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy Season 7 Critic Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 22, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2011. Sepinwall, Alan (May 20, 2011). "Season finale review: Greys Anatomy – Unaccompanied Minor: All come crashing down". Uproxx. Archived from the original on May 24, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Bierley, Mandi (May 29, 2012). "TV Season Finale Awards: YOUR 2012 Winners!: Best Ending to An Otherwise So-So Season". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Goldberg, Lesley (May 17, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy' Recap: Who Met Their Maker in the Deadly Season Finale?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Gay, Verne (May 16, 2012). "'Grey's Anatomy' season finale review". Newsday. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. "'Grey's Anatomy', 'Elementary' and 'Last Resort': Thursday night TV reviews". The Star. Toronto. Archived from the original on October 6, 2017. Maerz, Melissa (December 4, 2012). "Grey's Anatomy review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 16, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Barrett, Annie (September 27, 2013). "Grey's Anatomy season premiere recap: After the Storm". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Siede, Caroline (September 27, 2013). "Grey's Anatomy: "Seal Our Fate"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Bustle". bustle.com. June 5, 2014. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. "Could Grey's Anatomy Season 10 Earn Sandra Oh an Emmy?". Wetpaint, Inc. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix Right Now Archived December 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Netflixlife.com. Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Schmidt, Patrick. (April 24, 2015) 50 Best TV Shows on Netflix: Grey's Anatomy Moves Up Archived December 22, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Netflixlife.com. Retrieved on December 3, 2016. Courtney W. Bailey (March 2011). "Coming Out as Homophobic: Isaiah Washington and the Grey's Anatomy Scandal". Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies. 8 (1). "Best of 2005". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 18, 2009. Retrieved December 14, 2008. "Best of 2006". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 22, 2010. Retrieved December 14, 2008. "Best of 2007". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved December 14, 2008. "Best of 2010". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "The Best Television Of 2015". NPR. December 27, 2015. Archived from the original on January 3, 2016. Retrieved May 22, 2016. Adlersberg, Jay (February 25, 2011). "The effects of Grey's Anatomy". WABC-TV. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on January 24, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Majewski, Lori (December 20, 2006). "'Grey's Anatomy' Tops Entertainment Weekly Year-End List". KLTV. WorldNow. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2012. Lacob, Jace (November 3, 2010). "Grey's Anatomy's 7th Year Surge". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on June 2, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012. "The McDreamy phenomenon". National Post. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Arnold, Dessylyn (May 30, 2007). "A Look at the Pop Culture Behind Grey's Anatomy". Yahoo! Voices. Archived from the original on July 29, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Martin, Rebecca (December 23, 2010). "Hilarious MADtv Grey's Anatomy Parody!". Wetpaint. The Cambio Network. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "The New Classics: TV". Entertainment Weekly. June 18, 2007. Archived from the original on July 16, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Schillaci, Sophie A. (January 25, 2012). "Johnny Depp, 'The Dark Knight,' 'Lost' Named to IMDb's Top 10 of the Last Decade". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Seidman, Robert (April 27, 2010). "ABC Press Release: "Grey's Anatomy" Adaptation "A Corazón Abierto" Premieres to Huge Ratings In Colombia". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on April 29, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2010. "A Corazón Abierto Premieres in Mexico". ttvMediaNews. Print.Division. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Holtz, Andrew (2010). The Real Grey's Anatomy: A Behind-The-Scenes Look at the Real Lives of Surgical Residents. Penguin. p. 2. ISBN 978-0425232118. Archived from the original on January 30, 2018. Ford, Rebecca (December 5, 2011). "'Grey's Anatomy' Credited for Saving Life". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "saved her husband by what she have learned from Gray's Anatomy". Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. "'Grey's Anatomy' Fans Are Changing Their Twitter Names To The Domestic Violence Hotline To Raise Awareness". Bustle. January 19, 2018. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Rice, Lynette (September 1, 2011). "The most Tivo'ed show on TV is ..." Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 2, 2011.[dead link] "Weekly Program Rankings: 1/30/06-2/05/06". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. February 7, 2006. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Poggi, Jeanine (September 30, 2016). "TV Ad Pricing Chart: A Show in Its 13th Season Returns to the Top 10 Most Expensive Buys". Advertisement Age. Archived from the original on June 16, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2017. Pomerantz, Dorothy (March 16, 2011). "In Pictures: TV's Biggest Moneymakers". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 27, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2013. Pomerantz, Dorothy (April 10, 2012). "TV's Biggest Moneymakers". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013. Mitovich, Matt Webb (May 25, 2012). "TV Season Rankings: Sunday Night Football Ends Idol's Streak; Once, POI and Rob Score Wins". TVLine. PMC. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Katz, Josh (December 27, 2016). "'Duck Dynasty' vs. 'Modern Family': 50 Maps of the U.S. Cultural Divide". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2017. "Weekly Program Rankings: 3/21/05-3/27/05". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. March 29, 2005. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Weekly Program Rankings: 5/16/05-5/22/05". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 24, 2005. Archived from the original on May 16, 2009. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Season Program Rankings: 9/20/04-5/22/05". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 24, 2005. Archived from the original on March 29, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2010. "Primetime series". The Hollywood Reporter. May 27, 2005. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Weekly Program Rankings: 9/19/05-9/25/05". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. September 27, 2005. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved July 3, 2009. "Weekly Program Rankings: 5/15/06-5/21/06". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 23, 2006. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2009. "Season Program Rankings: 9/19/05-5/28/06". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2010. "Series". The Hollywood Reporter. May 26, 2006. Archived from the original on May 19, 2007. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Weekly Program Rankings: 9/18/06-9/24/06". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. September 26, 2006. Archived from the original on March 29, 2012. Retrieved May 17, 2012. "Weekly Program Rankings: 5/14/07-5/20/07". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 22, 2007. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved May 17, 2012. "Season Program Rankings: 9/18/06-5/27/07". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 30, 2007. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2011. "2006–07 primetime wrap". The Hollywood Reporter. May 25, 2007. Archived from the original on December 23, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Weekly Program Rankings: 9/24/07-9/30/07". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. October 2, 2007. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Weekly Program Rankings: 5/19/08-5/25/08". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 28, 2008. Archived from the original on March 29, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Season Program Rankings: 9/24/07-5/25/08". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 28, 2008. Archived from the original on April 13, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010. "ABC Primetime Performance – 2008 May Sweep/2007–08 TV Season". The Futon Critic. May 20, 2008. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Gorman, Bill (September 26, 2008). "Thursday, September 25: A Paler Shade of Grey's Boosts ABC". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on February 19, 2009. Retrieved September 12, 2010. Gorman, Bill (May 15, 2009). "Ratings: ABC, Grey's Anatomy Win "Finale Thursday"; But Decline Continues". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2010. "Season Program Rankings: 9/22/08-5/17/09". Medianet. American Broadcasting Company. May 19, 2009. Archived from the original on June 23, 2009. Retrieved May 19, 2010. "ABC 2009 May Sweep / TV Season Ratings". Medianet. TheFutonCritic. May 21, 2009. Retrieved December 11, 2012. Seidman, Robert (September 25, 2009). "Thursday broadcast finals, plus quarter hour detail for FlashForward". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009. Retrieved September 13, 2010. Gorman, Bill (May 21, 2010). "Grey's Anatomy Rules Finale Thursday; Bones, FlashForward, CSI, Parks, 30 Rock, Ref Rise". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on December 27, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010. "Full Series Rankings For The 2009–10 Broadcast Season". Deadline Hollywood. Zap2it. May 27, 2010. Archived from the original on August 16, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2010. Gorman, Bill (June 16, 2010). "Final 2009–10 Broadcast Primetime Show 18–49 Ratings". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Seidman, Robert (September 24, 2010). "Thursday Finals: 'Big Bang Theory,' '$#*! My Dad Says,' 'Grey's Anatomy,' 'The Office,' 'The Mentalist,' and 'Outsourced' All Rise; Private Practice Falls". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on September 26, 2010. Retrieved September 24, 2010. Seidman, Robert (May 20, 2011). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'American Idol,' 'Big Bang,' 'The Office,' 'Grey's,' 'Mentalist' Adjusted Up". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on May 27, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2011. Gorman, Bill (June 1, 2011). "2010–11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show Viewership Averages". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011. Gorman, Bill (June 1, 2011). "2010–11 Season Broadcast Primetime Show 18–49 Ratings Averages". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Seidman, Robert (September 23, 2011). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Big Bang Theory,' 'The X Factor,' 'Parks & Recreation' and 'Whitney' Adjusted Up". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved September 23, 2011. Bibel, Sara (May 18, 2012). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'American Idol', 'Grey's Anatomy', '30 Rock' Adjusted Up; 'Touch', 'Scandal' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved May 18, 2012. Gorman, Bill (May 24, 2012). "Complete List Of 2011–12 Season TV Show Viewership: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'American Idol,' 'NCIS' & 'Dancing With The Stars'". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2012. Gorman, Bill (May 24, 2012). "Complete List Of 2011–12 Season TV Show Ratings: 'Sunday Night Football' Tops, Followed By 'American Idol,' 'The Voice' & 'Modern Family'". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 28, 2012). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Big Bang Theory', 'Grey's Anatomy', Adjusted Up; 'Parks & Rec', 'Up All Night', 'SNL: Weekend Update', 'The Office', 'Glee', 'Scandal', 'Rock Center' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Kondolojy, Amanda (May 17, 2013). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Hannibal', 'The Big Bang Theory', 'The Vampire Diaries', 'Grey's Anatomy' & 'Office' Retrospective Adjusted Up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Patten, Dominic (May 23, 2013). "Full 2012–2013 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved May 24, 2013. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 27, 2013). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'The Big Bang Theory', 'The Michael J Fox Show' & 'The X Factor' Adjusted Up; 'The Crazy Ones' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Bibel, Sara (May 16, 2014). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'The Big Bang Theory' & 'Grey's Anatomy' Adjusted Up; 'Reign' & 'The Millers' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. "Full 2013–2014 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline Hollywood. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2014. Kondolojy, Amanda (October 12, 2014). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Grey's Anatomy', 'Scandal' & 'How to Get Away With Murder' Adjusted Up + Final Football Numbers". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 27, 2014. Retrieved October 13, 2014. Bibel, Sara (May 15, 2015). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'The Blacklist' Adjusted Up; 'Reign' Adjusted Down; No Adjustment to 'Scandal'". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 17, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2015). "Top 50 TV shows 2014–2015 Highest Rated Winners and Losers". TV Insider. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 25, 2015). "Thursday Final Ratings: 'Heroes Reborn' & 'Scandal' Adjusted Up + Final Football Ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. Porter, Rick (May 20, 2016). "Thursday final ratings: 'Bones' adjusts up, 'The Catch' finale and 'Game of Silence' adjust down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016. "Full 2015–16 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline Hollywood. May 26, 2015. Archived from the original on May 28, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2015. Porter, Rick (September 23, 2016). "Thursday final ratings: 'Grey's Anatomy,' 'Superstore' and 'Good Place' adjust up, 'Notorious' adjusts down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved September 23, 2016. Porter, Rick (May 19, 2017). "'Grey's Anatomy' and 'Masterchef Junior' finales, 'Amazing Race' adjust up: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2017. "Final 2016–17 TV Rankings: 'Sunday Night Football' Winning Streak Continues". Deadline Hollywood. May 26, 2017. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017. Porter, Rick (September 29, 2017). "'Will & Grace,' 'Superstore,' 'Good Place,' 'Gotham' adjust up; 'How to Get Away' adjusts down: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2017. Porter, Rick (May 18, 2018). "'SWAT' and 'Arrow' finales adjust down: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved May 18, 2018. Hipes, Patrick; de Moraes, Lisa (May 23, 2018). "2017–18 TV Series Ratings Rankings: NFL Football, 'Big Bang' Top Charts". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Welch, Alex (September 28, 2018). "'Grey's Anatomy,' 'Big Bang Theory,' and 'Thursday Night Football' adjust up: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. Rejent, Joseph (May 17, 2019). "'Paradise Hotel,' 'The Big Bang Theory' finale adjust up, 'Young Sheldon' adjusts down: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 17, 2019. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2019). "2018–19 TV Season Ratings: CBS Wraps 11th Season At No. 1 In Total Viewers, NBC Tops Demo; 'Big Bang Theory' Most Watched Series". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 22, 2019. Rejent, Joseph (September 27, 2019). "'Young Sheldon' adjusts up, 'A Million Little Things' and 'Evil' adjust down: Thursday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. Metcalf, Mitch (April 10, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Thursday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 4.9.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Porter, Rick (June 4, 2020). "TV Ratings: 7-Day Season Averages for Every 2019–20 Broadcast Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 5, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Metcalf, Mitch (November 13, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Thursday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 11.12.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Bauder, David (June 8, 2021). "Former president Trump returns as a diminished TV draw". Associated Press. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Porter, Rick (June 8, 2021). "2020–21 TV Ratings: Complete 7-Day Ratings for Broadcast Network Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Metcalf, Mitch (October 4, 2021). "ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Thursday Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals: 9.30.2021 Updated". Showbuzz Daily. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Metcalf, Mitch (May 27, 2022). "SHOWBUZZDAILY's Thursday 5.26.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals UPDATED". Showbuzz Daily. Retrieved May 27, 2022. Porter, Rick (June 8, 2022). "2021–22 TV Ratings: Final Seven-Day Numbers for Every Network Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Metcalf, Mitch (October 7, 2022). "ShowBuzzDaily's Thursday 10.6.2022 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals Updated". Showbuzz Daily. Retrieved October 8, 2022. Metcalf, Mitch (May 19, 2023). "ShowBuzzDaily's Thursday 5.18.2023 Top 150 Cable Originals & Network Finals". Showbuzz Daily. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Porter, Rick (June 7, 2023). "TV Ratings 2022-23: Final Seven-Day Averages for Every Network Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Pucci, Douglas (March 15, 2024). "Thursday Ratings: '9-1-1' Network Debut and Season Premieres of 'Grey's Anatomy' and 'Station 19' Lift ABC to Key Demo Victory". Programming Insider. Retrieved March 15, 2024. "63rd Golden Globe Awards Nominations". Golden Globe Awards. Hollywood Foreign Press Association. December 13, 2005. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "64th Golden Globe Awards Nominations". Golden Globe Awards. Hollywood Foreign Press Association. December 14, 2006. Archived from the original on February 25, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "63rd Golden Globe Award Winners". Golden Globe Awards. Hollywood Foreign Press Association. January 16, 2006. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "List of Golden Globe Nominees and Winners". The New York Times. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "List of Golden Globe Nominees and Winners". The New York Times. December 13, 2007. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "People's Choice Awards Nominees and Winners: 2011". People's Choice Awards. Procter & Gamble. Archived from the original on July 15, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "People's Choice Awards Nominees and Winners: 2008". People's Choice Awards. Procter & Gamble. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "The People's Choice Awards nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "People's Choice Awards 2015: Full List Of Nominees". peopleschoice.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2015. "People's Choice Awards Nominees and Winners: 2007". People's Choice Awards. Procter & Gamble. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012. "Past Recipients". Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards. Women in Film and Television International. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011. "The 42nd NAACP Image Awards – Television". NAACP Image Awards. National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved June 29, 2012. "The 12th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Screen Actors Guild. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved June 22, 2012. "The 13th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Screen Actors Guild. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012. https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0413573/awards/ Retrieved on 18 March 2024. Walls, Jeannette (March 7, 2007). "'Grey's Anatomy' stars fuming over spinoff". Today. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Keck, William; Wloszczyna, Susan (May 21, 2007). "Katherine Heigl positively glows". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 29, 2012. Retrieved May 9, 2009. Adalian, Josef (February 26, 2007). "Director set for 'Grey's' spinoff". Variety. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy Season 3, Episode Recap: 'The Other Side of This Life'". Grey's Anatomy. American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved July 15, 2012. Ausiello, Michael (July 11, 2007). "Breaking Grey's/Private Practice Casting News!". TV Guide. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Meltzer Zepeda, Dana (September 21, 2007). "Private Practice Preview: Hail to the New Chief (of Staff)". TV Guide. Archived from the original on January 19, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "'Private Practice' Recast: Merrin Dungey out, Audra McDonald in, on the 'Grey's Anatomy' spinoff". Los Angeles Times. June 29, 2007. Archived from the original on February 5, 2012. Retrieved May 17, 2012. "Private Practice Season 6 Catch Up". Private Practice Show Page. ABC.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Hughes, Jason (January 23, 2013). "'Private Practice' Finale: Weddings, Books And Happy Endings For Everyone (VIDEO)". HuffPost. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Littleton, Cynthia (May 16, 2017). "'Grey's Anatomy' Spinoff Lands Straight to Series Order From ABC". Variety. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2017. Roots, Kimberly (July 26, 2017). "Grey's Anatomy Spinoff Casts Rosewood's Jaina Lee Ortiz". Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Nemetz, Dave (September 12, 2017). "Grey's Anatomy: Jason George Jumps to Firefighter Spinoff as Series Regular". Archived from the original on January 28, 2018. Ausiello, Michael (October 6, 2017). "Grey's Anatomy Spinoff: Grey Damon, The Catch Star Among Five New Hires". Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Andreeva, Nellie (October 6, 2017). "'Grey's Anatomy' Spinoff: Grey Damon, Okieriete Onaodowan, Danielle Savre & Barrett Doss Cast In Shondaland Series". Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Ausiello, Michael (October 11, 2017). "Grey's Spinoff: Miguel Sandoval Joins Firefighter Drama as Captain". Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Corinthios, Aurelie (January 9, 2018). "Grey's Anatomy Web Series Follows Latest Batch of Newbie Doctors: Meet the B-Team". People. Archived from the original on January 9, 2018. "'Grey's Anatomy' Scrubs Now Available Online Through a Strategic Collaboration Between ABC Entertainment Group, Barco Uniforms and CafePress". The Futon Critic. February 9, 2011. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Scrubs Now Available Online Through a Strategic Collaboration Between ABC Entertainment Group, Barco". Reuters. Thomson Reuters Corporation. February 9, 2011. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved June 12, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Soundtrack Volume 2". Amazon. Retrieved December 5, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy Soundtrack Volume 3". Amazon. Retrieved December 5, 2011. "Grey's Anatomy: The Music Event". iTunes. Apple. March 31, 2011. Archived from the original on April 30, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy Soundtrack Volume 4". Amazon. Retrieved December 5, 2011. Faylor, Chris (January 7, 2009). "Ubisoft Announces Grey's Anatomy Video Game". Shacknews. GameFly, Inc. Archived from the original on December 9, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game". IGN. News Corporation. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012. Ocampo, Jason (March 12, 2009). "Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 22, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game for Wii Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved October 29, 2014. "Grey's Anatomy: The Video Game for PC". Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 19, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2014. Gross, Doug (February 1, 2011). "'Grey's Anatomy' gets a real-time iPad app". CNN Tech. Cable News Network. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved June 27, 2012. "Grey's Anatomy". Nature Medicine. 15: 590. 2009. doi:10.1038/nm0609-590. S2CID 5115728. "Moonlight Mile: Cast & Details". TV Guide. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012. Writer: Nowalk, Peter. Director: Ornelas, Edward (October 14, 2010). "Can't Fight Biology". Grey's Anatomy. Season 7. Episode 4. American Broadcasting Company. Burkhead, Cynthia; Robson, Hillary (2008). Grace under Pressure: Grey's Anatomy Uncovered. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1847185341. Van Dusen, Chris; McKee, Stacy (2006). Grey's Anatomy: Overheard at the Emerald City Bar. Hyperion Books. ISBN 1401308821. Wilson, Leah (2007). Grey's Anatomy 101: Seattle Grace, Unauthorized. BenBella Books. ISBN 978-1933771144. Grey's Anatomy at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Resources from Wikiversity Official website at ABC.com Grey's Anatomy at IMDb Grey's Anatomy at epguides.com