"Gangnam Style" (Korean: 강남스타일, IPA: [kaŋ.nam sɯ.tʰa.il]) is a K-pop song by South Korean rapper Psy, released on July 15, 2012, by YG Entertainment as the lead single of his sixth studio album, Psy 6 (Six Rules), Part 1 (Ssai Yukgap Part 1). The term "Gangnam Style" is a neologism that refers to the nouveau riche lifestyles associated with the Gangnam region of Seoul. On July 15, 2012, "Gangnam Style" debuted at number one on South Korea's Gaon Chart, receiving generally positive reviews, with praise for its catchy beat and Psy's amusing dancing during live performances and in various locations around the world in its music video. The song and its music video went viral in August 2012 and have influenced popular culture worldwide. In the United States, "Gangnam Style" peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, which at the time, was the highest charting song by a South Korean artist. By the end of 2012, "Gangnam Style" had topped the music charts of more than 30 countries including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Psy's dance in the music video itself became a cultural phenomenon. It subsequently won Best Video at the MTV Europe Music Awards held that year. It became a source of parodies and reaction videos by many different individuals, groups, and organizations. On December 21, 2012, "Gangnam Style" became the first YouTube video to reach a billion views. The song's music video was the most viewed video on YouTube from November 24, 2012, when it surpassed the music video for "Baby" by Justin Bieber featuring Ludacris, to July 10, 2017, when it was itself surpassed by the music video for "See You Again" by Wiz Khalifa featuring Charlie Puth. Its dance was attempted by political leaders such as British Prime Minister David Cameron and United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who hailed it as "a force for world peace". On May 7, 2013, at a bilateral meeting with South Korea's President Park Geun-hye at the White House, US President Barack Obama cited the success of "Gangnam Style" as an example of how people around the world are being "swept up" by the Korean Wave of culture. "Gangnam Style" is a South Korean neologism that refers to a lifestyle associated with the Gangnam region of Seoul, where people are trendy, hip, and exude a certain supposed class. The term was defined in Time's weekly vocabulary list as "a manner associated with lavish lifestyles in Seoul's Gangnam district". Psy likened Gangnam to Beverly Hills, California, and said in an interview that he intended the title as a joke, claiming that he has "Gangnam Style" when everything about the song, dance, looks, and music video is far from high class: People who are actually from Gangnam never proclaim that they are—it's only the posers and wannabes that put on these airs and say that they are "Gangnam Style"—so this song is actually poking fun at those kinds of people who are trying very hard to be something that they're not. The song talks about "the perfect girlfriend who knows when to be refined and when to get wild." The song's refrain "오빤 강남 스타일 (Oppan Gangnam style)" has been translated as "Big brother is Gangnam style," with Psy referring to himself. During an interview with The New York Times, Psy revealed that South Korean fans have high expectations about his dancing, so he felt a lot of pressure. In order to keep up with those expectations, he studied hard to find something new and stayed up late for about 30 nights to come up with the "Gangnam Style" dance. Along the way, he had tested various "cheesy" animal-inspired dance moves with his choreographer Lee Ju-sun, including panda and kangaroo moves, before settling for the horse trot, which involves pretending to ride a horse, alternately holding the reins and spinning a lasso, and moving into a legs-shuffling side gallop. During an interview with Reuters, Psy said that "Gangnam Style" was originally produced only for local K-pop fans. On July 11, 2012, Psy and his music label YG Entertainment started releasing several promotional teasers for "Gangnam Style" to their subscribers on YouTube. On July 15, 2012, the full music video of "Gangnam Style" was uploaded onto YouTube and was immediately a sensation, receiving about 500,000 views on its first day. However, at the time of its release in Germany, a dispute between YouTube and the GEMA (the country's performance rights organization) regarding copyright issues led to thousands of music videos including "Gangnam Style" being blocked in the country. The music video, along with other music videos from GEMA-protected artists released on YouTube, were unblocked in Germany on October 31, 2016, after YouTube reached an agreement with GEMA on copyrights and royalties. According to the news agency Agence France-Presse, the success of "Gangnam Style" could be considered as part of the Korean Wave, a term coined by Chinese journalists to refer to the significant increase in the popularity of South Korean entertainment and culture since the late 1990s. Korean popular music (K-pop), considered by some to be the most important aspect of the Korean Wave, is a music genre that relies on cultural technology to adapt to the tastes of foreign audiences and has now grown into a popular subculture among teenagers and young adults in many places around the world. Although it has spread to the Middle East, Eastern Europe, and parts of South America, its reception in the Western world was initially lukewarm. However, booming social media networks such as YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter made it easier for K-pop musicians to reach a wider audience in the West, and the song and video soon became a global phenomenon. The song has received mixed to positive ratings from music critics. Music journalist Bill Lamb from About.com praised the song for "spreading smiles and pure fun around the world in record time." He then writes, "take one part LMFAO's synth-based party music, another part Ricky Martin's Latin dance party and the rest a powerfully charismatic South Korean showman and you have the first worldwide K-Pop smash hit." Billboard K-Town columnist Jeff Benjamin became one of the first music critics to review the song when he published an article and reported that "Gangnam Style" has gone viral on the Internet. In his article, Benjamin introduced the reader to a couple of popular K-pop songs and wrote that "'Gangnam Style' in particular, plays all the right moves sonically while "borrowing from LMFAO along the way." Hallie Sekoff of The Huffington Post quoted from the video's official YouTube video description that the song is characterized by its "strongly addictive beats," and wrote that this is not too far-fetched, considering "how obsessed we've found ourselves." London's mayor Boris Johnson considered the song to be the greatest cultural masterpiece of 2012. Despite its popularity, a few music critics including Robert Copsey from Digital Spy criticized the song for being monotonous. Cospey wrote that "you could slap an LMFAO tag on the cover and few would know the difference", and Paul Lester of The Guardian similarly labeled it as "generic ravey Euro dance with guitars." Lester described the song as "Pump Up the Jam meets the Macarena with a dash of Cotton Eye Joe," while Robert Myers of The Village Voice dismissed "Gangnam Style" as an "inspired piece of silliness." Cha Woo-jin, a South Korean music critic, told The Chosun Ilbo that "Gangnam Style"'s sophisticated rendering and arrangement has made it very appealing to the general public. Choe Kwang-shik, the South Korean Minister of Culture, Sports and Tourism, told reporters that "Gangnam Style" had played an important role in introducing the Korean culture, language, and lifestyle to the rest of the world. However, some have criticized the song for failing to accurately represent South Korean culture. Oh Young-Jin, managing editor of The Korea Times, wrote that the dance has more to do with Americans than Koreans. In Japan, the song was met with considerable criticism. When "Gangnam Style" first appeared in Japanese TV shows in July, the reaction from viewers was negative. As a result, Psy's Japanese record label YGEX canceled a previously planned Japanese-language re-release of "Gangnam Style." According to The Dong-a Ilbo, a South Korean newspaper, the song's lukewarm reception in Japan could have been caused by a diplomatic conflict between the two countries, and the newspaper accused the Japanese media of keeping its people "in the dark." However, Jun Takaku of the Japanese daily newspaper Asahi Shimbun explained that "Gangnam Style" had caused "barely a ripple in Japan" because Psy does not conform to the image of other "traditionally polished" K-pop acts popular in Japan such as Girls' Generation and TVXQ. Erica Ho from Time magazine similarly noted that, despite the K-pop musical genre being very popular in Japan, the country seemed to be "immune to PSY Mania", and she advised her readers who dislike the song to "pack your bags for Japan." Immediately after its release, "Gangnam Style" was mentioned by various English-language websites providing coverage of Korean pop culture for international fans, including Allkpop and Soompi. Simon and Martina Stawski, a Canadian couple living in Seoul who were among the first to parody "Gangnam Style" in late July, wrote that the song has the potential to become "one of the biggest songs of the year." However, during an interview with Al Jazeera a few weeks later, Martina Stawski claimed that the worldwide popularity of "Gangnam Style" has been viewed negatively by some K-pop fans, because "they [the fans] didn't want K-pop being liked by other people who don't understand K-Pop." The music video of "Gangnam Style" has been met with positive responses and praises from the music industry and the commentators, who drew attention to its tone and dance moves, though some found them vulgar. Another notable aspect that helped popularise the video was its comical dance moves that can be easily copied, such as the pelvic thrust during the elevator scene. The United Nations hailed Psy as an "international sensation" because of the popularity of his "satirical" video clip and its "horse-riding-like dance moves." As such, the music video has spawned a dance craze unseen since the Macarena of the mid-1990s. The World Bank's lead economist David McKenzie remarked that some of Psy's dance moves "kind of look like a regression discontinuity," while the space agency NASA called "Gangnam Style" a dance-filled music video that has forever entered the hearts and minds of millions of people. Melissa Locker of Time noted that "it's hard not to watch again ... and again ... and again," while CNN reporter Shanon Cook told the audience that she had watched "Gangnam Style" about 15 times. The German news magazine Der Spiegel attributed the popularity of "Gangnam Style" to its daring dance moves, a sentiment similarly voiced by Maura Judkis of The Washington Post, who wrote, "'Gangnam Style' has made an extraordinarily stupid-looking dance move suddenly cool." The video was also positively reviewed by Steve Knopper from Rolling Stone, who called "Gangnam Style" an astoundingly great K-pop video that has all the best elements of hypnotically weird one-hit wonders and hopes that "PSY gets filthy rich from this." Mesfin Fekadu of the Associated Press wrote that Psy's dance moves are "somewhat bizarre" but the music video is full of colorful, lively outfits. Matt Buchanan and Scott Ellis of The Sydney Morning Herald wrote that the video "makes no sense at all to most Western eyes" and it "makes you wonder if you have accidentally taken someone else's medication" whereas Deborah Netburn of the Los Angeles Times called it "one of the greatest videos ever to be uploaded to YouTube." Kim Alessi from Common Sense Media considered the music video for "Gangnam Style" worth seeing for its caricature of contemporary Asian and American urban lifestyles, but also warned that "Gangnam Style" contains sexually suggestive images and "degrading messages" which could be inappropriate for children and teenagers. The video begins with Psy, who is lounging at what looks like a sandy beach, under a sun umbrella and holding a cold drink, but the camera zooms out to reveal he is actually at a playground. The video then alternates between the playground, where a boy (Hwang Min-woo) dances next to him; and a row of horses, who are in stalls, where Psy performs his signature "invisible horse dance." As Psy (and two women) walk through a parking garage, they are pelted by pieces of newspaper, trash, and snow. At a sauna, he rests his head on a man's shoulder, dressed in blue, while another man covered in tattoos is stretching. He then sings in front of two men (then labelmates under YG Entertainment, Big Bang's Daesung and Seungri, dressed as older men) playing Janggi (Korean chess), dances with a woman at a tennis court, and bounces around on a tour bus of seniors. The scenes alternate quickly until there is an explosion near the chess players, causing them to dive off the bench. Psy immediately walks toward the camera, pointing and shouting "Oppa Gangnam Style." The chorus starts as he and some dancers perform at a horse stable. He dances as two women walk backwards. He dances at the tennis court, a carousel, and the tour bus. He shuffles into an outdoor yoga session and on a boat. The camera zooms in on a woman's butt, then shows Psy "yelling" at it. The chorus ends and he is seen in a parking garage, where Psy is approached by a man (Yoo Jae-suk) in a yellow suit who steps out of a red Mercedes-Benz SLK 200; they have a dance duel. Psy then appears in an elevator underneath a man (Noh Hong-Chul) who is straddling him and thrusting his pelvis. The man in the yellow suit then gets in his car and leaves. The camera pans and it shows Psy in the subway station, where he boards the train and notices Hyuna (who would have her own version of the song) dancing. At one of the train stops, he approaches the girl in slow motion, and she approaches him. They start to embrace. He then tells the girl "Oppa Gangnam Style," and they horse dance along with some other dancers at the train stop, commencing the second chorus. He also surfaces from a spa hot tub. In the Rolling Stone interview, Psy says he copied the spa surfacing scene from Lady Gaga's video ("Poker Face"). Psy sings to the girl at a night club as people in various costumes walk behind them. He raps in a serious tone in an enclosed space, but when he says "You know what I'm saying" the camera zooms out, and it is revealed that he is actually sitting on a toilet with his pants down. The music video is directed by Cho Soo-hyun, who later directed the video for Psy's follow-up single "Gentleman" and the video for "This Love" by Shinhwa. It shows Psy performing a comical horse-riding dance and appearing in unexpected locations around the Gangnam District, such as an outdoor yoga session and a hot tub. He wears several distinctive suits and black sunglasses with a mindset of "dress classy and dance cheesy." It features a "skewering [of] the Gangnam image" by the "non-Gangnam Psy"; this parody would be recognizable to viewers familiar with Korean culture. Although there are more than ten different locations featured, only two of the scenes are filmed in the Gangnam district proper. The sauna scene, elevator scene, and bathroom scene were filmed elsewhere in the greater Seoul region, and some shots were filmed in World Trade Center Seoul and the Songdo International Business District, which includes Songdo Central Park and International Business District Station. The video was shot over 48 hours in July 2012. In K-pop, it is routine to have cameos by celebrities in a music video, such as in the dance scenes in the elevator and the parking garage. Guest appearances in the music video include: 4Minute member Hyuna, who dances in the subway car and attracts Psy's attention. Hwang Min-woo, a 7-year-old boy who dances at the beginning of the video. During an interview with CNN, Psy stated that "the night before the music video shoot, I was watching Korea's Got Talent and saw him dance to Michael Jackson. His moves were ridiculous. So we called him up and asked him to be in the music video, which was shooting the very next day, and he came and it all worked out." He has been praised for his eye-catching dance moves that have received a lot of attention from viewers. Comedian/television personality Korea's Nation MC Yoo Jae-suk, who engages in a dance duel with Psy. Comedian/television personality Noh Hongchul, who does his trademark pelvis-thrusting dance in an elevator while Psy raps underneath him. Following its July 15 release, "Gangnam Style" overtook Carly Rae Jepsen's "Call Me Maybe" to reach the number one position on the YouTube Top 100 Music Videos during the week of August 28, 2012. On September 1, 2012, it overtook Girls' Generation's "Gee" to become the most viewed K-pop video on YouTube. Although "Call Me Maybe" had unusually strong staying power, averaging over 1.5 million views each day, "Gangnam Style" increased to an average of over nine million views per day within just two months. This was mainly because "Call Me Maybe" remained largely a North American trend, whereas the popularity of "Gangnam Style" was not confined to the United States. 61.6 percent of viewers were male, and those aged between 13 and 17 represented the biggest group. According to The Wall Street Journal, T-Pain was among the first to have "sent [the video] to the stratosphere" when he tweeted about it on July 29, 2012. It was then picked up by Neetzan Zimmerman from the social blog Gawker, who asked "Did this underground Hip Hop artist from South Korea just release the Best Music Video of the Year?" on July 30. This was soon followed by Robbie Williams, Britney Spears, Katy Perry, Tom Cruise, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and William Gibson. The earliest video to catch the attention of media networks outside South Korea was "Psy Gangnam Style MV Reaction," which was uploaded by Katie and Mindy Anderson on July 18, 2012. The Andersons were subsequently interviewed by Evan Ramstad from The Wall Street Journal a few weeks later. In his article published on August 6, 2012, Ramstad also included "Kpop Music Mondays : PSY Gangnam Style," a review and parody of "Gangnam Style" uploaded on July 23 by K-pop video bloggers Simon and Martina Stawski, a Canadian couple living in Seoul. This makes the Stawskis' video the earliest parody featured in an American newspaper. On August 8, 2012, Ramstad appeared on WSJ Live, and he mentioned the Andersons and the Stawskis again, before claiming that "a lot of Koreans are also making their own parodies of 'Gangnam Style.'" On September 3, 2012, the number of daily views generated by "Gangnam Style" went past the 5-million mark. By the end of September, it had topped the iTunes charts in 31 countries. "Gangnam Style" reached the unprecedented milestone of 1 billion YouTube views on December 21, 2012. YouTube specially marked the video's accomplishments with a cartoon dancing Psy animated icon, added first by the site logo, and later next to the video's view counter when it exceeded 1 billion views. On April 6, 2013, the video on YouTube reached 1.5 billion views. As of January 2024, the video is the eleventh most viewed video on YouTube, having reached over 5 billion views. After the release of "Gangnam Style," the American talent manager Scooter Braun, who discovered Justin Bieber on YouTube, asked on Twitter "How did I not sign this guy [Psy]?" Soon afterward, it was reported that Psy had left for Los Angeles to meet with representatives of Justin Bieber, to explore collaboration opportunities. On September 3, 2012, Braun made a public announcement that was later uploaded onto YouTube, saying that he and Psy have decided to "make some history together. [To] be the first Korean artist to break a big record in the United States." On September 4, it was confirmed that Psy was signed to Braun's School Boy Records. The music video for the song went viral and became an Internet meme. Although Psy attributed the song's popularity to YouTube and his fans while at the same time insisted that he is not responsible for the song's success, the South Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism recognized the singer for "increasing the world's interest in Korea" and announced its decision to award Psy with a 4th Class Order of Cultural Merit. The phrase "Oppan Gangnam Style" was entered into The Yale Book of Quotations as one of the most famous quotes of 2012. As the song's popularity continued to rise, it caused the share price of the song's music label YG Entertainment to gain as much as 50% on the Korea Exchange. DI Corporation, whose executive chairman Park Won-ho is Psy's father, saw its share price increase by 568.8% within a few months of the song's release despite making a year-over-year loss. Soon, "Gangnam Style" began to attract the attention of several business and political leaders, including UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon who recognized the song as a "force for world peace." During his meeting with Psy at the United Nations Headquarters, he commented, "We have tough negotiations in the United Nations. In such a case I was also thinking of playing Gangnam Style-dance so that everybody would stop and dance. Maybe you can bring UN style." Through social networks like Facebook, many small, unofficial fan-organized flash mobs have been held in universities and colleges throughout the world. The earliest flash mobs were held in Pasadena, California, and Sydney, Australia. On September 12, 2012, Times Square in Manhattan was filled with a dance mob dancing to the music of "Gangnam Style" during ABC's Good Morning America. Major flash mobs (those with more than 1,000 participants) were also held in Seoul (South Korea), South Sulawesi (Indonesia), Palermo (Italy), Milan (Italy), and Paris (France). The song has been mentioned in tweets by the United Nations, the United Nations Children's Fund, and the American space agency NASA; by a reporter during a U.S. State Department briefing; and referenced by the president of the International Criminal Court Song Sang-Hyun during his speech in front of the UN Security Council. On October 9, the mayor of London Boris Johnson held a speech at the 2012 Conservative Party Conference where he told the audience that he and the British Prime Minister David Cameron have danced "Gangnam Style." During a Google Earnings call, Larry Page, the CEO and co-founder of Google, hailed the song as a glimpse of the future of worldwide distribution through YouTube. The American Council on Exercise estimated that dancing "Gangnam Style" will burn 150–200 calories per half-hour. Swype, an input method for Android operating systems, included "Gangnam Style" in its list of recognized words and phrases. U.S. President Barack Obama revealed possible plans to privately perform "Gangnam Style" for his spouse Michelle Obama. In November 2012, a Māori cultural group from Rotorua performed a version of the Gangnam Style dance mixed with a traditional Māori haka in Seoul, celebrating 50 years of diplomatic relations between South Korea and New Zealand. In Thailand, officials from the Dan Sai municipality in Loei Province shot a video of people wearing masks and performing "Gangnam Style" during the Phi Ta Khon "ghost" festival. According to the Thai newspaper The Nation, villagers and spiritual leaders from Loei province felt "uneasy" and also "greatly offended" about this "Gangnam Style" performance which tarnishes the image of a 400-year-old tradition. Another controversial incident was sparked by a "Gangnam Style" parody by officers from the Royal Thai Navy, which was not well received by some high-ranking commanders. Although Vice Admiral Tharathorn Kajitsuwan from the Third Naval Area Command insisted that "we had no intention to insult or make fun of navy officers in uniform," some senior officers called it "improper." Kajitsuwan claimed that his subordinates had the right to upload the video to YouTube, although he did not expect them to do so. On October 1, 2012, he issued an apology to his colleagues. Commander Surasak Rounroengrom believed an investigation was unnecessary because the video caused no damage to the navy, but he admitted that there was some impropriety about military officers doing their "fancy stepping in uniform." On September 18, 2012, the North Korean government became the first to use "Gangnam Style" for political activism when it uploaded a parody with the title "I'm Yushin style!" onto the government website Uriminzokkiri. The parody mocks the South Korean ruling conservative party president-elect Park Geun-hye. It shows a Photoshopped image of the presidential candidate performing the dance moves of "Gangnam Style" and labels her as a devoted admirer of the Yushin system of autocratic rule set up by her father, Park Chung-hee. A few weeks later, "草泥马 style" (literally, "Grass Mud Horse Style"; the Chinese characters are a homonym for a vulgar slur) was uploaded onto YouTube and other Chinese websites by the political activist and dissident Ai Weiwei. In his parody, Ai Weiwei dances "Gangnam Style" with a pair of handcuffs as a symbol of his arrest by Chinese authorities in 2011. According to the Associated Press, government authorities had removed the video from almost all Chinese websites the next day. South Korean President Park Geun-hye took office on February 25, 2013. At her inauguration, Psy performed "Gangnam Style" and "Champion", one of his first hits in his native country. In order to show his solidarity with Ai Weiwei and to advocate freedom of expression, the British sculptor Anish Kapoor produced the video Gangnam for Freedom, which features other prominent British artists as well as human rights activists from various international organisations including Index on Censorship and Amnesty International. A few days prior, the global grassroots network Students for a Free Tibet had uploaded a parody of "Gangnam Style" to show its support for the Tibetan independence movement. According to Max Fisher from The Washington Post, this parody of "Gangnam Style" was likely filmed in Dharamshala, the home of Tibet's government-in-exile in the northern Indian state of Himachal Pradesh. Greenpeace announced that it was "Going Gangnam, Greenpeace Style" in order to raise public awareness about illegal and unsustainable fishing practices off the coast of Mozambique. Activists from Greenpeace had parodied "Gangnam Style" on board the organization's excursion yacht Rainbow Warrior. Songdo, a ubiquitous city 40 miles (65 km) west of Gangnam, was among five cities vying for the right to host the Green Climate Fund (GCF), a project developed by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to channel $100 billion a year from developed countries to help developing countries combat climate change. During its campaign to win the right to host the GCF, the country's Presidential Committee on Green Growth produced a promotional video entitled "GCF Songdo Style by Psy" in which Psy recommends Songdo as the host city for the GCF. He announces that a "new paradigm" will begin at Songdo with the GCF and the video heralds "The beginning of Songdo Style" while "Gangnam Style" plays in the background. On October 20, 2012, the board of the GCF announced that Songdo had won the right to host the fund. In December 2012, the Department of Health in the Philippines launched a "Gangnam Style" dance campaign against the use of firecrackers to celebrate the New Year.Janine Tugonon, 2012 Miss Universe first runner-up, joined and danced in one of their campaigns at Pandacan, Manila. According to the department's assistant secretary, Dr. Eric Tayag, the popularity of the song will attract people especially children to use safer means of celebration such as dancing to "Gangnam Style". In contrast, the Philippine National Police was confirming intelligence reports about a firecracker named "Gangnam bomb," which supposedly produced by illegal firecracker makers in Bocaue, Bulacan and apparently riding on the popularity of the song. According to Chief Superintendent Raul Petrasanta, director of the Firearms and Explosives Office of the Philippine National Police, he did not know what the possibly dangerous "Gangnam bomb" looks like. Muhammad Rahim al Afghani, a close associate of Osama bin Laden currently held at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, had also used the song to demonstrate his ability to gain access to popular cultural trends despite being confined within a top secret prison. In a letter to his lawyer, Muhammad wrote, "I like this new song Gangnam Style. I want to do the dance for you but cannot because of my shackles." Reaction videos and parodies have been made for or with the music respectively. Some of these user generated videos have received international media recognition. "Gangnam Style"-related videos have also been uploaded by the CPDRC Dancing Inmates, Cody Simpson, Seungri, Latino, Fine Brothers, WAVEYA Dance Group, Barely Political, and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders. Numerous parodies have been spawned on college campuses. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology's version ("MIT Gangnam Style") featured Donald Sadoway, recognized in Time magazine as one of 2012 "Top 100 Most Influential People in the World"; Eric Lander, who is co-chairman of President Barack Obama's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology; and linguistics pioneer Noam Chomsky. The Maccabeats, an a cappella group from Yeshiva University, parodied the song as "What's Next? Sukkos Style?" with group members waving the four species. In addition, there have been parodies from The Ohio University Marching 110, York University, McMaster University, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Boston University, Dartmouth College, Stanford University Eton College, and the University of Michigan. The American space agency NASA uploaded an educational parody shot by its students at its Mission Control Center in Houston, Texas. The video features cameo appearances by astronauts Tracy Caldwell Dyson, Mike Massimino, Michael Coats, Ellen Ochoa, and the International Space Station's Expedition 15 flight engineer Clayton Anderson, who dances "Gangnam Style" halfway through the video. Shortly after its upload, the parody was retweeted by the European Space Agency and the SETI Institute. The song was also parodied by cadets from the United States Military Academy, United States Merchant Marine Academy, United States Naval Academy, United States Air Force Academy, and the Royal Military College of Canada; soldiers from the 210th Fires Brigade, the 2nd Infantry Division, service members from an undisclosed unit and location in Afghanistan, and service members from the China Coast Guard's Jiangsu division, as well as high-ranking officers from the Royal Thai Navy. CollegeHumor uploaded "Mitt Romney Style," while What's Trending uploaded "Obama Style." During the two weeks before August 7, 2012, nearly 1,000 videos with the word "Gangnam" in the title were uploaded onto YouTube. The Portuguese public broadcaster RTP1 spoofed the song in its late-night show 5 Para A Meia-Noite as Gamar com Style, sung by the comedian Pedro "Pacheco" Fernandes, criticizing the Prime Minister Pedro Passos Coelho, the European Union, the IMF, and the 2010–13 Portuguese financial crisis. There are many "Gangnam Style" parodies used for education. One such parody includes "Conjugation Style," a parody used to teach students about the conjugation of -er verbs in the French language. YouTube comedian cs188 uploaded a YouTube Poop of the song's iconic video, called "[PSYTP] Oppa Goddamn Style." The video has received more than 15 million views since its upload on October 11, 2012. Following the release of "Gangnam Style," Psy made several performances on television and at concerts in Korea. Early performances included his appearance on the weekly South Korean music program, The Music Trend. Psy also performed at several concerts prior to his departure to the United States, including during "The Heumbbeok Show" and the Summer Stand Concert in Seoul. After returning to South Korea, Psy performed "Gangnam Style" during a free concert that he held outside the Seoul City Hall. More than 80,000 fans attended the event, leading to the closure of part of the city center and an increase in subway operations. While Psy was in the US, it was announced that he, as ambassador of the Formula One Korean Grand Prix, would perform "Gangnam Style" at the event during the 2012 edition. At the event Psy taught Formula One drivers Mark Webber and Sebastian Vettel how to perform the dance. On November 28, 2012, Psy visited Thailand and held his concert "Gangnam Style Thailand Extra Live" at the SCG Stadium in Muang Thong Thani, Bangkok. At the show, a part of celebration for the 85th birthday of Thai's King Bhumibol Adulyadej, he performed the song along with his other hits. During the 2012 Mnet Asian Music Awards held in Hong Kong on November 30, he performed the song on stage, joined by the video's co-star Hyuna and Yoo Jae-Seok look-alikes in yellow suits. The track was one of three-song setlist on Psy's free showcase, held at the Marina Bay Sands in Singapore on December 1, 2012. On February 11, 2013, Psy arrived at the Malaysian state of Penang and performed "Gangnam Style" at a concert in front of more than 100,000 guests, including the Prime Minister of Malaysia Mohd Najib Abdul Razak as well as other high-ranking politicians from the country's ruling Barisan Nasional party. In early October 2012, Psy travelled to Sydney, Australia, and performed "Gangnam Style" on The X Factor, a reality TV music competition, where Melanie Brown joined him in performing the "horse dance" on stage. The following day, he performed on breakfast TV show Sunrise in Martin Place, Sydney. Psy's first public performance in Europe was on November 5, 2012, in France, where he and 20,000 fans danced "Gangnam Style" in front of the Eiffel Tower in Paris during a flashmob organized by NRJ Radio. Then, he traveled to Oxford and performed a short rendition of "Gangnam Style" with students from the Oxford Union, before moving on to the Yalding House in London where he danced "Gangnam Style" with the BBC's radio DJ Scott Mills. Shortly afterward, Psy left for Cologne and met up with the German comedian and television host Stefan Raab during the popular late-night show TV total, where Psy gave an interview and performed "Gangnam Style" for Raab. During the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards held in Frankfurt on November 11, Psy delivered a performance of "Gangnam Style" which featured a David Hasselhoff appearance and backup dancing of Psy look-alikes. In early 2013, Psy returned to France for the 2013 NRJ Music Awards at the Palais des Festivals et des Congrès in Cannes, where he began performing "Gangnam Style" on the red carpet before finishing the rest of the choreography on stage and leaving the ceremony with three awards. Following the viral success of his music video, Psy left for the United States and performed "Gangnam Style" in various locations. On August 20, 2012, Psy posted on Twitter "Bringing #GangnamStyle to the Dodgers–Giants game this evening." Dodger Stadium presented a segment called "Psy Dance Cam" where they showed clips of the music video, followed by live shots of baseball fans dancing, and then Psy, who waves and does the dance. Two days later, Psy appeared on VH1's Big Morning Buzz Live show, and taught television hosts Carrie Keagan and Jason Dundas how to dance "Gangnam Style." On September 6, Psy appeared at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards performing his "Gangnam Style" dance alongside comedian Kevin Hart. After the event, he made several more appearances on US TV programs. On September 10, he appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in Burbank, California, introducing himself as "Psy from Korea" before teaching Britney Spears the dance. He described the dance as "pretending to bounce like riding on an invisible horse" and when DeGeneres told Spears she would have to remove her high-heeled shoes to perform the dance, Psy protested that no, the point was "to dress classy, and dance cheesy." On September 14, he appeared on NBC's morning program Today in New York City for its Toyota Concert Series, where he performed the song and also taught the anchors the dance. The September 15, 2012, season premiere episode of Saturday Night Live featured a sketch based on the song and its video. Bobby Moynihan portrayed Psy, but was joined mid-sketch by Psy himself. He also made his second appearance on The Ellen Show's September 19 episode to perform the song along with his backup dancers. On September 22, Psy made an appearance at the iHeartRadio Music Festival to perform "Gangnam Style." On November 13, he joined Madonna on stage during her concert at Madison Square Garden in New York , where and they performed a mashup of the song and her 2008 hit "Give It .Me." Psy later told reporters that his gig with Madonna had "topped his list of accomplishments." On November 18, Psy, who rocked out in traditional Hammer pants, closed out the 40th American Music Awards show with a performance of "Gangnam Style" joined by surprise guest MC Hammer, who brought in his own moves and Psy's horse-riding dance as the song mashed into his 1990s hit "2 Legit 2 u.it." Jason Lipshutz of Billboard comme:that "Psy's feverish rendition of 'Gangnam Style' accomplished what so few award show performances can: a palpable sense of excitement. The combination of the K-pop star and MC Hammer ... was a stroke of genius that very few could have seen coming," and chose it as the best performance of the night. The Tonight Show with Jay Leno did a special Thanksgiving broadcast with an all-military audience on November 22, and appearedd by as the musical guest. The singer sang the song and danced alongside the soldiers, going into the crowd for part of his performance. Psy performed "Gangnam Style" during the second night of KIIS-FM Jingle Ball concert at Nokia Theatre L.A. Live on December 3, 2012. Wearing an all-red outfit including a sparkling, sequined top, he sang the song at TNT's Christmas in Washington special, attended by the US President Barack Obama and his family, and held at the National Building Museum On December 9. On December 16, he performed the song at the halftime show of the NFL game between the Buffalo Bills and Seattle Seahawks in Toronto. During the Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve event at Times Square in Manhattan on December 31, 2012, more than a million people witnessed a live "Gangnam Style" performance by Psy as he was joined on stage by characters (Yoo Jae-Seok, Noh Hong-chul) from the song's video for the first part of the performance, before MC Hammer appeared to perform a mash-up of the song and "2 Legit 2 Quit". During the five-day Carnival in Rio attended by more than five million people, Psy performed "Gangnam Style" with singers Claudia Leitte and Gilberto Gil to mark the 50th anniversary of the start of Korean immigration to Brazil. The success of "Gangnam Style" was a result of the build-up of South Korea's music industry that had been in the works for more than 20 years, and it led to other K-pop artists positioning themselves for similar breakthroughs in the U.S. music industry. Frances Moore, chief executive of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, brought up Gangnam Style as an example of how South Korea became one of the "most successful exporters of repertoire". According to the news agency Agence France-Presse, the success of "Gangnam Style" has led to the further rise and spread of the Korean Wave to other countries. As the song continued to attract worldwide media attention, it also led to various broadcasting networks and national newspapers focusing its attention on K-pop and other aspects of Korean culture. For example, The Daily Telegraph published an article recommending its readers to try out everything from K-Pop to "K-Cars", "K-Phones" and "K-Cuisine". Kim Byoung-gi, the Korean Ambassador to Lebanon, wrote that "Gangnam Style" had helped bridge Lebanese and Korean cultures. The French-born political commentator Tim Soutphommasane, a research fellow at Monash University, agreed that the "Gangnam phenomenon" was "something worth studying". According to Soutphommasane, the world was only beginning to appreciate Gangnam Style as "part of a broader hallyu cultural wave coming out of the country [South Korea]". In 2012, the South Korean government announced that "Gangnam Style" had brought in $13.4 million to the country's audio sector, and it subsequently launched a campaign to further expand the K-Pop music industry overseas. According to the Bank of Korea, the country's services account recorded a surplus of US$2.3 billion in the first nine months of this year, compared to a deficit of US$4.5 billion last year. This was mainly due to the growing influence and popularity of K-pop songs such as "Gangnam Style." However, American journalist John Seabrook noted that by "satirizing standard K-pop tropes in Gangnam Style", Psy may have subverted the music genre's chances of making it big in the West. Record executives in the music industry believe that music charts will increasingly be filled with YouTube-driven globalised acts from foreign countries. Sean Carey, a research fellow in the School of Social Sciences at the University of Roehampton, wrote that the flow of popular music will no longer be a single traffic route from North America and Europe to other parts of the globe, but will also move the other way as well. According to Adam Sherwin from The Independent, the global web demand for Gangnam Style had short-circuited the "traditional reluctance" of radio stations to play foreign-language songs. The song is also underlining a shift in how money is being made in the music business. Although Psy earned more than US$60,000 from music sales of "Gangnam Style" in South Korea alone, he and his music label YG Entertainment have raked in almost US$1 million from advertisements which appear on YouTube videos identified for using "Gangnam Style" in its content. The Harvard Business Review published an article written by Kevin Evers, who explained how "Gangnam Style" had changed Billboard's ranking methodology of its music charts. Instead of relying solely on radio plays and paid purchases, Billboard started to place a heavier emphasis on digital sales and YouTube views. As a result of the change, "Gangnam Style" moved up to the top position of Billboard's Hot Rap Songs music chart. According to the British Phonographic Industry's report based on Official Charts Company sales data, thanks to "Gangnam Style" and Carly Rae Jepsen's "Call Me Maybe", pop had become the UK's favourite musical genre of the year, taking the lion's share of the singles market (38.5%) in 2012. The song and its accompanying music video currently hold, or have attained, the following records: Most viewed K-pop video on YouTube – On September 1, 2012, it overtook "Gee" by the 9-member K-Pop idol-group Girls' Generation with 89 million views. Most liked video on YouTube – On September 13, 2012, it overtook "Party Rock Anthem" by the American electro recording duo LMFAO upon receiving 1.57 million "likes", and subsequently won its first Guinness World Record one week later. First K-pop song to top the UK Singles Chart – On October 6, 2012, the song reached number one of the UK singles chart and Psy became the first South Korean musician to achieve that feat. Most viewed video on YouTube – On November 24, 2012, it overtook "Baby" by the Canadian singer-songwriter Justin Bieber after receiving more than 803 million views. First video in Internet history to be viewed more than a billion times – On December 21, 2012, it acquired its billionth view at around 15:50 UTC. First video in Internet history to be viewed more than two billion times – On May 31, 2014, it acquired its 2 billionth view. A second dance animation was added next to the view counter. They were removed in July 2014. "Gangnam Style" was ranked No. 25 on the Rolling Stone's 50 best songs of 2012 list and No. 8 on SPIN's 40 best songs of the year. The song also took the No. 8 spot on the 2012 Billboard 20 best K-Pop songs list by Jeff Benjamin and Jessica Oak, who commented "[the song] stands out not only for its slick, electronic production but also for its deeper critique on high-class society." According to MTV's list of the 2012 best songs, the song was ranked No. 8 with MTV news staff James Montgomery's comment: "'Gangnam' is either the track we, as a culture needed right now, or the track we, as a culture, deserved." Time magazine chose it as the second best song of 2012 after Usher's "Climax," writing "The YouTube meme, a good-natured, mind-bendingly catchy lampoon [...] turned into a global obsession." The song was one of the best songs of the year on The New York Times pop critics' list and E! Online's No. 1 pick on the top 10 pop songs of 2012 list. Digital Spy ranked the song No. 20 among the 20 best singles of the year. It was voted the 12th best single of 2012 by The Village Voice's 40th annual Pazz & Jop critics' poll. Music critic Robert Christgau placed "Gangnam Style" as the No. 2 single on his 2012 Dean's List. The music video for "Gangnam Style" was chosen as the best music video of 2012 by Time. Melissa Locker of the magazine wrote "The catchy song paired with social satire and tongue-in-cheek vibe has spread so quickly it reminds us why videos are called viral. The video has sparked an International dance craze and catapulted Psy to international super stardom." Rolling Stone also ranked the video No. 1 on its "The Best Music Videos of 2012" list, saying "The Korean auteur [Psy] conquered the world with his 'dress classy, dance cheesy' aesthetic, blurring the line between parody and celebration." The video took No. 4 position on the Digital Spy's list of 10 top pop music videos of the year. The music video came in first with 21% rating in the 2012 Billboard.com's readers poll, beating "Where Have You Been" by Rihanna (19%) and "Beauty and a Beat" by Justin Bieber featuring Nicki Minaj (11%). The song was the most popular song played on New Year's Eve and the most sung song on the day, leaving "Auld Lang Syne" in second place for the first time since 2005, on karaoke company Lucky Voice's online service in the United Kingdom. CNN readers picked "Gangnam Style" as the eighth best song of 2012. The Week (US edition) ranked the song's global popularity at No. 6 with the strapline "'Gangnam Style' takes over the world" on the 13 biggest pop culture moments of the year list. The phenomenon of the song and the video was also picked as one of the 2012's most viral moments in music by Wendy Geller of Yahoo! Music, and No. 2 on the 2012 top 20 music moments list after Whitney Houston's death by Billboard, being written "If there's one meme, song and face that has been truly inescapable in the second half of 2012, it's South Korean rapper Psy and his outrageous 'Gangnam Style'." On December 1, 2014, YouTube announced that "Gangnam Style" had exceeded the number of views that are possible to store using a 32-bit signed integer, that being 2,147,483,647 (231−1, or two billion). As a result, YouTube was forced to upgrade to using 64-bit integers to store view numbers, with a maximum value of 9,223,372,036,854,775,807 (263−1, or nine quintillion). "We never thought a video would be watched in numbers greater than a 32-bit integer, but that was before we met Psy," stated a YouTube spokesperson. With 132 beats per minute, the song was momentarily forbidden in gyms in South Korea during the COVID-19 pandemic. The country restricted music faster than 120 BPM to avoid Koreans feel energized by the tempo of music, breath more heavily or sweat more intensely. Upon its release, "Gangnam Style" was an enormous hit. The song went straight to number one on the Gaon Singles Chart on the fourth week of July 2012, with 816,868 digital downloads, and spent five consecutive weeks at the top position of the chart, tying it with IU's "Good Day" for the most weeks at number one single in the chart's history. In addition, the song became the first-place winner on various weekly chart shows such as M Countdown (three straight weeks) and Music Bank (a total of 16 weeks including a record 10-consecutive-week). According to the Korea Music Content Industry Association, "Gangnam Style" became the best selling song of 2012 in South Korea with 3,842,109 download sales. The song debuted at number six on the Billboard Korea K-Pop Hot 100 for the week of July 28, 2012. It then topped the chart the week after and remained at the summit for five consecutive weeks, tying IU's record with "You and I" for the longest running number one song on the chart. The record, however, was broken by Lee Seung-gi's "Return" earned six weeks at the top spot from December 2012 to January 2013. "Gangnam Style" took number one spot on the 2012 Billboard K-Pop Hot 100 year-end chart. In Oceania, "Gangnam Style" was a huge success. The single made its chart debut on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 21 on September 3, 2012. After two weeks, the song reached in the top ten and the following week topped the chart, becoming the first K-pop song and the first foreign language song in three decades to achieve that feat since German band Nena's "99 Luftballons" hit the top spot in March 1982. The song remained atop the chart for two consecutive weeks before being deposed from the top spot by One Direction's "Live While We're Young." After one week of the band's reign, "Gangnam Style" regained its number one position and stayed at the top spot for a further four weeks, tallying a total of six nonconsecutive weeks atop the chart. The track was ranked in the top ten of the chart for 17 consecutive weeks before it fell to number 11 on the January 14, 2013, chart. The song has been certified 4× Platinum with sales exceeding 60,000 by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ). "Gangnam Style" was the second biggest-selling single of 2012 in the country behind Carly Rae Jepsen's "Call Me Maybe." In Australia, the song debuted at number seven on the ARIA Singles Chart on September 17, 2012, becoming the highest debut for the week. It reached number one on the chart just three weeks after its release, overtaking "Battle Scars" by Guy Sebastian featuring Lupe Fiasco, and spent six consecutive weeks at the summit, making it the second-longest running chart-topper for 2012 behind Flo Rida's "Whistle" remained at the pole position for seven weeks. As a result, Psy became the first artist to reach number one on the chart with a foreign-language song since Las Ketchup topped the chart with "The Ketchup Song" in September 2002, and the eighth overall. In addition, "Gangnam Style" was the first Korean song to enter the chart and to climb to the top spot in Australian chart history. After the single spent the first 14 weeks in the top ten of the chart since its chart debut, it dropped to number 11 in its 15th week. The song, however, rebounded from the position to number three on the issue date of December 31, 2012. It descended to number 14 in its 18th week, ending a 16-week in the top ten, and out of the top 20 the following week, placed at number 23. It has been certified 10× Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA), with sales exceeding 700,000 copies. "Gangnam Style" was placed at number two on the 2012 ARIA Singles year-end chart behind Carly Rae Jepsen's "Call Me Maybe." In Europe, the song was successful as well, topping the charts in almost all countries. "Gangnam Style" made its first European chart appearance, entering the Danish Singles Chart at number 40 on August 3, 2012. It reached the top ten in its fifth week, and climbed to number four in its sixth. For the issue dated September 14, 2012, the song became Psy's first number one on the chart, ending the one-week reign of the Danish rock band Nephew's "Hjertestarter." The song remained at the top position for seven consecutive weeks, tying it with "Somebody That I Used to Know" performed by Gotye featuring Kimbra for the longest running number one single on the chart for 2012. In its 24th week, it climbed back to the top, giving it its 8th week in that position. The single spent 22 straight weeks in the top ten of the chart. In January 2013, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI Denmark) certified the single 2× Platinum, denoting sales of 60,000 copies. The song entered the UK Singles Chart at number 196 on September 1, 2012, and in its fourth week broke into the top 40 at number 37. In its fifth week, the song reached the top five on the chart and eventually peaked at number one on the week of October 6, becoming the first-ever K-pop song to achieve that feat. While the track only remained atop the chart for one week before being overtaken by Rihanna's "Diamonds", it spent a further 17 consecutive weeks in the top ten of the chart before it fell to number twelve on the January 26, 2013, chart. The song was the sixth biggest selling single of 2012 with 878,000 sales, and ranked at number 24 among the top 40 most streamed tracks of the year in the United Kingdom. According to Official Charts Company sales data, "Gangnam Style" has become not only the 129th track to sell more than 1 million copies in the history of the UK's Official Singles Chart, but also the first million seller by an Asian music star. On April 9, 2013, the song became 13th most downloaded single of all time in the UK. Elsewhere in Europe, the song also peaked at number one on the German Singles Chart for two non-consecutive weeks in 2012. For the week of January 11, 2013, it returned to the summit, ending the ten-consecutive-week reign of "Diamonds" by Rihanna, and spent a week at the top. Psy's song remained in the top ten on the chart for a 19th straight week including 15 in the top three position since October 2012. It has been certified 5× Gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie (BVMI), denoting sales of 750,000 copies. In addition, the single remained number one in Austria for four nonconsecutive weeks, Belgium (Flanders) for five consecutive weeks, Belgium (Wallonia) for seven straight weeks, Czech Republic for one week, Finland for four consecutive weeks, France for six non-consecutive weeks, Italy for a week, the Netherlands for two consecutive weeks, Norway for four straight weeks, Scotland for a week, Spain for 12 consecutive weeks, and Switzerland for three nonconsecutive weeks. It additionally placed top five positions in Iceland, Ireland, and Sweden, and top ten in Hungary and Slovakia. In the United States, "Gangnam Style" debuted at number 64 the Billboard Hot 100 in the week of September 22, 2012, with 61,000 downloads sold, more than the total number of previous weeks (57,000), becoming the second K-pop song to enter the chart behind the Wonder Girls' "Nobody," which spent a week at number 76 on the October 31, 2009 chart. The following week, the song rocketed to number 11 on the chart with 188,000 downloads, seeing a sales increase of 210% after Psy appeared on various TV shows such as The Ellen DeGeneres Show and NBC's Today. In its third week, it rose to number two on the chart, topping the Hot Digital Songs chart with a 60% increase to 301,000 downloads sold and climbing to number nine on On-Demand Songs chart. After that, the song peaked at the runner-up spot for seven consecutive weeks behind Maroon 5's "One More Night," failing to gain in enough radio audience to ascend to the summit, although it ruled Hot Digital Songs for a fourth week and On-Demand Songs for a fifth week during that period. While "One More Night" dominated the Radio Songs chart for eight weeks, "Gangnam Style" peaked at just number 12 on the chart. For the week of November 24, the song dropped to number five on the Hot 100, despite leading in sales with 188,000 downloads. In its 12th week, the single rebounded from number seven to number five with top Digital Gainer accolades, spurred by Psy's show-closing performance of the song with MC Hammer at the AMA. The track returned for a sixth week atop Hot Digital Songs with 229,000 downloads sold including 41,000 stemmed from the duet version, which mixed in Hammer's 1992 No. 5 Hot 100 hit "2 Legit 2 Quit." It was the first song to spend six weeks at number one on the Digital Songs chart without reaching the top spot on the Hot 100 since Miley Cyrus's "Party in the U.S.A." in 2009. After the song stayed in the top ten of the Hot 100 for 11 consecutive weeks, it dropped out of the top ten on the December 22, 2012, chart, falling from number 10 to number 11. The following week, "Gangnam Style" descended to number 18 on the chart but achieved the milestone of 3 million downloads sold in the country, becoming the first and only K-pop song to reach the mark. For the week of January 12, 2013, powered by consumers purchasing some of 2012's most buzzworthy hits and radio airplay recounting the same in year-end retrospectives, the song resurged from number 19 to number six with its best weekly total 400,000 downloads sold, returning to the Hot 100's top ten after three weeks out of the top ten. The track dropped to number 14 in its 18th week, ending a 12-week in the top 10, and number 22 in its 19th week, despite staying in the top ten of Digital Songs chart with 192,000 and 105,000 copies sold, respectively. On February 20, 2013, Billboard and Nielsen announced the addition of U.S. YouTube video streaming data to its platforms, which includes an update to the methodology for the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Thanks to the change to reflect online video activity, "Gangnam Style" rebounded from number 48 to number 26 on the Hot 100 for the week of March 2, 2013. On October 11, 2012, Billboard unveiled new methodology for the Hot Rap Songs chart, including digital download sales and streaming data for the first time, along with radio airplay audience impressions as measured by Nielsen BDS. Due to this, "Gangnam Style" soared from number 20 to number one on the October 20, 2012, chart. The song spent eight consecutive weeks atop the chart before being overtaken by Flo Rida's "I Cry." After four weeks of his reign, "Gangnam Style" regained its number one position in the week of January 12, 2013. The track also peaked at number three on the Hot Dance/Club Play Songs chart in the week of November 17, 2012. The song was certified 4× Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on April 19, 2013, denoting digital download sales of 4,000,000. According to Nielsen SoundScan, "Gangnam Style" became the 9th best selling song of 2012 in the United States with 3,592,000 download sales. In late January 2013, the song topped the 4 million mark in digital sales, becoming the third comic/novelty song to reach the mark, following LMFAO's "Sexy and I Know It" and Cee Lo Green's "Fuck You!." In Canada, "Gangnam Style" was a big hit just like the rest of the world. The song entered the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number 71 on the week of September 8, 2012. In its fourth week, it reached in the top ten of the chart, climbing to number three, and the following week hit the pole position. The single spent seven consecutive weeks atop the chart, making it the second longest running number one song of 2012 behind Maroon 5's "Payphone" remained at the top for eight straight weeks. On the week of September 12, 2012, the song debuted at number seven on the Top 20 Digital Tracks chart, based on Nielsen SoundScan data. The following week it topped the chart and spent four weeks at the top spot before giving the summit to "I Knew You Were Trouble" by Taylor Swift. "Gangnam Style," however, was back on top of the chart for the week of October 24, and grabbed the number one position for another four straight weeks, tallying a total of eight nonconsecutive weeks atop the chart. On November 16, 2012, the track was certified 4× Platinum by Music Canada, and as of January 2013 had sold more than 476,000 copies in the country. On August 21, 2012, "Gangnam Style" charted number one on the iTunes Music Video Charts, overtaking Justin Bieber's "As Long as You Love Me" and Katy Perry's "Wide Awake"; this feat was the first for any South Korean artist. From September 8, 2012, to February 23, 2013, the song has also peaked and stayed at number one on Billboard's YouTube Chart for 22 weeks, until being surpassed by "Stay" by Rihanna for one week; as of April 2013, it had reclaimed its top position for a 30th week. "Gangnam Style" was officially re-released on August 14, 2012, as "Oppa Is Just My Style" (Korean: 오빤 딱 내 스타일), featuring additional vocals provided by Korean singer and 4Minute member Hyuna. Mallika Rao of The Huffington Post wrote that the video was "apparently retrofitted here to work from a woman's point of view, but the main difference we're spotting is less invisible horse riding and more sultry side-eyeing." As of January 2021[update], the accompanying music video had received more than 784 million views, 2.6 million likes, and 520,000 dislikes on YouTube. 2010s portal Internet portal Music portal South Korea portal Gangnam Style in popular culture World Digital Song Sales List of best-selling singles List of best-selling singles in Australia List of best-selling singles in South Korea List of best-selling singles in the United States List of million-selling singles in the United Kingdom List of top hit singles (Youtube 100) Fisher, Max. "Visual music: How 'Gangnam Style' exploited K-pop's secret strength and overcame its biggest weakness". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 11, 2012. Cochrane, Greg (January 10, 2012). "Gangnam Style the UK's first K-pop number one". BBC. Retrieved November 11, 2012. "'Gangnam Style' Sees Veteran Singer Psy Leapfrog K-Pop Bands". The Chosun Ilbo. August 13, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Wood, Mikael (December 31, 2012). "Psy threatens to retire 'Gangnam Style' on New Year's Eve". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 13, 2015. "Psy (Gangnam Style) – 'kẻ tâm thần' một lần vụt sáng rồi chợt tắt". ZingNews.vn (in Vietnamese). November 27, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2021. "Rap Songs 2012-10-20". Billboard. October 1, 2012. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2012. Gruger, William (December 21, 2012). "PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Video Hits 1 Billion Views, Unprecedented Milestone". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2012. Lipshutz, Jason (November 24, 2012). "PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Now Most-Watched YouTube Video of All Time". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2017. Dresdale, Andrea (July 12, 2017). "'See You Again' Breaks Record for Most-Viewed YouTube Video of All Time". ABC News. ABC News Internet Ventures. Archived from the original on July 12, 2017. Retrieved July 30, 2017. "Gangnam style gets UN stamp of approval". Sydney Morning Herald. October 10, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2019. "Remarks by President Obama and President Park of South Korea in a Joint Press Conference". whitehouse.gov. May 7, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2013 – via National Archives. "[Why] How did Gangnam become the Seoul epicenter it is today?". Korea JoongAng Daily. February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Benjamin, Jeff (July 31, 2012). "Fall in Love with Psy's 'Gangnam Style' – Korean Rapper Goes Viral". Billboard. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Steinmetz, Katy (September 12, 2012). "Wednesday Words: Gangnam Style, Geek Speak and More". Time. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "'Gangnam Style' Goes Viral". Seoul Metropolitan Government. August 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 9, 2012. Retrieved March 10, 2013. Cha, Frances (August 17, 2012). "Interview: PSY on 'Gangnam Style', posers and that hysterical little boy". CNN. Retrieved August 17, 2012. Netburn, Deborah (August 4, 2012). "Giddy up! S. Korean rapper Psy's 'Gangnam Style' is unstoppable". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved August 31, 2012. Yang, Jeff (August 28, 2012). "Gangnam Style's U.S. Popularity Has Koreans Puzzled, Gratified". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Cho, Joohee; Lee, Sungeun (August 14, 2012). "South Korean Rapper PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Goes Viral". ABC News. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Ryzik, Melena (October 11, 2012). "His Style Is Gangnam, and Viral Too". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Park, Si-soo (February 6, 2014). "Bitter reality behind hilarious dance". The Korea Times. van den Broeke, Leigh; Matheson, Melissa (October 17, 2012). "Psy goes Gangnam Style with Wolverine and fans wait for hours to see his TV performance". News Corp Australia Network. Archived from the original on October 18, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. "'Gangnam Style' star trialled other animal moves". ninemsn. October 17, 2012. Archived from the original on October 18, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Park, Ju-min (August 14, 2012). "Uncool Korean star goes viral with rapping dance". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. Retrieved September 26, 2012. "Psy releases second MV teaser for 'Gangnam Style'". Allkpop. Retrieved November 8, 2012. "싸이-유재석, 불꽃 튀는 '댄스 배틀 영상' 공개". Gaon Chart. July 14, 2012. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 12, 2014. Psy (July 11, 2012). "PSY – GANGNAM STYLE (강남스타일) Teaser No. 1" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2012. Allocca, Kevin. "'Gangnam Style' Is Your International Hit of the Month". YouTube Trends. Retrieved September 28, 2012. "Gangnam Style: Das beliebteste YouTube-Video aller Zeiten". Augsburger Allgemeine (in German). Mediengruppe Pressedruck. September 26, 2012. Retrieved October 7, 2012. Lischka, Konrad (March 31, 2009). "YouTube sperrt Musikvideos in Deutschland". Spiegel Online (in German). Spiegel Verlag. Retrieved October 7, 2012. "GEMA press statement regarding agreement with YouTube". gema.de. December 31, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Gangnam fever 'just the beginning' for new Korean wave". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved October 21, 2012.[dead link] Ravina, Mark. "Introduction: Conceptualizing the Korean Wave" (PDF). Southeast Review of Asian Studies (SERAS). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 11, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Lee, Woo-young. "K-pop as gateway to Korean culture". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on September 28, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Seabrook, John (October 2012). "Cultural technology and the making of K-Pop". The New Yorker. Retrieved October 19, 2012. Russell, Mark. "The Gangnam Phenom". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Oh, Esther. "K-Pop taking over the world? Don't make me laugh". CNN. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Sang-Hun, Choe; Russell, Mark (March 4, 2012). "Using Social Media to Bring Korean Pop Music to the West.html". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Sekoff, Hallie (August 1, 2012). "PSY's 'Gangnam Style': K-Pop Star's Viral Comeback Is Impossible to Resist (VIDEO)". Huffington Post. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Johnson, Boris (December 23, 2012). "How Gangnam Style and Fifty Shades gave culture a spanking". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2012. Copsey, Robert (September 20, 2012). "Psy: 'Gangnam Style' – Single review". Digital Spy. Hearst Magazines UK. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2012. Lester, Paul (September 13, 2012). "New band of the day – Psy (No 1,350)". The Guardian. London. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Myers, Robert (September 13, 2012). "New on the Hot 100 This Week: Taylor Swift's 'Ronan', PSY's 'Gangnam Style', and More". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on September 17, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "'Gangnam Style' Sees Veteran Singer Psy Leapfrog K-Pop Bands". The Chosun Ilbo. August 13, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2012. Cho, Chung-un (September 17, 2012). "Hallyu can help spread Korean: minister". The Korea Herald. Retrieved October 12, 2012. Oh, Young-jin (October 2, 2012). "Coming out on Psy". The Korea Times. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "「違和感しかない......」韓流歌手PSY「江南スタイル」日本デビュー無期限延期の裏事情". Yahoo! Japan. October 10, 2012. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "Chinese embrace 'Gangnam Style,' Japanese kept in the dark". The Dong-a Ilbo. October 6, 2012. Retrieved October 22, 2012. Takaku, Jun. "Maybe not yet big in Japan, but Psy already a sensation in the U.S". The Asahi Shimbun. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2012. Ho, Erica (October 15, 2012). "'Gangnam Style': Is Japan Immune to PSY Mania?". Time. Retrieved November 15, 2012. "Psy says Gary is to blame for the explicit lyrics in his album?". Allkpop. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "PSY Releases MV for 'Gangnam Style'". Soompi. July 16, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. Stawski, Simon and Martina (July 23, 2012). "Psy – Gangnam Style: Kpop Music Monday". Eatyourkimchi. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "K-pop diplomacy: South Korea's soft power goes Gangnam Style". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "The Stream : K-pop diplomacy". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2012. "Justin Bieber to record US version of Psy's 'Gangnam Style'?". MediaCorp Interactive. August 14, 2012. Archived from the original on November 23, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. While the music video has been viewed over 28 million times on video sharing site YouTube, and has been praised for its catchy rhythm as well as its wacky 'horse dance', not everyone is impressed – his detractors have labelled his music vulgar. Mahdawi, Arwa (September 24, 2012). "What's so funny about Gangnam Style?". The Guardian. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "From Korean pop music to skydiving to Earth – not-your-typical diplomatic meetings for UN Secretary-General". United Nations. October 24, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Bellini, Jerrett (October 15, 2012). "Apparently This Matters: R.I.P., 'Gangnam Style'". CNN. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "Gangnam Style is the latest craze to sweep across dancefloors". News.com.au. September 22, 2012. Archived from the original on December 28, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. McKenzie, David (December 17, 2012). "Gangnam Migration: Regression-Discontinuity Impacts of Migrating to Korea". World Bank. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "Johnson Space Center Pathways Interns Create 'Gangnam Style' Parody". NASA. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Locker, Melissa (August 22, 2012). "WATCH: Psy Brings 'Gangnam Style' to Dodger Stadium". Time. Retrieved September 26, 2012. "Rapper living 'Gangnam Style' goes viral". CNN. August 3, 2012. "Dank Katy Perry: US-Erfolg für koreanischen Sänger Psy". Der Spiegel (in German). Spiegel Verlag. August 24, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Judkis, Marua (August 23, 2012). "'Gangnam Style's invisible horse dance craze: Giddyup". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Knopper, Steve (September 5, 2012). "On the Charts: 'Gangnam Style' Is All the Rage". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 13, 2012. Fekadu, Mesfin (August 23, 2012). "Viral clip gives Korea's PSY a pop culture moment". Huffington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 27, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2012. Buchanan, Matt; Ellis, Scott (August 28, 2012). "Hit video may have a subversive message". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved September 14, 2012. This is an almost Dada-esque series of vignettes that make no sense at all to most Western eyes. Psy spits in the air while a child breakdances, sings to horses, strolls through a hurricane that shoots whipped cream in his face, there's [sic] explosions, a disco bus, he rides a merry-go-round, dances on boats, beaches, in car parks and in elevators and generally makes you wonder if you have accidentally taken someone else's medication. Netburn, Deborah (August 28, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' live: New Psy video blows up on YouTube". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 26, 2012. I think we can all agree that K-Pop singer Psy's music video 'Gangnam Style' is one of the greatest videos ever to be uploaded to YouTube. Fisher, Max (August 23, 2012). "Gangnam Style, Dissected: The Subversive Message Within South Korea's Music Video Sensation". The Atlantic. Atlantic Media Company. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "Invisible Horse Dance: The Business of 'Gangnam Style'". Knowledge@Wharton High School. University of Pennsylvania. September 27, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2012. The signature move of the video has been called the 'invisible horse dance' because it mimics a bouncing/riding movement with hand gestures of alternating holding reigns and lassoing. Garibaldi, Christina (September 17, 2012). "Psy Breaks Down Greatest Assets of 'Gangnam Style'". MTV News. Retrieved October 3, 2012. Knopper, Steve (September 14, 2012). "Breaking down Psy's 'Gangnam Style'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 19, 2012. Hong, Grace Danbi (May 8, 2013). "Fujii Mina to be Shinhwa's Lady in 'This Love' MV". enewsWorld. CJ E&M. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013. The Ellen DeGeneres Show (September 10, 2012). "Surprise! Britney Learns 'Gangnam Style' from Psy!" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Surh, Jung-min (August 8, 2012). "'Gangnam style' goes viral". The Hankyoreh. The Hankyoreh Newspaper Corp. Retrieved August 10, 2012. Ramstad, Evan (August 3, 2012). "What's Up with the 'Gangnam Style' Video?". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "There's No 'Gangnam' Seen in Psy's 'Gangnam Style' MV?!". KpopStarz. September 12, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. 안종훈 (August 23, 2012). "싸이 '강남스타일' 뮤직비디오 촬영지 인기". No Cut News (in Korean). Retrieved November 3, 2012. "Who's the dancing kid in Psy's 'Gangnam Style' MV?". Allkpop. August 29, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Lee, Sungeun. "'Little Psy', 7, Grabs 'Gangnam Style' Spotlight". ABC News. Retrieved November 25, 2012. Ramstad, Evan (August 6, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' Video Brings Attention to Fan Reaction Videos Too". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 20, 2012. Ramstad, Evan (September 7, 2012). "Canadians in South Korea fund expansion of popular website". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "Words cannot even describe how amazing this video is". Reddit. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2012. "T-Pain, Robbie Williams, Josh Groban, and Gawker Show Love for Psy's "Gangnam Style"". Soompi. August 1, 2012. Retrieved September 16, 2012. "Trying to Figure out which Tracks Stay on the Album". RobbieWilliams.com. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "Unohtakaa Macarena, tässä tulee hevostanssi!". Iltasanomat (in Finnish). Sanoma News. July 28, 2012. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. T-Pain. "Words cannot even describe how amazing this video is". Twitter. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2012. Zimmerman, Neetzan (July 30, 2012). "Did This Underground Hip Hop Artist from South Korea Just Release the Best Music Video of the Year?". Gawker. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved September 16, 2012. Sullivan, Andrew (August 1, 2012). "Mental Health Break". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. "Rapper living 'Gangnam Style' goes viral". CNN. August 3, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2012. @katyperry (August 21, 2012). "Help, I'm in a gangnam style k hole" (Tweet). Retrieved September 30, 2012 – via Twitter. "PSY Recreates His 'Gangnam Style' Video with Carrie and Jason". Big Morning Buzz Live. August 22, 2012. VH1. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Fekadu, Mesfin (August 27, 2012). "Wild, Crazy Style". Daily Express. Associated Press. "Charts – Music – YouTube, Most viewed videos, week of August 28, 2012". YouTube. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Popularity of Psy's 'Gangnam Style' Analyzed Realistically". KpopStarz. September 2, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2012. Allocca, Kevin (September 12, 2012). "YouTube Trends: Gangnam Style vs Call Me Maybe: A Popularity Comparison". YouTube Trends. YouTube. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Psy's 'Gangnam Style' most-viewed video on YouTube". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved November 25, 2012. T-Pain. "Words cannot even describe how amazing this video is". Twitter. Retrieved November 12, 2012. Day, Lara (September 12, 2012). "'Gangnam Style's Psy Appears on 'Ellen', Schools Britney Spears". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 21, 2012. "Tom Cruise Considering Psy as a Future Co-Star?". Mnet. CJ E&M Corporation. September 5, 2012. Archived from the original on September 9, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2012. Gordon-Levitt, Joseph [@hitRECordJoe] (September 20, 2012). "#EndlessGangamStyle #Again #AndAgain" (Tweet). Retrieved September 25, 2012 – via Twitter. Dayal, Geeta (December 15, 2012). "William Gibson on Punk Rock, Internet Memes, and 'Gangnam Style'". Wired. Retrieved December 20, 2012. "How 'Gangnam Style' Went Viral". The Wall Street Journal. August 8, 2012. Retrieved October 2, 2012. Jurgensen, John. "'Gangnam' Mania". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Hicap, Jonathan M. (September 24, 2012). "Guinness World Records Declares 'Gangnam Style' as 'Most Liked' Video in YouTube History". Manila Bulletin. Manila Bulletin Publishing. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Gruger, William (December 18, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' Leads YouTube's Top Trending Videos of 2012". Billboard. Retrieved December 24, 2012. "Gangnam Style hits one billion views on YouTube". BBC. December 21, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2012. Choi Ji-Ye (April 6, 2013). "싸이 '강남스타일', 유튜브 15억뷰…27일만에 1억 추가". mydaily. Retrieved April 6, 2013. "Top 1000 Most Viewed YouTube Videos of All Time". YouTube. Retrieved April 15, 2022. "PSY – GANGNAM STYLE(강남스타일) M/V". YouTube. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Kim, Yoon-mi (August 25, 2012). "K-pop's SNS explosion". AsiaOne. Singapore Press Holdings. Retrieved August 25, 2012. "Psy Signs to Scooter Braun's Label, Will Appear at MTV VMAs". Billboard. Retrieved September 12, 2012. Khan, Ujala Ali (August 28, 2012). "South Korean meme Gangnam Style gets 59 million hits on YouTube". The National. Abu Dhabi. Retrieved September 17, 2012. Charlton, Emma. "Psy says 'Gangnam Style' not his success". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved November 6, 2012. "Psy lands top honour in South Korea". Toronto Sun. November 6, 2012. Retrieved November 6, 2012. "2012 Top Quotes: From 'Binders Full of Women' to 'Gangnam Style'". NBC Miami (Associated Press). December 9, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2012. Yang, Jun; Shin, Saeromi. "'Gangnam Style' Link Spurs DI Surge: Chart of the Day". Bloomberg. Retrieved October 18, 2012. Saadeh, Ramy (October 15, 2012). "Short-Selling the "Gangnam Style"". Seeking Alpha. Retrieved October 18, 2012. "Ban Ki-Moon Dances to Gangnam Style with Psy (VIDEO)". The Huffington Post UK. October 24, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2012. Davies, Lizzy (October 24, 2012). "Rapper Psy brings Gangnam Style horseplay to United Nations". The Guardian. London. Retrieved October 24, 2012. MnetAmerica (August 20, 2012). "Official Mnet/Koreaboo Gangnam Style (Psy) Flash Mob Video". YouTube. Archived from the original (YouTube) on August 21, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "A Prince in Vegas and Gangnam Style". Radio National. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. September 2, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Oldenburg, Ann (September 12, 2012). "Korea's Psy teaches Britney Spears his 'Gangnam Style'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Seoul shows its 'Gangnam Style'". Euronews. October 7, 2012. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2012. "Mass 'Gangnam Style' Performance Breaks Indonesian Records". Jakarta Globe. October 15, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Mack, Eric (October 12, 2012). "Gangnam Style flash mob of 9000 strong storms Sicily". CNET. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2012. "Largest flash mob for 'Gangnam Style' gathers 20,000 people in Milan, Italy". Koreaboo. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "Psy draws thousands to 'Gangnam Style' Paris flashmob". France 24. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved November 5, 2012. "15,000 People Do PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Dance During Flash Mob in Rome". Capital FM. Retrieved November 12, 2012. United Nations. "Friday fun – Ban Ki-moon relinquishes title of most famous Korean to @psy_oppa, singer of "Gangnam Style"". Twitter. Retrieved October 20, 2012. UNICEF. "Congrats to Novak Djokovic @DjokerNole on winning the China Open – and celebrating with Gangnam Style dance". Twitter. Retrieved October 26, 2012. NASA. "It's @NASA_Johnson Style! NASA". Twitter. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Daily Press Briefing – October 3, 2012". Washington, D.C.: U.S. State Department. October 3, 2012. Retrieved October 5, 2012. Video: Daily Press Briefing – October 3, 2012. U.S. State Department. October 3, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 5, 2012. "Gag me with the Gangnam jokes". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2012. Kneezle, Sarah (October 19, 2012). "Eton Students Give 'Gangnam Style' an Old School Makeover". Time. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "Judge Sang-Hyun Song – International Criminal Court, Rule of law, Security Council, 6849th meeting". United Nations. Retrieved October 19, 2012. "Boris Johnson: David Cameron and I have danced Gangnam style". The Daily Telegraph. London. October 9, 2012. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2012. Pham, Alex. "Google CEO Larry Page Calls PSY's 'Gangnam Style' a Glimpse of 'The Future'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2012. O'Dair, Barbara. "In Case You Missed It: 'Gangam Style' Goes Gangbusters". Reader's Digest. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2012. Neal, Dave (October 18, 2012). "Swype for Android gets an updated beta, can dance Gangnam style". The Inquirer. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved October 18, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Fendrich, Howard. "'GANGNAM STYLE', OBAMA STYLE?". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Johnson, Luke (November 6, 2012). "Obama on 'Gangnam Style': 'I Think I Can Do That Move'". Huffington Post. Retrieved November 6, 2012. Tau, Bryon. "Obama: I can do 'Gangnam Style' dance". Politico. Retrieved November 6, 2012. "Barack Obama's 'Gangnam Style': Yes I Can Do That Dance". Billboard. Retrieved November 6, 2012. "Maori take on Gangnam Style in Korea". 3 News NZ. November 30, 2012. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. SRITRAIPOP, BOONCHU. "Ghost Festival-themed 'Gangnam Style' video offends Loei villagers". The Nation. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2012. "Navy 'Gangnam Style' makes choppy waves". Bangkok Post. The Post Publishing. October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. "I'm Yushin style!" (in Korean). Uriminzokkiri. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved September 27, 2012. "N. Korea takes 'Gangnam Style' shot at South politician". The Straits Times. August 20, 2012. Retrieved September 20, 2012. Kwon, K. J.; Mullen, Jethro (September 20, 2012). "North Korean video evokes 'Gangnam Style' to taunt South Korean candidate". CNN. Retrieved September 25, 2012. "Ai Weiwei goes 'Gangnam Style' _ with handcuffs". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved October 25, 2012. Foster Klug And Hyung-Jin Kim (February 24, 2013). "First female SKorean president faces NKorea crisis – Yahoo! News". News.yahoo.com. Retrieved February 25, 2013. "Anish Kapoor's Gangnam style youtube film for Ai WeiWei". Amnesty International UK. November 21, 2012. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2013. Fisher, Max. "Video: Gangnam Style plus Tibetan independence plus bobblehead Xi Jinping". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 9, 2012. Baillie, Mike. "Going Gangnam, Greenpeace Style". Greenpeace. Retrieved December 20, 2012. "South Korea picked as HQ of new U.N. Green Climate Fund". CNBC. Retrieved October 21, 2012.[dead link] "GCF Songdo Style by Psy". Green Growth Korea. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2012. "Psy appears in video promoting S. Korea's bid to host GCF Secretariat". The Korea Times. Retrieved October 20, 2012. "Press advisory: Republic of Korea selected to host the Green Climate Fund" (PDF). Green Climate Fund. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 15, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2012. Tina G. Santos (December 8, 2012). "DOH anticracker drive launched Gangnam style". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Sheila Crisostomo (December 28, 2012). "Tugonon, DOH chief dance Gangnam Style for anti-firecracker drive". The Philippine Star. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Aaron B. Recuenco (December 26, 2012). "Beware Of 'Gangnam Bomb,' 'Goodbye Bading'". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2012. "Police fret over 'Gangnam Bomb' firecracker". GMA News. December 27, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Fox, Ben. "A lesson in pop culture via Guantanamo". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2012. More surprising still was the content: quirky notes peppered with references to Howard Stern, Fox News and the global video hit of South Korean singer Psy. "Dear Mr. Warner", he wrote. "I like this new song Gangnam Style. I want to do the dance for you but cannot because of my shackles." "DYESS KOMICS". Dyess Air Force Base. Archived from the original on February 17, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2012. Locker, Melissa (October 2, 2012). "WATCH: Filipino Prisoners Go 'Gangnam Style'". Time. Hernandez, Brian Anthony (October 1, 2012). "Prison Inmates Perform 'Gangnam Style' in Pouring Rain". Mashable. "Gangnam Style – Cody Simpson, Victoria Duffield and Crew". YouTube. September 14, 2012. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2012. "BIGBANG's Seungri – Challenged PSY's Gangnam Style" (YouTube). YouTube. August 21, 2012. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2012. Latino (September 17, 2012). "Latino – Despedida de solteiro (Laçar, Puxar, Beijar)". YouTube. Archived from the original (YouTube) on September 27, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012. "Teens react to Gangnam Style". YouTube. August 19, 2012. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2012. "PSY싸이 – GANGNAM STYLE (강남스타일) Waveya 웨이브야 Korean dance team – WAVEYA2011 ♥ Waveya | Worlds #1 Korean DanceSlut Sisters". Waveya | Worlds #1 Korean DanceSlut Sisters. August 15, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Barely Political (September 21, 2012). "PSY – GANGNAM STYLE (강남스타일) PARODY! KIM JONG STYLE! | Key of Awesome No. 63" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Tampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders (September 23, 2012). "Captain Fear & Tampa Bay Buccaneers Cheerleaders – Gangnam Style" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2012. Bennettsmith, Meredith (October 29, 2012). "MIT 'Chomsky Style' Best Gangnam Parody Yet? Noted Intellectual Steals The Wacky Show (VIDEO)". Huffington Post. Retrieved December 11, 2012. "MIT Gangnam Style: gone viral". Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved December 6, 2012. JTA (November 24, 2015). "Watch: The Maccabeats Release New Holiday Video". Retrieved March 22, 2017. The Ohio University Marching 110 (September 22, 2012). "Ohio University Marching 110 – Gangnam Style" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Ballingall, Alex (September 27, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' parody by York University student goes viral". Toronto Star. Craggs, Samantha (October 3, 2012). "McMaster University goes Gangnam Style in video parody". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. UIUC Physics Gangnam Style, archived from the original on November 2, 2021, retrieved May 19, 2021 Laundry, Lauren. "Berklee Alum's 'Gangnam Style' Sparks Awkward Dartmouth & Boston University Parody Videos". BostInno. "Stanford University Flash Mob – Gangnam Style Parody (Official Version)". CNN. October 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 21, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2012. Larson, Kathryn (September 24, 2012). "U-M Embraces 'Gangnam Style' with Flash Mob". CBSLocal. Miriam, Kramer (December 17, 2012). "NASA spoofs 'Gangnam Style' video". NBC News. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Hit Viral Song Goes NASA Style!". The Weather Channel. December 18, 2012. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. ESA. "We like RT @NASA_Johnson: NASA goes '#Gangnam Style' in new video from @NASAJSCStudents". Twitter. Retrieved December 18, 2012. SETI Institute. "NASA also does 'Gangnam Style'. An educational parody to promote NASA Johnson work which includes 3 real astronauts". Twitter. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Goodman, William (October 3, 2012). "West Point Military Academy accepts the 'Gangnam Style' challenge". CBS News. "Army cadets go 'Gangnam Style' on hallowed battle versus Navy". MSN Now. October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Goodman, William (October 20, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' craziness continues (with a dancing robot and Merchant Marines)". CBS News. Taylor, Chris (September 18, 2012). "Hey, Sexy Sailors: Navy Officer Cadets Do 'Gangnam Style' [VIDEO]". Mashable. Grossman, Samantha (September 19, 2012). "Watch: Navy Midshipmen Perform 'Gangnam Style' Lip Dub". Time. Goodman, William. "Air Force Academy joins in on the 'Gangnam Style' challenge". CBS News. Retrieved October 31, 2012. "MSVU, RMC produce 'Gangnam Style' parody videos". Academia Group. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2012. "PSY's 'Gangnam Style' big hit among US troops". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Retrieved October 27, 2012. "实拍：超萌海警版《江南style》". China News. Retrieved October 31, 2012. "Navy 'Gangnam Style' makes choppy waves". Bangkok Post. The Post Publishing. October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Tim Morrison (October 3, 2012). "Mitt Romney vs. Barack Obama: Whose 'Gangnam Style' Parody Video Is Better?". Time. Retrieved November 13, 2012. Almeida, Inês (October 11, 2012). "Já temos o nosso "Gangnam Style" e chama-se "Gamar com Style"". Público. Retrieved April 14, 2014. Jason Shu (March 28, 2013). "Conjugation Style: In French, Conjugating -er Verbs is Very, Very Easy". YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2013. "[PSYTP] OPPA GODDAMN STYLE". YouTube. October 11, 2012. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2020. Kim, Jea (August 25, 2012). "KOREAN MUSIC: Psy Sings Gangnam Style Live". My Dear Korea. Blogger. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2012. "30,000 Fans Enjoy Psy's Successful 'Summer Stand' Concert". KpopStarz. August 11, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Hewitt, Giles (October 5, 2012). "Psy brings 'Gangnam Style' home with free show". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved October 5, 2012. Jackson, Julie (October 4, 2012). "'Oppa' delivers Seoul-style performance". The Korea Herald. Retrieved October 5, 2012. "Psy to Add Excitement to Formula One Korean Grand Prix". The Chosun Ilbo. The Chosun Ilbo Company. September 20, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. "Mark Webber and Sebastian Vettel Bust Out the Gangnam Style with Psy (VIDEO/PICTURES)". The Huffington Post UK. October 15, 2012. Retrieved October 20, 2012. "'Billion Style' for Psy on YouTube". Bangkok Post. December 22, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2013. "Psy to Perform at Thai King's Birthday Bash". The Chosun Ilbo. November 23, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2013. Benjamin, Jeff (December 2, 2012). "PSY, HyunA & Adam Lambert Rock MAMAs: Video Highlights". Billboard. Retrieved December 2, 2012. Sim, Fann (December 2, 2012). "PSY rocks to "Gangnam Style" with 4,000 fans at MBS". Yahoo! Entertainment. Yahoo! Asia Pacific Pte Ltd. Retrieved January 8, 2013. Mok, Opalyn (February 11, 2013). "Psy wows crowd at Penang BN Chinese New Year party". The Malaysian Insider. Archived from the original on February 13, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2013. Daniels, Colin (October 16, 2012). "Mel B dances 'Gangnam Style' with Psy". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 30, 2021. van den Broeke, Leigh; Matheson, Matheson (October 17, 2012). "Psy goes Gangnam Style with Wolverine and fans wait for hours to see his TV performance". Herald Sun. Retrieved October 17, 2012. "Psy draws thousands to 'Gangnam Style' Paris flashmob". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved August 1, 2015. Brant, Emma (August 11, 2012). "Psy accepts record for YouTube Gangnam Style likes". BBC. Retrieved December 24, 2012. "Stefan Raab im 'Gangnam Style': Psy versetzt Stefan in Schwingung" (in German). Prosieben. Archived from the original on November 17, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2012. Wolkoff, Carly (November 12, 2012). "PSY Takes Over EMA 2012 with Army of 'Gangnam Style' Clones". MTV. Retrieved November 18, 2012. "Psy garners three awards in France". AsiaOne. Archived from the original on June 11, 2015. Retrieved January 30, 2013. The singer enjoyed much publicity from the French media. He walked the red carpet in a limousine with a group of beauties, started his Gangnam Style there and led his performance and camera team inside the concert hall to finish his choreography on stage. Fans got a taste of the PSY sensation in a Dance Cam. Major League Baseball. August 22, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2012. officialpsy (August 28, 2012). "PSY – VH1 Morning Buzz Live with Carrie and Jason" (YouTube). YouTube. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "Who Was That VMA Surprise Guest Psy?". MTV News. September 6, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Bleaney, Rob (September 13, 2012). "Britney, Gangnam style! Watch YouTube sensation PSY teach Britney how to ride the horse in multi-million viewed viral". Daily Mirror. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Britney Spears Learns Psy's 'Gangnam Style' on Ellen". MTV News. September 11, 2012. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Kim, Eun Kyung (September 14, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' rapper PSY horses around on TODAY". ToyotaConcertSeries.Today.com. NBCUniversal Media. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Carbone, Nick (September 14, 2012). "New York City Goes Gangnam Style: PSY Rocks the 'Today' Show". Time. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Blas, Lorena (September 16, 2012). "Psy brings 'Gangnam Style' to 'SNL'". USA Today. Retrieved September 16, 2012. Gruger, William (September 28, 2012). "PSY Rules Social 50 Chart for Fifth Straight Week". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved November 17, 2012. "Psy in Las Vegas for 'iHeartRadio Music Festival 2012' with Ryan Seacrest!". KpopStarz. September 22, 2012. Retrieved September 24, 2012. Kaufman, Gil. "Madonna Goes 'Gangnam Style' With Psy". MTV. Retrieved November 14, 2012. "PSY Performs 'Gangnam Style' with Madonna". MTV Networks. November 14, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012. Greenwald, David (November 18, 2012). "AMAs 2012: Justin Bieber, Nicki Minaj Top Exuberant Night". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved November 19, 2012. Lipshutz, Jason (November 19, 2012). "AMAs 2012: Top 5 Best Performances". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved November 20, 2012. "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno: Episode Guide". NBC. NBCUniversal. November 22, 2012. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved November 23, 2012. "Photos: KIIS FM's Jingle Ball 2012". The Denver Post. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on December 7, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2013. Richards, Chris (December 10, 2012). "A penitent Psy brings 'Gangnam Style' to Washington". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 2, 2013. Katz, Michael (December 17, 2012). "Bills vs Seahawks: Streaker, Psy halftime show make for best-possible Bills experience". USA Today. Retrieved December 24, 2012. Kukil Bora (January 1, 2013). "New Year's Eve 2013 Times Square Photos: Psy's 'Gangnam Style,' Ryan Seacrest And Thousands Of Colorful New Yorkers". The International Business Times Inc. Retrieved June 15, 2014. "Psy takes Gangnam Style to Times Square stage for New Year celebrations". Metro. Associated Newspapers Limited. January 1, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2013. Wood, Mikael (December 31, 2012). "Psy threatens to retire 'Gangnam Style' on New Year's Eve". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 1, 2013. "Psy performs 'Gangnam Style' at Rio Carnival". The Korea Herald. February 10, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2013. Chace, Zoe. "Gangnam Style: Three Reasons K-Pop Is Taking Over The World". NPR.org. NPR. Retrieved December 3, 2012. "Korean pop rides 'Gangnam Style' into U.S. music scene". Reuters. November 30, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2012. "Frances Moore's address to the International Anti-Counterfeiting Forum, Moscow". International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2012. Thomas, David (October 7, 2012). "South Korea: a rough guide to Gangnam style". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Strum, Beckie. "Lebanon rides out the Gangnam Style wave". Daily Star. Retrieved December 3, 2012. Soutphommasane, Tim (October 8, 2012). "Gangnam points to our future". Brisbane Times. Retrieved October 8, 2012. Sherwin, Adam (November 12, 2012). "Gangnam Style isn't a one-off – Major music industry report says future pop sensations will be YouTube-driven globalised acts from Asia and South America". The Independent. London. Retrieved November 12, 2012. The South Korean government has announced that Psy's hit had brought in $13.4 million to the country's audio sector and promised a drive to export further examples of the country's burgeoning "K-Pop" industry. "Services account surplus expected this year due to K-pop". Korea.net. Retrieved November 22, 2012. Seabrook, John. "Cultural technology and the making of K-pop". The New Yorker. Retrieved December 3, 2012. Carey, Sean. "2 Could 'Gangnam style' be a game-changer for the international music scene?". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2012. Sherwin, Adam (November 12, 2012). "Gangnam Style isn't a one-off – Major music industry report says future pop sensations will be YouTube-driven globalised acts from Asia and South America". The Independent. London. Retrieved December 2, 2012. YOUKYUNG LEE; RYAN NAKASHIMA. "Cashing in on Gangnam Style's YouTube fame". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2013. Evers, Kevin. "Morning Advantage: How Gangnam Style Changed Billboard's Old-School Ways". Harvard Business Review. Archived from the original on December 3, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2012. Diamond, Jason (November 16, 2012). "From Jukeboxes to YouTube: How Billboard Is Catching Up With The Times". The New Republic. Retrieved December 2, 2012. lane, Dan (January 14, 2013). "Pop is still the UK's favourite genre of music!". The Official UK Charts Company. The British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes (U.S.) – Music – PSY – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes (U.S.). December 17, 2015. Retrieved September 6, 2012. "iTunes (U.S.) – Music – PSY – Gangnam Style / 2 Legit 2 Quit Mashup (feat. MC Hammer) – Single". iTunes (U.S.). November 19, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2015. "iTunes (U.S.) – Music – PSY – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) [Remix Style] – EP". iTunes (U.S.). March 5, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2015. "MTV 2012 MTV EMA Winners". MTV. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2012. "Psy to Perform (and Pick Up a Prize) at the American Music Awards". People. November 13, 2012. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2012. Eun, Elizabeth (November 30, 2012). "Big Bang, Super Junior and Psy each take home a grand prize at this year's 'MAMA'". Mnet Media. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved November 30, 2012. Younie, Chris (December 1, 2012). "Robbie Williams wins Best Video at 4Music's Video Honours 2012". 4Music. Channel 4. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2013. 이은정 (December 14, 2012). "싸이·비스트, MMA서 각각 4관왕·3관왕" (in Korean). Yonhapnews. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Capricho Awards 2102: Internet". Capricho (in Portuguese). Editora Abril. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved January 22, 2013. "People's Choice Awards 2013 – Nominees". P&G Productions, Inc. November 15, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2012. "PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Wins Korean Top Song Award". Billboard. January 17, 2013. Retrieved January 18, 2013. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) MEHIDI, Samia (January 26, 2013). "PSY, One Direction, Rihanna... : découvrez tous les gagnants des NRJ Music Awards 2013 !". TF1 (in French). Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. Goodacre, Kate (January 22, 2013). "NME Awards 2013: All the nominees in full". Digital Spy. National Magazine Company Ltd. Retrieved January 22, 2013. "2013 Korean Music Awards winners: General field" (in Korean). 한국대중음악상 선정위원회. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2013. "2013 Korean Music Awards nominees: Genre awards" (in Korean). 한국대중음악상 선정위원회. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2013. "2013 Kids' Choice Awards nominees & winners". Nickelodeon. Viacom International Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "2013 Billboard Music Awards Finalists: Top Streaming Song (Video)". Billboard.com. Retrieved April 22, 2013. "2013 Billboard Music Awards Finalists: Top Rap Song". Billboard.com. Retrieved April 22, 2013. "2013 Billboard Music Awards Finalists: Top Dance Song". Billboard.com. Retrieved April 22, 2013. "World's Best Song Nominees". worldmusicawards.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2013. "World's Best Video Nominees". worldmusicawards.com. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2013. "싸이, 방송 불참에도 카라 꺾고 '뮤뱅' 1위..벌써 4번째 트로피" [Psy beats Kara and takes first place on 'Music Bank' despite not attending broadcast.. Already his 4th trophy]. Herald POP (in Korean). Naver. September 14, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2024. "싸이, 단 한번 안나간 '뮤뱅' 석달 1위..'왜?'" [Psy, No. 1 on 'Music Bank' for three months without appearing even once.. 'Why?']. Osen (in Korean). Naver. November 18, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2024. '뮤직뱅크' 싸이, '강남스타일'로 1위 재탈환 ['Music Bank' Psy regains first place with 'Gangnam Style']. Xports News (in Korean). Naver. November 30, 2012. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. 싸이 '강남스타일', '뮤직뱅크' 결산 K차트 1위 [Psy's 'Gangnam Style' takes first place on 'Music Bank' K Chart]. Star News (in Korean). Naver. December 21, 2012. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "싸이 '강남스타일' 질주 언제까지? '뮤직뱅크' 또 1위" [How long will Psy's 'Gangnam Style' run last? Takes first place on 'Music Bank' again]. Xports News (in Korean). Naver. December 31, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2024. 싸이, '뮤직뱅크' 새해 첫 1위 주인공...'총 16번' [Psy, first winner of the new year on 'Music Bank'... '16 times in total']. Osen (in Korean). Naver. January 4, 2013. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2021. "싸이, '엠카'서 1위…트리플크라운 달성" [Psy takes first place on ‘M Countdown’… Triple Crown achieved]. My Daily (in Korean). Naver. September 6, 2012. Retrieved December 30, 2020. "'Gangnam Style' holds guinness world record for most 'liked' video in youtube history". Guinness World Records. September 20, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2012. "Psy's 'Gangnam Style' MV becomes Most Liked Video in YouTube History". Allkpop. Retrieved November 2, 2012. "South Korean rapper Psy tops UK chart". BBC News. September 30, 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "Official Singles Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 2012-09-30. Lipshutz, Jason. "PSY's 'Gangnam Style' Passes Justin Bieber's 'Baby' for YouTube Crown". Billboard. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "Gangnam Style hits a billion views on YouTube". Radio Netherlands Worldwide (ANP/AFP). ANP/AFP. December 21, 2012. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved December 21, 2012. The view counter attached to "Gangnam Style", which was only posted on the video-sharing site July 15, clicked over into 10 figures at around 1550 GMT, confirming its status as the most viewed video in the site's history. "YouTube Announces 2B Views Of #GangnamStyle On Twitter". YouTube. May 31, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2014. @psy_oppa's #GangnamStyle just became the first YouTube video to hit 2 billion views! "PSY Gangnam Style Video Crosses 2 Billion Views on YouTube". vlogg.com. May 31, 2014. Retrieved September 23, 2021. Watch page archives from Wayback Machine: 2014-07-01; 2014-08-01 "50 Best Songs of 2012: No. 25 Psy, 'Gangnam Style'". Rolling Stone. December 5, 2012. Retrieved December 29, 2012. "SPIN's 40 Best Songs of 2012: No. 8 PSY – "Gnagnam Style"". Spin. December 10, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Benjamin, Jeff; Oak, Jessica (December 21, 2012). "20 Best K-pop Songs of 2012: BIGBANG, PSY, 2NE1 & More". Billboard. Retrieved December 29, 2012. MTV News staff (December 10, 2012). "Best Songs Of 2012". Viacom International Inc. Retrieved December 29, 2012. "Listen to Time's Top 10 Songs of 2012 Playlist". Time. December 4, 2012. Retrieved December 29, 2012. Wolk, Douglas (December 4, 2012). "Top 10 Songs: #2 PSY, "Gangnam Style"". Time. Retrieved December 29, 2012. "Popcast: Best Songs of 2012". The New York Times. December 21, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2013. "Photos/Top 10 Pop Songs of 2012: No. 1 PSY, "Gangnam Style"". E!. Retrieved January 1, 2013. Copsey, Robert; Corner, Lewis (December 29, 2012). "20 best singles of 2012 (20–11)". Digital Spy. National Magazine Company Ltd. Retrieved January 2, 2013. "Pazz+Jop 2012, Singles — All Votes". The Village Voice. Retrieved January 31, 2013. Christgau, Robert (January 14, 2013). "The Dean's List 2012". Barnes and Noble Review. Barnes and Noble. Locker, Melissa (December 18, 2012). "9 Best Music Videos of 2012: No. 1 PSY, "Gangnam Style"". Time. Retrieved December 31, 2012. "Best Music Videos of 2012: Psy, "Gangnam Style"". Rolling Stone. December 7, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Corner, Lewis (December 27, 2012). "10 top pop music videos of 2012: David Guetta, Gangnam Style and more". Digital Spy. Hearst Magazines UK. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Lipshutz, Jason (December 18, 2012). "Madonna Rules Billboard.com's Readers Poll 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 2, 2013. "'Gangnam Style' revealed as most popular New Year's Eve track". NME. January 2, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2013. Dex, Robert (January 2, 2013). "Auld Lang Syne ditched for Gangnam Style as Psy tops New Year's Eve karaoke chart". The Independent. London. Retrieved January 4, 2013. "CNN Readers Pick the Best of 2012". Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. December 17, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Meslow, Scott (December 26, 2012). "The 13 biggest pop culture moments of 2012". The Week. The Week Publications, Inc. Retrieved January 3, 2013. Geller, Wendy (December 19, 2012). "Drama! Fights! Love! Gangnam Style! 2012's Most Viral Moments In Music". Yahoo! Inc. Retrieved January 3, 2013. "The 2012 Top 20 Music Moments". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 10, 2013. "We never thought a video would be watched in numbers greater than a 32-bit". December 1, 2014. Archived from the original on February 8, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Gangnam Style music video 'broke' YouTube view limit". BBC. December 4, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. South Korea Restricts Music in Gyms to Fight Covid – Newsendip "South Korean Gaon Chart – Week: July 15, 2012 to July 21, 2012" (in Korean). Gaon Chart. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 12, 2014. "South Korean Gaon Chart: Online download – July 15, 2012 to July 21, 2012". Gaon Chart. Korea Music Content Industry Association. July 21, 2012. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 12, 2014. 강수진 (August 26, 2012). 가온주간차트: 싸이, 5주연속 1위 독주 태세. The Kyunghyang Shinmun (in Korean). Kyunghyang Co. Retrieved January 5, 2013. 박세완 (September 7, 2012). '엠카운트다운' 싸이, 강남스타일로 트리플크라운 달성!. OBS News (in Korean). OBS Gyeongin TV. Retrieved January 5, 2013. OBS news staff (January 4, 2012). 뮤직뱅크 새해 첫 1위, 싸이 '강남스타일' 16주 동안 정상. OBS News (in Korean). OBS Gyeongin TV. Retrieved January 5, 2013. "Online download – 2012 Year End Chart". Gaon Chart (in Korean). Korea Music Content Industry Association. Archived from the original on July 16, 2014. Retrieved October 12, 2014. "Korea K-Pop Hot 100, Week of 28 July, 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved August 20, 2012. "Korea K-Pop Hot 100, Week of August 4, 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved August 20, 2012. "Korea K-Pop Hot 100, Week of September 2, 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved August 25, 2012. Benjamin, Jeff (January 4, 2013). "K-Pop Hot 100: Lee Seung Gi Makes Chart History". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 5, 2013. "Best of 2012 – Billboard Korea K-Pop Hot 100". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Psy – Gangnam Style". Top 40 Singles. Retrieved 2012-09-14. 3 News online staff (September 25, 2012). "Gangnam Style is NZ #1". 3 News. MediaWorks TV. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "New Zealand single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". Recorded Music NZ. Retrieved January 21, 2013. "Top Selling Singles of 2012 – The Official New Zealand Music Chart". Recording Industry Association of New Zealand (RIANZ). Retrieved January 21, 2013. "Psy – Gangnam Style". ARIA Top 50 Singles. Retrieved 2012-09-30. Ryan, Gavin (November 4, 2012). "PSY Tops ARIA Singles For 6th Week". Noise11. Archived from the original on November 24, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2013. Ryan, Gavin (September 30, 2012). "Guy Sebastian PSY Fi'd Off Top Of ARIA Chart". Noise11. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2013. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 2013 Singles". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2013. "ARIA Charts – End Of Year Charts – Top 100 Singles 2012". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved January 8, 2013. "Psy – Gangnam Style". Tracklisten. Retrieved 2012-09-21. "Certificeringer | ifpi.dk" (in Danish). IFPI Denmark. Retrieved February 1, 2013. Zywietz, Tobias. "Chart Log UK: New Entries Update (1.09.2012 – week 34)". Zobbel.de. Retrieved September 4, 2012. Kreisler, Lauren (September 16, 2012). "Gangnam Style breaks into the UK Official Singles Chart Top 40". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved September 30, 2012. Lane, Dan (January 2, 2013). "The Official Top 40 Biggest Selling Singles Of 2012 revealed!". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved January 2, 2013. Lane, Dan (January 5, 2013). "The Top 40 most streamed tracks of 2012 revealed". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved January 7, 2013. Lane, Dan (February 8, 2013). "Gangnam Style gallops to over a million sales in the UK!". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved April 10, 2013. Lane, Daniel (April 9, 2013). "1 billionth singles download is sold in the UK!". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved April 10, 2013. "Psy – Gangnam Style (2-track)" (in German). GfK Entertainment charts. Retrieved 2012-10-24. "Gold-/Platin-Datenbank (Psy; 'Gangnam Style')" (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie. Retrieved April 25, 2018. "Psy – Gangnam Style" (in German). Ö3 Austria Top 40. Retrieved 2012-10-11. "Psy – Gangnam Style" (in Dutch). Ultratop 50. "Psy – Gangnam Style" (in French). Ultratop 50. "ČNS IFPI" (in Czech). Hitparáda – Radio Top 100 Oficiální. IFPI Czech Republic. Note: Change the chart to CZ – RADIO – TOP 100 and insert 201242 into search. Retrieved 2012-10-23. "Psy: Gangnam Style" (in Finnish). Musiikkituottajat. Retrieved 2012-10-01. "Psy – Gangnam Style" (in French). Les classement single. Retrieved 2012-10-08. "FIMI – Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana". Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "Psy – Gangnam Style" (in Dutch). Single Top 100. Retrieved 2012-12-01. "Topp 20 Single uke 39, 2012 – VG-lista. Offisielle hitlister fra og med 1958" (in Norwegian). VG-lista. Retrieved 2012-09-28. "Official Scottish Singles Sales Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 2012-09-30. "Psy – Gangnam Style" Canciones Top 50. Retrieved 2012-12-31. "Psy – Gangnam Style". Swiss Singles Chart. Retrieved 2012-10-04. "Chart Track: Week 40, 2012". Irish Singles Chart. Retrieved 2012-10-25. "Psy – Gangnam Style". Singles Top 100. Retrieved 2012-09-23. "Archívum – Slágerlisták – MAHASZ" (in Hungarian). Rádiós Top 40 játszási lista. Magyar Hanglemezkiadók Szövetsége. Retrieved 2012-11-01. "ČNS IFPI" (in Slovak). Hitparáda – Radio Top 100 Oficiálna. IFPI Czech Republic. Note: insert 201247 into search. Retrieved 2012-11-27. Trust, Gary (September 14, 2012). "Weekly Chart Notes: Psy Adds 'Style' to the Hot 100". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved September 18, 2012. Trust, Gary (September 19, 2012). "Maroon 5 Reaches No. 1 on Hot 100 with 'One More Night'". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved September 19, 2012. Trust, Gary (September 26, 2012). "Maroon 5 Still Tops Hot 100, PSY One Step from No. 1". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved September 26, 2012. Trust, Gary (November 7, 2012). "Maroon 5 Spends Eighth Week Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 5, 2013. Trust, Gary (October 31, 2012). "Maroon 5, PSY Spend a Sixth Week in Hot 100's Top Spots". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Trust, Gary (November 14, 2012). "Maroon 5's 'One More Night' Ties for Hot 100's Longest Lead This Year". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved November 14, 2012. Trust, Gary (November 28, 2012). "Rihanna Scores Double Domination Atop Hot 100, Billboard 200". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Grein, Paul (November 28, 2012). "Week Ending Nov. 25, 2012. Songs: Phillip Phillips Is "Home"". Yahoo! Music. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Trust, Gary (December 12, 2012). "Bruno Mars Makes 'Heaven'-ly Ascent to No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved December 12, 2012. Trust, Gary (December 12, 2012). "Bruno Mars Has Top Hot 100 Spot 'Locked' Up Again". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Trust, Gary (January 3, 2013). "Bruno Mars 'Locked' at No. 1 on Hot 100, Taylor Swift Closing In". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 3, 2013. "Billboard Hot 100: The week of January 26, 2013". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 18, 2013. "Billboard Hot Digital Songs: The week of January 26, 2013". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 18, 2013. Billboard staff (February 20, 2013). "Hot 100 News: Billboard and Nielsen Add YouTube Video Streaming to Platforms". Billboard. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Grein, Paul (February 20, 2013). "Week Ending Feb. 17, 2013. Songs: "Harlem Shake" Debuts At #1". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo! Inc. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Pietroluongo, Silvio (October 11, 2012). "Taylor Swift, Rihanna & PSY Buoyed by Billboard Chart Changes". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Billboard Hot Rap Songs: The week of January 12, 2013". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Psy Chart History (Dance Club Songs)". Billboard. Retrieved 2013-04-23. "American single certifications – PSY – Gangnam Style". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original (If necessary, click Advanced, then click Format, then select Single, then click SEARCH) on January 4, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "The Nielsen Company & Billboard's 2012 Music Industry Report". Business Wire. Berkshire Hathaway Company. January 4, 2013. Retrieved January 8, 2013. Grein, Paul (January 31, 2013). "Week Ending Jan. 27, 2013. Songs: Another F**kin' Top 10 Hit". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo! Inc. Retrieved January 31, 2013. "Billboard Canadian Hot 100: The week of September 8, 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 7, 2013. "Psy Chart History (Japan Hot 100)". Billboard. Retrieved 2013-04-23. "Billboard Canadian Hot 100: The week of November 17, 2012". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved January 7, 2013. Top 20 Digital Tracks chart in Canada: *"Top 20 Digital Tracks: September 12, 2012". Nielsen SoundScan. Music Canada. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. *"Top 20 Digital Tracks: September 19, 2012". Nielsen SoundScan. Music Canada. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. *"Top 20 Digital Tracks: October 17, 2012". Nielsen SoundScan. Music Canada. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. *"Top 20 Digital Tracks: October 24, 2012". Nielsen SoundScan. Music Canada. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. *"Top 20 Digital Tracks: November 14, 2012". Nielsen SoundScan. Music Canada. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. MacNeil, Jason (January 14, 2013). "Adele, Carly Rae Jepsen, Celine Dion Rule Nielsen/Billboard 2012 Canadian Music Industry Report". The Huffington Post Canada. Retrieved November 26, 2014. Woo, Jaeyeon (August 21, 2012). "Baseball Goes Gangnam Style". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 21, 2012. "The most popular songs on YouTube". Billboard. Retrieved February 23, 2013. BPP, ed. (November 2012). "Billboard Brasil Hot 100 Airplay". Billboard Brasil (36): 84–89. "AIRPLAY TOP 5- 08.10.2012". Bulgarian Association of the music producers. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2012. "Psy Chart History (Canadian Hot 100)". Billboard. ""Gangnam Style" Psy Ranks Number 1 on China Chart!". KpopStarz.com. 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Psy — Gangnam Style. TopHit. Retrieved April 1, 2022. "Top Nacional: Semana 45. Del 05-11-2012 al 11-11-2012" (in Spanish). National-Report. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. "Chart Search Results – Euro Digital Songs 2012-10-06". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 24, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2012. "Greece Billboard". Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2012. "Top 50". Fuzion (in Spanish). El Tiempo. October 4, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. "Archívum – Slágerlisták – MAHASZ" (in Hungarian). Dance Top 40 lista. Magyar Hanglemezkiadók Szövetsége. Retrieved 2012-11-07. "Media Forest Week 40, 2012". Israeli Airplay Chart. Media Forest. Retrieved 2012-10-04. "Lebanese Top 20 Charts". The Official Lebanese Top 20. October 14, 2012. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "Luxembourg Digital Songs 2012-10-13". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "Mexico Airplay". Billboard. October 7, 2012. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2012. "Top 20 General". RadioNotas (in Spanish). Monitor Latino Media. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. "Nederlandse Top 40 – week 41, 2012" (in Dutch). Dutch Top 40. UNIMPRO December 2012 Top 20 Perú "Top 5 video". Polish Video Chart. ZPAV. Archived from the original on April 16, 2013. Retrieved November 1, 2012. "Listy bestsellerów, wyróżnienia :: Związek Producentów Audio-Video". Polish Dance Top 50. "Portugal Billboard". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved October 10, 2012. "Airplay 100 (25 noiembrie 2012)". Romanian Top 100. Archived from the original on April 26, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2012. "Российские музыкальные чарты. Недели 47 и 48 – 2012: Культура: Lenta.ru". lenta.ru. "Russia Airplay Chart for 2012-10-29." TopHit. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "SloTop50: Slovenian official singles weekly chart" (in Slovenian). SloTop50. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Ukraine Airplay Chart for 2012-12-31." TopHit. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Psy Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Retrieved 2012-10-15. "Psy Chart History (Pop Songs)". Billboard. Retrieved 2013-04-23. "Psy Chart History (Hot Rap Songs)". Billboard. Retrieved 2013-04-23. "Psy Chart History (Hot Dance/Electronic Songs)". Billboard. Retrieved 2019-10-10. "Psy Chart History (Adult Pop Songs)". Billboard. Retrieved 2023-11-15. "Top 100". Record Report (in Spanish). R.R. Digital C.A. November 3, 2012. Archived from the original on July 16, 2014. "Ö3 Austria Top40 – Single Charts 2012". Hitradio Ö3. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2013. "Jaaroverzichten 2012 – Singles" (in Dutch). Ultratop. Hung Medien. Retrieved December 28, 2012. "Rapports Annuels 2012 – Singles" (in French). Ultratop. Hung Medien. Retrieved December 28, 2012. "Best of 2012 – Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Track 2012". IFPI Danmark. Retrieved March 2, 2013. "Myydyimmät singlet vuonna 2012" (in Finnish). IFPI Finland. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Classement Singles – année 2012". Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique (in French). GFK Music. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2013. "Jahrescharts 2012". media control GfK. Retrieved January 4, 2013. "Dance Top 100 – 2012". Mahasz. Retrieved April 3, 2020. "MAHASZ Rádiós TOP 100 2012" (in Hungarian). Mahasz. Retrieved January 18, 2013. "Árslisti Tónlist.is 2012" (in Icelandic). Tónlist. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2022. "most played songs of 2012 – By Medis Forest". mako.co.il. January 2, 2013. "Classifica annuale 2012 (dal 02.01.2012 al 30.12.2012)" (in Italian). FIMI. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Top 100-Jaaroverzicht van 2012". Dutch Top 40. Retrieved October 10, 2019. "Jaaroverzichten – Single 2012" (in Dutch). Mega Single Top 100. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2012. "TOP digital utworów – 2012". ZPAV. Retrieved March 22, 2013. Триумф нестыдной попсы. 2M and Lenta.ru. (in Russian). Rambler Media Group. December 28, 2012. Retrieved December 29, 2012. "Top Radio Hits Russia Annual Chart 2012" (in Russian). TopHit. Archived from the original on March 16, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Top 50 Canciones Anual 2012" (PDF). PROMUSICAE. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 24, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "Årslista Singlar – År 2012". Sverigetopplistan. Grammofonleverantörernas förening (GLF). Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved January 23, 2013. "Schweizer Jahreshitparade 2012" (in German). Schweizer Hitparade. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2012. "Best of 2012 – Hot 100 Songs". Billboard. Rovi Corporation. December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "World Digital Song Sales – 2012". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Digital Music Report 2013" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2013. "End Of Year Charts – Top 100 Singles 2013". ARIA. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Jahreshitparade Singles 2013" (in German). Austrian Charts Portal. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Jaaroverzichten 2013: Singles" (in Dutch). Ultratop Flanders. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Rapports Annuels 2013: Singles" (in French). Ultratop Wallonia. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Canadian Hot 100 – 2013". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Track Top-50 2013" (in Danish). hitlisterne.dk. Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Myydyimmät singlet vuonna 2013" (in Finnish). IFPI Finland. Retrieved August 21, 2018. "Top 100 Singles Jahrescharts 2013" (in German). VIVA. Viacom International Media Networks. Archived from the original on January 20, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2014. "Dance Top 100 – 2013". Mahasz. Retrieved April 3, 2020. "Jaarlijsten 2013" (in Dutch). Dutch Top 40. Retrieved May 11, 2022. "Jaaroverzichten – Single 2013" (in Dutch). MegaCharts. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Billboard Korea K-Pop Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Årslista Singlar – År 2013" (in Swedish). Sverigetopplistan. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Swiss Year-End Charts 2013" (in German). Swiss Charts Portal. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "End of Year Singles Chart Top 100 – 2013". Official Charts Company. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Hot 100 Songs Year End 2013". Billboard. Retrieved September 8, 2015. "Dance/Electronic Songs – 2013". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Rap Songs – 2013". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "World Digital Song Sales – 2013". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Streaming Songs – 2014". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Dance/Electronic Streaming Songs – 2014". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Dance/Electronic Digital Songs – 2014". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Rap Streaming Songs – 2014". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "World Digital Song Sales – 2014". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Streaming Songs – 2015". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "Rap Streaming Songs – 2015". Billboard. Retrieved August 24, 2018. "World Digital Song Sales – 2015". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "2019 ARIA End of Decade Singles Chart". ARIA. January 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. "🇰🇷🇺🇸 Op, op, op, op, Oppa "Gangnam Style" von Psy landet auf Platz 49 der erfolgreichsten Singles des Jahrzehnts. Bei den Alben steht dort "Born To Die", die zweite Studioplatte von Lana Del Rey, die starke 94 Wochen dabei war". GfK Entertainment (in German). offiziellecharts.de. Retrieved November 18, 2019 – via Twitter. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 2013 Singles" (PDF). Australian Recording Industry Association. Retrieved November 9, 2021. "Austrian single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style" (in German). IFPI Austria. Retrieved April 20, 2013. "Ultratop − Goud en Platina – singles 2013". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Retrieved August 3, 2013. "Canadian single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". Music Canada. "Danish single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". IFPI Danmark. Retrieved February 1, 2013. "PSY" (in Finnish). Musiikkituottajat – IFPI Finland. Pure Charts, ed. (July 26, 2014). "Top 100 des singles les plus vendus en France du millénaire, épisode 3 (80–71)" (in French). Charts in France. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "Gold-/Platin-Datenbank (Psy; 'Gangnam Style')" (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie. Retrieved April 25, 2018. "Italian single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style" (in Italian). Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Select "2012" in the "Anno" drop-down menu. Select "Gangnam Style" in the "Filtra" field. Select "Singoli" under "Sezione". "Japanese single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style" (in Japanese). Recording Industry Association of Japan. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Select 2014年2月 on the drop-down menu Sales references for "Gangnam Style": "Download Chart (Domestic) – 2012 (see #1)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – January 2013 (see #159)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – February 2013 (see #198)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – March 2013 (see #278)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – April 2013 (see #243)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – May 2013 (see #291)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – June 2013 (see #321)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – July 2013 (see #345)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Download Chart (Domestic) – August 2013 (see #315)". Gaon Music Chart (in Korean). KMCIA. Retrieved August 10, 2016. "Spanish single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". El portal de Música. Productores de Música de España. Retrieved November 9, 2021. "Sverigetopplistan – Psy" (in Swedish). Sverigetopplistan. Retrieved November 9, 2021. "The Official Swiss Charts and Music Community: Awards ('Gangnam Style')". IFPI Switzerland. Hung Medien. Retrieved March 14, 2013. "British single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved March 22, 2024. "American single certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved December 31, 2013. "American videosingle certifications – Psy – Gangnam Style". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved December 31, 2013. "[NEWS] PSY releases cover & tracklist for 6th album 'Psy's Best Sixth'". Dkpopnews.com. Retrieved October 13, 2012. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Argentina). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Australia). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Austria). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Brazil). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Czech Republic). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Denmark). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (United Kingdom). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2012. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (United States). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2012. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Canada). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style (강남스타일) – Single". iTunes Store (Mexico). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2013. "iTunes – Music – Gangnam Style / 2 Legit 2 Quit Mashup (feat. MC Hammer) – Single |". iTunes Store (United States). Apple, Inc. January 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2013. Benjamin, Jeff (August 14, 2012). "Psy Releases New 'Gangnam Style' Video". Billboard. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Rao, Mallika (August 15, 2012). "'Gangnam Style' Becomes 'Oppa Is Just My Style': PSY's 'Girl Version' Followup, Featuring Hyuna (VIDEO)". The Huffington Post. Retrieved August 17, 2012. officialpsy. "PSY (ft. HYUNA) 오빤 딱 내 스타일" [Psy featuring Hyuna: Oppa Is Just My Style Official MV]. YouTube. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gangnam Style. "GANGNAM STYLE (강남스타일)" music video on YouTube "PSY (ft. HYUNA) 오빤 딱 내 스타일 M/V – Oppa Is Just My Style" music video on YouTube "PSY – GANGNAM STYLE (강남스타일) M/V Making Film" on YouTube Kirsten Acuna: Here's the English Translation of "Gangnam Style", Business Insider, September 19, 2012