Lake Chany (Russian: озеро Чаны) is a lake in Novosibirsk Oblast, Russia. The lake extends across five districts of Novosibirsk Oblast: Zdvinsky, Barabinsky, Chanovsky, Kupinsky and Chistoozyorny. Lake Chany is one of the largest lakes in Russia. It is located in the Baraba steppe area. The lake is shallow, slightly salty (hyposaline), and has a fluctuating water level, which can change from season to season and year to year. The depth of the lake is mainly 1–2 m, but it can reach 8 m in some places. Lake Chany is connected with the Small Chany (Malye Chany) and Yarkul lakes to the south. North of its northeastern end lies lake Tandovo. There are about 70 islands on the lake: Amelkina Griva, Shuldikov, Lezhan, Medvezhy, Colpachok, Chinyaikha, Cheryomukhovy, Uzkoredky, Cheryomushkin, Kobyly, Perekopny, Bekarev, Kalinova, Shipyagin, Krugly, Kolotov, Kamyshny etc. Severe storms are frequent on Chany, during a powerful wind, high waves occur on the surface of the lake. A variety of ecosystems that surround the lake include a mixture of wetlands, salt marshes, and a mixture of birch and aspen forests. Lake Chany in particular is critically important for the migratory birds of Siberia, and is listed as a Ramsar Site of International Importance. According to local legend, a giant creature which devours cattle and people lives in the lake. List of lakes of Russia "Chany Lakes". Ramsar Sites Information Service. Retrieved 25 April 2018. The glorious sea is Lake Chany. Sovetskaya Sibir. Славное море — озеро Чаны. Советская Сибирь. May 4, 2007. "N-43 Topographic Chart (in Russian)". Retrieved 10 July 2022. "N-44 Topographic Chart (in Russian)". Retrieved 7 July 2022. Lake Chany. Chronicles of Novosibirsk Oblast. Озеро Чаны. Летописи Новосибирской области. "Ramsar Site Information Sheet - Chany Lake" (PDF). Ramsar International. Retrieved May 5, 2018. 16 people died on Lake Chany in Siberia. 16 человек погибло на озере Чаны в Сибири. Life. July 7, 2010. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lake Chany. Kipriyanova L.M., Yermolaeva N.I., Bezmaternykh D.M., Dvurechenskaya S.Ya., Mitrophanova E.Yu. Changes in the biota of Chany Lake along a salinity gradient // Hydrobiologia. – 2007. – V. 576, №1. – P. 83-93.