Canberra (/ˈkænbərə/ KAN-bər-ə) is the capital city of Australia. Founded following the federation of the colonies of Australia as the seat of government for the new nation, it is Australia's largest inland city and the eighth-largest Australian city overall. The city is located at the northern end of the Australian Capital Territory at the northern tip of the Australian Alps, the country's highest mountain range. As of June 2023,[update] Canberra's estimated population was 466,566. The area chosen for the capital had been inhabited by Aboriginal Australians for up to 21,000 years, by groups including the Ngunnawal, Ngunawal and Ngambri. European settlement commenced in the first half of the 19th century, as evidenced by surviving landmarks such as St John's Anglican Church and Blundells Cottage. On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies of Australia was achieved. Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was at least 100 mi (160 km) from Sydney. The capital city was founded and formally named as Canberra in 1913. A plan by the American architects Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin was selected after an international design contest, and construction commenced in 1913. Unusual among Australian cities, it is an entirely planned city. The Griffins' plan featured geometric motifs and was centred on axes aligned with significant topographical landmarks such as Black Mountain, Mount Ainslie, Capital Hill and City Hill. Canberra's mountainous location makes it the only mainland Australian city where snow-capped mountains can be seen in winter, although snow in the city itself is uncommon. As the seat of the Government of Australia, Canberra is home to many important institutions of the federal government, national monuments and museums. This includes Parliament House, Government House, the High Court building and the headquarters of numerous government agencies. It is the location of many social and cultural institutions of national significance such as the Australian War Memorial, the Australian National University, the Royal Australian Mint, the Australian Institute of Sport, the National Gallery, the National Museum and the National Library. The city is home to many important institutions of the Australian Defence Force including the Royal Military College Duntroon and the Australian Defence Force Academy. It hosts all foreign embassies in Australia as well as regional headquarters of many international organisations, not-for-profit groups, lobbying groups and professional associations. Canberra has been ranked among the world's best cities to live in and visit. Although the Commonwealth Government remains the largest single employer in Canberra, it is no longer the majority employer. Other major industries have developed in the city, including in health care, professional services, education and training, retail, accommodation and food, and construction. Compared to the national averages, the unemployment rate is lower and the average income higher; tertiary education levels are higher, while the population is younger. At the 2016 Census, 32% of Canberra's inhabitants were reported as having been born overseas. Canberra's design is influenced by the garden city movement and incorporates significant areas of natural vegetation. Its design can be viewed from its highest point at the Telstra Tower and the summit of Mount Ainslie. Other notable features include the National Arboretum, born out of the 2003 Canberra bushfires, and Lake Burley Griffin, named for Walter Burley Griffin. Highlights in the annual calendar of cultural events include Floriade, the largest flower festival in the Southern Hemisphere, the Enlighten Festival, Skyfire, the National Multicultural Festival and Summernats. Canberra's main sporting venues are Canberra Stadium and Manuka Oval. The city is served with domestic and international flights at Canberra Airport, while interstate train and coach services depart from Canberra railway station and the Jolimont Centre respectively. City Interchange is the main hub of Canberra's bus and light rail transport network. The word "Canberra" is derived from the Ngunnawal language of a local Ngunnawal or Ngambri clan who resided in the area and were referred to by the early British colonists as either the Canberry, Kanberri or Nganbra tribe. Joshua John Moore, the first European land-owner in the region, named his grant "Canberry" in 1823 after these people. "Canberry Creek" and "Canberry" first appeared on regional maps from 1830, while the derivative name "Canberra" started to appear from around 1857. Numerous local commentators, including the Ngunnawal elder Don Bell, have speculated upon possible meanings of "Canberra" over the years. These include "meeting place", "woman's breasts" and "the hollow between a woman's breasts". Alternative proposals for the name of the city during its planning included Austral, Australville, Aurora, Captain Cook, Caucus City, Cookaburra, Dampier, Eden, Eucalypta, Flinders, Gonebroke, Home, Hopetoun, Kangaremu, Myola, Meladneyperbane, New Era, Olympus, Paradise, Shakespeare, Sydmelperadbrisho, Swindleville, The National City, Union City, Unison, Wattleton, Wheatwoolgold, Yass-Canberra. The first peoples of the Canberra area include the Ngunnawal, Ngunawal and Ngambri peoples. Other groups claiming a connection to the land include the Ngarigo (who also lived directly to the south) and the Ngambri-Guumaal. Neighbouring groups include the Wandandian to the east, the Walgulu also to the south, Gandangara people to the north and Wiradjuri to the north-west. The first British settlers into the Canberra area described two clans of Ngunnawal people resident to the vicinity. The Canberry or Nganbra clan lived mostly around Sullivan's Creek and had ceremonial grounds at the base of Galambary (Black Mountain), while the Pialligo clan had land around what is now Canberra Airport. The people living here carefully managed and cultivated the land with fire and farmed yams and hunted for food. Archaeological evidence of settlement in the region includes inhabited rock shelters, rock paintings and engravings, burial places, camps and quarry sites as well as stone tools and arrangements. Artefacts suggests early human activity occurred at some point in the area 21,000 years previously. Still today, Ngunnawal men into the present conduct ceremony on the banks of the river, Murrumbidgee River. They travel upstream as they receive their Totems and corresponding responsibilities for land management. 'Murrum' means 'Pathway' and Bidgee means 'Boss'. The submerged limestone caves beneath Lake Burley Griffin contained Aboriginal rock art, some of the only sites in the region. Galambary (Black Mountain) is an important Aboriginal meeting and business site, predominantly for men’s business. According to the Ngunnawal and Ngambri people, Mt Ainslie is primarily for place of women’s business. Black Mountain and Mount Ainslie are referred to as women’s breasts. Galambary was also used by Ngunnawal people as an initiation site, with the mountain itself said to represent the growth of a boy into a man. In October 1820, Charles Throsby led the first British expedition to the area. Four other expeditions occurred between 1820 and 1823 with the first accurate map being produced by explorer Mark John Currie in June 1823. By this stage the area had become known as the Limestone Plains. British settlement of the area probably dates from late 1823, when a sheep station was formed on what is now the Acton Peninsula by James Cowan, the head stockman employed by Joshua John Moore. Moore had received a land grant in the region in 1823 and formally applied to purchase the site on 16 December 1826. He named the property "Canberry". On 30 April 1827, Moore was told by letter that he could retain possession of 1,000 acres (405 ha) at Canberry. Other colonists soon followed Moore's example to take up land in the region. Around 1825 James Ainslie, working on behalf of the wealthy merchant Robert Campbell, arrived to establish a sheep station. He was guided to the region by a local Aboriginal girl who showed him the fine lands of her Pialligo clan. The area then became the property of Campbell and it was initially named Pialligo before Campbell changed it to the Scottish title of Duntroon. Campbell's family later built the imposing stone house that is now the officers' mess of the Royal Military College, Duntroon. The Campbells sponsored settlement by other farmer families to work their land, such as the Southwells of "Weetangera". Other notable early colonists included Henry Donnison, who established the Yarralumla estate—now the site of the official residence of the Governor-General of Australia—in 1827, and John Palmer who employed Duncan Macfarlane to form the Jerrabomberra property in 1828. A year later, John MacPherson established the Springbank estate, becoming the first British owner-occupier in the region. The Anglican church of St John the Baptist, in the suburb of Reid, was consecrated in 1845 and is now the oldest surviving public building in the city. St John's churchyard contains the earliest graves in the district. It has been described as a "sanctuary in the city", remaining a small English village-style church even as the capital grew around it. Canberra's first school, St John's School (now a museum), was situated next to the church and opened in the same year of 1845. It was built to educate local settlers children, including the Blundell children who lived in nearby Blundell's Cottage. As the European presence increased, the Indigenous population dwindled largely due to the destruction of their society, dislocation from their lands and from introduced diseases such as influenza, smallpox, alcoholism and measles. The district's change from a rural area in New South Wales to the national capital started during debates over federation in the late 19th century. Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was at least 100 mi (160 km) from Sydney, with Melbourne to be the temporary seat of government while the new capital was built. A survey was conducted across several sites in New South Wales with Bombala, southern Monaro, Orange, Yass, Albury, Tamworth, Armidale, Tumut and Dalgety all discussed. Dalgety was chosen by the federal parliament and it passed the Seat of Government Act 1904 confirming Dalgety as the site of the nation's capital. However, the New South Wales government refused to cede the required territory as they did not accept the site. In 1906, the New South Wales Government finally agreed to cede sufficient land provided that it was in the Yass-Canberra region as this site was closer to Sydney. Newspaper proprietor John Gale circulated a pamphlet titled 'Dalgety or Canberra: Which?' advocating Canberra to every member of the Commonwealth's seven state and federal parliaments. By many accounts, it was decisive in the selection of Canberra as the site in 1908 as was a result of survey work done by the government surveyor Charles Scrivener. The NSW government ceded the district to the federal government in 1911 and the Federal Capital Territory was established. An international design competition was launched by the Department of Home Affairs on 30 April 1911, closing on 31 January 1912. The competition was boycotted by the Royal Institute of British Architects, the Institution of Civil Engineers and their affiliated bodies throughout the British Empire because the Minister for Home Affairs King O'Malley insisted that the final decision was for him to make rather than an expert in city planning. A total of 137 valid entries were received. O'Malley appointed a three-member board to advise him but they could not reach unanimity. On 24 May 1911, O'Malley came down on the side of the majority of the board with the design by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin of Chicago, Illinois, United States, being declared the winner. Second was Eliel Saarinen of Finland and third was Alfred Agache of Brazil but resident in Paris, France. O'Malley then appointed a six-member board to advise him on the implementation of the winning design. On 25 November 1912, the board advised that it could not support the Griffins' plan in its entirety and suggested an alternative plan of its own devising. This plan ostensibly incorporated the best features of the three place-getting designs as well as of a fourth design by H. Caswell, R.C.G. Coulter and W. Scott-Griffiths of Sydney, the rights to which it had purchased. It was this composite plan that was endorsed by Parliament and given formal approval by O'Malley on 10 January 1913. However, it was the Griffin plan which was ultimately proceeded with. In 1913, Walter Burley Griffin was appointed Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction and construction began. On 23 February, King O'Malley drove the first peg in the construction of the future capital city. In 1912, the government invited suggestions from the public as to the name of the future city. Almost 750 names were suggested. At midday on 12 March 1913, Lady Denman, the wife of Governor-General Lord Denman, announced that the city would be named "Canberra" at a ceremony at Kurrajong Hill, which has since become Capital Hill and the site of the present Parliament House. Canberra Day is a public holiday observed in the ACT on the second Monday in March to celebrate the founding of Canberra. After the ceremony, bureaucratic disputes hindered Griffin's work; a Royal Commission in 1916 ruled his authority had been usurped by certain officials and his original plan was reinstated. Griffin's relationship with the Australian authorities was strained and a lack of funding meant that by the time he was fired in 1920, little work had been done. By this time, Griffin had revised his plan, overseen the earthworks of major avenues and established the Glenloch Cork Plantation. The Commonwealth government purchased the pastoral property of Yarralumla in 1913 to provide an official residence for the Governor-General of Australia in the new capital. Renovations began in 1925 to enlarge and modernise the property. In 1927, the property was official dubbed Government House. On 9 May that year, the Commonwealth parliament moved to Canberra with the opening of the Provisional Parliament House. The Prime Minister Stanley Bruce had officially taken up residence in The Lodge a few days earlier. Planned development of the city slowed significantly during the depression of the 1930s and during World War II. Some projects planned for that time, including Roman Catholic and Anglican cathedrals, were never completed. (Nevertheless, in 1973 the Roman Catholic parish church of St. Christopher was remodelled into St. Christopher's Cathedral, Manuka, serving the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn. It is the only cathedral in Canberra.) From 1920 to 1957, three bodies — successively the Federal Capital Advisory Committee, the Federal Capital Commission, and the National Capital Planning and Development Committee — continued to plan the further expansion of Canberra in the absence of Griffin. However, they were only advisory and development decisions were made without consulting them, which increased inefficiency. The largest event in Canberra up to World War II was the 24th Meeting of ANZAAS in January 1939. The Canberra Times described it as "a signal event ... in the history of this, the world's youngest capital city". The city's accommodation was not nearly sufficient to house the 1,250 delegates and a tent city had to be set up on the banks of the Molonglo River. One of the prominent speakers was H. G. Wells, who was a guest of the Governor-General Lord Gowrie for a week. This event coincided with a heatwave across south-eastern Australia during which the temperature in Canberra reached 108.5 degrees Fahrenheit (42.5 Celsius) on 11 January. On Friday, 13 January, the Black Friday bushfires caused 71 deaths in Victoria and Wells accompanied the Governor-General on his tour of areas threatened by fires. Immediately after the end of the war, Canberra was criticised for resembling a village and its disorganised collection of buildings was deemed ugly. Canberra was often derisively described as "several suburbs in search of a city". Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies regarded the state of the national capital as an embarrassment. Over time his attitude changed from one of contempt to that of championing its development. He fired two ministers charged with the development of the city for poor performance. Menzies remained in office for over a decade and in that time the development of the capital sped up rapidly. The population grew by more than 50 per cent in every five-year period from 1955 to 1975. Several Government departments, together with public servants, were moved to Canberra from Melbourne following the war. Government housing projects were undertaken to accommodate the city's growing population. The National Capital Development Commission (NCDC) formed in 1957 with executive powers and ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin — the centrepiece of Griffin's design — and construction was completed in 1964 after four years of work. The completion of the lake finally laid the platform for the development of Griffin's Parliamentary Triangle. Since the initial construction of the lake, various buildings of national importance have been constructed on its shores. The newly built Australian National University was expanded and sculptures as well as monuments were built. A new National Library was constructed within the Parliamentary Triangle, followed by the High Court and the National Gallery. Suburbs in Canberra Central (often referred to as North Canberra and South Canberra) were further developed in the 1950s and urban development in the districts of Woden Valley and Belconnen commenced in the mid and late 1960s respectively. Many of the new suburbs were named after Australian politicians such as Barton, Deakin, Reid, Braddon, Curtin, Chifley and Parkes. On 9 May 1988, a larger and permanent Parliament House was opened on Capital Hill as part of Australia's bicentenary celebrations. The Commonwealth Parliament moved there from the Provisional Parliament House, now known as Old Parliament House. In December 1988, the Australian Capital Territory was granted full self-government by the Commonwealth Parliament, a step proposed as early as 1965. Following the first election on 4 March 1989, a 17-member Legislative Assembly sat at temporary offices at 1 Constitution Avenue, Civic, on 11 May 1989. Permanent premises were opened on London Circuit in 1994. The Australian Labor Party formed the ACT's first government, led by the Chief Minister Rosemary Follett, who made history as Australia's first female head of government. Parts of Canberra were engulfed by bushfires on 18 January 2003 that killed four people, injured 435 and destroyed more than 500 homes as well as the major research telescopes of Australian National University's Mount Stromlo Observatory. Throughout 2013, several events celebrated the 100th anniversary of the naming of Canberra. On 11 March 2014, the last day of the centennial year, the Canberra Centenary Column was unveiled in City Hill. Other works included The Skywhale, a hot air balloon designed by the sculptor Patricia Piccinini, and StellrScope by visual media artist Eleanor Gates-Stuart. On 7 February 2021, The Skywhale was joined by Skywhalepapa to create a Skywhale family, an event marked by Skywhale-themed pastries and beer produced by local companies as well as an art pop song entitled "We are the Skywhales". In 2014, Canberra was named the best city to live in the world by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and was named the third best city to visit in the world by Lonely Planet in 2017. Canberra covers an area of 814.2 km2 (314.4 sq mi) and is located near the Brindabella Ranges (part of the Australian Alps), approximately 150 km (93 mi) inland from Australia's east coast. It has an elevation of approximately 580 m (1,900 ft) AHD; the highest point is Mount Majura at 888 m (2,913 ft). Other low mountains include Mount Taylor 855 m (2,805 ft), Mount Ainslie 843 m (2,766 ft), Mount Mugga Mugga 812 m (2,664 ft) and Black Mountain 812 m (2,664 ft). The native forest in the Canberra region was almost wholly eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes. By the early 1960s, logging had depleted the eucalypt, and concern about water quality led to the forests being closed. Interest in forestry began in 1915 with trials of a number of species including Pinus radiata on the slopes of Mount Stromlo. Since then, plantations have been expanded, with the benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment, and the forests are also popular recreation areas. The urban environs of the city of Canberra straddle the Ginninderra plain, Molonglo plain, the Limestone plain, and the Tuggeranong plain (Isabella's Plain). The Molonglo River which flows across the Molonglo plain has been dammed to form the national capital's iconic feature Lake Burley Griffin. The Molonglo then flows into the Murrumbidgee north-west of Canberra, which in turn flows north-west toward the New South Wales town of Yass. The Queanbeyan River joins the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate just within the ACT. A number of creeks, including Jerrabomberra and Yarralumla Creeks, flow into the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee. Two of these creeks, the Ginninderra and Tuggeranong, have similarly been dammed to form Lakes Ginninderra and Tuggeranong. Until recently the Molonglo River had a history of sometimes calamitous floods; the area was a flood plain prior to the filling of Lake Burley Griffin. Under the Köppen-Geiger classification, Canberra has an oceanic climate (Cfb). In January, the warmest month, the average high is approximately 29 °C (84 °F); in July, the coldest month, the average high drops to approximately 12 °C (54 °F). Frost is common in the winter months. Snow is rare in the CBD (central business district) due to being on the leeward (eastern) side of the dividing range, but the surrounding areas get annual snowfall through winter and often the snow-capped Brindabella Range can be seen from the CBD. The last significant snowfall in the city centre was in 1968. Canberra is often affected by foehn winds, especially in winter and spring, evident by its anomalously warm maxima relative to altitude. The highest recorded maximum temperature was 44.0 °C (111.2 °F) on 4 January 2020. Winter 2011 was Canberra's warmest winter on record, approximately 2 °C (4 °F) above the average temperature. The lowest recorded minimum temperature was −10.0 °C (14.0 °F) on the morning of 11 July 1971. Light snow falls only once in every few years, and is usually not widespread and quickly dissipates. Canberra is protected from the west by the Brindabellas which create a strong rain shadow in Canberra's valleys. Canberra gets 100.4 clear days annually. Annual rainfall is the third lowest of the capital cities (after Adelaide and Hobart) and is spread fairly evenly over the seasons, with late spring bringing the highest rainfall. Thunderstorms occur mostly between October and April, owing to the effect of summer and the mountains. The area is generally sheltered from a westerly wind, though strong northwesterlies can develop. A cool, vigorous afternoon easterly change, colloquially referred to as a 'sea-breeze' or the 'Braidwood Butcher', is common during the summer months and often exceeds 40 km/h in the city. Canberra is also less humid than the nearby coastal areas. Canberra was severely affected by smoke haze during the 2019/2020 bushfires. On 1 January 2020, Canberra had the worst air quality of any major city in the world, with an AQI of 7700 (USAQI 949). Canberra is a planned city and the inner-city area was originally designed by Walter Burley Griffin, a major 20th-century American architect. Within the central area of the city near Lake Burley Griffin, major roads follow a wheel-and-spoke pattern rather than a grid. Griffin's proposal had an abundance of geometric patterns, including concentric hexagonal and octagonal streets emanating from several radii. However, the outer areas of the city, built later, are not laid out geometrically. Lake Burley Griffin was deliberately designed so that the orientation of the components was related to various topographical landmarks in Canberra. The lakes stretch from east to west and divided the city in two; a land axis perpendicular to the central basin stretches from Capital Hill—the eventual location of the new Parliament House on a mound on the southern side—north northeast across the central basin to the northern banks along Anzac Parade to the Australian War Memorial. This was designed so that looking from Capital Hill, the War Memorial stood directly at the foot of Mount Ainslie. At the southwestern end of the land axis was Bimberi Peak, the highest mountain in the ACT, approximately 52 km (32 mi) south west of Canberra. The straight edge of the circular segment that formed the central basin of Lake Burley Griffin was perpendicular to the land axis and designated the water axis, and it extended northwest towards Black Mountain. A line parallel to the water axis, on the northern side of the city, was designated the municipal axis. The municipal axis became the location of Constitution Avenue, which links City Hill in Civic Centre and both Market Centre and the Defence precinct on Russell Hill. Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue were to run from the southern side from Capital Hill to City Hill and Market Centre on the north respectively, and they formed the western and eastern edges of the central basin. The area enclosed by the three avenues was known as the Parliamentary Triangle, and formed the centrepiece of Griffin's work. The Griffins assigned spiritual values to Mount Ainslie, Black Mountain, and Red Hill and originally planned to cover each of these in flowers. That way each hill would be covered with a single, primary colour which represented its spiritual value. This part of their plan never came to fruition, as World War I slowed construction and planning disputes led to Griffin's dismissal by Prime Minister Billy Hughes after the war ended. The urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of districts, town centres, group centres, local suburbs as well as other industrial areas and villages. There are seven residential districts, each of which is divided into smaller suburbs, and most of which have a town centre which is the focus of commercial and social activities. The districts were settled in the following chronological order: Canberra Central, mostly settled in the 1920s and 1930s, with expansion up to the 1960s, 25 suburbs Woden Valley, first settled in 1964, 12 suburbs Belconnen, first settled in 1966, 27 suburbs (2 not yet developed) Weston Creek, settled in 1969, 8 suburbs Tuggeranong, settled in 1974, 18 suburbs Gungahlin, settled in the early 1990s, 18 suburbs (3 not yet developed) Molonglo Valley, development began in 2010, 13 suburbs planned. The Canberra Central district is substantially based on Walter Burley Griffin's designs. In 1967 the then National Capital Development Commission adopted the "Y Plan" which laid out future urban development in Canberra around a series of central shopping and commercial area known as the 'town centres' linked by freeways, the layout of which roughly resembled the shape of the letter Y, with Tuggeranong at the base of the Y and Belconnen and Gungahlin located at the ends of the arms of the Y. Development in Canberra has been closely regulated by government, both through planning processes and the use of crown lease terms that have tightly limited the use of parcels of land. Land in the ACT is held on 99-year crown leases from the national government, although most leases are now administered by the Territory government. There have been persistent calls for constraints on development to be liberalised, but also voices in support of planning consistent with the original 'bush capital' and 'urban forest' ideals that underpin Canberra's design. Many of Canberra's suburbs are named after former Prime Ministers, famous Australians, early settlers, or use Aboriginal words for their title. Street names typically follow a particular theme; for example, the streets of Duffy are named after Australian dams and reservoirs, the streets of Dunlop are named after Australian inventions, inventors and artists and the streets of Page are named after biologists and naturalists. Most diplomatic missions are located in the suburbs of Yarralumla, Deakin and O'Malley. There are three light industrial areas: the suburbs of Fyshwick, Mitchell and Hume. The average Canberran was responsible for 13.7 tonnes of greenhouse gases in 2005. In 2012, the ACT Government legislated greenhouse gas targets to reduce its emissions by 40 per cent from 1990 levels by 2020, 80 per cent by 2050, with no net emissions by 2060. The government announced in 2013 a target for 90% of electricity consumed in the ACT to be supplied from renewable sources by 2020, and in 2016 set an ambitious target of 100% by 2020. In 1996 Canberra became the first city in the world to set a vision of no waste, proposing an ambitious target of 2010 for completion. The strategy aimed to achieve a waste-free society by 2010, through the combined efforts of industry, government and community. By early 2010, it was apparent that though it had reduced waste going to landfill, the ACT initiative's original 2010 target for absolutely zero landfill waste would be delayed or revised to meet the reality. Plastic bags made of polyethylene polymer with a thickness of less than 35 µm were banned from retail distribution in the ACT from November 2011. The ban was introduced by the ACT Government in an effort to make Canberra more sustainable. Of all waste produced in the ACT, 75 per cent is recycled. Average household food waste in the ACT remains above the Australian average, costing an average $641 per household per annum. Canberra's annual Floriade festival features a large display of flowers every Spring in Commonwealth Park. The organisers of the event have a strong environmental standpoint, promoting and using green energy, "green catering", sustainable paper, the conservation and saving of water. The event is also smoke-free. There is no local council or city government for the city of Canberra. The Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly performs the roles of both a city council for the city and a territory government for the rest of the Australian Capital Territory. However, the vast majority of the population of the Territory reside in Canberra and the city is therefore the primary focus of the ACT Government. The assembly consists of 25 members elected from five districts using proportional representation. The five districts are Brindabella, Ginninderra, Kurrajong, Murrumbidgee and Yerrabi, which each elect five members. The Chief Minister is elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and selects colleagues to serve as ministers alongside him or her in the Executive, known informally as the cabinet. Whereas the ACT has federally been dominated by Labor, the Liberals have been able to gain some footing in the ACT Legislative Assembly and were in government during a period of 6+1⁄2 years from 1995 and 2001. Labor took back control of the Assembly in 2001. At the 2004 election, Chief Minister Jon Stanhope and the Labor Party won 9 of the 17 seats allowing them to form the ACT's first majority government. Since 2008, the ACT has been governed by a coalition of Labor and the Greens. As of 2022[update], the Chief Minister was Andrew Barr from the Australian Labor Party. The Australian federal government retains some influence over the ACT government. In the administrative sphere, most frequently this is through the actions of the National Capital Authority which is responsible for planning and development in areas of Canberra which are considered to be of national importance or which are central to Griffin's plan for the city, such as the Parliamentary Triangle, Lake Burley Griffin, major approach and processional roads, areas where the Commonwealth retains ownership of the land or undeveloped hills and ridge-lines (which form part of the Canberra Nature Park). The national government also retains a level of control over the Territory Assembly through the provisions of the Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988. This federal act defines the legislative power of the ACT assembly. The ACT was given its first federal parliamentary representation in 1949 when it gained a seat in the House of Representatives, the Division of Australian Capital Territory. However, the ACT member could only vote on matters directly affecting the territory. In 1974, the ACT was allocated two Senate seats and the House of Representatives seat was divided into two. A third was created in 1996, but was abolished in 1998 because of changes to the regional demographic distribution. At the 2019 election, the third seat has been reintroduced as the Division of Bean. The House of Representatives seats have mostly been held by Labor and usually by comfortable margins. The Labor Party has polled at least seven percentage points more than the Liberal Party at every federal election since 1990 and their average lead since then has been 15 percentage points. The ALP and the Liberal Party held one Senate seat each until the 2022 election when Independent candidate David Pocock unseated the Liberal candidate Zed Seselja. The Australian Federal Police (AFP) provides all of the constabulary services in the territory in a manner similar to state police forces, under a contractual agreement with the ACT Government. The AFP does so through its community policing arm ACT Policing. People who have been charged with offences are tried either in the ACT Magistrates Court or, for more severe offences, the ACT Supreme Court. Prior to its closure in 2009, prisoners were held in remand at the Belconnen Remand Centre in the ACT but usually imprisoned in New South Wales. The Alexander Maconochie Centre was officially opened on 11 September 2008 by then Chief Minister Jon Stanhope. The total cost for construction was $130 million. The ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal deal with minor civil law actions and other various legal matters. Canberra has the lowest rate of crime of any capital city in Australia as of 2019[update]. As of 2016[update] the most common crimes in the ACT were property related crimes, unlawful entry with intent and motor vehicle theft. They affected 2,304 and 966 people (580 and 243 per 100,000 persons respectively). Homicide and related offences—murder, attempted murder and manslaughter, but excluding driving causing death and conspiracy to murder—affect 1.0 per 100,000 persons, which is below the national average of 1.9 per 100,000. Rates of sexual assault (64.4 per 100,000 persons) are also below the national average (98.5 per 100,000). However the 2017 crime statistics showed a rise in some types of personal crime, notably burglaries, thefts and assaults. In February 2020, the unemployment rate in Canberra was 2.9% which was lower than the national unemployment rate of 5.1%. As a result of low unemployment and substantial levels of public sector and commercial employment, Canberra has the highest average level of disposable income of any Australian capital city. The gross average weekly wage in Canberra is $1827 compared with the national average of $1658 (November 2019). The median house price in Canberra as of February 2020 was $745,000, lower than only Sydney among capital cities of more than 100,000 people, having surpassed Melbourne and Perth since 2005. The median weekly rent paid by Canberra residents is higher than rents in all other states and territories. As of January 2014 the median unit rent in Canberra was $410 per week and median housing rent was $460, making the city the third most expensive in the country. Factors contributing to this higher weekly rental market include; higher average weekly incomes, restricted land supply, and inflationary clauses in the ACT Residential Tenancies Act. The city's main industry is public administration and safety, which accounted for 27.1% of Gross Territory Product in 2018-19 and employed 32.49% of Canberra's workforce. The headquarters of many Australian Public Service agencies are located in Canberra, and Canberra is also host to several Australian Defence Force establishments, most notably the Australian Defence Force headquarters and HMAS Harman, which is a naval communications centre that is being converted into a tri-service, multi-user depot. Other major sectors by employment include Health Care (10.54%), Professional Services (9.77%), Education and Training (9.64%), Retail (7.27%), Accommodation & Food (6.39%) and Construction (5.80%). The former RAAF Fairbairn, adjacent to the Canberra Airport was sold to the operators of the airport, but the base continues to be used for RAAF VIP flights. A growing number of software vendors have based themselves in Canberra, to capitalise on the concentration of government customers; these include Tower Software and RuleBurst. A consortium of private and government investors is making plans for a billion-dollar data hub, with the aim of making Canberra a leading centre of such activity in the Asia-Pacific region. A Canberra Cyber Security Innovation Node was established in 2019 to grow the ACT's cyber security sector and related space, defence and education industries. At the 2021 census, the population of Canberra was 453,558, up from 395,790 at the 2016 census, and 355,596 at the 2011 census. Canberra has been the fastest-growing city in Australia in recent years, having grown 23.3% from 2011-2021. Canberrans are relatively young, highly mobile and well educated. The median age is 35 years and only 12.7% of the population is aged over 65 years. Between 1996 and 2001, 61.9% of the population either moved to or from Canberra, which was the second highest mobility rate of any Australian capital city. As at May 2017, 43% of ACT residents (25–64) had a level of educational attainment equal to at least a bachelor's degree, significantly higher that the national average of 31%. According to statistics collected by the National Australia Bank and reported in The Canberra Times, Canberrans on average give significantly more money to charity than Australians in other states and territories, for both dollar giving and as a proportion of income. At the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: English (35%) Australian (34%) Irish (14%) Scottish (11%) Chinese (6%) German (4.7%) Indian (3.9%) Italian (3.5%) Dutch (1.7%) Indigenous (1.6%) Filipino (1.3%) Vietnamese (1.3%) Greek (1.3%) Croatian (1.2%) Polish (1.1%) The 2016 census showed that 32% of Canberra's inhabitants were born overseas. Of inhabitants born outside Australia, the most prevalent countries of birth were England, China, India, New Zealand and the Philippines. 1.6% of the population, or 6,476 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2016. At the 2016 census, 72.7% of people spoke only English at home. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Mandarin (3.1%), Vietnamese (1.1%), Cantonese (1%), Hindi (0.9%) and Spanish (0.8%). On census night in 2016, approximately 50.0% of ACT residents described themselves as Christian (excluding not stated responses), the most common denominations being Catholic and Anglican; 36.2% described themselves as having no religion. The two main tertiary institutions are the Australian National University (ANU) in Acton and the University of Canberra (UC) in Bruce, with over 10,500 and 8,000 full-time-equivalent students respectively. Established in 1946, the ANU has always had a strong research focus and is ranked among the leading universities in the world and the best in Australia by The Times Higher Education Supplement and the Shanghai Jiao Tong World University Rankings. There are two religious university campuses in Canberra: Signadou in the northern suburb of Watson is a campus of the Australian Catholic University; St Mark's Theological College in Barton is part of the secular Charles Sturt University. The ACT Government announced on 5 March 2020 that the CIT campus and an adjoining carpark in Reid would be leased to the University of New South Wales (UNSW) for a peppercorn lease, for it to develop as a campus for a new UNSW Canberra. UNSW released a master plan in 2021 for a 6,000 student campus to be realised over 15 years at a cost of $1 billion. The Australian Defence College has two campuses: the Australian Command and Staff College (ACSC) plus the Centre for Defence and Strategic Studies (CDSS) at Weston, and the Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) beside the Royal Military College, Duntroon located in the inner-northern suburb of Campbell. ADFA teaches military undergraduates and postgraduates and includes UNSW@ADFA, a campus of the University of New South Wales; Duntroon provides Australian Army officer training. Tertiary level vocational education is also available through the Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT), with campuses in Bruce, Reid, Gungahlin, Tuggeranong and Fyshwick. The combined enrolment of the CIT campuses was over 28,000 students in 2019. Following the transfer of land in Reid for the new UNSW Canberra, a new CIT Woden is scheduled to be completed by 2025. In 2016 there were 132 schools in Canberra; 87 were operated by the government and 45 were private. During 2006, the ACT Government announced closures of up to 39 schools, to take effect from the end of the school year, and after a series of consultations unveiled its Towards 2020: Renewing Our Schools policy. As a result, some schools closed during the 2006–08 period, while others were merged; the creation of combined primary and secondary government schools was to proceed over a decade. The closure of schools provoked significant opposition. Most suburbs were planned to include a primary and a nearby preschool; these were usually located near open areas where recreational and sporting activities were easily available. Canberra also has the highest percentage of non-government (private) school students in Australia, accounting for 40.6 per cent of ACT enrollments. Canberra is home to many national monuments and institutions such as the Australian War Memorial, the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, the National Gallery of Australia, the National Portrait Gallery, the National Library, the National Archives, the Australian Academy of Science, the National Film & Sound Archive and the National Museum. Many Commonwealth government buildings in Canberra are open to the public, including Parliament House, the High Court and the Royal Australian Mint. Lake Burley Griffin is the site of the Captain James Cook Memorial and the National Carillon. Other sites of interest include the Australian–American Memorial, Commonwealth Park, Commonwealth Place, the Telstra Tower, the Australian National Botanic Gardens, the National Zoo and Aquarium, the National Dinosaur Museum, and Questacon – the National Science and Technology Centre. The Canberra Museum and Gallery in the city is a repository of local history and art, housing a permanent collection and visiting exhibitions. Several historic homes are open to the public: Lanyon and Tuggeranong Homesteads in the Tuggeranong Valley, Mugga-Mugga in Symonston, and Blundells' Cottage in Parkes all display the lifestyle of the early European settlers. Calthorpes' House in Red Hill is a well-preserved example of a 1920s house from Canberra's very early days. Strathnairn Homestead is an historic building which also dates from the 1920s. Canberra has many venues for live music and theatre: the Canberra Theatre and Playhouse which hosts many major concerts and productions; and Llewellyn Hall (within the ANU School of Music), a world-class concert hall are two of the most notable. The Street Theatre is a venue with less mainstream offerings. The Albert Hall was the city's first performing arts venue, opened in 1928. It was the original performance venue for theatre groups such as the Canberra Repertory Society. Stonefest was a large annual festival, for some years one of the biggest festivals in Canberra. It was downsized and rebranded as Stone Day in 2012. There are numerous bars and nightclubs which also offer live entertainment, particularly concentrated in the areas of Dickson, Kingston and the city. Most town centres have facilities for a community theatre and a cinema, and they all have a library. Popular cultural events include the National Folk Festival, the Royal Canberra Show, the Summernats car festival, Enlighten festival, the National Multicultural Festival in February and the Celebrate Canberra festival held over 10 days in March in conjunction with Canberra Day. Canberra maintains sister-city relationships with both Nara, Japan and Beijing, China. Canberra has friendship-city relationships with both Dili, East Timor and Hangzhou, China. City-to-city relationships encourage communities and special interest groups both locally and abroad to engage in a wide range of exchange activities. The Canberra Nara Candle Festival held annually in spring, is a community celebration of the Canberra Nara Sister City relationship. The festival is held in Canberra Nara Park on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin. The history of Canberra was told in the 1938 radio feature Canberra the Great. As Australia's capital, Canberra is the most important centre for much of Australia's political reportage and thus all the major media, including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, the commercial television networks, and the metropolitan newspapers maintain local bureaus. News organisations are represented in the press gallery, a group of journalists who report on the national parliament. The National Press Club of Australia in Barton has regular television broadcasts of its lunches at which a prominent guest, typically a politician or other public figure, delivers a speech followed by a question-and-answer session. Canberra has a daily newspaper, The Canberra Times, which was established in 1926. There are also several free weekly publications, including news magazines CityNews and Canberra Weekly as well as entertainment guide BMA Magazine. BMA Magazine first went to print in 1992; the inaugural edition featured coverage of the Nirvana Nevermind tour. There are a number of AM and FM stations broadcasting in Canberra (AM/FM Listing). The main commercial operators are the Capital Radio Network (2CA and 2CC), and Austereo/ARN (104.7 and Mix 106.3). There are also several community operated stations. A DAB+ digital radio trial is also in operation, it simulcasts some of the AM/FM stations, and also provides several digital only stations (DAB+ Trial Listing). Five free-to-air television stations service Canberra: ABC Canberra (ABC) SBS New South Wales (SBS) Southern Cross 10 Southern NSW & ACT (CTC) – Network 10 affiliate Seven Network Southern NSW & ACT (CBN) – Seven Network owned and operated station WIN Television Southern NSW & ACT (WIN) – Nine Network affiliate Each station broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels. Of the three main commercial networks: WIN airs a half-hour local WIN News each weeknight at 6pm, produced from a newsroom in the city and broadcast from studios in Wollongong. Southern Cross 10 airs short local news updates throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Hobart studios. It previously aired a regional edition of Nine News from Sydney each weeknight at 6pm, featuring opt-outs for Canberra and the ACT when it was a Nine affiliate. Seven airs short local news and weather updates throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Canberra studios. Prior to 1989, Canberra was serviced by just the ABC, SBS and Capital Television (CTC), which later became Ten Capital in 1994 then Southern Cross Ten in 2002 then Channel 9/Southern Cross Nine in 2016 and finally Channel 10 in 2021, with Prime Television (now Prime7) and WIN Television arriving as part of the Government's regional aggregation program in that year. Pay television services are available from Foxtel (via satellite) and telecommunications company TransACT (via cable). In addition to local sporting leagues, Canberra has a number of sporting teams that compete in national and international competitions. The best known teams are the Canberra Raiders and the ACT Brumbies who play rugby league and rugby union respectively; both have been champions of their leagues. Both teams play their home games at Canberra Stadium, which is the city's largest stadium and was used to hold group matches in football for the 2000 Summer Olympics and in rugby union for the 2003 Rugby World Cup. Canberra United represents the city in the A-League Women (formerly the W-League), the national women's soccer league and were champions in the 2011–12 season. A men's team is set to join the A-League Men in the 2024–25 season. The city also has a successful basketball team, the Canberra Capitals, which has won seven out of the last eleven national women's basketball titles. The Canberra Vikings represent the city in the National Rugby Championship and finished second in the 2015 season. There are also teams that participate in national competitions in netball, field hockey, ice hockey, cricket and baseball. The historic Prime Minister's XI cricket match is played at Manuka Oval annually. Other significant annual sporting events include the Canberra Marathon and the City of Canberra Half Ironman Triathlon. Canberra has been bidding for an Australian Football League club since 1981 when Australian rules in the Australian Capital Territory was more popular. While the league has knocked back numerous proposals, according to the AFL Canberra belongs to the Greater Western Sydney Giants who play three home games at Manuka Oval each season. Other significant annual sporting events include the Canberra Marathon and the City of Canberra Half Ironman Triathlon. The Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) is located in the Canberra suburb of Bruce. The AIS is a specialised educational and training institution providing coaching for elite junior and senior athletes in a number of sports. The AIS has been operating since 1981 and has achieved significant success in producing elite athletes, both local and international. The majority of Australia's team members and medallists at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney were AIS graduates. Canberra has numerous sporting ovals, golf courses, skate parks, and swimming pools that are open to the public. Tennis courts include those at the National Sports Club, Lyneham, former home of the Canberra Women's Tennis Classic. A Canberra-wide series of bicycle paths are available to cyclists for recreational and sporting purposes. Canberra Nature Parks have a large range of walking paths, horse and mountain bike trails. Water sports like sailing, rowing, dragon boating and water skiing are held on Canberra's lakes. The Rally of Canberra is an annual motor sport event, and from 2000 to 2002, Canberra hosted the Canberra 400 event for V8 Supercars on the temporary Canberra Street Circuit, which was located inside the Parliamentary Triangle. A popular form of exercise for people working near or in the Parliamentary Triangle is to do the "bridge to bridge walk/run" of about 5 km around Lake Burley Griffin, crossing the Commonwealth Avenue Bridge and Kings Avenue Bridge, using the paths beside the lake. The walk takes about 1 hour, making it ideal for a lunchtime excursion. This is also popular on weekends. Such was the popularity during the COVID-19 isolation in 2020 that the ACT Government initiated a 'Clockwise is COVID-wise' rule for walkers and runners. Canberra has two large public hospitals, the approximately 600-bed Canberra Hospital—formerly the Woden Valley Hospital—in Garran and the 174-bed Calvary Public Hospital in Bruce. Both are teaching institutions. The largest private hospital is the Calvary John James Hospital in Deakin. Calvary Private Hospital in Bruce and Healthscope's National Capital Private Hospital in Garran are also major healthcare providers. The Royal Canberra Hospital was located on Acton Peninsula on Lake Burley Griffin; it was closed in 1991 and was demolished in 1997 in a controversial and fatal implosion to facilitate construction of the National Museum of Australia. The city has 10 aged care facilities. Canberra's hospitals receive emergency cases from throughout southern New South Wales, and ACT Ambulance Service is one of four operational agencies of the ACT Emergency Services Authority. NETS provides a dedicated ambulance service for inter-hospital transport of sick newborns within the ACT and into surrounding New South Wales. The automobile is by far the dominant form of transport in Canberra. The city is laid out so that arterial roads connecting inhabited clusters run through undeveloped areas of open land or forest, which results in a low population density; this also means that idle land is available for the development of future transport corridors if necessary without the need to build tunnels or acquire developed residential land. In contrast, other capital cities in Australia have substantially less green space. Canberra's districts are generally connected by parkways—limited access dual carriageway roads with speed limits generally set at a maximum of 100 km/h (62 mph). An example is the Tuggeranong Parkway which links Canberra's CBD and Tuggeranong, and bypasses Weston Creek. In most districts, discrete residential suburbs are bounded by main arterial roads with only a few residential linking in, to deter non-local traffic from cutting through areas of housing. In an effort to improve road safety, traffic cameras were first introduced to Canberra by the Kate Carnell Government in 1999. The traffic cameras installed in Canberra include fixed red-light and speed cameras and point-to-point speed cameras; together they bring in revenue of approximately $11 million per year in fines. ACTION, the government-operated bus service, provides public transport throughout the city. CDC Canberra provides bus services between Canberra and nearby areas of New South Wales of (Murrumbateman and Yass) and as Qcity Transit (Queanbeyan). A light rail line commenced service on 20 April 2019 linking the CBD with the northern district of Gungahlin. A planned Stage 2A of Canberra's light rail network will run from Alinga Street station to Commonwealth Park, adding three new stops at City West, City South and Commonwealth Park. In February 2021 ACT Minister for Transport and City Services Chris Steel said he expects construction on Stage 2A to commence in the 2021-22 financial year, and for "tracks to be laid" by the next Territory election in 2024. At the 2016 census, 7.1% of the journeys to work involved public transport, while 4.5% walked to work. There are two local taxi companies. Aerial Capital Group enjoyed monopoly status until the arrival of Cabxpress in 2007. In October 2015 the ACT Government passed legislation to regulate ride sharing, allowing ride share services including Uber to operate legally in Canberra. The ACT Government was the first jurisdiction in Australia to enact legislation to regulate the service. Since then many other ride sharing and taxi services have started in ACT namely Ola, Glide Taxi and GoCatch An interstate NSW TrainLink railway service connects Canberra to Sydney. Canberra railway station is in the inner south suburb of Kingston. Between 1920 and 1922 the train line crossed the Molonglo River and ran as far north as the city centre, although the line was closed following major flooding and was never rebuilt, while plans for a line to Yass were abandoned. A 3 ft 6 in (1,067 mm) gauge construction railway was built in 1923 between the Yarralumla brickworks and the provisional Parliament House; it was later extended to Civic, but the whole line was closed in May 1927. Train services to Melbourne are provided by way of a NSW TrainLink bus service which connects with a rail service between Sydney and Melbourne in Yass, about a one-hour drive from Canberra. Plans to establish a high-speed rail service between Melbourne, Canberra and Sydney, have not been implemented, as the various proposals have been deemed economically unviable. The original plans for Canberra included proposals for railed transport within the city, however none eventuated. The phase 2 report of the most recent proposal, the High Speed Rail Study, was published by the Department of Infrastructure and Transport on 11 April 2013. A railway connecting Canberra to Jervis Bay was also planned but never constructed. Canberra is about three hours by road from Sydney on the Federal Highway (National Highway 23), which connects with the Hume Highway (National Highway 31) near Goulburn, and seven hours by road from Melbourne on the Barton Highway (National Highway 25), which joins the Hume Highway at Yass. It is a two-hour drive on the Monaro Highway (National Highway 23) to the ski fields of the Snowy Mountains and the Kosciuszko National Park. Batemans Bay, a popular holiday spot on the New South Wales coast, is also two hours away via the Kings Highway. Canberra Airport provides direct domestic services to Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Gold Coast, Hobart, Melbourne, Perth, Sunshine Coast and Sydney with connections to other domestic centres. There are also direct flights to small regional towns: Ballina, Dubbo, Newcastle and Port Macquarie in New South Wales. Canberra Airport is, as of September 2013, designated by the Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development as a restricted use designated international airport. International flights have previously been operated by both Singapore Airlines and Qatar Airways. Fiji Airways has announced direct flights to Nadi commencing in July 2023. Until 2003 the civilian airport shared runways with RAAF Base Fairbairn. In June of that year, the Air Force base was decommissioned and from that time the airport was fully under civilian control. Canberra has one of the highest rates of active travel of all Australian major cities, with 7.1 per cent of commuters walking or cycling to work in 2011. An ACT Government survey conducted in late 2010 found that Canberrans walk an average of 26 minutes each day. According to The Canberra Times in March 2014, Canberra's cyclists are involved in an average of four reported collisions every week. The newspaper also reported that Canberra is home to 87,000 cyclists, translating to the highest cycling participation rate in Australia; and, with higher popularity, bike injury rates in 2012 were twice the national average. Since late 2020, two scooter-sharing systems have been operational in Canberra: orange scooters from Neuron Mobility and purple scooters from Beam Mobility, both Singapore-based companies that operate in many Australian cities. These services cover much of Canberra Central and Central Belconnen, with plans to expand coverage to more areas of the city in 2022. The government-owned Icon Water manages Canberra's water and sewerage infrastructure. ActewAGL is a joint venture between ACTEW and AGL, and is the retail provider of Canberra's utility services including water, natural gas, electricity, and also some telecommunications services via a subsidiary TransACT. Canberra's water is stored in four reservoirs, the Corin, Bendora and Cotter dams on the Cotter River and the Googong Dam on the Queanbeyan River. Although the Googong Dam is located in New South Wales, it is managed by the ACT government. Icon Water owns Canberra's two wastewater treatment plants, located at Fyshwick and on the lower reaches of the Molonglo River. Electricity for Canberra mainly comes from the national power grid through substations at Holt and Fyshwick (via Queanbeyan). Power was first supplied from the Kingston Powerhouse near the Molonglo River, a thermal plant built in 1913, but this was finally closed in 1957. The ACT has four solar farms, which were opened between 2014 and 2017: Royalla (rated output of 20 megawatts, 2014), Mount Majura (2.3 MW, 2016), Mugga Lane (13 MW, 2017) and Williamsdale (11 MW, 2017). In addition, numerous houses in Canberra have photovoltaic panels or solar hot water systems. In 2015 and 2016, rooftop solar systems supported by the ACT government's feed-in tariff had a capacity of 26.3 megawatts, producing 34,910 MWh. In the same year, retailer-supported schemes had a capacity of 25.2 megawatts and exported 28,815 MWh to the grid (power consumed locally was not recorded). There are no wind-power generators in Canberra, but several have been built or are being built or planned in nearby New South Wales, such as the 140.7 megawatt Capital Wind Farm. The ACT government announced in 2013 that it was raising the target for electricity consumed in the ACT to be supplied from renewable sources to 90% by 2020, raising the target from 210 to 550 megawatts. It announced in February 2015 that three wind farms in Victoria and South Australia would supply 200 megawatts of capacity; these are expected to be operational by 2017. Contracts for the purchase of an additional 200 megawatts of power from two wind farms in South Australia and New South Wales were announced in December 2015 and March 2016. The ACT government announced in 2014 that up to 23 megawatts of feed-in-tariff entitlements would be made available for the establishment of a facility in the ACT or surrounding region for burning household and business waste to produce electricity by 2020. The ACT has the highest rate with internet access at home (94 per cent of households in 2014–15). Canberra has three sister cities: Beijing, China Nara, Japan Wellington, New Zealand In addition, Canberra has the following friendship cities: Hangzhou, China: The ACT Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Hangzhou Municipal People's Government on 29 October 1998. The Agreement was designed to promote business opportunities and cultural exchanges between the two cities. Dili, East Timor: The Canberra Dili Friendship Agreement was signed in 2004, aiming to build friendship and mutual respect and promote educational, cultural, economic, humanitarian and sporting links between Canberra and Dili. Australia portal 1971 Canberra flood 2003 Canberra bushfires List of planned cities List of tallest buildings in Canberra Lists of capitals In accordance with the Australian Bureau of Statistics source, England, Scotland, Mainland China and the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau are listed separately As a percentage of 373,561 persons who nominated their ancestry at the 2016 census. The Australian Bureau of Statistics has stated that most who nominate "Australian" as their ancestry are part of the Anglo-Celtic group. Of any ancestry. Includes those identifying as Aboriginal Australians or Torres Strait Islanders. Indigenous identification is separate to the ancestry question on the Australian Census and persons identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander may identify any ancestry. Of any ancestry. Includes those identifying as Aboriginal Australians or Torres Strait Islanders. Indigenous identification is separate to the ancestry question on the Australian Census and persons identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander may identify any ancestry. "Regional population, 2022-23". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 26 March 2024. Retrieved 26 March 2024. "GFS / BOM data for CANBERRA AIRPORT". Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2018. "Planning Data Statistics". ACT Planning & Land Authority. 21 July 2009. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Great Circle Distance between CANBERRA and SYDNEY". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2016. "Great Circle Distance between CANBERRA and MELBOURNE". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2016. "Great Circle Distance between CANBERRA and ADELAIDE". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2016. "Great Circle Distance between CANBERRA and BRISBANE". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2016. "Great Circle Distance between CANBERRA and PERTH". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2016. Augmented Electoral Commission for the Australian Capital Territory (July 2018). "Redistribution of the Australian Capital Territory into electoral divisions" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 16 September 2018. The electoral divisions described in this report came into effect from Friday 13 July 2018 ... However, members of the House of Representatives will not represent or contest these electoral divisions until ... a general election. "Canberra map". Britannica. 2013. Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Flood, J. M.; David, B.; Magee, J.; English, B. (1987), "Birrigai: a Pleistocene site in the south eastern highlands", Archaeology in Oceania, 22: 9–22, doi:10.1002/j.1834-4453.1987.tb00159.x "Community Stories: Canberra Region". National Museum of Australia. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Davison, Graeme; Hirst, John; Macintyre, Stuart, eds. (1998). The Oxford Companion to Australian History. Oxford University Press. pp. 464–465, 662–663. ISBN 9780195535976. Nowroozi, Isaac (19 February 2021). "Celebrating Marion Mahony Griffin, the woman who helped shape Canberra". ABC News. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Lewis, Wendy; Balderstone, Simon; Bowan, John (2006). Events That Shaped Australia. New Holland. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-74110-492-9. "Canberra ranked 'best place to live' by OECD". BBC News. 8 October 2014. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2021. Riordan, Primrose (7 October 2014). "Canberra named the best place in the world...again". The Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "Why Canberra is Australia's most liveable city". Switzer Daily. 4 February 2020. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "'Criminally overlooked': Canberra named third-best travel city in the world". ABC News. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "Lonely Planet lists Canberra as one of the world's three hottest destinations". The Guardian. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "EDA ACT Economic Indicators". EDA Australia. Archived from the original on 29 March 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "2016 Census Community Profiles: Australian Capital Territory". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. "Canberra blooms: Australia's biggest celebration of spring - People's Daily Online". en.people.cn. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Floriade - the biggest blooming show in Australia". Australian Traveller. 5 September 2014. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2021. Osborne, Tegan (3 April 2016). "What is the Aboriginal history of Canberra?". ABC News. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Ngambri people consider claiming native title over land in Canberra after ACT government apologises". ABC News. 29 April 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023. The name 'Canberra' is derived from the name of our people and country: the Ngambri, the Kamberri. Selkirk, Henry (1923). "The Origins of Canberra". The Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society. 9: 49–78. Retrieved 23 May 2022. Cambage, Richard Hind (1919). "Part X, The Federal Capital Territory". Notes on the Native Flora of New South Wales. Linnean Society of New South Wales. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "A Skull Where Once The Native Roamed". The Canberra Times. Vol. 37, no. 10,610. Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 9 August 1963. p. 2. Retrieved 23 May 2022 – via National Library of Australia. Frei, Patricia. "Discussion on the Meaning of 'Canberra'". Canberra History Web. Patricia Frei. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Hull, Crispin (6 February 2009). "European settlement and the naming of Canberra". Canberra – Australia's National Capital. Crispin Hull. Archived from the original on 26 April 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2010. "Suggested names for Australia's new capital | naa.gov.au". www.naa.gov.au. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021. "Australia For Everyone: Canberra - The Names of Canberra". Australia Guide. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021. Salvage, Jess (25 August 2016). "The Siting and Naming of Canberra". www.nca.gov.au. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2021. "ABORIGINES ADVISED AINSLIE TO CHOOSE DUNTROON". The Canberra Times. Vol. 28, no. 3, 213. Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 30 April 1954. p. 2. Retrieved 24 May 2022 – via National Library of Australia. "CANBERRA BLACKS". Sydney Morning Herald. No. 27, 886. New South Wales, Australia. 21 May 1927. p. 11. Retrieved 24 May 2022 – via National Library of Australia. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Heritage Trail (PDF). Australian National University. Gillespie, Lyall (1984). Aborigines of the Canberra Region. Canberra: Wizard (Lyall Gillespie). pp. 1–25. ISBN 0-9590255-0-2. "Blundells Cottage". National Capital Authority. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Cambage, R.H. (1921). "Exploration between the Wingecarribee, Shoalhaven, Macquarie and Murrumbidgee Rivers". Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society. 7 (5): 217–288. Retrieved 23 May 2022. Canberra – Australia's capital city, Australian Government, 4 February 2010, archived from the original on 12 February 2014 Fitzgerald 1987, p. 5. Gillespie 1991, pp. 3–8. Currie, Mark John (1823), Journal of an excursion to the southward of Lake George in New South Wales, nla.obj-62444232, retrieved 24 May 2022 – via Trove Gillespie 1991, p. 9. "LETTERS". Sydney Morning Herald. National Library of Australia. 31 January 1934. p. 6. Archived from the original on 28 July 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2012. Gibbney 1988, p. 48. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 9. "The Royal Military College, Duntroon" (PDF). Defence Housing Australia. p. 81. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Gibbney 1988, pp. 87–95. "Canberra and the Early Settlers". Sydney Mail. Vol. XXXI, no. 789. New South Wales, Australia. 11 May 1927. p. 13. Retrieved 24 May 2022 – via National Library of Australia. "Government House". Governor General of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Sparke 1988, p. 116. Gillespie 1991, p. 78. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 17. Weatherill, David (2007). "Church of St John the Baptist Cemetery". The Heraldry & Genealogy Society of Canberra. Archived from the original on 3 April 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2010. Wilson, Randall (2012). Sanctuary in the city: the Anglican Church of St John the Baptist Canberra. The Anglican Church of St John the Baptist, Canberra. ISBN 9780646574455. "Sanctuary in the City". Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020. "Discover our territory". Canberra History. Canberra & District Historical Society. Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2020. Danielle, Nohra (3 July 2019). "New roof for Canberra's oldest church". City News (Canberra). Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. W, Sue. "St John's Church & Schoolhouse Museum". Weekend Notes. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 22 April 2020. Rowley, C.D. (1970). The Destruction of Aboriginal Society. Canberra: ANU Press. "Canberra – Australia's capital city". Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts. 4 February 2010. Archived from the original on 10 April 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 92. Gillespie 1991, pp. 220–230. Wigmore 1971, p. 24. Fitzhardinge, L. F. (1975). Old Canberra and the search for a capital. Canberra & District Historical Society. p. 27. ISBN 0-909655-02-2. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 93. Tom Lawrence, "The competition for the plan of Canberra", in supplement "Australia - 100 Years a Nation", The Canberra Times, 1 January 2001 Fitzgerald 1987, p. 100. Gillespie 1991, p. 178. Wigmore 1971, pp. 160–166. Wigmore 1971, p. 63. Gillespie 1991, p. 303. "Naming the Federal Capital of Australia", Australian Screen, National Film & Sound Archive, 1913, archived from the original on 17 February 2014 Fitzgerald 1987, p. 103. Australian Bureau of Statistics 1963. "View Naming the Federal Capital of Australia". YouTube. 12 March 1913. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 105. Wigmore 1971, pp. 70–71. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 101. National Capital Development Commission 1988, p. 4. Wigmore 1971, pp. 69–79. "History of the NCA". National Capital Authority. 11 June 2009. Archived from the original on 12 February 2014. Retrieved 26 February 2010. "Glenloch Cork Oak Plantation". Territory and Municipal Services. Archived from the original on 21 July 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2010. "Government House". The Australiana Fund. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. "Government House". Office of the Official Secretary to the Governor General. Archived from the original on 10 March 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 130. Museum of Australian Democracy at Old Parliament House (12 April 2010). "Witness to history: the opening of the Provisional Parliament House in 1927". Museum of Australian Democracy at Old Parliament House. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. "Ethel Bruce – Stanley Melbourne Bruce – Australia's PMs – Australia's Prime Ministers". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 11 February 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Wigmore 1971, p. 101. Wigmore 1971, pp. 125–128. Gibbney 1988, pp. 116–126. "Canberra Churches and Cathedrals: Canberra, Australian Capital Territory - ACT, Australia". Archived from the original on 29 December 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2021. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 115. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 128. Wigmore 1971, p. 113. Stephen Wilks, "The visitation of 1939", The Canberra Times, 29 June 2000, p. 11 Sparke 1988, p. 6. Sparke 1988, pp. 1–3. Sparke 1988, pp. 7–9. Minty, A. E. (1973). "Lake Burley Griffin, Australia". In Ackermann, William C.; White, Gilbert F.; Worthington, E. B. (eds.). Man-Made Lakes: Their Problems and Environmental Effects. American Geophysical Union. p. 804. Sparke 1988, p. 30. Sparke 1988, pp. 31–32. Sparke 1988, pp. 103–104, 145, 188, 323. Wigmore 1971, pp. 111–120. Gibbney 1988, pp. 230–242. Sparke 1988, pp. 130–140. Sparke 1988, pp. 170–180. National Capital Development Commission 1988, p. 18. Sparke 1988, pp. 173–174. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 138. Gibbney 1988, p. 250. Sparke 1988, p. 180. Universal Publishers 2007, p. 6. "Australian Parliament House – 10 Years On". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 5 May 1998. Archived from the original on 18 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Buxton, David (1965). "Self-Government for the Australian Capital Territory?". The Australian Quarterly. 37 (1): 40–49. doi:10.2307/20634023. hdl:1885/132092. ISSN 0005-0091. JSTOR 20634023. "Election timetable – 1989 Election". Elections ACT. Archived from the original on 28 March 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Fact sheets". Legislative Assembly for the ACT. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Role of the Assembly". Legislative Assembly for the ACT. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Past election results". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2010. Jerga, Josh (3 December 2009). "NSW boasts first female leadership team". The Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 15 May 2012. Retrieved 13 January 2010. Doogan, Maria (December 2006). The Canberra Firestorm: Inquests and inquiry into four deaths and four fires between 8 and 18 January 2003 (PDF). Vol. 1. Canberra: ACT Coroners Court. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 May 2009. Retrieved 7 June 2010. "About the Centenary of Canberra". Centenary of Canberra unit – ACT Government. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2013. "Sculpture as hot-air balloon - a whale of a commission". Media release. ACT Chief Minister and Cabinet Directorate. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. Maher, Louise. "StellrScope: Swirling art and science". 666 ABC Canberra. ABC. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. "New Skywhale hot air balloon, Skywhalepapa, debuts in Canberra but unfavourable weather keeps sculpture on the ground". ABC News. 7 February 2021. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "Climate of Canberra Area". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 12 July 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Lady luck or lucky lady?". The Queanbeyan Age. 19 July 2002. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. "Canberra Nature Park: Mt Majura Nature Reserve" (PDF). ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Canberra Nature Park: Mt Taylor Nature Reserve" (PDF). ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Canberra Nature Park: Mt Ainslie Nature Reserve" (PDF). ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Canberra Nature Park: Mt Mugga Mugga Nature Reserve" (PDF). ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Canberra Nature Park: Black Mountain Nature Reserve" (PDF). ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. Penguin Books Australia 2000, p. 28. McLeod, Ron (2003). Inquiry into the Operational Response to the January 2003 Bushfires in the ACT (PDF). Canberra, ACT: Chief Minister's Department. ISBN 0-642-60216-6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2013. Gibbney 1988, inside cover. Sparke 1988, pp. 131–132. Sparke 1988, pp. 181–182. "Lake Ginninderra". ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. Archived from the original on 28 June 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013. Williams 2006, p. 260. Sparke 1988, pp. 4–7, 13–14. Scrivener Dam (PDF). National Capital Authority. pp. 1–2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2009. "Climate: Canberra – Climate graph, Temperature graph, Climate table". Climate-Data.org. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2013. "Australian heatwave: Canberra and Penrith smash temperature records that stood for 80 years". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 4 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. "Canberra's warmest winter". abc.net.au. 31 August 2011. Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 28 August 2016. "Climate statistics for Australian locations: Canberra Airport Comparison". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2011. "Australia – Climate of Our Continent". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Climate information for Canberra Aero". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. The Yowie Man, Tim (23 February 2017). "Summer saviour". Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Bureau of Meteorology Australian Capital Territory". Twitter. Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Taylor, John R.; Kossmann, Meinolf; Low, David J.; Zawar-Reza, Peyman (September 2005). "Summertime easterly surges in southeastern Australia: a case study of thermally forced flow" (PDF). Australian Meteorological Magazine (54): 213–223. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Canberra chokes on world's worst air quality as city all but shut down". TheGuardian.com. 3 January 2020. Archived from the original on 4 January 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2020. "Climate statistics for Australian locations: Canberra Airport Comparison (1991–2020)". Bureau of Meteorology. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Climate statistics for Australian locations: Canberra Airport". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Wigmore 1971, pp. 60–63. Wigmore 1971, p. 67. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 10–120. National Capital Development Commission 1988, p. 3. Wigmore 1971, p. 64. National Capital Development Commission 1988, p. 17. Wigmore 1971, pp. 64–67. "Timeline Entries for William Morris Hughes". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 10–60. Gibbney 1988, pp. 110–200. "About Weston Creek, Canberra". Weston Creek Community Council. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Fitzgerald 1987, p. 167. "Lake Burley Griffin Interactive Map". National Capital Authority. Archived from the original on 22 May 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2009. Sparke 1988, pp. 154–155. "How to cut through the ACT's planning thicket". The Canberra Times. 2 March 2005. Archived from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Trail, Jim (9 April 2010). "It's time to review the grand plan for Canberra, says the NCA". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Grants of leases". ACT Planning & Land Authority. Archived from the original on 29 September 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Alexandra, Jason; Norman, Barbara (23 July 2020). "The city as forest - integrating living infrastructure, climate conditioning and urban forestry in Canberra, Australia". Sustainable Earth. 3 (1): 10. Bibcode:2020SuERv...3...10A. doi:10.1186/s42055-020-00032-3. ISSN 2520-8748. "Place name processes". ACT Planning & Land Authority. 11 May 2009. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2010. "Foreign Embassies in Australia". Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2015. Johnston, Dorothy (September 2000). "Cyberspace and Canberra Crime Fiction". Australian Humanities Review. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Environmental care". www.floriadeaustralia.com. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2015. "Sustainability issues in Canberra – background". ACT Government. 13 June 2012. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Corbell, Simon (28 August 2013). "Minister showcases Canberra's sustainability success" (Press release). Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "ACT sets 90% renewable energy target in law" (Press release). ACT Government. 4 November 2013. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. Lawson, Kirsten (29 April 2016). "ACT commits to 100 per cent renewable energy target by 2020: Simon Corbell". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. "ACT to be powered by 100pc renewable energy by 2020". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 April 2016. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. "Zero waste" (PDF). Residua. September 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 November 2011. Lauer, Sandra (23 May 2007). "Reducing commercial waste going to landfill in Canberra by improving the waste management practices of micro businesses" (PDF). ACT Government. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2013. "Canberra's waste dilemma". CityNews. Canberra. 2 March 2011. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Allen, Craig (1 March 2010). "No waste". ABC News. Archived from the original on 27 January 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "Plastic Bag Ban". Canberra Connect. ACT Government. 1 November 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2013. Dyett, Kathleen (1 November 2011). "ACT bag ban begins". ABC News. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. "Bin bag sales booming". ABC News. 9 January 2012. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Nash, Lucy (18 January 2010). "No waste 2010=some waste 2010". 666 ABC Canberra. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Pryor, Penny (30 October 2011). "Saving money can help save others". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. "Role of the Assembly". Legislative Assembly for the ACT. 2010. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Electorates 2016 election". Elections ACT. 27 April 2016. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2016. "Canberra". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 December 2007. Archived from the original on 9 March 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2010. "Fraser". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 December 2007. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2010. "Turbulent 20yrs of self-government". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 11 May 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2010. Green, Antony. "2016 ACT Election Preview". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2016. "Administration of National Land". National Capital Authority. 18 December 2008. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Capital Works Overview". National Capital Authority. 23 October 2008. Archived from the original on 16 May 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Maintenance and Operation of Assets". National Capital Authority. 23 October 2008. Archived from the original on 16 May 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988 (Cth) Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988 (Cth) Schedule 4. Sparke 1988, p. 289. "ACT Representation (House of Representatives) Act 1974 (Cth)". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 16 December 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2010. "ACT elects David Pocock as first independent senator, unseating Liberal Zed Seselja". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 14 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Frequently Asked Questions". Australian Federal Police. 19 November 2009. Archived from the original on 3 January 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2010. "ACT Policing". Australian Federal Police. 16 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "History of the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court". The Supreme Court of the ACT. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Laverty, Jo (21 May 2009). "The Belconnen Remand Centre". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 29 April 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Kittel, Nicholas (26 November 2008). "ACT prison built to meet human rights obligations". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Canberra Court List". Family Court of Australia. Archived from the original on 3 May 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Court Listing". ACT Law Courts and Tribunals. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Crime". Australian Federal Police. ACT Policing. 7 March 2016. Archived from the original on 28 February 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "4510.0 – Recorded Crime – Victims, Australia, 2016". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 6 July 2017. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Australian Bureau of Statistics (27 June 2017). "Australian Capital Territory". 2016 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Australian Bureau of Statistics (27 June 2017). "Australia". 2016 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 7 December 2017. "CMTED Brief". ACT Government. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "ACT Stats, 2005". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 12 September 2005. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "CMTED Brief". ACT Government. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. Janda, Michael (29 October 2009). "House prices surge as rate hike looms". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 August 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "It's official: the property market has cooled". Real Estate Institute of Australia. 9 September 2010. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 7 June 2010. "Census of Population and Housing Australia in Profile A Regional Analysis". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2004. Archived from the original on 2 April 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Clisby, Meredith (16 January 2014). "ACT still expensive place to live despite fall in rent prices". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 8 March 2014. All of the land in the ACT land is held by the government. s68 allows for an annual increase linked to a Rental Housing CPI index, which is usually significantly higher than CPI. For 2008 this deems an increase up to 10.12% as not excessive on the face of it. "CMTED Brief". ACT Government. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "HMAS Harman". Royal Australian Navy. 2008. Archived from the original on 15 May 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2013. "Fairbairn: Australian War Memorial". Australian War Memorial. 2010. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "RAAF Museum Fairbairn". RAAF Museum. 2009. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "No 34 Squadron". RAAF Museum. 2009. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Sutherland, Tracy (15 January 2007). "USFTA begins to reap results". Australian Financial Review. Archived from the original on 13 October 2009. Retrieved 17 June 2010. Sharma, Mahesh (2 April 2008). "HP bids for Tower Software". The Australian. Retrieved 17 June 2010. Colley, Andrew (2 October 2007). "HP bids for Tower Software". The Australian. Retrieved 17 June 2010. "Canberra Cyber Security Innovation Node launches". IT Brief. Archived from the original on 29 March 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Regional population, 2021". Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 11 September 2022. Australian Bureau of Statistics (27 June 2017). "Canberra - Queanbeyan (Canberra Part)". 2016 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Australian Bureau of Statistics (31 October 2012). "Canberra - Queanbeyan (Canberra Part)". 2011 Census QuickStats. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Australian Demographic Statistics, Dec 2002". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 5 June 2003. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2010. "6227.0 – Education and Work, Australia, May 2017". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 6 November 2017. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Sweet charity: territory leads in giving". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. 4 November 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Statistics, c=AU; o=Commonwealth of Australia; ou=Australian Bureau of (January 1995). "Feature Article - Ethnic and Cultural Diversity in Australia (Feature Article)". www.abs.gov.au. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "2016 Census QuickStats: Australian Capital Territory". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2021. "University of Canberra". Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations. Archived from the original on 11 December 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Australian National University". Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Gibbney 1988, pp. 258–262. "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2004" (PDF). Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Canberra Campus". Australian Catholic University. 5 May 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Canberra School of Theology". Charles Sturt University. Archived from the original on 30 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. UNSW strikes prime land deal with ACT Government to build $1 billion campus in central Canberra Archived 5 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Tom Lowrey and Tom Maddocks, ABC News Online, 5 March 2020 Brewer, Peter (29 January 2021). "First glimpse of bold plans for university campus on Constitution Avenue". The Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "Australian Defence College". Australian Defence College. Archived from the original on 8 August 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Campbell". North Canberra Community Council. Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "The Program". Australian Defence Force Academy. Archived from the original on 27 August 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Introduction". Australian Defence Force Academy. 2 April 2009. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Officer Training". Defence Jobs. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "CIT Locations". cit.edu.au. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. "CIT Annual Report 2019" (PDF). Annual Report. Canberra Institute of Technology: 15. 2020. ISSN 1322-5456. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. Williams, Kathryn Lewis, Elliot (24 August 2020). "CIT Woden campus plans approved with classes to begin in 2025". The Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "4221.0 - Schools, Australia, 2016". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2 February 2017. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. Barr, Andrew (2007). "Towards 2020: Renewing Our Schools – Message from the Minister". ACT Department of Education and Training. Archived from the original on 2 March 2011. Retrieved 13 May 2005. "Closing date for primary school". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 October 2009. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2010. "Tharwa, Hall schools should be reopened: committee". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 17 September 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "School closures report 'doesn't go far enough'". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 31 January 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 1–90. Macdonald, Emma (8 May 2013). "Public schools win young, but lose seniors". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014. "Locations and opening hours". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "The Shine Dome". Australian Academy of Science. Archived from the original on 5 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Visiting the High Court". High Court of Australia. Archived from the original on 17 October 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Visitors". Parliament of Australia. Archived from the original on 17 February 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Opening hours". Royal Australian Mint. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013. "Outdoor and Nature". Visit Canberra. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Canberra Museum and Gallery". ACT Government. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. "Lanyon". ACT Museums and Galleries. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Minders of Tuggeranong Homestead". Chief Minister's Department. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Mugga-Mugga". ACT Museums and Galleries. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Calthorpes' House". ACT Museums and Galleries. Archived from the original on 25 October 2009. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Atkinson, Ann; Knight, Linsay; McPhee, Margaret (1996). The Dictionary of Performing Arts in Australia: Opera, Dance, Music. Allen & Unwin. pp. 46–47. ISBN 1-86448-005-X. Daly, Margo (2003). Rough Guide to Australia. Rough Guides. p. 67. ISBN 1-84353-090-2. "Fact sheets". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 17 September 2013. Clarke, Jenna (9 July 2013). "Foreshore Festival axed for 2013". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 18 August 2013. Fallon, Naomi; Scanlon, Joni (11 October 2012). "Stone rolls on". The Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Egging, Kiel (16 September 2012), Stonefest Returns As 'Stone Day' – 2012 Lineup Announced, Music Feeds, archived from the original on 19 September 2012 Vaisutis 2009, pp. 283–285. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 10–12. Vaisutis 2009, pp. 278. "Canberra's international relationships". Chief Minister's Department. 22 November 2018. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 20 October 2009. "Festival celebrates Canberra-Nara friendship". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 26 September 2008. Archived from the original on 29 September 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Canberra Nara Park". ACT Government Territory and Municipal Services. 9 October 1999. Archived from the original on 17 September 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013. "Speaker archive". National Press Club of Australia. Archived from the original on 19 April 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Wigmore 1971, p. 87. Waterford, Jack (3 March 2013). "History of a paper anniversary". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 17 September 2013. "BMA comes of age". 666 ABC Canberra. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 24 March 2013. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Bills Digest No. 132 2001–02: Broadcasting Services Amendment (Media Ownership) Bill 2002". Parliament of Australia. 21 March 2002. Archived from the original on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 25 September 2013. "Subscription television". TransACT. 11 June 2009. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 25 September 2013. "Brumbies Crowned Super 12 Champions". Irish Rugby. 22 May 2004. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Premiership Records". NRL. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2015. "Canberra Stadium". Australian Institute of Sport. Archived from the original on 9 October 2007. Retrieved 9 March 2016. "Sydney 2000:Football". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 1999. Archived from the original on 3 August 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Complete draw for 2003 Rugby World Cup". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 2003. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Canberra downs Roar to clinch W-League title". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 31 January 2012. Archived from the original on 1 February 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2012. "Caps take WNBL championship". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 17 February 2007. Archived from the original on 26 October 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2007. Growden 2008, pp. 200–210. "Canberra Marathon". Canberra Marathon. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Weaknesses exposed in VFL transfer plan". The Canberra Times. Vol. 55, no. 16, 746. Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 2 August 1981. p. 6. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2021 – via National Library of Australia. Tassie wants in, so does the NT. Where will AFL teams 19 and 20 come from? Archived 2 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine Max Laughton. Fox Sports 5 March 2020 Sparke 1988, p. 304. "History and successes". Australian Institute of Sport. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Boating on Lake Burley Griffin". National Capital Authority. Archived from the original on 23 September 2007. Retrieved 9 October 2007. "Lake Burley Griffin reopens". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 16 November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2010. Coronavirus restrictions-approved exercise in Canberra — excluding a walk around the lake Archived 23 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Niki Burnside, ABC News Online, 19 April 2020 "Hospitals". ACT Health. Archived from the original on 26 March 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Canberra Hospital". ACT Health. Archived from the original on 16 July 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Contact Us & Location Map". Calvary Health Care ACT. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Public Hospital". Calvary Health Care ACT. Archived from the original on 18 July 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Cronin, Fiona (12 August 2008). "Chemo crisis to hit ACT patients". The Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Welcome to Calvary John James Hospital". Calvary John James Hospital. Archived from the original on 28 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "15 years since hospital implosion tragedy". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. 13 July 2012. Archived from the original on 14 July 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2013. Reynolds, Fiona (5 November 1999). "Increasing pressure on ACT Chief Minister". A.M. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2009. "About Emergency". ACT Government Health Information. Archived from the original on 11 October 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "About Us". ACT Emergency Services Authority. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "What is NETS?". Newborn Emergency Transport Service. Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Canberra's transport system" (PDF). Parliament of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Penguin Books Australia 2000, pp. 23–25. Penguin Books Australia 2000, pp. 3–6, 32–35, 53–59, 74–77, 90–91, 101–104. "ACT Road Hierarchy". ACT Government. 21 August 2012. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 14 February 2014. "Survey shows speeding at disputed camera site". Chief Minister's Department. 17 July 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "Speeding". Australian Federal Police. 20 May 2008. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 57, 67, 77. Universal Publishers 2007, pp. 1–100. Lawson, Kirsten (11 March 2014). "Impact of traffic cameras on speed put under microscope". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 11 March 2014. "Corporate". ACTION. Archived from the original on 5 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. "About Us". Transborder Express. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2017. "About Us". Qcity Transit. Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2017. "Trams run near empty as light rail turns one". Canberra Weekly. Newstate Media. 20 April 2020. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "London Circuit to be raised for light rail stage 2A". Canberra Weekly. Newstate Media. 12 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Federal Government contributes $132.5 million toward light rail stage 2A". Canberra Weekly. Newstate Media. 23 February 2021. Archived from the original on 3 March 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Taxi company 'not concerned' at losing monopoly". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 3 February 2007. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011. "Uber launches in ACT as Canberra becomes first city to regulate ride sharing". Australian Broadcasting Commission. 31 October 2015. Archived from the original on 1 November 2015. McIlroy, Tom (30 October 2015). "Uber goes live in Canberra with more than 100 drivers registered". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. "ACT chief minister launches regulated Uber in Canberra, calling it 'a real step forward'". The Guardian. 30 October 2015. Archived from the original on 3 November 2015. "Fully-regulated Uber services start in Canberra". Australian Financial Review. Fairfax Media. 30 October 2015. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. "Taxis". Canberra Airport. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "Australian-owned ride-booking app GoCatch to begin driving Canberra Airport customers". GoCatch. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "Southern timetable". NSW TrainLink. 7 September 2019. "Travel pass agencies". CountryLink. 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2010. Shellshear, Walter M. "Railways". Canberra's Engineering Heritage. Engineers Australia. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2010. Penguin Books Australia 2000, pp. 20. Richardson, Michael (19 July 2000). "Sydney to Canberra in 80 Minutes–by High-Speed Train". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2010. "Oz HSR Received?". The Australian. 29 October 2002. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 7 June 2010. Somer, Belinda (14 June 2001). "Govt considers rail link between eastern cities". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 13 January 2009. Retrieved 7 June 2010. MacDonald, B.T. (May 1967). "Railways in the Australian Capital Territory". Australian Railway Historical Society Bulletin: 106–116. AECOM; Booz and Co; KPMG; Hyder; Acil Tasman; Grimshaw Architects (April 2013). "High Speed Rail Study Phase 2 Report" (PDF). Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Transport. Libraries Australia ID 50778307. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2013. Gibbney 1988, pp. 58, 60. Penguin Books Australia 2000, inside cover. "Departures". Canberra Airport. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Designated International Airports in Australia". Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development. 27 February 2013. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. "Fiji Airways to Start Flying to Canberra - Reward Flight". rewardflight.com.au. 15 April 2023. Hogan, Richard (July 2003). "Farewell to Fairbairn". Air Force. 45 (12). Royal Australian Air Force. Corbell, Simon (31 July 2013). "Canberra ranks highly in national report" (Press release). Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Transport for Canberra: Transport for a sustainable city 2012–31 (PDF), ACT Government, March 2012, p. 38, archived from the original (PDF) on 31 January 2014 Thomson, Phillip (19 March 2014). "Costs add up as more cyclists take to public roads and suffer tumbles". Archived from the original on 19 March 2014. Thistleton, John (25 June 2014). "Cycling campaign group Pedal Power slams ACT government on injury rates". The Canberra Times. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. "E-scooters have rolled into Canberra - Our Canberra". Act.gov.au. 28 August 2020. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2022. "E-scooters to expand across entire city". 23 October 2021. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022. "Mount Majura Solar Farm powers up in ACT". Solar Choice. 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "What we do". ACTEW. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "About our business". ActewAGL. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. "The Water Network". ActewAGL. Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Fyshwick Sewage Treatment Plant". ActewAGL. Archived from the original on 12 March 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Lower Molonglo Water Quality Control Centre". ActewAGL. Archived from the original on 12 March 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. Independent Competition and Regulatory Commission (October 2003). "Review of Contestable Electricity Infrastructure Workshop" (PDF). p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 April 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2010. "The Founding of Canberra". The Sydney Morning Herald. 14 March 1913. p. 5. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. "20048. Kingston Powerhouse Historic Precinct (Entry to the ACT Heritage Register)" (PDF). ACT Heritage Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Australia's largest solar farm opens in the ACT" (Press release). ACT Government. 3 September 2014. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Mugga Lane solar farm opens, bringing ACT to 35 per cent renewable energy". The Canberra Times. 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 March 2017. Retrieved 1 December 2017. "Government unveils 36,000 new solar panels at Williamsdale". The Canberra Times. 5 October 2017. Archived from the original on 29 November 2017. Retrieved 1 December 2017. "2015–16 Annual Feed-in Tariff Report" (PDF). ACT Government. p. 7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Large scale feed-in tariff law expanded to meet 90% renewables target" (Press release). ACT Government. 27 February 2014. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "Wind auction result delivers renewable energy and economic benefits to the ACT" (Press release). ACT Government. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2015. "Hornsdale achieves new record price in ACT's second wind auction" (Press release). ACT Government. 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "New wind farm set to power more than just Canberra homes" (Press release). ACT Government. 4 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "Turning waste into energy" (Press release). ACT Government. 7 March 2014. Archived from the original on 11 March 2014. Retrieved 11 March 2014. "8146.0 - Household Use of Information Technology, Australia, 2014-15". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 18 February 2016. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. "Canberra adopts New Zealand capital as sister city". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 7 July 2016. Archived from the original on 10 July 2016. Hangzhou, China, ACT Government Chief Minister and Treasury Directorate, archived from the original on 9 March 2014 Dili, Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, ACT Government Chief Minister and Treasury Directorate, archived from the original on 9 March 2014 Australian Bureau of Statistics (25 January 1963). "The Australian Capital Territory, Canberra the National Capital: Fifty Years of Development". Year Book Australia. Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Lake Burley Griffin, Canberra: Policy Plan. Canberra: National Capital Development Commission. 1988. ISBN 0-642-13957-1. The Penguin Australia Road Atlas. Ringwood, Victoria: Penguin Books Australia. 2000. ISBN 0-670-88980-6. UBD Canberra. North Ryde, New South Wales: Universal Publishers. 2007. ISBN 978-0-7319-1882-9. Fitzgerald, Alan (1987). Canberra in Two Centuries: A Pictorial History. Torrens, Australian Capital Territory: Clareville Press. ISBN 0-909278-02-4. Gibbney, Jim (1988). Canberra 1913–1953. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. ISBN 0-644-08060-4. Gillespie, Lyall (1991). Canberra 1820–1913. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. ISBN 0-644-08060-4. Growden, Greg (2008). Jack Fingleton: The Man Who Stood Up To Bradman. Crows Nest, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1-74175-548-0. Sparke, Eric (1988). Canberra 1954–1980. Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. ISBN 0-644-08060-4. Vaisutis, Justine (2009). Australia. Footscray, Victoria: Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74179-160-0. Wigmore, Lionel (1971). Canberra: History of Australia's National Capital. Canberra: Dalton Publishing Company. ISBN 0-909906-06-8. Williams, Dudley (2006). The Biology of Temporary Waters. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-852811-6. Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2015. Wikiquote has quotations related to Canberra. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Canberra. Canberra travel guide from Wikivoyage WikiSatellite view of Canberra at WikiMapia Official Tourism Website The ACT Government webpage Canberra region map – all districts Canberra – Tourism Australia Canberra 100 – Celebrating Canberra's 100th anniversary List of public art in Australian Capital Territory Geographic data related to Canberra at OpenStreetMap