Dell Inc. is an American technology company that develops, sells, repairs, and supports computers and related products and services. Dell is owned by its parent company, Dell Technologies. Dell sells personal computers (PCs), servers, data storage devices, network switches, software, computer peripherals, HDTVs, cameras, printers, and electronics built by other manufacturers. The company is known for how it manages its supply chain and electronic commerce. This includes Dell selling directly to customers and delivering PCs that the customer wants. Dell was a pure hardware vendor until 2009 when it acquired Perot Systems. Dell then entered the market for IT services. The company has expanded storage and networking systems. It is now[when?] expanding from offering computers only to delivering a range of technology for enterprise customers. Dell is a subsidiary of Dell Technologies, Inc., a publicly traded company (Nasdaq: DELL), as well as a component of the NASDAQ-100 and S&P 500. Dell is ranked 31st on the Fortune 500 list in 2022, up from 76th in 2021. It is also the sixth-largest company in Texas by total revenue, according to Fortune magazine. It is the second-largest non-oil company in Texas. As of 2024,[update] it is the world's third-largest personal computer vendor by unit sales after Lenovo and HP. In 2015, Dell acquired the enterprise technology firm EMC Corporation. Dell and EMC became divisions of Dell Technologies. Dell EMC sells data storage, information security, virtualization, analytics, and cloud computing. Michael Dell founded Dell Computer Corporation, doing business as PC's Limited in 1984 while a student at the University of Texas at Austin, operating from Michael Dell's off-campus dormitory room at Dobie Center. The start-up aimed to sell IBM PC compatible computers built from stock components. Michael Dell started trading in the belief that, by selling personal computer systems directly to customers, PC's Limited could better understand customers' needs and provide the most effective computing solutions to meet those needs. Dell dropped out of college upon completion of his freshman year at the University of Texas in order to focus full-time on his fledgling business, after getting about $1,000 in expansion-capital from his family. As of April 2021, Dell's net worth was estimated to be over $50 billion (equivalent to $55,470,000,000 in 2023). In 1985, the company produced the first computer of its own design, the "Turbo PC", selling for US$795 (equivalent to $1,913 in 2023) and containing an Intel 8088-compatible processor capable of running at a maximum speed of 8 MHz. PC's Limited advertised the systems in national computer magazines for sale directly to consumers, and custom assembled each ordered unit according to a selection of options. This offered buyers prices lower than those of retail brands, but with greater convenience than assembling the components themselves. Pc's Limited was not the first company to use this business model, but they became one of the first to succeed with it. The company grossed more than $73 million in its first year of trading. The company dropped the PC's Limited name in 1987 to become Dell Computer Corporation and began expanding globally. The reasoning was that this new company name better reflected its presence in the business market, and also resolved issues with the use of "Limited" in a company name in certain countries. The company set up its first international operations in Britain; 11 more followed within the next four years. In June 1988, Dell Computer's market capitalization grew by $30 million to $80 million (equivalent to $177,850,000 in 2023) from its June 22 initial public offering of 3.5 million shares at $8.50 a share. In 1989, Dell Computer set up its first on-site service programs in order to compensate for the lack of local retailers prepared to act as service centers. In 1990, Dell Computer tried selling its products indirectly through warehouse clubs and computer superstores, but met with little success, and the company re-focused on its more successful direct-to-consumer sales model. In 1992, Fortune included Dell Computer Corporation in its list of the world's 500 largest companies, making Michael Dell the youngest CEO of a Fortune 500 company at that time. In 1993, to complement its own direct sales channel, Dell planned to sell PCs at big-box retail outlets such as Wal-Mart, which would have brought in an additional $125 million (equivalent to $238,100,000 in 2023) in annual revenue. Bain consultant Kevin Rollins persuaded Michael Dell to pull out of these deals, believing they would be money losers in the long run. Margins at retail were thin at best and Dell left the reseller channel in 1994. Rollins would soon join Dell full-time and eventually become the company president and CEO. Originally, Dell did not emphasize the consumer market, due to the higher costs and low profit margins in selling to individuals and households; this changed when the company's Internet site took off in 1996 and 1997. While the industry's average selling price to individuals was going down, Dell's was going up, as second- and third-time computer buyers who wanted powerful computers with multiple features and did not need much technical support were choosing Dell. Dell found an opportunity among PC-savvy individuals who liked the convenience of buying direct, customizing their PC to their means, and having it delivered in days. In early 1997, Dell created an internal sales and marketing group dedicated to serving the home market and introduced a product line designed especially for individual users. From 1997 to 2004, Dell steadily grew and it gained market share from competitors even during industry slumps. During the same period, rival PC vendors such as Compaq, Gateway, IBM, Packard Bell, and AST Research struggled and eventually left the market or were bought out. Dell surpassed Compaq to become the largest PC manufacturer in 1999. Operating costs made up only 10 percent of Dell's $35 billion in revenue in 2002 (equivalent to $56,680,000,000 in 2023), compared with 21 percent of revenue at Hewlett-Packard, 25 percent at Gateway, and 46 percent at Cisco. In 2002, when Compaq merged with Hewlett-Packard (the fourth-place PC maker), the newly combined Hewlett-Packard took the top spot for a time but struggled and Dell soon regained its lead. Dell grew the fastest in the early 2000s. In 2002, Dell expanded its product line to include televisions, handhelds, digital audio players, and printers. Chairman and CEO Michael Dell had repeatedly blocked President and COO Kevin Rollins's attempt to lessen the company's heavy dependency on PCs, which Rollins wanted to fix by acquiring EMC Corporation; a move that would eventually occur over 12 years later. In 2003, at the annual company meeting, the stockholders approved changing the company name to "Dell Inc." to recognize the company's expansion beyond computers. In 2004, the company announced that it would build a new assembly-plant near Winston-Salem, North Carolina; the city and county provided Dell with $37.2 million in incentive packages; the state provided approximately $250 million (equivalent to $386,600,000 in 2023) in incentives and tax breaks. In July, Michael Dell stepped aside as chief executive officer while retaining his position as chairman of the board. Kevin Rollins, who had held a number of executive posts at Dell, became the new CEO. Despite no longer holding the CEO title, Dell essentially acted as a de facto co-CEO with Rollins. Under Rollins, Dell purchased the computer hardware manufacturer Alienware in 2006. Dell Inc.'s plan anticipated Alienware continuing to operate independently under its existing management. Alienware expected to benefit from Dell's efficient manufacturing system. In 2005, while earnings and sales continued to rise, sales growth slowed considerably, and the company stock lost 25% of its value that year. By June 2006, the stock traded around US$25 which was 40% down from July 2005—the high-water mark of the company in the post-dotcom era. By June 2021, the stock had reached an all-time high of over US$100 per share, reflecting the company's successful transition to a technology solutions provider that helps customers navigate digital transformation. The slowing sales growth has been attributed to the maturing PC market, which constituted 66% of Dell's sales, and analysts suggested that Dell needed to make inroads into non-PC business segments such as storage, services, and servers. Dell's price advantage was tied to its ultra-lean manufacturing for desktop PCs, but this became less important as savings became harder to find inside the company's supply chain, and as competitors such as Hewlett-Packard and Acer made their PC manufacturing operations more efficient to match Dell, weakening Dell's traditional price differentiation. Throughout the entire PC industry, declines in prices along with commensurate increases in performance meant that Dell had fewer opportunities to upsell to their customers. As a result, the company was selling a greater proportion of inexpensive PCs than before, which eroded profit margins. The laptop segment had become the fastest-growing of the PC market, but Dell produced low-cost notebooks in China like other PC manufacturers which eliminated Dell's manufacturing cost advantages, plus Dell's reliance on Internet sales meant that it missed out on growing notebook sales in big box stores. CNET has suggested that Dell was getting trapped in the increasing commoditization of high volume low margin computers, which prevented it from offering more exciting devices that consumers demanded. Despite plans of expanding into other global regions and product segments, Dell was heavily dependent on US corporate PC market, as desktop PCs sold to both commercial and corporate customers accounted for 32 percent of its revenue, 85 percent of its revenue comes from businesses, and 64 percent of its revenue comes from North and South America, according to its 2006 third-quarter results. US shipments of desktop PCs were shrinking, and the corporate PC market, which purchases PCs in upgrade cycles, had largely decided to take a break from buying new systems. The last cycle started around 2002, three or so years after companies started buying PCs ahead of the perceived Y2K problems, and corporate clients were not expected to upgrade again until extensive testing of Microsoft's Windows Vista (expected in early 2007), putting the next upgrade cycle around 2008. Heavily dependent on PCs, Dell had to slash prices to boost sales volumes, while demanding deep cuts from suppliers. Dell had long stuck by its direct sales model. Consumers had become the main drivers of PC sales in recent years, yet there had a decline in consumers purchasing PCs through the Web or on the phone, as increasing numbers were visiting consumer electronics retail stores to try out the devices first. Dell's rivals in the PC industry, HP, Gateway and Acer, had a long retail presence and so were well poised to take advantage of the consumer shift. The lack of a retail presence stymied Dell's attempts to offer consumer electronics such as flat-panel TVs and MP3 players. Dell responded by experimenting with mall kiosks, plus quasi-retail stores in Texas and New York. Dell had a reputation as a company that relied upon supply chain efficiencies to sell established technologies at low prices, instead of being an innovator. By the mid-2000s many analysts were looking to innovating companies as the next source of growth in the technology sector. Dell's low spending on R&D relative to its revenue (compared to IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Apple Inc.)—which worked well in the commoditized PC market—prevented it from making inroads into more lucrative segments, such as MP3 players and later mobile devices. Increasing spending on R&D would have cut into the operating margins that the company emphasized. Dell had done well with a horizontal organization that focused on PCs when the computing industry moved to horizontal mix-and-match layers in the 1980s, but by the mid-2000 the industry shifted to vertically integrated stacks to deliver an end-to-end IT product, and Dell lagged far behind competitors like Hewlett-Packard and Oracle. Dell's reputation for poor customer service, which was exacerbated as it moved call centers offshore and as its growth outstripped its technical support infrastructure, came under increasing scrutiny on the Web. The original Dell model was known for high customer satisfaction when PCs sold for thousands of dollars but by the 2000s, the company could not justify that level of service when computers in the same line-up sold for hundreds of dollars.[citation needed] Rollins responded by shifting Dick Hunter from the head of manufacturing to head of customer service. Hunter, who noted that Dell's DNA of cost-cutting "got in the way," aimed to reduce call transfer times and have call center representatives resolve inquiries in one call. By 2006, Dell had spent $100 million in just a few months to improve on this and rolled out DellConnect to answer customer inquiries more quickly. In July 2006, the company started its Direct2Dell blog, and then in February 2007, Michael Dell launched IdeaStorm.com, asking customers for advice including selling Linux computers and reducing the promotional "bloatware" on PCs. These initiatives did manage to cut the negative blog posts from 49% to 22%, as well as reduce the "Dell Hell" prominent on Internet search engines. There was also criticism that Dell used faulty components for its PCs, particularly the 11.8 million OptiPlex desktop computers sold to businesses and governments from May 2003 to July 2005 that suffered from faulty capacitors. A battery recall in August 2006, as a result of a Dell laptop catching fire, caused much negative attention for the company though later, Sony was found responsible for the manufacturing of the batteries, however a Sony spokesman said the problem concerned the combination of the battery with a charger, which was specific to Dell. 2006 marked the first year that Dell's growth was slower than the PC industry as a whole. By the fourth quarter of 2006, Dell lost its title of the largest PC manufacturer to Hewlett Packard whose Personal Systems Group was invigorated thanks to a restructuring initiated by their CEO Mark Hurd. In August 2005, Dell became the subject of an informal investigation by the United States SEC. In 2006, the company disclosed that the US Attorney for the Southern District of New York had subpoenaed documents related to the company's financial reporting dating back to 2002. The company delayed filing financial reports for the third and fourth fiscal quarter of 2006, and several class-action lawsuits were filed. Dell Inc's failure to file its quarterly earnings report could have subjected the company to de-listing from the Nasdaq, but the exchange granted Dell a waiver, allowing the stock to trade normally. In August 2007, the Company announced that it would restate its earnings for fiscal years 2003 through 2006 and the first quarter of 2007 after an internal audit found that certain employees had changed corporate account balances to meet quarterly financial targets. In July 2010, the SEC announced charges against several senior Dell executives, including Dell Chairman and CEO Michael Dell, former CEO Kevin Rollins, and former CFO James Schneider, "with failing to disclose material information to investors and using fraudulent accounting to make it falsely appear that the company was consistently meeting Wall Street earnings targets and reducing its operating expenses." Dell, inc. was fined $100 million, with Michael Dell personally fined $4 million. After four out of five quarterly earnings reports were below expectations, Rollins resigned as president and CEO on January 31, 2007, and founder Michael Dell assumed the role of CEO again. On March 1, 2007, the company issued a preliminary quarterly earnings report showing gross sales of $14.4 billion, down 5% year-over-year, and net income of $687 million (30 cents per share), down 33%. Net earnings would have declined even more if not for the effects of eliminated employee bonuses, which accounted for six cents per share. NASDAQ extended the company's deadline for filing financials to May 4. Dell announced a change campaign called "Dell 2.0," reducing the number of employees and diversifying the company's products. While chairman of the board after relinquishing his CEO position, Michael Dell still had significant input in the company during Rollins' years as CEO. With the return of Michael Dell as CEO, the company saw changes in operations, the exodus of many senior vice-presidents and new personnel brought in from outside the company. Michael Dell announced a number of initiatives and plans (part of the "Dell 2.0" initiative) to improve the company's financial performance. These include elimination of 2006 bonuses for employees with some discretionary awards, reduction in the number of managers reporting directly to Michael Dell from 20 to 12, and reduction of "bureaucracy". Jim Schneider retired as CFO and was replaced by Donald Carty, as the company came under an SEC probe for its accounting practices. On April 23, 2008, Dell announced the closure of one of its biggest Canadian call-centers in Kanata, Ontario, terminating approximately 1100 employees, with 500 of those redundancies effective on the spot, and with the official closure of the center scheduled for the summer. The call-center had opened in 2006 after the city of Ottawa won a bid to host it. Less than a year later, Dell planned to double its workforce to nearly 3,000 workers add a new building. These plans were reversed, due to a high Canadian dollar that made the Ottawa staff relatively expensive, and also as part of Dell's turnaround, which involved moving these call-center jobs offshore to cut costs. The company had also announced the shutdown of its Edmonton, Alberta, office, losing 900 jobs. In total, Dell announced the ending of about 8,800 jobs in 2007–2008 — 10% of its workforce. By the late 2000s, Dell's "configure to order" approach of manufacturing—delivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications from its US facilities was no longer as efficient or competitive with high-volume Asian contract manufacturers as PCs became powerful low-cost commodities. Dell closed plants that produced desktop computers for the North American market, including the Mort Topfer Manufacturing Center in Austin, Texas (original location) and Lebanon, Tennessee (opened in 1999) in 2008 and early 2009, respectively. The desktop production plant in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, received US$280 million in incentives from the state and opened in 2005 (equivalent to $419,900,000 in 2023), but ceased operations in November 2010. Dell's contract with the state required them to repay the incentives for failing to meet the conditions, and they sold the North Carolina plant to Herbalife. Much work was transferred to manufacturers in Asia and Mexico, or some of Dell's own factories overseas. On January 8, 2009, Dell announced the closure of its manufacturing plant in Limerick, Ireland, with the loss of 1,900 jobs and the transfer of production to its plant in Łodź in Poland. The release of Apple's iPad tablet computer had a negative impact on Dell and other major PC vendors, as consumers switched away from desktop and laptop PCs. Dell's own mobility division has not managed success with developing smartphones or tablets, whether running Windows or Google Android. The Dell Streak was a failure commercially and critically due to its outdated OS, numerous bugs, and low resolution screen. InfoWorld suggested that Dell and other OEMs saw tablets as a short-term, low-investment opportunity running Google Android, an approach that neglected user interface and failed to gain long term market traction with consumers. Dell has responded by pushing higher-end PCs, such as the XPS line of notebooks, which do not compete with the Apple iPad and Kindle Fire tablets. The growing popularity of smartphones and tablet computers instead of PCs drove Dell's consumer segment to an operating loss in Q3 2012. In December 2012, Dell suffered its first decline in holiday sales in five years, despite the introduction of Windows 8. In the shrinking PC industry, Dell continued to lose market share, as it dropped below Lenovo in 2011 to fall to number three in the world. Dell and fellow American contemporary Hewlett Packard came under pressure from Asian PC manufacturers Lenovo, Asus, and Acer, all of which had lower production costs and were willing to accept lower profit margins. In addition, while the Asian PC vendors had been improving their quality and design—for instance, Lenovo's ThinkPad series was winning corporate customers away from Dell's laptops—Dell's customer service and reputation had been slipping. Dell remained the second-most profitable PC vendor, as it took 13 percent of operating profits in the PC industry during Q4 2012, behind Apple's Mac that took 45 percent, seven percent at Hewlett Packard, six percent at Lenovo and Asus, and one percent for Acer. Dell attempted to offset its declining PC business, which still accounted for half of its revenue and generates steady cash flow, by expanding into the enterprise market with servers, networking, software, and services. It avoided many of the acquisition write-downs and management turnover that plagued its chief rival Hewlett Packard. Despite spending $13 billion on acquisitions to diversify its portfolio beyond hardware, the company was unable to convince the market that it could thrive or made the transformation in the post-PC world, as it suffered continued declines in revenue and share price. Dell's market share in the corporate segment was previously a "moat" against rivals but this has no longer been the case as sales and profits have fallen precipitously. After several weeks of rumors, which started around January 11, 2013, Dell announced on February 5, 2013, that it had struck a $24.4 billion (equivalent to $31,470,000,000 in 2023) leveraged buyout deal, that would have delisted its shares from the NASDAQ and Hong Kong Stock Exchange and taken it private. Reuters reported that Michael Dell and Silver Lake Partners, aided by a $2 billion loan from Microsoft, would acquire the public shares at $13.65 apiece. The $24.4 billion buyout was projected to be the largest leveraged buyout backed by private equity since the 2007 financial crisis (equivalent to $34,550,000,000 in 2023). It is also the largest technology buyout ever, surpassing the 2006 buyout of Freescale Semiconductor for $17.5 billion (equivalent to $25,450,000,000 in 2023). Michael Dell said of the February offer "I believe this transaction will open an exciting new chapter for Dell, our customers and team members". Dell rival Lenovo responded to the buyout, saying, "the financial actions of some of our traditional competitors will not substantially change our outlook." In March 2013, the Blackstone Group and Carl Icahn expressed interest in purchasing Dell. In April 2013, Blackstone withdrew their offer, citing deteriorating business. Other private equity firms such as KKR & Co. and TPG Capital declined to submit alternative bids for Dell, citing the uncertain market for personal computers and competitive pressures, so the "wide-open bidding war" never materialized. Analysts said that the biggest challenge facing Silver Lake would be to find an "exit strategy" to profit from its investment, which would be when the company would hold an IPO to go public again, and one warned "But even if you can get a $25bn enterprise value for Dell, it will take years to get out." In May 2013, Michael Dell joined his board in voting for the offer. The following August he reached a deal with the special committee on the board for $13.88 per share, a raised price of $13.75 plus a special dividend of 13 cents, as well as a change to the voting rules. The $13.88 cash offer (plus a $.08 per share dividend for the third fiscal quarter) was accepted on September 12 and closed on October 30, 2013, ending Dell's 25-year run as a publicly-traded company. After the buyout, the newly private Dell offered a Voluntary Separation Program that they expected to reduce their workforce by up to seven percent. The reception to the program so exceeded the expectations that Dell may be forced to hire new staff to make up for the losses. On November 19, 2015, Dell, alongside Arm Holdings, Cisco Systems, Intel, Microsoft, and Princeton University, founded the OpenFog Consortium, to promote interests and development in fog computing. On October 12, 2015, Dell Inc. announced its intent to acquire EMC Corporation in a cash-and-stock deal valued at $67 billion (equivalent to $84,210,000,000 in 2023), which has been considered the largest-ever acquisition in the technology sector. As part of the acquisition, Dell would take over EMC's 81% stake in the cloud-computing and virtualization company VMware. This would combine Dell's enterprise server, personal computer, and mobile businesses with EMC's enterprise storage business in a significant Vertical merger of IT giants. Dell would pay $24.05 per share of EMC, and $9.05 per share of tracking stock in VMware. The announcement came two years after Dell Inc. returned to private ownership, claiming that it faced bleak prospects and would need several years out of the public eye to rebuild its business. It was thought that the company's value had roughly doubled since then. EMC was being pressured by Elliott Management, a hedge fund holding 2.2% of EMC's stock, to reorganize their unusual "Federation" structure, in which EMC's divisions were effectively being run as independent companies. Elliott argued this structure deeply undervalued EMC's core "EMC II" data storage business, and that increasing competition between EMC II and VMware products was confusing the market and hindering both companies. The Wall Street Journal estimated that in 2014 Dell had revenue of $27.3 billion (equivalent to $34,610,000,000 in 2023) from personal computers and $8.9 billion from servers, while EMC had $16.5 billion from EMC II, $1 billion from RSA Security, $6 billion from VMware, and $230 million from Pivotal Software. EMC owns around 80 percent of the stock of VMware. The proposed acquisition will maintain VMware as a separate company, held via a new tracking stock, while the other parts of EMC will be rolled into Dell. Once the acquisition closes Dell will again publish quarterly financial results, having ceased these on going private in 2013. The combined business was expected to address the markets for scale-out architecture, converged infrastructure and private cloud computing, playing to the strengths of both EMC and Dell. Commentators have questioned the deal, with FBR Capital Markets saying that though it makes a "ton of sense" for Dell, it's a "nightmare scenario that would lack strategic synergies" for EMC. Fortune said there was a lot for Dell to like in EMC's portfolio, but "does it all add up enough to justify tens of billions of dollars for the entire package? Probably not." The Register reported the view of William Blair & Company that the merger would "blow up the current IT chess board", forcing other IT infrastructure vendors to restructure to achieve scale and vertical integration. The value of VMware stock fell 10% after the announcement, valuing the deal at around $63–64bn rather than the $67bn originally reported. Key investors backing the deal besides Dell were Singapore's Temasek Holdings and Silver Lake Partners. On September 7, 2016, Dell completed the merger with EMC, which involved the issuance of $45.9 billion (equivalent to $57,140,000,000 in 2023) in debt and $4.4 billion (equivalent to $5,478,000,000 in 2023) of common stock. At the time, some analysts claimed that Dell's acquisition of the former Iomega could harm the LenovoEMC partnership. In July 2018, Dell announced intentions to become a publicly traded company again by paying $21.7 billion (equivalent to $25,940,000,000 in 2023) in both cash and stock to buy back shares from its stake in VMware, offering shareholders roughly 60 cents on the dollar as part of the deal. In November, Carl Icahn (9.3% owner of Dell) sued the company over plans to go public. As a result of pressure from Icahn and other activist investors, Dell renegotiated the deal, ultimately offering shareholders about 80% of market value. As part of this deal, Dell once again became a public company, with the original Dell computer business and Dell EMC operating under the newly created parent, Dell Technologies. Post-acquisition, Dell was re-organized with a new parent company, Dell Technologies; Dell's consumer and workstation businesses are internally referred to as the Dell Client Solutions Group, and is one of the company's three main business divisions alongside Dell EMC and VMware. In January 2021 (equivalent to $14,420,000,000 in 2023), Dell reported $94 billion (equivalent to $104,280,000,000 in 2023) in sales and $13 billion operating cash flow during 2020. On March 1, 2024, Dell's stock hit all time high after earnings. It delivered a strong performance from its artificial intelligence unit that sent shares up nearly 40%, its highest daily gain since the company went public in 2018. When Dell acquired Alienware early in 2006, some Alienware systems had AMD chips. On August 17, 2006, a Dell press release stated that starting in September, Dell Dimension desktop computers would have AMD processors and that later in the year Dell would release a two-socket, quad-processor server using AMD Opteron chips, moving away from Dell's tradition of only offering Intel processors in Dell PCs. CNET's News.com on August 17, 2006, cited Dell's CEO Kevin Rollins as attributing the move to AMD processors to lower costs and to AMD technology. AMD's senior VP in commercial business, Marty Seyer, stated: "Dell's wider embrace of AMD processor-based offerings is a win for Dell, for the industry and most importantly for Dell customers." On October 23, 2006, Dell announced new AMD-based servers — the PowerEdge 6950 and the PowerEdge SC1435. On November 1, 2006, Dell's website began offering notebooks based on AMD processors (the Inspiron 1501 with a 15.4-inch (390 mm) display) with the choice of a single-core MK-36 processor, dual-core Turion X2 chips or Mobile Sempron. In 2017, Dell released the AlienWare 17 gaming laptop. The model was primarily based on NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1080 systems. In 1998, Ralph Nader asked Dell (and five other major OEMs) to offer alternate operating systems to Microsoft Windows, specifically including Linux, for which "there is clearly a growing interest". Possibly coincidentally, Dell started offering Linux notebook systems that "cost no more than their Windows 98 counterparts" in 2000, and soon expanded, with Dell becoming "the first major manufacturer to offer Linux across its full product line". However, by early 2001 Dell had "disbanded its Linux business unit." On February 26, 2007, Dell announced that it had commenced a program to sell and distribute a range of computers with pre-installed Linux distributions as an alternative to Microsoft Windows. Dell indicated that Novell's SUSE Linux would appear first. However, the next day, Dell announced that its previous announcement related to certifying the hardware as ready to work with Novell SUSE Linux and that it (Dell) had no plans to sell systems pre-installed with Linux in the near future. On March 28, 2007, Dell announced that it would begin shipping some desktops and laptops with Linux pre-installed, although it did not specify which distribution of Linux or which hardware would lead. On April 18, a report appeared suggesting that Michael Dell used Ubuntu on one of his home systems. On May 1, 2007, Dell announced it would ship the Ubuntu Linux distribution. On May 24, 2007, Dell started selling models with Ubuntu Linux 7.04 pre-installed: a laptop, a budget computer, and a high-end PC. On June 27, 2007, Dell announced on its Direct2Dell blog that it planned to offer more pre-loaded systems (the new Dell Inspiron desktops and laptops). After the IdeaStorm site supported extending the bundles beyond the US market, Dell later announced more international marketing. On August 7, 2007, Dell officially announced that it would offer one notebook and one desktop in the UK, France and Germany with Ubuntu "pre-installed". At LinuxWorld 2007 Dell announced plans to provide Novell's SUSE Linux Enterprise Desktop on selected models in China, "factory-installed". On November 30, 2007, Dell reported shipping 40,000 Ubuntu PCs. On January 24, 2008, Dell in Germany, Spain, France, and the United Kingdom launched a second laptop, an XPS M1330 with Ubuntu 7.10, for 849 euro or GBP 599 upwards. On February 18, 2008, Dell announced that the Inspiron 1525 would have Ubuntu as an optional operating system. On February 22, 2008, Dell announced plans to sell Ubuntu in Canada and in Latin America From September 16, 2008, Dell has shipped both Dell Ubuntu Netbook Remix and Windows XP Home versions of the Inspiron Mini 9 and the Inspiron Mini 12. As of November 2009[update] Dell shipped the Inspiron Mini laptops with Ubuntu version 8.04. As of 2021, Dell continues to offer select laptops and workstations with Ubuntu Linux pre-installed, under the "Developer Edition" moniker. Be direct (1998-2001) Easy as Dell (2001-2004) Get more out of now (2004–2005) It's a Dell (2005-2006) Dell. Purely You (2006–2007) Yours is Here (2007–2011) The power to do more (2011–present) Michael Dell (1984– ) Michael Dell (1984–2004) Kevin Rollins (2004–2007) Michael Dell (2007–present); second term Dell's headquarters is located in Round Rock, Texas. As of 2013[update] the company employed about 14,000 people in central Texas and was the region's largest private employer, which has 2,100,000 square feet (200,000 m2) of space. As of 1999 almost half of the general fund of the city of Round Rock originated from sales taxes generated from the Dell headquarters. Dell previously had its headquarters in the Arboretum complex in northern Austin, Texas. In 1989 Dell occupied 127,000 square feet (11,800 m2) in the Arboretum complex. In 1990, Dell had 1,200 employees in its headquarters. In 1993, Dell submitted a document to Round Rock officials, titled "Dell Computer Corporate Headquarters, Round Rock, Texas, May 1993 Schematic Design." Despite the filing, during that year the company said that it was not going to move its headquarters. In 1994, Dell announced that it was moving most of its employees out of the Arboretum, but that it was going to continue to occupy the top floor of the Arboretum and that the company's official headquarters address would continue to be the Arboretum. The top floor continued to hold Dell's board room, demonstration center, and visitor meeting room. Less than one month prior to August 29, 1994, Dell moved 1,100 customer support and telephone sales employees to Round Rock. Dell's lease in the Arboretum had been scheduled to expire in 1994. By 1996, Dell was moving its headquarters to Round Rock. As of January 1996, 3,500 people still worked at the current Dell headquarters. One building of the Round Rock headquarters, Round Rock 3, had space for 6,400 employees and was scheduled to be completed in November 1996. In 1998 Dell announced that it was going to add two buildings to its Round Rock complex, adding 1,600,000 square feet (150,000 m2) of office space to the complex. In 2000, Dell announced that it would lease 80,000 square feet (7,400 m2) of space in the Las Cimas office complex in unincorporated Travis County, Texas, between Austin and West Lake Hills, to house the company's executive offices and corporate headquarters. 100 senior executives were scheduled to work in the building by the end of 2000. In January 2001, the company leased the space in Las Cimas 2, located along Loop 360. Las Cimas 2 housed Dell's executives, the investment operations, and some corporate functions. Dell also had an option for 138,000 square feet (12,800 m2) of space in Las Cimas 3. After a slowdown in business required reducing employees and production capacity, Dell decided to sublease its offices in two buildings in the Las Cimas office complex. In 2002 Dell announced that it planned to sublease its space to another tenant; the company planned to move its headquarters back to Round Rock once a tenant was secured. By 2003, Dell moved its headquarters back to Round Rock. It leased all of Las Cimas I and II, with a total of 312,000 square feet (29,000 m2), for about a seven-year period after 2003. By that year roughly 100,000 square feet (9,300 m2) of that space was absorbed by new subtenants. In 2008, Dell switched the power sources of the Round Rock headquarters to more environmentally friendly ones, with 60% of the total power coming from TXU Energy wind farms and 40% coming from the Austin Community Landfill gas-to-energy plant operated by Waste Management, Inc. Dell facilities in the United States are located in Austin, Texas; Nashua, New Hampshire; Nashville, Tennessee; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Peoria, Illinois; Hillsboro, Oregon (Portland area); Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Eden Prairie, Minnesota (Dell Compellent); Bowling Green, Kentucky; Lincoln, Nebraska; and Miami, Florida. Facilities located abroad include Penang, Malaysia; Xiamen, China; Bracknell, UK; Manila, Philippines Chennai, India; Hyderabad, India; Noida, India; Hortolândia and Porto Alegre, Brazil; Bratislava, Slovakia; Łódź, Poland; Panama City, Panama; Dublin and Limerick, Ireland; Casablanca, Morocco and Montpellier, France. The US and India are the only countries that have all Dell's business functions and provide support globally: research and development, manufacturing, finance, analysis, and customer care. From its early beginnings, Dell operated as a pioneer in the "configure to order" approach to manufacturing—delivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications. In contrast, most PC manufacturers in those times delivered large orders to intermediaries on a quarterly basis. To minimize the delay between purchase and delivery, Dell has a general policy of manufacturing its products close to its customers. This also allows for implementing a just-in-time (JIT) manufacturing approach, which minimizes inventory costs. Low inventory is another signature of the Dell business model—a critical consideration in an industry where components depreciate very rapidly. Dell's manufacturing process covers assembly, software installation, functional testing (including "burn-in"), and quality control. Throughout most of the company's history, Dell manufactured desktop machines in-house and contracted out the manufacturing of base notebooks for configuration in-house. The company's approach has changed, as cited in the 2006 Annual Report, which states, "We are continuing to expand our use of original design manufacturing partnerships and manufacturing outsourcing relationships." The Wall Street Journal reported in September 2008 that "Dell has approached contract computer manufacturers with offers to sell" their plants. By the late 2000s, Dell's "configure to order" approach of manufacturing—delivering individual PCs configured to customer specifications from its US facilities was no longer as efficient or competitive with high-volume Asian contract manufacturers as PCs became powerful low-cost commodities. Assembly of desktop computers for the North American market formerly took place at Dell plants in Austin, Texas, (original location) and Lebanon, Tennessee, (opened in 1999), which were closed in 2008 and early 2009, respectively. The plant in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, opened in 2005 but ceased operations in November 2010. Most of the work that used to take place in Dell's US plants was transferred to contract manufacturers in Asia and Mexico, or some of Dell's own factories overseas. The Miami, Florida, facility of its Alienware subsidiary remains in operation, while Dell continues to produce its servers (its most profitable products) in Austin, Texas. Dell assembled computers for the EMEA market at the Limerick facility in the Republic of Ireland, and once employed about 4,500 people in that country. Dell began manufacturing in Limerick in 1991 and went on to become Ireland's largest exporter of goods and its second-largest company and foreign investor. On January 8, 2009, Dell announced that it would move all Dell manufacturing in Limerick to Dell's new plant in the Polish city of Łódź by January 2010. European Union officials said they would investigate a €52.7million aid package the Polish government used to attract Dell away from Ireland. European Manufacturing Facility 1 (EMF1, opened in 1990) and EMF3 form part of the Raheen Industrial Estate near Limerick. EMF2 (previously a Wang facility, later occupied by Flextronics, situated in Castletroy) closed in 2002,[citation needed] and Dell Inc. has consolidated production into EMF3 (EMF1 now[when?] contains only offices). Subsidies from the Polish government did keep Dell for a long time. After ending assembly in the Limerick plant the Cherrywood Technology Campus in Dublin was the largest Dell office in the republic with over 1200 people in sales (mainly UK & Ireland), support (enterprise support for EMEA) and research and development for cloud computing, but no more manufacturing except Dell's Alienware subsidiary, which manufactures PCs in an Athlone, Ireland, plant. Whether this facility will remain in Ireland is not certain. Dell started production at EMF4 in Łódź, Poland, in late 2007. Dell moved desktop, notebook and PowerEdge server manufacturing for the South American market from the Eldorado do Sul plant opened in 1999, to a new plant in Hortolândia, Brazil, in 2007. The corporation markets specific brand names to different market segments. Its Business/Corporate class includes: OptiPlex (office desktop computer systems) Dimension (home desktop computer systems) Vostro (office/small business desktop and notebook systems) n Series (desktop and notebook computers shipped with Linux or FreeDOS installed) Latitude (business-focused notebooks) Precision (workstation systems and high-performance "Mobile Workstation" notebooks), PowerEdge (business servers) PowerVault (direct-attach and network-attached storage) Force10 (network switches) PowerConnect (network switches) Dell Compellent (storage area networks) EqualLogic (enterprise class iSCSI SANs) Dell EMR (electronic medical records) Dell's Home Office/Consumer class includes: Inspiron (budget desktop and notebook computers) XPS (high-end desktop and notebook computers) G Series (high/medium-performance gaming laptops) Alienware (high-performance gaming systems) Venue (Tablets Android / Windows) Dell's Peripherals class includes USB keydrives, LCD televisions, and printers; Dell monitors includes LCD TVs, plasma TVs and projectors for HDTV and monitors. Dell UltraSharp is further a high-end brand of monitors. Dell service and support brands include the Dell Solution Station (extended domestic support services, previously "Dell on Call"), Dell Support Center (extended support services abroad), Dell Business Support (a commercial service-contract that provides an industry-certified technician with a lower call-volume than in normal queues), Dell Everdream Desktop Management ("Software as a service" remote-desktop management, originally a SaaS company founded by Elon Musk's cousin, Lyndon Rive, which Dell bought in 2007), and Your Tech Team (a support-queue available to home users who purchased their systems either through Dell's website or through Dell phone-centers). Discontinued products and brands include Axim (PDA; discontinued April 9, 2007), Dimension (home and small office desktop computers; discontinued July 2007), Dell Digital Jukebox (MP3 player; discontinued August 2006), Dell PowerApp (application-based servers), Dell Optiplex (desktop and tower computers previously supported to run server and desktop operating systems), Dell Unix (an SVR4-based Unix operating system for its Dell-branded PCs and workstations; discontinued in 1993) and Dell Mobile Connect（Windows Mobile application; discontinued July 31st, 2022). In November 2015, it emerged that several Dell computers had shipped with an identical pre-installed root certificate known as "eDellRoot". This raised such security risks as attackers impersonating HTTPS-protected websites such as Google and Bank of America and malware being signed with the certificate to bypass Microsoft software filtering. Dell apologized and offered a removal tool. Also in November 2015, a researcher discovered that customers with diagnostic program Dell Foundation Services could be digitally tracked using the unique service tag number assigned to them by the program. This was possible even if a customer enabled private browsing and deleted their browser cookies. Ars Technica recommended that Dell customers uninstall the program until the issue was addressed. The board consists of nine directors. Michael Dell, the founder of the company, serves as chairman of the board and chief executive officer. Other board members include Don Carty, Judy Lewent, Klaus Luft, Alex Mandl, and Sam Nunn. Shareholders elect the nine board members at meetings, and those board members who do not get a majority of votes must submit a resignation to the board, which will subsequently choose whether or not to accept the resignation. The board of directors usually sets up five committees having oversight over specific matters. These committees include the Audit Committee, which handles accounting issues, including auditing and reporting; the Compensation Committee, which approves compensation for the CEO and other employees of the company; the Finance Committee, which handles financial matters such as proposed mergers and acquisitions; the Governance and Nominating Committee, which handles various corporate matters (including the nomination of the board); and the Antitrust Compliance Committee, which attempts to prevent company practices from violating antitrust laws.[citation needed] Day-to-day operations of the company are run by the Global Executive Management Committee, which sets strategic direction. Dell has regional senior vice-presidents for countries other than the United States.[citation needed] Dell advertisements have appeared in several types of media including television, the Internet, magazines, catalogs, and newspapers. Some of Dell Inc's marketing strategies include lowering prices at all times of the year, free bonus products (such as Dell printers), and free shipping to encourage more sales and stave off competitors. In 2006, Dell cut its prices in an effort to maintain its 19.2% market share. This also cut profit margins by more than half, from 8.7 to 4.3 percent. To maintain its low prices, Dell continues to accept most purchases of its products via the Internet and through the telephone network, and to move its customer-care division to India and El Salvador. A popular United States television and print ad campaign in the early 2000s featured the actor Ben Curtis playing the part of "Steven", a lightly mischievous blond-haired youth who came to the assistance of bereft computer purchasers. Each television advertisement usually ended with Steven's catch-phrase: "Dude, you're gettin' a Dell!" A subsequent advertising campaign featured interns at Dell headquarters (with Curtis' character appearing in a small cameo at the end of one of the first commercials in this particular campaign). In 2007, Dell switched advertising agencies in the US from BBDO to Working Mother Media. In July 2007, Dell released new advertising created by Working Mother to support the Inspiron and XPS lines. The ads featured music from the Flaming Lips and Devo who re-formed especially to record the song in the ad "Work it Out". Also in 2007, Dell began using the slogan "Yours is here" to say that it customizes computers to fit customers' requirements. Beginning in 2011, Dell began hosting a conference in Austin, Texas, at the Austin Convention Center titled "Dell World". The event featured new technology and services provided by Dell and Dell's partners. In 2011, the event was held October 12–14. In 2012, the event was held December 11–13. In 2013, the event was held December 11–13. In 2014, the event was held November 4–6. In late 2007, Dell Inc. announced that it planned to expand its program to value-added resellers (VARs), giving it the official name of "Dell Partner Direct" and a new Website. Dell India has started Online Ecommerce website with its Dell Partner www.compuindia.com GNG Electronics Pvt Ltd termed as Dell Express Ship Affiliate(DESA). The main objective was to reduce the delivery time. Customers who visit Dell India official site are given the option to buy online which then will be redirected to Dell affiliate website compuindia.com. Dell also operates a captive analytics division which supports pricing, web analytics, and supply chain operations. DGA operates as a single, centralized entity with a global view of Dell's business activities. The firm supports over 500 internal customers worldwide and has created a quantified impact of over $500 million.[citation needed] In 2008, Dell received press coverage over its claim of having the world's most secure laptops, specifically, its Latitude D630 and Latitude D830. At Lenovo's request, the (US) National Advertising Division (NAD) evaluated the claim, and reported that Dell did not have enough evidence to support it. Dell first opened their retail stores in India. In the early 1990s, Dell sold its products through Best Buy, Costco and Sam's Club stores in the United States. Dell stopped this practice in 1994, citing low profit margins on the business, exclusively distributing through a direct-sales model for the next decade. In 2003, Dell briefly sold products in Sears stores in the US. In 2007, Dell started shipping its products to major retailers in the US once again, starting with Sam's Club and Wal-Mart. Staples, the largest office-supply retailer in the US, and Best Buy, the largest electronics retailer in the US, became Dell retail partners later that same year. Starting in 2002, Dell opened kiosk locations in the United States to allow customers to examine products before buying them directly from the company. Starting in 2005, Dell expanded kiosk locations to include shopping malls across Australia, Canada, Singapore and Hong Kong. On January 30, 2008, Dell announced it would shut down all 140 kiosks in the US due to expansion into retail stores. By June 3, 2010, Dell had also shut down all of its mall kiosks in Australia. As of the end of February 2008[update], Dell products shipped to one of the largest office supply retailers in Canada, Staples Business Depot. In April 2008, Future Shop and Best Buy began carrying a subset of Dell products, such as certain desktops, laptops, printers, and monitors. Since some shoppers in certain markets show reluctance to purchase technological products through the phone or the Internet, Dell has looked into opening retail operations in some countries in Central Europe and Russia. In April 2007, Dell opened a retail store in Budapest. In October of the same year, Dell opened a retail store in Moscow. In the UK, HMV's flagship Trocadero store has sold Dell XPS PCs since December 2007. From January 2008 the UK stores of DSGi have sold Dell products (in particular, through Currys and PC World stores). As of 2008, the large supermarket chain Tesco has sold Dell laptops and desktops in outlets throughout the UK. In May 2008, Dell reached an agreement with the office supply chain, Officeworks (part of Coles Group), to stock a few modified models in the Inspiron desktop and notebook range. These models have slightly different model numbers, but almost replicate the ones available from the Dell Store. Dell continued its retail push in the Australian market with its partnership with Harris Technology (another part of Coles Group) in November of the same year. In addition, Dell expanded its retail distributions in Australia through an agreement with the discount electrical retailer, The Good Guys, known for "Slashing Prices". Dell agreed to distribute a variety of makes of both desktops and notebooks, including Studio and XPS systems in late 2008. Dell and Dick Smith Electronics (owned by Woolworths Limited) reached an agreement to expand within Dick Smith's 400 stores throughout Australia and New Zealand in May 2009 (1 year since Officeworks—owned by Coles Group—reached a deal). The retailer has agreed to distribute a variety of Inspiron and Studio notebooks, with minimal Studio desktops from the Dell range. As of 2009[update], Dell continues to run and operate its various kiosks in 18 shopping centers throughout Australia. On March 31, 2010, Dell announced to Australian Kiosk employees that they were shutting down the Australian/New Zealand Dell kiosk program. In Germany, Dell is selling selected smartphones and notebooks via Media Markt and Saturn, as well as some shopping websites. Dell's major competitors include Lenovo, Hewlett-Packard (HP), Hasee, Acer, Fujitsu, Toshiba, Gateway, Sony, Asus, MSI, Panasonic, Samsung and Apple. Dell and its subsidiary, Alienware, compete in the enthusiast market against AVADirect, Falcon Northwest, VoodooPC (a subsidiary of HP), and other manufacturers. In the second quarter of 2006, Dell had between 18% and 19% share of the worldwide personal computer market, compared to HP with roughly 15%. In late 2006[update], Dell lost its lead in the PC business to Hewlett-Packard. Both Gartner and IDC estimated that in the third quarter of 2006, HP shipped more units worldwide than Dell did. Dell's 3.6% growth paled in comparison to HP's 15% growth during the same period. The problem got worse in the fourth quarter, when Gartner estimated that Dell PC shipments declined 8.9% (versus HP's 23.9% growth). As a result, at the end of 2006 Dell's overall PC market share stood at 13.9% (versus HP's 17.4%). IDC reported that Dell lost more server market share than any of the top four competitors in that arena. IDC's Q4 2006 estimates show Dell's share of the server market at 8.1%, down from 9.5% in the previous year. This represents an 8.8% loss year-over-year, primarily to competitors EMC and IBM. As of 2021, Dell is the third-largest PC manufacturer after Lenovo and HP. In 2001, Dell and EMC entered into a partnership whereby both companies jointly design products, and Dell provided support for certain EMC products including midrange storage systems, such as fibre channel and iSCSI storage area networks. The relationship also promotes and sells OEM versions of backup, recovery, replication and archiving software. On December 9, 2008, Dell and EMC announced the multi-year extension, through 2013, of the strategic partnership with EMC. In addition, Dell expanded its product lineup by adding the EMC Celerra NX4 storage system to the portfolio of Dell/EMC family of networked storage systems and partnered on a new line of data deduplication products as part of its TierDisk family of data storage devices. On October 17, 2011, Dell discontinued reselling all EMC storage products, ending the partnership 2 years early. Later Dell would acquire and merge with EMC in the largest tech merger to date. Dell committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from its global activities by 40% by 2015, with the 2008 fiscal year as the baseline year. It is listed in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics that scores leading electronics manufacturers according to their policies on sustainability, climate and energy and how green their products are. In November 2011, Dell ranked 2nd out of 15 listed electronics makers (increasing its score to 5.1 from 4.9, which it gained in the previous ranking from October 2010). Dell was the first company to publicly state a timeline for the elimination of toxic polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs), which it planned to phase out by the end of 2009. It revised this commitment and now aims to remove toxics by the end of 2011 but only in its computing products. In March 2010, Greenpeace activists protested at Dell offices in Bangalore, Amsterdam and Copenhagen calling for Dell's founder and CEO Michael Dell to "drop the toxics" and claiming that Dell's aspiration to be 'the greenest technology company on the planet' was "hypocritical". Dell has launched its first products completely free of PVC and BFRs with the G-Series monitors (G2210 and G2410) in 2009. In its 2012 report on progress relating to conflict minerals, the Enough Project rated Dell the eighth-highest of 24 consumer electronics companies. Dell became the first company in the information technology industry to establish a product-recycling goal (in 2004) and completed the implementation of its global consumer recycling-program in 2006. On February 6, 2007, the National Recycling Coalition awarded Dell its "Recycling Works" award for efforts to promote producer responsibility. On July 19, 2007, Dell announced that it had exceeded targets in working to achieve a multi-year goal of recovering 275 million pounds of computer equipment by 2009. The company reported the recovery of 78 million pounds (nearly 40,000 tons) of IT equipment from customers in 2006, a 93-percent increase over 2005; and 12.4% of the equipment Dell sold seven years earlier. On June 5, 2007, Dell set a goal of becoming the greenest technology company on Earth for the long term. The company launched a zero-carbon initiative that includes: reducing Dell's carbon intensity by 15 percent by 2012 requiring primary suppliers to report carbon emissions data during quarterly business reviews partnering with customers to build the "greenest PC on the planet" expanding the company's carbon-offsetting program, "Plant a Tree for Me" Dell reports its environmental performance in an annual Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Report that follows the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) protocol. Dell's 2008 CSR report ranked as "Application Level B" as "checked by GRI". The company aims to reduce its external environmental impact through an energy-efficient evolution of products, and also reduce its direct operational impact through energy-efficiency programs.[citation needed] In the 1990s, Dell switched from using primarily ATX motherboards and PSU to using boards and power supplies with mechanically identical but differently wired connectors. This meant customers wishing to upgrade their hardware would have to replace parts with scarce Dell-compatible parts instead of commonly available parts. While motherboard power connections reverted to the industry standard in 2003, Dell remains secretive about their motherboard pin-outs for peripherals (such as MMC readers and power on/off switches and LEDs). In 2005, complaints about Dell more than doubled to 1,533, after earnings grew 52% that year. In 2006, Dell acknowledged that it had problems with customer service. Issues included call transfers of more than 45% of calls and long wait times. Dell's blog detailed the response: "We're spending more than a $100 million—and a lot of blood, sweat, and tears of talented people—to fix this." Later in the year, the company increased its spending on customer service to $150 million. Since 2018, Dell has seen significant increase in consumer satisfaction. Moreover, their customer service has been praised for its prompt and accurate answers to most questions, especially those directed to their social media support. On August 17, 2007, Dell Inc. announced that after an internal investigation into its accounting practices it would restate and reduce earnings from 2003 through to the first quarter of 2007 by a total amount of between $50 million and $150 million, or 2 cents to 7 cents per share. The investigation, begun in November 2006, resulted from concerns raised by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission over some documents and information that Dell Inc. had submitted. It was alleged that Dell had not disclosed large exclusivity payments received from Intel for agreeing not to buy processors from rival manufacturer AMD. In 2010 Dell finally paid $100 million (equivalent to $136,400,000 in 2023) to settle the SEC's charges of fraud. Michael Dell and other executives also paid penalties and suffered other sanctions, without admitting or denying the charges. In July 2009, Dell apologized after drawing the ire of the Taiwanese Consumer Protection Commission for twice refusing to honor a flood of orders against unusually low prices offered on its Taiwanese website. In the first instance, Dell offered a 19" LCD panel for $15. In the second instance, Dell offered its Latitude E4300 notebook at NT$18,558 (US$580), 70% lower than the usual price of NT$60,900 (US$1900). Concerning the E4300, rather than honor the discount taking a significant loss, the firm withdrew orders and offered a voucher of up to NT$20,000 (US$625) a customer in compensation. The consumer rights authorities in Taiwan fined Dell NT$1 million (US$31250) for customer rights infringements. Many consumers sued the firm for unfair compensation. A court in southern Taiwan ordered the firm to deliver 18 laptops and 76 flat-panel monitors to 31 consumers for NT$490,000 (US$15,120), less than a third of the normal price. The court said the event could hardly be regarded as mistakes, as the prestigious firm said the company mispriced its products twice in Taiwanese website within 3 weeks. After Michael Dell made a $24.4 billion buyout bid in August 2013 (equivalent to $31,470,000,000 in 2023), activist shareholder Carl Icahn sued the company and its board in an attempt to derail the bid and promote his own forthcoming offer. In 2020, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute accused at least 82 major brands, including BYD, of being connected to forced Uyghur labor in Xinjiang. Portals:  Companies  Telecommunication  Electronics  Technology List of computer system manufacturers List of Dell ownership activities Configurator Mass customization "Dell Company Profile". Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2010. "Dell Technologies company profile". Craft. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2019. "Number of employees at Dell from 1996 to 2020 (in 1,000s)*". Statista. Retrieved March 11, 2021. "Form 10-K | Dell Technologies". investors.delltechnologies.com. 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. As of January 31, 2020, we had approximately 165,000 total full-time employees "Dell selling former site of North Carolina manufacturing plant". statesman.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "What you don't know about Dell". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. November 2, 2003. Archived from the original on August 8, 2012. Retrieved October 28, 2012. "Dell company profile". Reuters Financial. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Carey, David (September 13, 2013). "Silver Lake Investors Said to See Dell as Mixed Blessing". Bloomberg. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Dell Technologies". Fortune. Retrieved June 28, 2022. "Dell Technologies". Fortune. Retrieved June 28, 2022. "Fortune 500". CNN. "Fortune 500 2010: States: Texas Companies". CNN. "Gartner Says Worldwide PC Shipments Increased 0.3% in Fourth Quarter of 2023 but Declined 14.8% for the Year". Gartner. January 11, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Dell EMC". Forbes. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Dell, Michael; Catherine Fredman (1999). Direct from Dell. HarperCollins. p. 13. ISBN 0-88730-914-3. "Computers, Monitors & Technology Solutions | Dell USA" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on March 24, 2004. "Dell | Dell". aajads.com. November 12, 2018. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved November 12, 2018. "Our Timeline". Dell Technologies. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Stupples, Benjamin (2021). "Michael Dell's Fortune Soars to $51 Billion With Spinoff". Bloomberg. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Koehn, Nancy Fowler (2001). Brand New: How Entrepreneurs Earned Consumers' Trust from Wedgwood to Dell. Harvard Business Press. p. 287. ISBN 978-1-57851-221-8. Retrieved October 14, 2008. Edwards, Benj (2017). "The Golden Age of Dell Computers". PC Magazine. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Ferrell, Keith (August 1987). "CES And Comdex: A Tale Of Two Cities". Compute!. p. 14. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Frequently Asked Questions. Archived January 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Rivlin, Gary (September 11, 2005). "He Naps. He Sings. And He Isn't Michael Dell". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2012. "Dell Computer Corporation Online Case". Mhhe.com. January 30, 1994. Retrieved January 9, 2014. ZDNET Asia: Michael Dell back as CEO February 1, 2007. Visited: April 10, 2012 Archived June 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Jones, Kathryn (February 1, 2003). "The Dell Way Michael Dell's famous business model made his company the world's premier computer maker. Now he's branching into new fields and taking on virtually every other hardware manufacturer. Can "the Model" stand the strain? – February 1, 2003". CNN. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Benner, Katie (June 13, 2011). "Michael Dell's dilemma – Fortune Tech". Fortune. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Dell Inc, Form PRE 14A, Filing Date May 5, 2003". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "Dell Inc, Form DEF 14A, Filing Date May 27, 2004". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Lee, Louise (March 23, 2006). "Dell Goes High-end and Hip". BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on March 24, 2006. Bloomberg-Businessweek Its Dell vs the Dell way, February 2006. Visited: April 10, 2012 Darlin, Damon (June 15, 2006). "Falling Short of A+". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2012. "Dell revamps product group, adds executives". CNET. December 12, 2006. Retrieved October 30, 2012. Dell Technologies Inc. (DELL) Stock Price, News, Quote & History [1]> "Michael Dell back as CEO; Rollins resigns – CNET News". CNET. January 31, 2007. Retrieved October 30, 2012. Haff, Gordon (March 29, 2010). "The real Dell 2.0 | The Pervasive Data Center – CNET News". CNET. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Dell revamps product group, adds executives – CNET News". CNET. December 12, 2006. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Dell's dog days of summer – CNET News". CNET. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Woodward, David. "Michael Dell | Dell". Director.co.uk. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Michael Dell had a risk-averse management style and he openly mocked rivals that spent on R&D and acquisitions, though by the late 2000s this may have contributed to Dell missing market shifts like mobile phones and tablet computers.[2] "Dell Learns to Listen". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. October 17, 2007. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Vance, Ashlee (June 28, 2010). "In Suit Over Faulty Computers, Window to Dell's Fall". The New York Times. "Dell to recall 4.1 million batteries made by Sony - Technology - International Herald Tribune". The New York Times. August 15, 2006. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 6, 2021. CRN.COM: Rollins now out of job Archived August 2, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Cantrell, Amanda (February 10, 2006). "All's not well with Dell". CNN. Ben Ames. "Dell reveals SEC investigation, says Q2 profit down 51%". Computerworld.com. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved December 4, 2012. Reddall, Braden (April 1, 2010). "UPDATE 2-Dell says several former staff may face SEC action, Reuters Apr 1, 2010". Reuters.com. Retrieved December 4, 2012. Dallas Morning News | News for Dallas, Texas | Texas/Southwest Archived October 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Moltzen, Edward F. "NASDAQ Sends Dell, Novell Delisting Notices - Hardware - IT Channel News by CRN and VARBusiness". Crn.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Dell Buys Time From Nasdaq On Delisting - Hardware - IT Channel News by CRN and VARBusiness". Crn.com. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2012. Ames, Ben; McMillan, Robert (August 16, 2007). ""Dell to restate results after finding manipulation," Computerword, August 16, 2007". Computerworld.com. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "SEC Charges Dell and Senior Executives with Disclosure and Accounting Fraud". US Securities and Exchange Commission. July 22, 2010. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved November 22, 2021. "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Feb 5, 2007" (PDF). secdatabase.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Alexei Oreskovic (March 2, 2007). "Dell's Dejection". TheStreet.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2009. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Michael Dell back as CEO; Rollins resigns – CNET News". CNET. January 31, 2007. Retrieved February 10, 2013. "Dell CFO stepping down in January – CNET News". CNET. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Seggewiss, Krista; Hill, Bert (April 24, 2008). "The Dell dream dies". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on January 26, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2009. The Ottawa centre is closing because Dell can't justify paying $18 per hour with the Canadian and American currencies at parity. The relatively high pay, benefits and training opportunities separated Dell from other call centres ... Gollner, Phillip (January 31, 2008). "UPDATE 1-Dell to cut nearly 900 jobs, close Canada center". Reuters. Kirk Ladendorf (October 8, 2009). "Dell closing its last large U.S. plant". Austin American-Statesman. Archived from the original on October 11, 2009. Retrieved November 19, 2009. 95gt-95gt-95gt (1 comment ). "Inside Dell's manufacturing mecca – CNET News". CNET. Retrieved January 9, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Silverman, Dwight (April 1, 2008). "One-time showcase for Dell closing in Austin – TechBlog". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Herbalife to open N.C. plant, creating 500 jobs – Charlotte Business Journal". The Business Journals. December 19, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2013. The Register: Dell cuts North-Carolina plant despite $280m sweetener, October 8, 2009. Visited: April 10, 2012 "Dell closes N.C. manufacturing plant". September 13, 2010. FinFacts Ireland Dell remains Ireland's biggest manufacturing exporter despite closing Limerick plant, November 16, 2012. Visited: April 23, 2013. Arthur, Charles (November 16, 2012). "Dell revenues slump as tablets and smartphones eat into market | The Guardian". The Guardian. London. Retrieved April 27, 2013. Sun, Leo (February 20, 2013). "The Death of Dell – AAPL, DELL, GOOG, HPQ, MSFT – Foolish Blogging Network". Beta.fool.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2013. Gruman, Galen. "Anatomy of failure: Mobile flops from RIM, Microsoft, and Nokia". MacWorld. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "Dell, HP earnings expected to mark death of PC era | Financial Post". Financial Post. Business.financialpost.com. Bloomberg News. November 15, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "The Dell dilemma – Fortune Tech". Fortune. April 6, 2012. Archived from the original on April 1, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "Dell CEO agreed to lower shares' value to push $24 billion buyout". Reuters. February 14, 2013 Sommer, Jeff (February 9, 2013). "At Dell, a Gamble on a Legacy". The New York Times. Cunningham, Andrew (October 10, 2012). "Lenovo and Asus are up, Dell and HP are down, and PC sales are slowing". Ars Technica. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "PC floggers scavenge for crumbs as Apple hoovers up profits • The Channel". channelregister.co.uk. Aaron Ricadela (February 6, 2013). "Business: Washington Post Business Page, Business News". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2013. Schofield, Jack (February 6, 2013). "The love of Mike: What you need to know about Dell's buy-out". ZDNet. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "HP, Dell fight to stay relevant". Houston Chronicle. November 24, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Worthen, Ben (August 22, 2012). "H-P, Dell Struggle as Buyers Shun PCs". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved June 22, 2013. Arthur, Charles (November 16, 2012). "Dell revenues slump as tablets and smartphones eat into market". The Guardian. London. Retrieved June 22, 2013. Jeffrey Burt (November 15, 2012). "Dell Finances Continue to Be Hit by Struggling PC Market". Eweek.com. Retrieved April 27, 2013. "Dell's buy-out: Heading for the exit". The Economist. Schumpeter Business and management. February 5, 2013. Retrieved April 27, 2013. Schaefer, Steve (December 9, 2013). "Michael Dell Finally Sews Up Buyout, Now For The Hard Part". Forbes. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Feb 6, 2013". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Official Dell pressrelease on (leveraged) buyout by Michael Dell and Silverlake Archived February 10, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, February 5, 2013. Visited: February 5, 2013 "DELL: Summary for Dell Inc.- Yahoo!! Finance". Yahoo! Finance. Retrieved February 10, 2013. Berkowitz, Ben; Edwin Chan (February 5, 2013). "Dell to go private in landmark $24.4 billion deal". Reuters. Retrieved February 5, 2013. Alden, William (February 5, 2013). "Dell's Record-Breaking Buyout". The New York Times. Retrieved February 5, 2013. Chang, Andrea (February 5, 2013). "Dell Inc. to go private in $24.4-billion deal". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 5, 2013. Roumeliotis, Greg; Toonkel, Jessica (March 23, 2013). "Blackstone, Icahn set up three-way battle to buy out Dell". Reuters.com. Shu, Catherine (April 19, 2013). "Blackstone Reportedly Withdraws Bid For Dell, Citing "Deteriorating" Business". TechCrunch. Sorkin, Andrew Ross (April 18, 2013). "Blackstone Is Said to Drop Out of the Bidding for Dell". The New York Times. Gelles, David (February 5, 2013). "Daring $24bn deal to make Dell relevant". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Murphy, Tom (May 31, 2013) "Dell Board Recommends Michael Dell Buyout Offer". Associated Press via ABC News. "Michael Dell closes in on prize with sweeter $25 billion deal". Reuters. "Dell Takes Itself Private With $25 Billion Buyout". WIRED. September 2013 Kunert, Paul (February 12, 2014). "Dell staffers head for exit armed with redundo cheques". channelregister.co.uk. Janakiram, MSV (April 18, 2016). "Is Fog Computing the Next Big Thing in the Internet of Things". Forbes Magazine. Retrieved April 18, 2016. Womack, Brian; Bass, Dina (October 12, 2015). "Dell to Buy EMC in Deal Worth About $67 Billion". Bloomberg. Retrieved October 12, 2015. "Dell agrees $67bn EMC takeover". BBC News. October 12, 2015. Retrieved October 12, 2015. Gara, Antonie. "Deal Of The Century: How Michael Dell Turned His Declining PC Business Into A $40 Billion Windfall". Forbes. Retrieved November 22, 2021. "Dell to Buy EMC for $67 Billion". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 12, 2015. "In Takeover of EMC, Dell Makes Ambitious Bet". The New York Times. October 12, 2015. Retrieved October 12, 2015. "Dell Makes Case to Go Private in Grim Filing". The Wall Street Journal. March 29, 2013. David Benoit (October 12, 2015). "Dell's Value and the 'Falling Knife'". The Wall Street Journal. "Elliott Management Sends Letter to Board of Directors of EMC Corporation". BusinessWire. October 8, 2014. "EMC Takeover Marks Return of Michael Dell". The Wall Street Journal. October 13, 2015. "Dell-EMC: The empty shop". Financial Times. October 12, 2015. "Dell agrees $63bn acquisition of EMC". Financial Times. October 12, 2015. Brian Womack (October 21, 2015). "Dell CFO Reluctantly Accepts Public Disclosures With EMC Deal". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved February 23, 2018. "The merger of Dell and EMC stems from the rise of cloud computing". The Economist. October 12, 2015. Mike Stone (October 8, 2015). "Dell in talks to buy data storage company EMC: source". Reuters. Stacey Higginbotham (October 8, 2015). "A Dell-EMC deal doesn't make sense. Here's why". Fortune. "Dell hooking up with EMC and going public again? Come off it". The Register. October 9, 2015. Tom Braithwaite (October 13, 2015). "Dell-EMC deal: why VMware is falling". Financial Times. "BOOM: Dell to Acquire EMC for $67 Billion". Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. October 12, 2015. "Document". www.sec.gov. "Historic Dell and EMC Merger Complete; Forms World's Largest Privately-Controlled Tech Company" (Press release). Business Wire. September 7, 2016. Chris Mellor (October 15, 2015). "Dell-EMC merger could leave Lenovo out in the cold – analysts". TheRegister (UK). Donnell, Carl. "Dell moves to go public, spurns IPO". Reuters. Retrieved July 3, 2018. "Carl Icahn sues Dell over plans to go public". "Dell Technologies Inc. Form 10-K". sec.gov. Retrieved January 29, 2018. King, Rachael (September 7, 2016). "Dell Closes $60 Billion Merger with EMC". The Wall Street Journal.(subscription required) Clark, Don; Cimilluca, Dana; McMillan, Robert (October 13, 2015). "EMC Takeover Marks Return of Michael Dell". The Wall Street Journal.(subscription required) Derek, Saul (March 1, 2024). "This Old-School Tech Stock Just Hit A New All-Time High Thanks To AI". Forbes. Retrieved March 4, 2024. Press-release. Archived January 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. "Product reviews and prices, software downloads, and tech news - CNET". News.com.com. August 17, 2006. Retrieved December 4, 2012. Krazit, Tom (November 1, 2006). "Dell puts AMD-powered notebooks on sale". CNET News. CBS Interactive. Dell's first notebooks with chips from Advanced Micro Devices appeared for sale on its Web site Wednesday, although the company made no formal announcement. Laptop Reviews, Old Dell (February 24, 2018). "Alienware Unveils New Alienware 17 Gaming Notebook". Old Dell Laptop Reviews. Dell's latest AlienWare beast takes off in the market with its amazing specs. James Love (March 8, 1998). "Nader/CPT ask OEMs to offer OS alternatives". Information Policy Notes. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved August 28, 2008. Consumer Project on Technology. "CPT's Microsoft Antitrust Page". Archived from the original on November 6, 2002. Dan Neel (February 3, 2000). "Dell offers Linux on laptops". Archived from the original on October 10, 2009. Michael Dell (August 15, 2000). "Michael Dell Remarks/Putting Linux on the Fast Track/Keynote at the LinuxWorld Expo" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 22, 2010. Andrew Orlowski (March 19, 2002). "Microsoft 'killed Dell Linux' — States". The Register. "Dell says all aboard for Linux PCs". iTWire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2007. Retrieved December 4, 2012. Computerworld (February 27, 2007). "Dell to Linux users: Not so fast". Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Ideas In Action Archived March 19, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Steven J. Vaughan-Nichols (DesktopLinux) (April 18, 2007). "Michael Dell's Linux choice? Ubuntu". Archived from the original on June 22, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. BBC (May 1, 2007). "Dell to choose Ubuntu". BBC News. Retrieved January 2, 2010. Menchaca, Lionel (May 24, 2008). "Dell Offers Three Consumer Systems With Ubuntu 7.04". Direct2Dell blog. Retrieved October 21, 2009. Dell will offer U.S customers three different systems with Ubuntu 7.04 installed: the XPS 410n and Dimension E520n desktops and the Inspiron E1505n notebook. Ubuntu on Two New Inspirons; Update from the Linux Live Expert Forum - Direct2Dell Linux for Consumers in the U.K. France, and Germany; Dell/Red Hat Solutions & More - Direct2Dell Ashlee Vance (November 30, 2007). "Dell moves 40,000 Ubuntu PCs". Channel Register. Archived from the original on October 9, 2009. "Dell's XPS M1330 with Ubuntu pre-load in Germany, only". Engadget. January 24, 2008. Judd, Daniel (February 18, 2008). "Welcome the Inspiron 1525 to the Dell Ubuntu Family". dell.com. Dell. Retrieved November 12, 2017. Earlier today, we added the Inspiron 1525 notebook to our family of Ubuntu products. "Ubuntu Dell Systems Launch in Canada". Tombuntu. February 22, 2008. "Laptops, Ultrabooks ™ & Tablets - New Dell Laptop Computers for Sale". Dell. Archived from the original on September 25, 2010. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Linux Workstations and Laptops | Dell USA". Dell. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Quintos, Karen (September 15, 2011). "How does technology ignite your power to do more?". Forbes Magazine. "Dell to Buy Alienware, a Maker Of High-End PC's for Gamers". The New York Times. March 23, 2006. Retrieved April 13, 2012. WhatIz website over WHAT IZ @ Alienware Android Cell Phone?, apnizindagi.com. November 10, 2011. Lee, Louise (March 23, 2006). "Dell Goes High-end and Hip". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. McGraw-Hill. Archived from the original on March 24, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2008. "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Nov 8, 2007". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Jan 28, 2008" (PDF). secdatabase.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Gonsalves, Antone (November 5, 2007). "Dell's EqualLogic Buy Could Drive Down iSCSI Storage Prices". InformationWeek. United Business Media. Retrieved October 29, 2008. "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Sep 21, 2009" (PDF). secdatabase.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "Dell to buy Perot Systems for $3.9 billion". Finanznachrichten.de. September 22, 2009. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Perot Systems". Hoover's. 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2010. Shah, Agam (February 11, 2010). "Dell Acquires Systems Management Company KACE". The New York Times. "Dell Acquires SaaS Company, Boomi". SiliconANGLE. November 2, 2010. Retrieved November 3, 2010. "Dell Inc, Form 10-K, Annual Report, Filing Date Mar 15, 2011". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Chris Mellor (July 20, 2011). "Dell buys Force 10 Networks: Storm winds to leave Brocade out in the cold?". The Register. Retrieved August 8, 2011. "Dell Inc, Form 10-Q, Quarterly Report, Filing Date May 31, 2012" (PDF). secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Businesswire: Dell completes acquisition SonicWall, May 9, 2012 USA Today, page B1, published March 14, 2008, "Dell buys security specialist SonicWall" InformationAge.com website: Dell buys thin client market leader Wyse, April 2, 2012. Visited: April 3, 2012 Dell press-release Dell Acquires Clerity Solutions, Launching New Applications Modernization Services Archived April 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, April 3, 2012 "Dell Inc, Form 8-K, Current Report, Filing Date Jul 2, 2012". secdatabase.com. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "Dell buying Quest Software for $2.36 billion". USA Today. July 2, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2012. "Dell ponies up $2.4B to buy Quest Software". CBS News. July 2, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2012. Dell official pressrelease: Dell completes acquisition of Quest software Archived November 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, September 28, 2012. Visited: November 1, 2012 Dell Pressreleases: Dell Acquires Gale Technologies, a Leading Provider of Infrastructure Automation Solutions Archived November 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, November 16, 2012. Visited: November 28, 2012 Dell press-release: Dell reaches agreement for acquiring Credant Technologies Archived January 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, December 18, 2012. Visited: December 26, 2012 informationweek.com: 6 Dell storylines to watch in 2013, December 20, 2012. Visited: December 26, 2012 "Dell Acquires StatSoft to Bolster Portfolio of Big Data Solutions". dell.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2014. Goldman, David (October 12, 2015). "Dell EMC agree to merge in biggest tech deal ever". CNNMoney. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Press Release: Michael S. Dell, MSD Partners and Silver Lake Lead Transaction to Combine Dell and EMC, Creating Premier End-to-End Technology Company". www.emc.com. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Dell and EMC: Why, and What It Means - Reflections". Reflections. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Contact Us – Dell Mailing Address." Dell. Retrieved February 8, 2012. Austin American-Statesman: The Dell deal: what would be different if... Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, January 19, 2013. Visited: January 23, 2013 Staff. "Dell headquarters now carbon-free." New Mexico Business Weekly. Wednesday April 2, 2008. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Jacobs, Janet. "Cash flow from Dell lets Round Rock boost budget." Austin American-Statesman. September 9, 1999. A1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Almost half the city's general fund comes from sales tax at Dell's headquarters," Pope, Kyle. "Dell chief disbands project." Austin American-Statesman. February 25, 1990. A1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell is headquartered at the Arboretum complex in North Austin and employs about 1200 people." PC Magazine. Volume 12, 1993. 175. "Dell Computer Corp., 9505 Arboretum Blvd., Austin, TX 78759." Pope, Kyle. "Dell plans expansion and move High-tech firm inks Braker Center deal." Austin American-Statesman. January 24, 1989. B7. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell occupies 127000 square feet of office space at the Arboretum." Ladendorf, Kirk and R. Michelle Breyer. "Despite document, Dell says no headquarters move planned." Austin American-Statesman. May 22, 1993. E1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell to keep top floor at Arboretum offices." Austin American-Statesman. August 29, 1994. C1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Ladendorf, Kirk and Mike Todd. "Dell seeks space for expansion Firm makes proposal for tax abatements." Austin American-Statesman. November 5, 1992. B4. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "The lease on the company's headquarters building at the Arboretum expires in 1994." Ladendorf, Kirk. "Dell expanding in Central Texas." Austin American-Statesman. October 1, 1996. A1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Mahoney, Jerry. "Dell's success is Round Rock's gain." Austin American-Statesman. January 9, 1996. A1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell will have room for 6400 employees when it finishes Round Rock 3 in November. The company, which still employs about 3500 people at its headquarters." Mahoney, Jerry. "Dell to expand its office complex." Austin American-Statesman. May 30, 1998. D1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Pletz, John. "Dell moving executives closer to Austin." (Alternate link) Austin American-Statesman. May 9, 2000. A1. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell seeks to sublease Las Cimas offices." Austin Business Journal. Friday March 8, 2002. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Pletz, John. "Article: Dell Leaders to Return to Round Rock, Texas, Campus." Austin American-Statesman. March 8, 2002. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Hudgins, Matt. "Dell space taken." Austin Business Journal. Friday May 9, 2003. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Dell Locations Corporate Web Site". .ap.dell.com. Archived from the original on August 21, 2008. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "EET India article on Dell". Eetindia.co.in. Archived from the original on July 9, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "#25 Michael Dell". The World's Billionaires 2009. March 11, 2009. Archived from the original on March 14, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2009. [Michael Dell] caused ire in Ireland after relocating factory to cheaper Poland. "How Dell conquered India". CNN. February 10, 2011. Archived from the original on February 12, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2011. Dedrick, J. and Kraemer, K. L. (March 2007) "Market Making in the PC Industry", Chapter 10, in Hamilton, Senauer and Petrovic (eds) The Market Makers: How Retailers are Reshaping the Global Economy. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199655871 Kraemer, K. L. and Dedrick, J. (2002) "Dell Computer: Organization of a Global Production Network", Center for Research on Information Technology and Organizations. Company Annual Reports, various years. Scheck, J: "Dell Plans to Sell Factories in Effort to Cut Costs", The Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2008. 1,900 jobs lost at Dell in Limerick. RTÉ New Report — January 8, 2009 EU to investigate Dell aid package. RTÉ New Report — January 8, 2009 "Dell reorganises Irish operations". The IE Professional. No. 250. May 17, 2000. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Dell to Sell Polish Plant to Taiwan's Foxconn". IndustryWeek. Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved May 8, 2012. IDA Ireland website on Dell Archived January 10, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, visited October 12, 2012 RTE News: Fears for 70 jobs at Athlone's Alienware facility, March 25, 2009. Checked: October 12, 2012 "Dell Announces Manufacturing Facility In Poland To Serve Growing Central And Eastern European Markets". euro.dell.com. Retrieved November 17, 2011. Dell Starts Manufacturing Servers in Brazil. Dell, Porto Alegre, Brazil, February 19, 2001 "Dell Precision Open-Source Workstations with Linux". Dell.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Lyndon Rive, Elon Musk: Cousins, partners". Silicon Valley Business Journal. December 28, 2010. Goodbye, Axim. Direct2Dell.com. April 11, 2007 Roth, Emma (July 25, 2022). "Dell is getting out of the phone syncing game". The Verge. Retrieved July 27, 2022. "Dell does a Superfish, ships PCs with easily cloneable root certificates". Ars Technica. Conde Nast. November 23, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2015. "Dell apologizes for HTTPS certificate fiasco, provides removal tool". Ars Technica. Conde Nast. November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2015. "PCs running Dell support app can be uniquely ID'd by snoops and scammers". Ars Technica. Conde Nast. November 25, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2015. Michael Dell Sees India Playing a Key Role in the Online World. Dell, New Delhi, India, March 20, 2007. Walker, Rob (June 3, 2002). "The Mystery of the Dell Dude". slate.com. Slate Magazine. Retrieved October 14, 2015. "Dell launches star-studded "Yours Is Here" ad campaign". Engadget. November 21, 2007. Retrieved July 14, 2010. "Dell World 2011". Dell. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Dell World 2012 Press Kit". Dell. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Dell World 2013". Dell. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Dell World speaker schedule without star keynote; panel to open show". bizjournals.com. Retrieved August 18, 2018. "Partner Direct". Dell. Retrieved June 13, 2011. "Dell enables online purchases through DESA platform". The Times of India. June 3, 2013. "Dell launches online e-store Dell Express Ship Affiliate". The Hindu. June 3, 2013 Anderson, Parker (May 8, 2023). "Dell Global Analytics (DGA) Empowering Data-Driven Insights for Global Success". Dell Menia. Archived from the original on May 8, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Nichols, Shaun (June 27, 2008). "Dell Scolded for Laptop Ads". Vnunet.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. "Dell's Claim as World's Most Secure Commercial Laptops?". Digitaldaily.allthingsd.com. June 23, 2008. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Dell Focuses on Direct and Retail Business, Closes Kiosks in U.S". Content.dell.com. January 30, 2008. Archived from the original on November 13, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Dell Closing Down Their Retail Kiosks Across The Country". gizmodo.com. April 1, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2011. "Dell Venue Pro offered by Media Markt". Netzwelt.de. February 22, 1999. Retrieved November 17, 2011. Kirdahy, Matthew (October 19, 2006) [3]. Forbes. "Gartner Says Hewlett-Packard Takes Clear Lead in Fourth Quarter Worldwide PC Shipments and Creates a Virtual Tie with Dell for 2006 Year-End Results". Business Wire. January 17, 2007. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2013. "Canalys Newsroom - Global PC shipments pass 340 million in 2021 and 2022 is set to be even stronger". canalys.com. Retrieved May 27, 2022. "Dell, EMC Sign Multi-Billion-Dollar Enterprise Storage Agreement" (Press release). Dell EMC. October 22, 2001. "Dell, EMC Extend and Expand Strategic Alliance" (Press release). Dell EMC. December 9, 2008. "Dell, EMC End Storage Reseller Partnership Two Years Early". EWeek. October 17, 2011. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Mearian, Lucas (October 17, 2011). "Dell ends 10-year reseller relationship with EMC". Computerworld. "Walking the Walk on Greenhouse Gas Reduction". Dell. Retrieved January 13, 2011. "Guide to Greener Electronics". Greenpeace International. Archived from the original on November 12, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. "Ranking tables – October 2010" (PDF). Greenpeace International. Retrieved January 13, 2011. "Dell Sets Goal Of Becoming Greenest Technology Company". Dell. Retrieved January 13, 2011. "Dell targeted for breaking promise on toxic chemicals". Greenpeace International. Retrieved January 13, 2011. "Materials Use: What's Inside Our Products – And What's Not". Dell. Retrieved August 16, 2010. Lezhnev, Sasha; Alex Hellmuth (August 2012). "Taking Conflict Out of Consumer Gadgets: Company Rankings on Conflict Minerals 2012" (PDF). Enough Project. Retrieved August 17, 2012. William Baue. "Dell First US Computer Company to Commit to a Global Recycling Goal". SocialFunds. Archived from the original on August 4, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. Winners of NRC's "Recycling Works" Award. National Recycling Coalition Dell Ahead of Schedule to Achieve Multi-Year Product Recycling Goal. Dell. July 19, 2007 "Dell Sets Goal of Becoming Greenest Technology Company". Retrieved March 8, 2018. Dell 2008 Corporate Social Responsibility Report: Section "GRI Performance Indicators Index", Dell Inc, 2008. Retrieved October 28, 2012 "Dell proprietary (non-standard) ATX design | Dell proprietary (non-standard) ATX design". InformIT. Retrieved November 17, 2011. Mueller, Scott (2002). Upgrading and Repairing PCs, 13ed, Indianapolis: Que Publications, ISBN 0-7897-2542-8, and subsequent editions "It's Dell vs. the Dell Way". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on February 25, 2006. Retrieved October 30, 2012. Dell Spiffs Up Its Service. Business Week. June 13, 2006 No Magic Wands For Customer Service, The Official Dell blog. July 13, 2006 Kirkpatrick, David (September 18, 2006). "Dell in the penalty box". CNN. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Dell Customer Service Rating 2018: Undercover Tech Support Review. Laptop Mag. April 24, 2019. Notebook Service and Support Satisfaction Survey – Who has the best laptop service? – NotebookCheck.net Reviews. Notebookcheck. April 15, 2018. Dell pares past profits because of "massaging". The Guardian. August 17, 2007. Darlin, Damon (November 16, 2006). "Dell Accounting Inquiry Made Formal by S.E.C". The New York Times. Retrieved August 19, 2007. Reed, Kevin (July 23, 2010). "Dell pays $100m penalty to settle accounting fraud charges". Accountancy Age. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010. Retrieved July 23, 2010. Dell loses Taiwan consumer lawsuit: report, June 7, 2010. Visited: October 28, 2012. Taiwanese lawsuit: full-text verdict. Retrieved October 28, 2012 Poornima Gupta; Edwin Chan (August 1, 2013). "Icahn sues Dell in latest attempt to foil buyout". Reuters. Xu, Vicky Xiuzhong; Cave, Danielle; Leibold, James; Munro, Kelsey; Ruser, Nathan (March 1, 2020). "Uyghurs for Sale". Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Retrieved March 17, 2022. Dell Company Information Michael Dell, Catherine Fredman, Direct From Dell, ISBN 0-88730-914-3 Serwer, Andy (November 28, 2005). "Dell's Midlife Crisis". Fortune. pp. 63–66. Dell as the seventh-most-admired computer company in the USA, eighth overall, and seventh worldwide. Fortune, Most Admired Companies 2006. BBC News, August 21, 2003, Dell makes grab for market share USA Today, January 20, 2001, Dell business model turns to muscle as rivals struggle Ubuntu Forums, June 7, 2007, Dell's with Ubuntu called Dellbuntu Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dell. Official website