Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus (Latin: [ˈɡaːiʊs sweːˈtoːniʊs traŋˈkᶣɪlːʊs]), commonly referred to as Suetonius (/swɪˈtoʊniəs/ swih-TOH-nee-əs; c. AD 69 – after AD 122), was a Roman historian who wrote during the early Imperial era of the Roman Empire. His most important surviving work is a set of biographies of 12 successive Roman rulers from Julius Caesar to Domitian, properly titled De vita Caesarum. Other works by Suetonius concerned the daily life of Rome, politics, oratory, and the lives of famous writers, including poets, historians, and grammarians. A few of these books have partially survived, but many have been lost. Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus was probably born about AD 69, a date deduced from his remarks describing himself as a "young man" 20 years after Nero's death. His place of birth is disputed, but most scholars place it in Hippo Regius, a small north African town in Numidia, in modern-day Algeria. It is certain that Suetonius came from a family of moderate social position, that his father, Suetonius Laetus, was a tribune belonging to the equestrian order (tribunus angusticlavius) in Legio XIII Gemina, and that Suetonius was educated when schools of rhetoric flourished in Rome. Suetonius was a close friend of senator and letter-writer Pliny the Younger. Pliny describes him as "quiet and studious, a man dedicated to writing". Pliny helped him buy a small property and interceded with the Emperor Trajan to grant Suetonius immunities usually granted to a father of three, the ius trium liberorum, because his marriage was childless. Through Pliny, Suetonius came into favour with Trajan and Hadrian. Suetonius may have served on Pliny's staff when Pliny was imperial governor (legatus Augusti pro praetore) of Bithynia and Pontus (northern Asia Minor) between 110 and 112. Under Trajan he served as secretary of studies (precise functions are uncertain) and director of Imperial archives. Under Hadrian, he became the emperor's secretary. Hadrian later dismissed Suetonius for his alleged affair with the empress Vibia Sabina. Suetonius is mainly remembered as the author of De Vita Caesarum—translated as The Life of the Caesars, although a more common English title is The Lives of the Twelve Caesars or simply The Twelve Caesars—his only extant work except for the brief biographies and other fragments noted below. The Twelve Caesars, probably written in Hadrian's time, is a collective biography of the Roman Empire's first leaders, Julius Caesar (the first few chapters are missing), Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus and Domitian. The book was dedicated to his friend Gaius Septicius Clarus, a prefect of the Praetorian Guard in 119. The work tells the tale of each Caesar's life according to a set formula: the descriptions of appearance, omens, family history, quotes, and then a history are given in a consistent order. He recorded the earliest accounts of Julius Caesar's epileptic seizures. De Viris Illustribus ("On Famous Men" — in the field of literature), to which belong: De Illustribus Grammaticis ("Lives of the Grammarians"; 20 brief lives, apparently complete) De Claris Rhetoribus ("Lives of the Rhetoricians"; 5 brief lives out of an original 16 survive) De Poetis ("Lives of the Poets"; the life of Virgil, as well as fragments from the lives of Terence, Horace and Lucan, survive) De Historicis ("Lives of the historians"; a brief life of Pliny the Elder is attributed to this work) Peri ton par' Hellesi paidion ("Greek Games") Peri blasphemion ("Greek Terms of Abuse") The two last works were written in Greek. They apparently survive in part in the form of extracts in later Greek glossaries. The following list of Suetonius's lost works is from Robert Graves's foreword to his translation of the Twelve Caesars. Royal Biographies Lives of Famous Whores Roman Manners and Customs The Roman Year The Roman Festivals Roman Dress Greek Games Offices of State On Cicero's Republic Physical Defects of Mankind Methods of Reckoning Time An Essay on Nature Greek Objurations Grammatical Problems Critical Signs Used in Books The introduction to the Loeb edition of Suetonius, translated by J. C. Rolfe, with an introduction by K. R. Bradley, references the Suda with the following titles: On Greek games On Roman spectacles and games On the Roman year On critical signs in books On Cicero's Republic On names and types of clothes On insults On Rome and its customs and manners The volume adds other titles not testified within the Suda. On famous courtesans On kings On the institution of offices On physical defects On weather signs On names of seas and rivers On names of winds Two other titles may also be collections of some of the aforelisted: Pratum (Miscellany) On various matters Edwards, Catherine Lives of the Caesars. Oxford World's Classics. (Oxford University Press, 2008). Robert Graves (trans.), Suetonius: The Twelve Caesars (Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Books, Ltd, 1957) Donna W. Hurley (trans.), Suetonius: The Caesars (Indianapolis/London: Hackett Publishing Company, 2011). J.C. Rolfe (trans.), Lives of the Caesars, Volume I (Loeb Classical Library 31, Harvard University Press, 1997). J.C. Rolfe (trans.), Lives of the Caesars, Volume II (Loeb Classical Library 38, Harvard University Press, 1998). C. Suetonii Tranquilli De vita Caesarum libros VIII et De grammaticis et rhetoribus librum, ed. Robert A. Kaster (Oxford: 2016). Suetonius on Christians The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. "Suetonius". Encyclopædia Britannica. Cambridge University Press. Retrieved 15 May 2017. Suetonius (1997). Lives of the Caesars. Vol. 1. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 4. Suetonius. Vita Othonis. 10, 1. Pliny the Younger. "10.95". Letters. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. Hadrianus. "11:3". Historia Augusta. claims that Hadrian "removed from office Septicius Clarus, the prefect of the guard, and Suetonius Tranquillus, the imperial secretary, and many others besides, because without his consent they had been conducting themselves toward his wife, Sabina, in a more informal fashion than the etiquette of the court demanded." Reynolds, Leighton Durham (1980). Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 509. ISBN 978-0-19-814456-4. The dedication, in the lost preface, is recorded by a sixth-century source when the text was still complete Suetonius (1957). "Foreword". In Rives, James (ed.). Suetonius: The Twelve Caesars. Translated by Graves, Robert (1st ed.). Hamondsworth, Middlesex, England: Penguin Books. p. 7. Barry Baldwin, Suetonius: Biographer of the Caesars. Amsterdam: A. M. Hakkert, 1983. Gladhill, Bill. "The Emperor's No Clothes: Suetonius and the Dynamics of Corporeal Ecphrasis." Classical Antiquity, vol. 31, no. 2, 2012, pp. 315–348. Lounsbury, Richard C. The Arts of Suetonius: An Introduction. Frankfurt: Lang, 1987. Mitchell, Jack "Literary Quotation as Literary Performance in Suetonius." The Classical Journal, vol. 110, no. 3, 2015, pp. 333–355 Newbold, R.F. "Non-Verbal Communication in Suetonius and 'The Historia Augusta:' Power, Posture and Proxemics." Acta Classica, vol. 43, 2000, pp. 101–118. Power, Tristan, Collected Papers on Suetonius. Abingdon: Routledge, 2021. Power, Tristan and Roy K. Gibson (ed.), Suetonius, the Biographer: Studies in Roman Lives. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 2014 Syme, Ronald. "The Travels of Suetonius Tranquillus." Hermes 109:105–117, 1981. Trentin, Lisa. "Deformity in the Roman Imperial Court." Greece & Rome, vol. 58, no. 2, 2011, pp. 195–208. Trevor, Luke "Ideology and Humor in Suetonius' 'Life of Vespasian' 8." The Classical World, vol. 103, no. 4, 2010, pp. 511–527. Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew F. Suetonius: The Scholar and his Caesars. New Haven, CT: Yale Univ. Press, 1983. Wardle, David. "Did Suetonius Write in Greek?" Acta Classica 36:91–103, 1993. Wardle, David. "Suetonius on Augustus as God and Man." The Classical Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 1, 2012, pp. 307–326. Kaster, Robert A., Studies on the Text of Suetonius' "De vita Caesarum" (Oxford: 2016). Wikiquote has quotations related to Suetonius. Wikisource has original works by or about: Suetonius Wikimedia Commons has media related to Suetonius. Library resources about Suetonius Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Suetonius Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The Lives of the Twelve Caesars at LacusCurtius (Latin original, English translation) Suetonius' works at Latin Library (Latin) Works by Suetonius in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Suetonius at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Suetonius at Internet Archive Works by Suetonius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Gai Suetoni Tranquilli De vita Caesarum libri III-VI Cornell University Library Historical Monographs Collection. Lewis E 195 Vitae XII caesarium (Lives of the twelve caesars), fragment and Book of Hours leaf at OPenn Livius.org: Suetonius