John Vianney (born Jean-Marie Vianney and later Jean-Marie-Baptiste Vianney; 8 May 1786 – 4 August 1859) was a French Catholic priest often referred to as the Curé d'Ars ("the parish priest of Ars"). He is known for his priestly and pastoral work in his parish in Ars, France, resulting in the radical spiritual transformation of the community and its surroundings. Catholics note his saintly life, mortification, persevering ministry in the sacrament of confession, and ardent devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary. He was canonized in 1925 and his feast day is August 4. He is the patron saint of parish priests. Vianney was born on 8 May 1786, in the French town of Dardilly, France (near Lyon), and was baptized the same day. His parents, Matthieu Vianney and his wife Marie (Belize), had six children, of whom John was the fourth. The Vianneys were devout Catholics who helped the poor. Vianney's paternal grandparents once hosted Benedict Joseph Labre, the patron saint of the homeless, who passed through Dardilly on his pilgrimage to Rome in 1770. By 1790, the anticlerical Terror phase of the French Revolution forced many loyal priests to hide from the regime in order to carry out the sacraments in their parish. Even though to do so had been declared illegal, the Vianneys travelled to distant farms to attend Masses celebrated on the run. Realizing that such priests risked their lives day by day, Vianney began to look upon them as heroes. He received his First Communion catechetical instruction in a private home from two nuns whose communities had been dissolved during the Revolution. He made his first communion at the age of 13 in a neighbour's kitchen; during the Mass, the windows were covered so that the light of the candles could not be seen from outside. The Catholic Church was re-established in France in 1802 by Napoleon Bonaparte, resulting in religious peace throughout the country, culminating in a Concordat. By this time, Vianney was concerned about his future vocation and longed for an education. He was 20 when his father allowed him to leave the farm to be taught at a "presbytery school" in the neighbouring village of Écully, conducted by the Abbé Balley. The school taught arithmetic, history, geography and Latin. Vianney struggled with school, especially with Latin, since his past education had been interrupted by the French Revolution. Only because of Vianney's deepest desire to be a priest—and Balley's patience—did he persevere. Vianney's studies were interrupted in 1809 when he was drafted into Napoleon's armies. He would have been exempt, as an ecclesiastical student, but Napoleon had withdrawn the exemption in certain dioceses because of his need for soldiers in his fight against Spain. Two days after he had to report at Lyons, he became ill and was hospitalized, during which time his draft left without him. Once released from the hospital, on 5 January, he was sent to Roanne for another draft. He went into a church to pray, and fell behind the group. He met a young man who volunteered to guide him back to his group, but instead led him deep into the mountains of Le Forez, to the village of Les Noes, where deserters had gathered. Vianney lived there for fourteen months, hidden in the byre attached to a farmhouse, and under the care of Claudine Fayot, a widow with four children. He assumed the name Jerome Vincent, and under that name, he opened a school for village children. Since the harsh weather isolated the town during the winter, the deserters were safe from gendarmes. However, after the snow melted, gendarmes came to the town constantly, searching for deserters. During these searches, Vianney hid inside stacks of fermenting hay in Fayot's barn.[citation needed] An imperial proclamation in March 1810 granted amnesty to all deserters, enabling Vianney to go back legally to Écully, where he resumed his studies. He was tonsured in 1811, and in 1812 he went to the minor seminary at Verrières-en-Forez. In the autumn of 1813, he was sent to the major seminary at Lyons. Considered too slow, he was returned to Balley. However, Balley persuaded the vicar general that Vianney's piety was great enough to compensate for his ignorance, and the seminarian received minor orders and the subdiaconate on 2 July 1814, was ordained a deacon in June 1815, and was ordained priest on 12 August 1815 in the Couvent des Minimes de Grenoble. He said his first Mass the next day, and was appointed the assistant to Balley in Écully.[citation needed] In 1818, shortly after the death of Balley, Vianney was appointed parish priest of the parish of Ars, a town of 230 inhabitants. When Vianney's bishop first assigned him to Ars, Vianney got lost trying to find the town. Two young men tending flocks in the fields pointed him in the right direction. With Catherine Lassagne and Benedicta Lardet, he established La Providence, a home for girls. As parish priest, Vianney realized that the Revolution's aftermath had resulted in religious ignorance and indifference, due to the devastation wrought on the Catholic Church in France. At the time, Sundays in rural areas were spent working in the fields, or dancing and drinking in taverns. Vianney spent time in the confessional and gave homilies against blasphemy and profane dancing. If his parishioners did not give up this dancing, he refused them absolution. His stern sermons were later collected together in the famous "Sermons of the Curé of Ars," along with his moral Catechetical Instructions. Vianney came to be known internationally, and people from distant places began travelling to consult him as early as 1827. "By 1855, the number of pilgrims had reached 20,000 a year. During the last ten years of his life, he spent 16 to 18 hours a day in the confessional. Even the bishop forbade him to attend the annual retreats of the diocesan clergy because of the souls awaiting him yonder". He spent at least 11 or 12 hours a day in the confessional during winter, and up to 16 in the summer. In his article "How does the Church Respond to Suicide?" Shaun McAfee references an incident described in the book Cure of Ars: "...a woman...told....Vianney that she was devastated because her husband had committed suicide. She wanted to approach the great priest but his line often lasted for hours and she could not reach him. She was ready to give up and in a moment of mystical insight that only a great saint can receive...Vianney exclaimed through the crowd, "He is saved!” The woman was incredulous so the saint repeated, stressing each word, "I tell you he is saved. He is in Purgatory, and you must pray for him. Between the parapet of the bridge and the water he had time to make an act of contrition." Vianney had a great devotion to Saint Philomena. He regarded her as his guardian and erected a chapel and shrine in honour of the saint. In May 1843, he felt so ill that he thought that his life was coming to an end. He attributed his cure to her intercession. Vianney yearned for the contemplative life of a monk, and four times ran away from Ars, the last time in 1853. He was a champion of the poor as a Franciscan tertiary and was a recipient of the coveted French Legion of Honour. On 4 August 1859, Vianney died at the age of 73. The bishop presided over his funeral with 300 priests and more than 6,000 people in attendance. Before he was entombed, Vianney's body was fitted with a wax mask. On 3 October 1874 Pope Pius IX proclaimed him "venerable"; on 8 January 1905, Pope Pius X declared him Blessed and proposed him as a model to the parochial clergy. In 1925 John Mary Vianney was canonized by Pope Pius XI, who in 1929 made him patron saint of parish priests. In 1928 his feast day was inserted into the General Roman Calendar for celebration on 9 August. Pope John XXIII's 1960 revision, in which the Vigil of Saint Lawrence had a high rank, moved the feast to 8 August. Finally, the 1969 revision placed it on 4 August, the day of his death.[citation needed] In 1959, to commemorate the centenary of John Vianney's death, Pope John XXIII issued the encyclical letter Sacerdotii nostri primordia. John Paul II visited Ars in person in 1986 in connection with the bicentenary of Vianney's birth and referred to him as a "rare example of a pastor acutely aware of his responsibilities … and a sign of courage for those who today experience the grace of being called to the priesthood." In honour of the 150th anniversary of Vianney's death, Pope Benedict XVI declared a Year of the Priest, running from the Feast of the Sacred Heart 2009–2010. The Vatican Postal Service issued a set of stamps to commemorate the 150th Anniversary. With the following words on 16 June 2009, Benedict XVI officially marked the beginning of the year dedicated to priests, "…On the forthcoming Solemnity of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, Friday 19 June 2009 – a day traditionally devoted to prayer for the sanctification of the clergy –, I have decided to inaugurate a ‘Year of the Priest’ in celebration of the 150th anniversary of the dies natalis of John Mary Vianney, the Patron Saint of parish priests worldwide..." Pope Benedict XVI declared 19 June 2009 – 19 June 2010 the Year of the Priests to encourage priests to strive for spiritual perfection. In the Pope's words the Curé d'Ars is "a true example of a pastor at the service of Christ's flock." There are statues of Vianney in many French churches and in Catholic churches throughout the world. Also, many parishes founded in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries are named after him. Some relics are kept in the Church of Notre-Dame de la Salette in Paris.[citation needed] John Vianney is remembered in the Anglican Communion with a commemoration on 4 August. In November 2018, Vianney's heart was transported to the United States for a 6-month nationwide tour. As Joe Bollig explained in his article detailing the relic's unexpected stop in Kansas City, "The heart receives special veneration because in Scripture it is considered to be a person’s hidden centre of emotional, intellectual and moral activity. Saint John Vianney is said to have lived his life according to the heart of Christ and united his heart to Christ’s." By the end of the tour, "the relic [had] travelled almost 36,000 miles [58,000 km] — almost one and a half times the circumference of the Earth — and was available for over 1,200 hours of public veneration." The tour of the incorrupt heart of John Vianney came to the Parish of St. Catherine of Siena in Nichols, Connecticut, on April 29, 2019, with a liturgy celebrated by Daniel A. Cronin, Archbishop Emeritus of Hartford, and concelebrated by Joseph A. Marcello, pastor of St. Catherine of Siena. (Photos of the event available here.) There are dozens of institutions, including schools, seminaries, and churches named after Vianney in countries including Belize, Brazil, Canada, Guatemala, Haiti, Ireland, India, Pakistan, Philippines, England, United States, Nigeria, South Africa, New Zealand and Australia.[citation needed] Curé of Ars Roman Catholic Church (Merrick, New York, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Round Rock, Texas, US) St. John Vianney Roman Catholic Primary School (Belize City, Belize) Personal Apostolic Administration of Saint John Mary Vianney (Campos dos Goytacazes, Brazil) St. John Vianney Catholic Church and School (Barrie, Ontario, Canada) Societé Jean-Marie Vianney (SJMV), (Ars-sur-Formans, France) St. John Vianney's Church (Peshawar, Pakistan) Saint John Mary Vianney Academy (Antipolo, Rizal, Philippines) St. John Vianney Theological Seminary (Cagayan de Oro, Philippines) St. John Mary Vianney Centre (Seminary), (Colombo, Sri Lanka) St. Jean Vianney School (Baton Rouge, Louisiana, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church, (Shelby Township, Michigan, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Flint, Michigan, US) St. John Vianney Cure of Ars School (The Bronx, New York, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Brookfield, Wisconsin, US) Saint John Vianney Theological Seminary (Denver, Colorado, US) St. John Vianney High School (Holmdel Township, New Jersey, US) St. John Vianney High School (Kirkwood, Missouri, US) St. John Vianney High School (Los Angeles, California, US) St. John Vianney College Seminary (Miami, Florida, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (St. Petersburg, Florida, US) Saint John Vianney School (Gallatin, Tennessee, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Sedona, Arizona, US) Saint John Vianney Seminary (St. Paul, Minnesota, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church and School (Spokane Valley, Washington, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Cumberland, Rhode Island, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Dublin, Ireland) Saint John Vianney School (Firswood, England, UK) Saint John Vianney Catholic Church & School (Rancho Cordova, California, US) Saint John Vianney Clergy Residence for Retired Priests (Riverdale, Bronx, New York, US) Saint John Vianney Catholic Church & St John Vianney R.C Primary School (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK) Saint John Vianney Catholic Church (Houston, Texas, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church & School (San Jose, California, US) St. John Vianney Catholic Church (Hacienda Heights, California, US) Saint John Vianney Catholic Church & School (Northlake, Illinois, US) Saint John Vianney Catholic Church (Omaha, Nebraska, US) St John Vianney Church (West Green Road, Tottenham, London, England, UK) Peter Julian Eymard Jean-Claude Colin Mathias Loras Saint John Vianney's prayer to Jesus André César Vermare Saint John Vianney, patron saint archive "For All the Saints / For All the Saints - A Resource for the Commemorations of the Calendar / Worship Resources/ Karakia/ ANZPB-HKMOA / Resources / Home - Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia". www.anglican.org.nz. Retrieved 27 March 2021. Trochu, Frances (1977). The Cure D'Ars. TAN Books and Publishers. p. 48. "The Life of St Jean-Marie Vianney". www.ewtn.com. Retrieved 14 December 2020. Trochu, Frances (1930). The Cure D'Ars. Burns Oates & Washbourne LTD. pp. 3–5. "St. Benedict Joseph Labre". Walsh 1991, p. 236. "Life with Saint John Vianney". Marshall, Bruce. The Curé of Ars (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1952), 273. "Otten, Susan Tracy. "St. Jean-Baptiste-Marie Vianney." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 30 Dec. 2012". Newadvent.org. Retrieved 2 June 2013. Walsh 1991, p. 237. "Graf, Ernest, The Cure of Ars. Incorporated Catholic Truth Society, London, 1952". Ewtn.com. Retrieved 14 December 2020. Heffernan, Greg. "John Vianney: The Saint Who Read Souls at a Glance", St. Anthony Messenger Archived 2 August 2003 at the Wayback Machine Foley, O.F.M., Leonard. Saint of the Day, Franciscan Media. Americancatholic.org. 2009. ISBN 978-0-86716-887-7. Retrieved 2 June 2013. Walsh 1991, pp. 237–238. Walsh 1991, p. 238. "How does the Church Respond to Suicide?". Catholic Exchange. 13 August 2014. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Who is the Cure of Ars?", Sisters of the Cure of Ars, Diocese of Portland, Maine Cruz, Joan Carroll. The Incorruptibles: A Study of the Incorruption of the Bodies of Various Catholic Saints and Beati, TAN Books and Publishers, Inc, June 1977. ISBN 0-89555-066-0 Walsh 1991, p. 239. "Independent Catholic News, May 5, 2009". Indcatholicnews.com. 28 May 2009. Retrieved 2 June 2013. "Congregazione per il Clero – Annus Sacerdotalis – Letter proclaiming a Year for Priests". Annus Sacerdotalis. 19 June 2009. Retrieved 2 June 2013. "Year for Priests – 150th Ann. of St John Vianney". World Stamp News. 18 June 2010. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2010. Pope Benedict XVI, "Letter Proclaiming a Year for Priests on the 150th Anniversary of the 'Dies Natalis of the Curé of Ars", 16 June 2009 "To participants in the Plenary Assembly of the Congregation for the Clergy (March 16, 2009) | BENEDICT XVI". w2.vatican.va. Retrieved 25 April 2019. "The Calendar". The Church of England. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "For All the Saints / For All the Saints - A Resource for the Commemorations of the Calendar / Worship Resources/ Karakia/ ANZPB-HKMOA / Resources / Home - Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia". www.anglican.org.nz. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "Year for Priests – St John Vianney | Liturgy". 3 August 2009. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "St. John Vianney's Incorrupt Heart Begins US Tour". 20 November 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. "Heart of St. John Vianney to tour the archdiocese". theleaven.org. 8 March 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Saint Jean Vianney Relic Pilgrimage". "Large Crowds at St. Catherine for Relic Tour". patch.com. 2 May 2019. Retrieved 4 August 2021. "The Parish Family of Curé of Ars". The Parish Family of Curé of Ars. Retrieved 23 April 2023. "St John Vianney Church, 95 Ardlea Road, Dublin D05 TH79". "Tottenham: Roman catholicism Pages 355-356 A History of the County of Middlesex: Volume 5, Hendon, Kingsbury, Great Stanmore, Little Stanmore, Edmonton Enfield, Monken Hadley, South Mimms, Tottenham". British History Online. Victoria County History, 1976. Retrieved 14 November 2022. Walsh, Michael (1991). Butler's Lives of the Saints. New York City: HarperCollins Publishers. Marshall, Bruce (1952). The Curé of Ars. New York City: Sheed and Ward.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "St. Jean-Baptiste-Marie Vianney". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Wikiquote has quotations related to John Vianney. Wikisource has original works by or about: Jean-Marie-Baptiste Vianney Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jean-Marie Vianney. The Life of Blessed John B. Marie Vianney, Curé of Ars public domain audiobook at LibriVox * "Saint John Vianney: mystic and messenger of the Miraculous Medal". Invisible Monastery of charity and fraternity – Christian family prayer. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Portals:  Biography  Catholicism  France  Saints