Dundee Island is an ice-covered island lying east of the northeastern tip of Antarctic Peninsula and south of Joinville Island. It is named after the city of Dundee in Scotland. The Petrel Base is a scientific station in Antarctica belonging to Argentina. Its coordinates are 63 ° 28′S 56 ° 17′W and it is located on rocks at 18 meters above sea level at the foot of the Rosamaría glacier in the Petrel bay, the low point of Cape Welchness on Dundee Island in the Joinville archipelago. A 10-year plan began in 2013 to convert it into a permanent base. The base infrastructure has 3600 m² under roof, a 1200 m² logistics area and 25 beds. Account for transport: 2 Zodiac with outboard motor and 1 all-terrain truck of 1.5 ton. It is from this island that the American businessman Lincoln Ellsworth, accompanied by the pilot Herbert Hollick-Kenyon, took off on the 23 November 1935 for the first crossing of the Antarctic by plane.[citation needed] The Eden Rocks, a designated Important Bird Area, lie off the east coast of Dundee Island. East past those are another rock, called Puget Rock. The use of "Puget" in this area commemorates Captain William D. Puget of the British Royal Navy. It was first used by Sir James Clark Ross on December 30, 1842, as "Cape Puget", but it is not clear from Ross' text what feature he was naming. The name Puget Rock was chosen by the United Kingdom Antarctic Place-Names Committee (UK-APC) in 1956 in order to preserve Ross' naming choice in the vicinity. Composite Antarctic Gazetteer List of Antarctic islands south of 60° S SCAR Territorial claims in Antarctica Active Reef "Dundee Island". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved 3 December 2013. "Eden Rocks". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved 14 August 2018. "Puget Rock". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved 14 August 2018.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Geological Survey. v t e