The Walt Disney Company, commonly known as Disney (/ˈdɪzni/ DIZ-nee), is an American multinational mass media and entertainment conglomerate that is headquartered at the Walt Disney Studios complex in Burbank, California. Disney was founded on October 16, 1923, by brothers Walt Disney and Roy Disney as Disney Brothers Studio; it also operated under the names Walt Disney Studio and Walt Disney Productions before changing its name to the Walt Disney Company in 1986. In 1928, Disney established itself as a leader in the animation industry with the short film Steamboat Willie. The film used synchronized sound to become the first post-produced sound cartoon, and popularized Mickey Mouse, who became Disney's mascot and corporate icon. After becoming a major success by the early 1940s, Disney diversified into live-action films, television, and theme parks in the 1950s. However, following Walt Disney's death in 1966, the company's profits, especially in the animation division, began to decline. In 1984, Disney's shareholders voted Michael Eisner as CEO, who led a reversal of the company's decline through a combination of international theme park expansion and the highly successful Disney Renaissance period of animation in the 1990s. In 2005, under new CEO Bob Iger, the company continued to expand into a major entertainment conglomerate with the acquisitions of Marvel Studios, Lucasfilm, and 20th Century Studios. In 2020, Bob Chapek became the head of Disney after Iger's retirement. However, Chapek was ousted in 2022 and Iger was reinstated as CEO. The company is known for its film studio division Walt Disney Studios, which includes Walt Disney Pictures, Walt Disney Animation Studios, Pixar, Marvel Studios, Lucasfilm, 20th Century Studios, 20th Century Animation, and Searchlight Pictures. Disney's other main business units include divisions in television, broadcasting, streaming media, theme park resorts, consumer products, publishing, and international operations. Through these divisions, Disney owns and operates the ABC television network; cable television networks such as Disney Channel, ESPN, Freeform, FX, and National Geographic; publishing, merchandising, music, and theater divisions; direct-to-consumer streaming services such as Disney+, Star+, ESPN+, Hulu, and Hotstar; and Disney Experiences, which includes several theme parks, resort hotels, and cruise lines around the world. Disney is one of the biggest and best-known companies in the world, and has been ranked number 53 on the 2022 Fortune 500 list of biggest companies in the United States by revenue. In 2023, the company's seat in Forbes Global 2000 was 87. Since its founding, the company has won 135 Academy Awards, 26 of which have been awarded to Walt. The company has been said to have produced some of the greatest films of all time, as well as revolutionizing the theme park industry. The company, which has been public since 1940, trades on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) with ticker symbol DIS and has been a component of the Dow Jones Industrial Average since 1991. In August 2020, about two-thirds of the stock was owned by large financial institutions. The company celebrated their 100th anniversary on October 16, 2023. In 1921, American animators Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks founded Laugh-O-Gram Studio in Kansas City, Missouri. Iwerks and Disney went on to create several short films at the studio. The final one, created in 1923, was entitled Alice's Wonderland and depicted child actor Virginia Davis interacting with animated characters. While Laugh-O-Gram's shorts were locally popular in Kansas City, the studio went bankrupt in 1923 and Disney moved to Hollywood, Los Angeles, to join his brother Roy O. Disney, who was recovering there from tuberculosis. Shortly after Walt's move to Los Angeles, New York film distributor Margaret J. Winkler purchased Alice's Wonderland, which began to gain popularity. Disney signed a contract later that year with Winkler for $1,500 to create six series of Alice Comedies, with an option for two more six-episode series. Walt and Roy founded Disney Brothers Studio on October 16, 1923, to produce the films. In January 1926, the Disney's moved into a new studio on Hyperion Street and Disney Brothers Studio's name was changed to Walt Disney Studio. After producing several Alice films over the next four years, Winkler handed the role of distributing the studio's shorts to her husband, Charles Mintz. In 1927, Mintz asked for a new series of shorts to be made, and in response, Disney created his first series of fully animated shorts, starring a character named Oswald the Lucky Rabbit. The series was produced by Winkler Pictures and distributed by Universal Pictures. Walt Disney Studios completed 26 Oswald shorts in total. In 1928, Walt and Mintz entered into a contract dispute, with Walt asking for a larger fee for his shorts while Mintz instead sought to reduce the price. Soon after, Walt discovered Universal Pictures owned the intellectual property rights to Oswald, and Mintz threatened to produce the shorts without him if he did not accept the reduction in payment. Walt declined and Mintz signed four of Walt Disney Studio's primary animators to start his own studio; Iwerks was the only top animator to remain with the Disney brothers. Walt and Iwerks replaced Oswald with a mouse character that was originally named Mortimer Mouse before Walt's wife urged him to change the name to Mickey Mouse. In May 1928, Mickey Mouse debuted in test screenings of the shorts Plane Crazy and The Gallopin' Gaucho. Later that year, the studio produced Steamboat Willie, its first sound film and the third short in the Mickey Mouse series, which was made using synchronized sound, becoming the first post-produced sound cartoon. The sound was created using Powers' Cinephone system, which used Lee de Forest's Phonofilm system. Pat Powers' distribution company distributed Steamboat Willie, which became an immediate hit. In 1929, the company successfully re-released the two earlier films with synchronized sound. After the release of Steamboat Willie at the Colony Theater in New York, Mickey Mouse became an immensely popular character. Disney Brothers Studio made several cartoons featuring Mickey and other characters. In August 1929, the company began making the Silly Symphony cartoon series with Columbia Pictures as the series' distributor because the Disney brothers felt they were not receiving their share of profits from Powers. Powers ended his contract with Iwerks, who later started his own studio. Carl W. Stalling played an important role in starting the series, and composed the music for early films but left the company after Iwerks' departure. In September, theater manager Harry Woodin requested permission to start a Mickey Mouse Club at his theater the Fox Dome to boost attendance. Walt agreed but David E. Dow started the first-such club at Elsinore Theatre before Woodin could start his. On December 21, the first meeting for the club at Elsinore Theatre was attended by around 1,200 children. On July 24, 1930, Joseph Conley, president of King Features Syndicate, wrote to the Disney studio and asked the company to produce a Mickey Mouse comic strip; production started in November and samples were sent to King Features, which approved them. On December 16, 1930, the Walt Disney Studios partnership was reorganized as a corporation with the name Walt Disney Productions, Limited, which had a merchandising division named Walt Disney Enterprises, and subsidiaries called Disney Film Recording Company, Limited and Liled Realty and Investment Company; the latter of which managed real estate holdings. Walt and his wife held 60 percent (6,000 shares) of the company, and Roy owned 40 percent. The comic strip Mickey Mouse debuted on January 13, 1930, in New York Daily Mirror and by 1931, the strip was published in 60 newspapers in the U.S., and in twenty other countries. After realizing releasing merchandise based on the characters would generate more revenue for the company, a man in New York offered Walt $300 for license to put Mickey Mouse on writing tablets he was manufacturing. Walt accepted and Mickey Mouse became the first licensed character. In 1933, Walt asked Kay Kamen, the owner of an Kansas City advertising firm, to run Disney's merchandising; Kamen agreed and transformed Disney's merchandising. Within a year, Kamen had 40 licenses for Mickey Mouse and within two years, had made $35 million worth of sales. In 1934, Walt said he made more money from the merchandising of Mickey Mouse than from the character's films. Later, the Waterbury Clock Company created a Mickey Mouse watch, which became so popular it saved the company from bankruptcy during the Great Depression. During a promotional event at Macy's, 11,000 Mickey Mouse watches sold in one day; and within two years, two-and-a-half million watches were sold. As Mickey Mouse become a heroic character rather than a mischievous mouse, Disney needed another character that could produce gags. Walt invited radio presenter Clarence Nash to the animation studio; Walt wanted to use Nash to play Donald Duck, a talking duck character that would be the studio's new gag character. Donald Duck made his first appearance in 1934 in The Wise Little Hen. Though he did not become popular as quickly as Mickey Mouse had, Donald Duck had a featured role in Donald and Pluto (1936), and eventually was given his own series. After a disagreement with Columbia Pictures about the Silly Symphony cartoons, Walt signed a distribution contract with United Artists from 1932 to 1937 to distribute the series. In 1932, Disney signed an exclusive contract with Technicolor to produce cartoons in color until the end of 1935, beginning with the Silly Symphony short Flowers and Trees (1932). The film was the first full-color cartoon and later that year, it won the Academy Award for the Best Cartoon. In 1933, The Three Little Pigs, another popular Silly Symphony short, was released and also won the Academy Award for Best Cartoon. The song from the film "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?", which was composed by Frank Churchill—who wrote other Silly Symphonies songs—became popular and remained so throughout the 1930s, and became one of the best-known Disney songs. Other Silly Symphonies films won the Best Cartoon award from 1931 to 1939, except for 1938, when another Disney film Ferdinand the Bull won it. In 1934, Walt announced that the studio would produce a feature-length animated film, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. Snow White would be the first cel animated feature film and the first animated feature produced in the United States. Its novelty made it a risky venture; Roy tried to persuade Walt not to produce the film, arguing that it would bankrupt the studio, and while widely anticipated by the general public, it was referred to by some Hollywood critics as "Disney's Folly". Walt directed the animators to take a realistic approach to the film, creating scenes as though they were live action. While making the film, the company created the multiplane camera, consisting of pieces of glass upon which drawings were placed at different distances to create an illusion of depth in the backgrounds. After United Artists attempted to attain future television rights to the Disney shorts, Walt signed a distribution contract with RKO Radio Pictures on March 2, 1936. Walt Disney Productions exceeded its original budget of $150,000 for Snow White by ten times; its production eventually cost the company $1.5 million. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs took three years to make, premiering on December 12, 1937. It was an immediate critical and commercial success, becoming the highest-grossing film of all time up to that point, grossing $8 million (equivalent to $169,555,556 in 2023 dollars); after several re-releases, the film grossed a total of $998,440,000 in the U.S. adjusted for inflation. Using the profits from Snow White, Disney financed the construction of a new 51-acre studio complex in Burbank, which the company fully moved into in 1940 and in which the company is still headquartered today. On April 2 of the same year, Disney had its initial public offering, with the common stock remaining with Walt and his family. Walt did not want to go public but the company needed the money. Shortly before Snow White's release, work began on the company's next feature films Pinocchio and Bambi; Pinocchio was released in February 1940 while Bambi was eventually postponed. Despite Pinocchio's critical acclaim (it won the Academy Awards for Best Song and Best Score and was lauded for groundbreaking achievements in animation), the film performed poorly at the box office in large part due to World War II affecting the international box office. The company's third feature film Fantasia (1940) introduced several groundbreaking advancements in cinema technology, chiefly Fantasound, an early surround sound audio system making it the first commercial film to be shown in stereo. However, Fantasia similarly performed poorly at the box office In 1941, the company experienced a major setback when 300 of its 800 animators, led mainly by one of the studio's top animators Art Babbitt, went on strike for five weeks for unionization and higher pay. Walt publicly accused the strikers of being party to a communist conspiracy, and fired many of the animators, including some of the studio's best. Roy unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the company's main distributors to invest in the studio, which could no longer afford to offset production costs with employee layoffs. The anthology film The Reluctant Dragon (1941), ran $100,000 short of its production cost, contributing to the studio's financial woes.[clarification needed] While negotiations to end the strike were underway, Walt and a group of the studio's animators embarked on a twelve-week goodwill visit to South America, funded by the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs. During the trip, the animators began plotting for films taking inspiration from the local environments and music. As a result of the strike, federal mediators compelled the studio to recognize the Screen Cartoonists Guild and several animators left the company, leaving it with 694 employees. To recover from their financial losses, Disney rushed into production the studio's fourth animated feature Dumbo (1941) on a cheaper budget, which performed well at the box office, infusing the studio with much needed cash. After the U.S. entry into World War II following the bombing of Pearl Harbor, many of the company's animators were drafted into the army. Later, 500 United States Army soldiers occupied the studio for eight months to protect a nearby Lockheed aircraft plant. While they were there, the soldiers fixed equipment in large soundstages and converted storage sheds into ammunition depots. The United States Navy asked Walt to produce propaganda films to gain support for the war, and with the studio badly in need of profits, Walt agreed, signing a contract with the navy for 20 war-related shorts for $90,000. Most of the company's employees worked on the project, which spawned films such as Victory Through Air Power, and others which included some of the company's characters. In August 1942, Bambi was finally released as Disney's fifth feature film after five years in development, performing poorly at the box office. Later, as products of the South American trip, the studio released the features Saludos Amigos (1942) and The Three Caballeros (1944); the two films showcased the studio's new strategy of releasing package films, collections of several short cartoons grouped together to make up feature films. Both films performed poorly upon their releases.[citation needed] Disney released more package films throughout the rest of the decade, including Make Mine Music (1946), Fun and Fancy Free (1947), Melody Time (1948), and The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad (1949), to try to recover from its financial losses. The studio also began producing less-expensive live-action films mixed with animation, beginning with Song of the South (1946) which would become one of Disney's most controversial films upon its release. As a result of the company's financial issues, it began re-releasing its feature films in 1944 to generate much-needed revenue. In 1948, the studio began premiering the nature documentary series, True-Life Adventures, which ran until 1960, winning eight Academy Awards. In 1949 the Walt Disney Music Company was founded to help with profits for merchandising. In the 1950s Disney returned to producing full-length animated feature films, beginning with Cinderella (1950), the studio's first in eight years. A critical and commercial success, Cinderella is considered to have saved the studio after the financial pitfalls of the wartime era; it was Disney's most financially successful film since Snow White, making $8 million in its first year. Walt began to reduce his involvement with the studio's animation, instead focusing his attention on the company's increasingly diversified portfolio of projects including live-action films (of which Treasure Island was the studio's first), television and amusement parks. In 1950 the company made its first foray into television when NBC aired "One Hour in Wonderland", which was a promotional program for Disney's next animated film Alice in Wonderland (1951) and sponsored by Coca-Cola. Alice was financially unsuccessful, falling $1 million short of the production budget. In February 1953, Disney's next animated film Peter Pan was released to financial success; it was the last Disney film distributed by RKO after Disney ended its contract and created its own distribution company Buena Vista Distribution. According to Walt, he first had the idea of building an amusement park during a visit to Griffith Park with his daughters. He said he watched them ride a carousel there and that he thought there "should be ... some kind of amusement enterprise built where the parents and the children could have fun together". Initially planning the construction of an eight-acre (3.2 ha) Mickey Mouse Park near the Burbank studio, Walt changed the planned amusement park's name to Disneylandia, then to Disneyland. A new company, WED Enterprises (now Walt Disney Imagineering), was formed in 1952 to design and construct the park. Drawing inspiration from amusement parks in the U.S. and Europe, Walt approached the design of Disneyland with an emphasis on storytelling and cleanliness, innovative approaches for amusement parks of the time. The plan to build the park in Burbank was abandoned when Walt realized that eight acres would not be enough land to accomplish his vision. Disney instead acquired 160 acres (65 ha) of orange groves in Anaheim, southeast of Los Angeles in neighboring Orange County, at $6,200 per acre to build the park. Construction on Disneyland began in July 1954. To finance the construction of Disneyland, Walt sold his home at Smoke Tree Ranch in Palm Springs and the company promoted it with a television series of the same name aired on ABC. The Disneyland television series, which would be the first in a long-running series of successful anthology television programs for the company, was a success and garnered over 50% of viewers in its time slot, along with praise from critics. In August, Walt formed another company Disneyland, Inc. to finance the park, whose final construction costs totaled at $17 million. In October, with the success of Disneyland, ABC allowed Disney to produce The Mickey Mouse Club, a variety show for children; the show included a daily Disney cartoon, a children's newsreel, and a talent show. It was presented by a host, and talented children and adults called "Mousketeers" and "Mooseketeers", respectively. After the first season, over ten million children and five million adults watched it daily; and two million Mickey Mouse ears, which the cast wore, were sold. In December 1954, the five-part miniseries Davy Crockett, premiered as part of Disneyland, starring Fess Parker as the title character. According to writer Neal Gabler, "[It] became an overnight national sensation", selling 10 million Crockett coonskin caps. The show's theme song "The Ballad of Davy Crockett" became a part of American pop culture, selling 10 million records. Los Angeles Times called it "the greatest merchandising fad the world had ever seen". In June 1955, Disney's 15th animated film Lady and the Tramp was released and performed better at the box office than any other Disney films since Snow White. Disneyland opened on July 17, 1955. The park's opening was a major media event, broadcast live on ABC with actors Art Linkletter, Bob Cummings, and Ronald Reagan hosting. The park's opening garnered over 90 million viewers, becoming the most-watched live broadcast to that date. While the park's opening day was disastrous (restaurants ran out of food, the Mark Twain Riverboat began to sink, several rides malfunctioned, and the drinking fountains were not working in the 100 °F. (38 °C) heat), the park quickly became a major success with 161,657 visitors in its first week and 20,000 visitors a day in its first month. After its first year, 3.6 million people had visited the park, and after its second year, four million more guests came, making it more popular than the Grand Canyon and Yellowstone National Park. That year, the company earned a gross total of $24.5 million compared to the $11 million the previous year. Walt continued to delegate much of the company's animation work to the studio's top animators, known as the Nine Old Men. The company produced an average of five film releases per year throughout the 1950s and 1960s. Animated feature films of this period included Sleeping Beauty (1959), One Hundred and One Dalmatians (1961), and The Sword in the Stone (1963). Sleeping Beauty was a financial loss for the company, and at $6 million, had the highest production costs for a film up to that point. One Hundred and One Dalmatians introduced an animation technique using the xerography process to electromagnetically transfer the drawings to animation cels, resulting in a transformed art style for the studio's animated films. In 1956, the Sherman Brothers, Robert and Richard, were asked to produce a theme song for the television series Zorro. The company later hired them as exclusive staff songwriters, an arrangement that lasted 10 years. They wrote many of the songs for Disney's films and theme parks, and several of them were commercial hits. In the late 1950s, Disney ventured into comedy with the live-action films The Shaggy Dog (1959), which became the highest-grossing film in the U.S. and Canada for Disney at over $9 million, and The Absent Minded Professor (1961), both starring Fred MacMurray. Disney also made several live-action films based on children's books including Pollyanna (1960) and Swiss Family Robinson (1960). Child actor Hayley Mills starred in Pollyanna, for which she won an Academy Juvenile Award. Mills also starred in five other Disney films, including a dual role as the twins in The Parent Trap (1961). Another child actor Kevin Corcoran was a prominent figure in many of Disney's live-action films, first appearing in a serial for The Mickey Mouse Club, where he would play a boy named Moochie. He worked alongside Mills in Pollyanna, and starred in features such as Old Yeller (1957), Toby Tyler (1960), and Swiss Family Robinson. In 1964, the live action/animation musical film Mary Poppins was released to major commercial success and rapturous critical acclaim, becoming the year's highest-grossing film and winning five Academy Awards, including Best Actress for Julie Andrews as Poppins and Best Song for the Sherman Brothers', who also won Best Score for the film's "Chim Chim Cher-ee". Throughout the 1960s, Dean Jones, whom The Guardian called "the figure who most represented Walt Disney Productions in the 1960s", starred in ten Disney films, including That Darn Cat! (1965), The Ugly Dachshund (1966), and The Love Bug (1968). Disney's last child actor of the 1960s was Kurt Russell, who had signed a ten-year contract with the company. He featured in films such as The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes (1969), The Horse in the Gray Flannel Suit (1968) alongside Dean Jones, The Barefoot Executive (1971), and The Strongest Man in the World (1975). In late 1959, Walt had an idea to build another park in Palm Beach, Florida, called the City of Tomorrow, a city that would be full of technological improvements. In 1964, the company chose land southwest of Orlando, Florida to build the park and quickly acquired 27,000 acres (10,927 ha) of land for it. On November 15, 1965, Walt, along with Roy and Florida's governor Haydon Burns, announced plans for another park called Disney World, which included Magic Kingdom—‌a larger version of Disneyland‍—‌and the City of Tomorrow, which would be at the park's center. By 1967, the company had made several expansions to Disneyland, and more rides were added in 1966 and 1967, at a cost of $20 million. The new rides included Walt Disney's Enchanted Tiki Room, which was the first attraction to use Audio-Animatronics; Walt Disney's Carousel of Progress, which debuted at the 1964 New York World's Fair before moving to Disneyland in 1967; and Dumbo the Flying Elephant, which opened a month after the park. On November 20, 1964, Walt sold most of WED Enterprise to Walt Disney Productions for $3.75 million after being persuaded to by Roy, who thought Walt having his own company would cause legal problems. Walt formed a new company called Retlaw to handle his personal business, primarily Disneyland Railroad and Disneyland Monorail. When the company started looking for a sponsor for the project, Walt renamed the City of Tomorrow Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow (EPCOT). Walt, who had been a heavy smoker since World War I, experienced deteriorating health; he visited St. Joseph Hospital on November 2, 1966, for tests. Doctors discovered a walnut-sized spot on his left lung and a few days later, they found the lung was cancerous and removed it. Walt was released from hospital after two weeks, however he was re-hospitalized in late November after his health continued to deteriorate. He died on December 15, 1966, at the age of 65, of circulatory collapse caused by lung cancer. In 1967, the last two films Walt had worked on were released; the animated film The Jungle Book, which was Disney's most successful film for the next two decades, and the live-action musical The Happiest Millionaire. After Walt's death, the company largely abandoned the animation industry but make several live-action films. Its animation staff declined from 500 to 125 employees, with the company only hiring 21 people from 1970 to 1977. Disney's first post-Walt animated film The Aristocats was released in 1970; according to Dave Kehr of Chicago Tribune, "the absence of his [Walt's] hand is evident". The following year, the anti-fascist musical Bedknobs and Broomsticks was released and won the Oscar for Best Special Visual Effects. At the time of Walt's death, Roy was ready to retire but wanted to keep Walt's legacy alive; he became the first CEO and chairman of the company. In May 1967, Roy had legislation passed by Florida's legislatures to grant Disney World its own quasi-government agency in an area called Reedy Creek Improvement District. Roy also changed Disney World's name to Walt Disney World to remind people it was Walt's dream. Over time, EPCOT became less of the City of Tomorrow and developed more into another amusement park. After 18 months of construction at a cost of around $400 million, Walt Disney World's first park the Magic Kingdom, along with Disney's Contemporary Resort and Disney's Polynesian Resort, opened on October 1, 1971, with 10,400 visitors. A parade with over 1,000 band members, 4,000 Disney entertainers, and a choir from the U.S. Army marched down Main Street. The icon of the park was the Cinderella Castle. Three months later on Thanksgiving Day, cars traveling to the Magic Kingdom caused traffic jams along interstate roads. On December 21, 1971, Roy died of cerebral hemorrhage at St. Joseph Hospital. After Roy's death, Donn Tatum, a senior executive and former president of Disney, became the first non-Disney-family-member to become CEO and chairman of the board. Card Walker, who had been with the company since 1938, became its president. By June 30, 1973, Disney had over 23,000 employees and had a gross revenue of $257,751,000 over a nine-month period, compared to the year before when it made $220,026,000. In November, Disney released the animated film Robin Hood (1973), which became Disney's biggest international-grossing movie at $18 million. Throughout the 1970s, Disney released several more live-action films such as The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes' sequel Now You See Him, Now You Don't; The Love Bug sequels Herbie Rides Again (1974) and Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo (1977); Escape to Witch Mountain (1975); and Freaky Friday (1976). In 1976, Card Walker became CEO of the company, with Tatum remaining as chairman until 1980, when Walker replaced him. In 1977, Roy E. Disney, Roy O. Disney's son and the only Disney working for the company, resigned from his job as an executive because of disagreements with the company's decisions. In 1977, Disney released the successful animated film The Rescuers, which grossed $48 million at the box office. The live-acton/animated musical Pete's Dragon was released in 1977, grossing $16 million in the U.S. and Canada, but was considered a disappointment to the company. In 1979, Disney's first PG-rated film and most expensive film up to that point at $26 million The Black Hole was released, showing Disney could use special effects. It grossed $35 million, which was a disappointment to the company, which thought it would be a hit like Star Wars (1977). The Black Hole was a response to other Science fiction films of the era. In September, 12 animators, which was over 15 percent of the department, resigned from the studio. Led by Don Bluth, they left because of a conflict with the training program and the atmosphere at the studio, and started their own company Don Bluth Productions. In 1981, Disney released Dumbo to VHS and Alice in Wonderland the following year, leading Disney to eventually release all its films on home media. On July 24, Walt Disney's World on Ice, a two-year tour of ice shows featuring Disney charters, made its premiere at the Brendan Byrne Meadowlands Arena after Disney licensed its characters to Feld Entertainment. The same month, Disney's animated film The Fox and the Hound was released and became the highest-grossing animated film to that point at $39.9 million. It was the company's first film that did not involve Walt and was the last major work done by Disney's Nine Old Men, who were replaced with younger animators. As profits for the company started to decline, on October 1, 1982, Epcot, then known as EPCOT Center, opened as the second theme park in Walt Disney World, with around 10,000 people in attendance during the opening. The park cost over $900 million to construct, and consisted of the Future World pavilion and the World Showcase representing Mexico, China, Germany, Italy, America, Japan, France, the United Kingdom, and Canada; Morocco and Norway were added in 1984 and 1988, respectively. The animation industry continued to decline and 69% of the company's profits were from its theme parks; in 1982, there were 12 million visitors to Walt Disney World, a figure that declined by 5% the following June. On July 9, 1982, Disney released Tron, one of the first films to extensively use computer-generated imagery (CGI). Tron was a big influence on other CGI movies, although it received mixed reviews. In total, in 1982, the company lost $27 million. On April 15, 1983, Disney's first park outside the U.S. Tokyo Disneyland, opened in Urayasu, Japan. Costing around $1.4 billion, construction of the park started in 1979 when Disney and The Oriental Land Company agreed to build a park together. Within its first ten years, the park had over 140 million visitors. After an investment of $100 million, on April 18, Disney started a pay-to-watch cable television channel called Disney Channel, a 16-hours-a-day service showing Disney films, twelve programs, and two magazines shows for adults. Although it was expected to do well, the company lost $48.3 million after its first year, with around 916,000 subscribers. In 1983, Walt's son-in-law Ron W. Miller, who had been president of the company since 1978, became its CEO, and Raymond Watson became chairman. Miller wanted the studio to produce more content for mature audiences, and as a result, Disney founded the film distribution label Touchstone Pictures to produce movies geared toward adults and teenagers in 1984. Splash (1984) was the first film released under the label, and was a much-needed success for the studio, grossing over $6.1 million in its first week of screening. Later, Disney's first R-rated film Down and Out in Beverly Hills (1986) was released and was another hit for the company, grossing $62 million. The following year, Disney's first PG-13 rated film Adventures in Babysitting was released. In 1984, Saul Steinberg attempted to buy out the company, holding 11.1% of the stocks. He offered to buy 49% of the company for $1.3 billion or the entire company for $2.75 billion. Disney, which had less than $10 million, rejected Steinberg's offer and offered to buy all of his stock for $325.5 million. Steinberg agreed, and Disney paid it all with part of a $1.3 billion bank loan, putting the company $866 million in debt. In 1984, the company's shareholders Roy E. Disney, Sid Bass, Lillian and Diane Disney, and Irwin L. Jacobs—who together owned about 35.5% of the shares of the company, forced out CEO Miller and replaced him with Michael Eisner, a former president of Paramount Pictures, and also appointed Frank Wells as president. Eisner's first act at Disney was to make it a major film studio, which at the time it was not considered. Eisner appointed Jeffrey Katzenberg as chairman and Roy E. Disney as head of the animation division. Eisner wanted the company to produce an animated film every 18 months rather than every four years, as the company had been doing. To help with the film division, the company started making Saturday-morning cartoons to create new Disney characters for merchandising, and produced several films through Touchstone. Under Eisner, Disney became more involved with television, creating Touchstone Television and producing the television situation comedy The Golden Girls, which was a hit. The company also spent $15 million promoting its theme parks, raising visitor numbers by 10%. In 1984, Disney produced The Black Cauldron, then the most-expensive animated movie at $40 million, their first animated film to feature computer-generated imagery, and also their first PG-rated animated film because of its adult themes. The film was a box-office failure, leading the company to move the animation department from the studio in Burbank into a warehouse in Glendale, California. The film-financing partnership Silver Screen Partners II, which was organized in 1985, financed films for Disney with $193 million. In January 1987, Silver Screen Partners III began financing movies for Disney with $300 million raised by E.F. Hutton, the largest amount raised for a film-financing limited partnership. Silver Screen IV was also set up to finance Disney's studios. In 1986, the company changed its name from Walt Disney Productions to the Walt Disney Company, stating the old name only referred to the film industry. With Disney's animation industry declining, the animation department needed its next movie The Great Mouse Detective to be a success. It grossed $25 million at the box office, becoming a much-needed financial success for the company. To generate more revenue from merchandising, the company opened its first retail store Disney Store in Glendale in 1987. Because of its success, the company opened two more stores in California, and by 1990, it had 215 stores throughout the U.S. In 1989, the company garnered $411 million in revenue and made a profit of $187 million. In 1987, the company signed an agreement with the Government of France to build a resort named Euro Disneyland in Paris; it would consist of two theme parks named Disneyland Park and Walt Disney Studios Park, a golf course, and six hotels. In 1988, Disney's 27th animated film Oliver & Company was released the same day as that of former Disney animator Don Bluth's The Land Before Time. Oliver & Company out-competed The Land Before Time, becoming the first animated film to gross over $100 million in its initial release, and the highest-grossing animated film in its initial run. Disney became the box-office-leading Hollywood studio for the first time, with films such as Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988), Three Men and a Baby (1987), and Good Morning, Vietnam (1987). The company's gross revenue went from $165 million in 1983 to $876 million in 1987, and operating income went from −$33 million in 1983 to +130 million in 1987. The studio's net income rose by 66%, along with a 26% growth in revenue. Los Angeles Times called Disney's recovery "a real rarity in the corporate world". On May 1, 1989, Disney opened Disney-MGM Studios, its third amusement park at Walt Disney World, and later became Hollywood Studios. The new park demonstrated to visitors the movie-making process, until 2008, when it was changed to make guests feel as though they are in movies. Following the opening of Disney-MGM Studios, Disney opened the water park Typhoon Lagoon on June 1, 1989; in 2008, it had 2.8 million visitors. Also in 1989, Disney signed an agreement-in-principle to acquire The Jim Henson Company from its founder Jim Henson. The deal included Henson's programming library and Muppet characters—excluding the Muppets created for Sesame Street—as well as Henson's personal creative services. Henson, however, died in May 1990 before the deal was completed, resulting in the two companies terminating merger negotiations the following December. On November 17, 1989, Disney released The Little Mermaid, which is considered to be the start of the Disney Renaissance, a period in which the company released hugely successful and critically acclaimed animated films. During its release, it became the animated film with the highest gross from its initial run and garnered $233 million at the box office; it also won two Academy Awards; Best Original Score and Best Original Song for "Under the Sea". During the Disney Renaissance, composer Alan Menken and lyricist Howard Ashman wrote several Disney songs until Ashman died in 1991. Together they wrote six songs that were nominated for Academy Awards; with two winning songs—"Under the Sea" and "Beauty and the Beast". To produce music geared for the mainstream, including music for movie soundtracks, Disney founded the recording label Hollywood Records on January 1, 1990. In September 1990, Disney arranged for financing of up to $200 million by a unit of Nomura Securities for Interscope films made for Disney. On October 23, Disney formed Touchwood Pacific Partners, which replaced the Silver Screen Partnership series as the company's movie studios' primary source of funding. Disney's first animated sequel The Rescuers Down Under was released on November 16, 1990, and was created using Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), a digital software that was developed by Disney and Pixar—the computer division of Lucasfilm—becoming the first feature film to be entirely created digitally. Although the film struggled in the box office, grossing $47.4 million, it received positive reviews from critics. In 1991, Disney and Pixar agreed to a deal to make three films together, the first one being Toy Story. Dow Jones & Company, wanting to replace three companies in its industrial average, chose Disney in May 1991, statement Disney "reflects the importance of entertainment and leisure activities in the economy". Disney's next animated film Beauty and the Beast was released on November 13, 1991, and grossed nearly $430 million. It was the first animated film to win a Golden Globe for Best Picture, and it received six Academy Award nominations, becoming the first animated film to be nominated for the Best Picture Oscar; it won Best Score, Best Sound, and Best Song for "Beauty and the Beast". The film was critically acclaimed, with some critics considering it to be the best Disney film. To coincide with the 1992 release of The Mighty Ducks, Disney founded the National Hockey League team The Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. Disney's next animated feature Aladdin was released on November 11, 1992, and grossed $504 million, becoming the highest-grossing animated film up to that point, and the first animated film to gross a half-billion dollars. It won two Academy Awards—Best Song for "A Whole New World" and Best Score; and "A Whole New World" was the first-and-only Disney song to win the Grammy for Song of the Year. For $60 million, Disney broadened its range of mature-audience films by acquiring independent film distributor Miramax Films in 1993. The same year, in a joint venture with The Nature Conservancy, Disney purchased 8,500 acres (3,439 ha) of Everglades headwaters in Florida to protect native animals and plant species, establishing the Disney Wilderness Preserve. On April 3, 1994, Frank Wells died in a helicopter crash; he, Eisner, and Katzenberg helped the company's market value go from $2 billion to $22 billion since taking office in 1984. On June 15 the same year, The Lion King was released and was a massive success, becoming the second-highest-grossing film of all time behind Jurassic Park and the highest-grossing animated film of all time, with a gross total of $968.5 million. It was critically praised and garnered two Academy Awards—Best Score and Best Song for "Can You Feel the Love Tonight". Soon after its release, Katzenberg left the company after Eisner refused to promote him to president. After leaving, he co-founded film studio DreamWorks SKG. Wells was later replaced with one of Eisner's friends Michael Ovitz on August 13, 1995. In 1994, Disney wanted to buy one of the major U.S. television networks ABC, NBC, or CBS, which would give the company guaranteed distribution for its programming. Eisner planned to buy NBC but the deal was canceled because General Electric wanted to keep a majority stake. In 1994, Disney's annual revenue reached $10.1 billion, 48% coming from the film industry, 34% from theme parks, and 18% from merchandising. Disney's total net income was up 25% from the previous year at $1.1 billion. Grossing over $346 million, Pocahontas was released on June 16, garnering the Academy Awards for Best Musical or Comedy Score and Best Song for "Colors of the Wind". Pixar's and Disney's first co-release was the first-ever fully computer-generated film Toy Story, which was released on November 19, 1995, to critical acclaim and an end-run gross total of $361 million. The film won the Special Achievement Academy Award and was the first animated film to be nominated for Best Original Screenplay. In 1995, Disney announced the $19 billion acquisition of television network Capital Cities/ABC Inc., which at the time was the second-largest corporate takeover in U.S. history. Through the deal, Disney would obtain broadcast network ABC, an 80% majority stake in sports networks ESPN and ESPN 2, 50% in Lifetime Television, a majority stake of DIC Entertainment, and a 37.5% minority stake in A&E Television Networks. Following the deal, the company started Radio Disney, a youth-focused radio program on ABC Radio Network, on November 18, 1996. The Walt Disney Company launched its official website disney.com on February 22, 1996, mainly to promote its theme parks and merchandise. On June 19 the same year, the company's next animated film The Hunchback of Notre Dame was released, grossing $325 million at the box office. Because Ovitz's management style was different from Eisner's, Ovitz was fired as the company's president in 1996. Disney lost a $10.4 million lawsuit in September 1997 to Marsu B.V. over Disney's failure to produce as contracted 13 half-hour Marsupilami cartoon shows. Instead, Disney felt other internal "hot properties" deserved the company's attention. Disney, which since 1996 had owned a 25% stake in the Major League Baseball team California Angels, bought out the team in 1998 for $110 million, renaming it Anaheim Angels and renovating their stadium for $100 million. Hercules (1997) was released on June 13, and underperformed at the box office compared to earlier films, grossing $252 million. On February 24, Disney and Pixar signed a ten-year contract to make five films together with Disney as the distributor. They would share the cost, profits, and logo credits, calling the films Disney-Pixar productions. During the Disney Renaissance, film division Touchstone also saw success with film such as Pretty Woman (1990), which has the highest number of ticket sales in the U.S. for a romantic comedy and grossed $432 million; Sister Act (1992), which was one of the more financially successful comedies of the early 1990s, grossing $231 million; action film Con Air (1997), which grossed $224 million; and the highest-grossing film on 1998 at $553 million Armageddon (1998). At Disney World, the company opened Disney's Animal Kingdom, the largest theme park in the world covering 580 acres (230 ha) on Earth Day, April 22, 1998. It had six animal-themed lands, over 2,000 animals, and the Tree of Life at its center. Receiving positive reviews, Disney's next animated films Mulan and Disney-Pixar film A Bug's Life were released on June 5 and November 20, 1998, respectively. Mulan became the year's sixth-highest-grossing film at $304 million, and A Bug's Life was the year's fifth-highest at $363 million. In a $770-million transaction, on June 18, Disney bought a 43% stake of Internet search engine Infoseek for $70 million, also giving it Infoseek-acquired Starwave. Starting web portal Go.com in a joint venture with Infoseek on January 12, 1999, Disney acquired the rest of Infoseek later that year. After unsuccessful negotiations with cruise lines Carnival and Royal Caribbean International, in 1994, Disney announced it would start its own cruise-line operation in 1998. The first two ships of the Disney Cruise Line would be named Disney Magic and Disney Wonder, and would be built by Fincantieri in Italy. To accompany the cruises, Disney bought Gorda Cay as the line's private island, and spent $25 million remodeling it and renaming it Castaway Cay. On July 30, 1998, Disney Magic set sail as the line's first voyage. Marking the end of the Disney Renaissance, Tarzan (1999) was released on June 12, garnering $448 million at the box office and critical acclaim; it also claimed the Academy Award for Best Original Song for Phil Collins' "You'll Be in My Heart". Disney-Pixar film Toy Story 2 was released on November 13, garnering praise and $511 million at the box office. To replace Ovitz, Eisner named ABC network chief Bob Iger Disney's president and chief operating officer on January 25, 2000. In November, Disney sold DIC Entertainment back to Andy Heyward, although still doing business with it. Disney had another huge success with Pixar when they released Monsters, Inc. in 2001. Later, Disney bought children's cable network Fox Family Worldwide for $3 billion and the assumption of $2.3 billion in debt. The deal also included 76% stake in Fox Kids Europe, Latin American channel Fox Kids, more than 6,500 episodes from Saban Entertainment's programming library, and Fox Family Channel. In 2001, Disney's operations had with a net loss of $158 million after a decline in viewership of the ABC television network, as well as decreased tourism due to the September 11 attacks. Disney earnings in fiscal 2001 were $120 million compared with the previous year's $920 million. To help reduce costs, Disney announced it would be lay off 4,000 employees and close 300 to 400 Disney Store outlets. After winning the World Series in 2002, Disney sold the Anaheim Angels to businessman Arturo Moreno for $180 million in 2003. In 2003, Disney became the first studio to garner $3 billion in a year at the box office. The same year, Roy Disney announced his retirement because of the way the company was being run, calling on Eisner to retire; the same week, board member Stanley Gold retired for the same reasons. Gold and Disney formed the "Save Disney" campaign. In 2004, at the company's annual meeting, the shareholders in a 43% vote voted Eisner out of his position as chairman of the board. On March 4, George J. Mitchell, who was a member of the board, was named as Eisner's replacement. In April, Disney purchased the Muppets franchise from the Jim Henson Company for $75 million, founding Muppets Holding Company, LLC. Following the success of Disney-Pixar films Finding Nemo (2003), which became the second highest-grossing animated film of all time at $936 million, and The Incredibles (2004), Pixar looked for a new distributor once its deal with Disney ended in 2004. Disney sold the loss-making Disney Stores chain of 313 stores to Children's Place on October 20. Disney also sold the NHL team Mighty Ducks to Henry Samueli and his wife Susan in 2005. Roy E. Disney decided to rejoin the company and was given the role of consultant with the title "Director Emeritus". In March 2005, Bob Iger, president of the company, became CEO of Disney after Eisner's retirement in September; Iger was officially named head of the company on October 1. Disney's eleventh theme park Hong Kong Disneyland opened on September 12, costing the company $3.5 billion to construct. On January 24, 2006, Disney began talks to acquire Pixar from Steve Jobs for $7.4 billion, and Iger appointed Pixar chief creative officer (CCO) John Lasseter and president Ed Catmull the heads of the Walt Disney Animation Studios. A week later, Disney traded ABC Sports commentator Al Michaels to NBCUniversal in exchange for the rights to Oswald the Lucky Rabbit and 26 cartoons featuring the character. On February 6, the company announced it would be merging its ABC Radio networks and 22 stations with Citadel Broadcasting in a $2.7 billion deal, though which Disney acquired 52% of television broadcasting company Citadel Communications. The Disney Channel movie High School Musical aired and its soundtrack was certified triple platinum, becoming the first Disney Channel film to do so. Disney's 2006 live-action film Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest was Disney's biggest hit to that date and the third-highest-grossing film ever, making a little over $1 billion at the box office. On June 28, the company announced it was replacing George Mitchell as chairman with one of its board members and former CEO of P&G John E. Pepper Jr. in 2007. The sequel High School Musical 2 was released in 2007 on Disney Channel and broke several cable rating records. In April 2007, the Muppets Holding Company was moved from Disney Consumer Products to the Walt Disney Studios division and renamed the Muppets Studios as part of efforts to relaunch the division. Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End became the highest-grossing film of 2007 at $960 million. Disney-Pixar films Ratatouille (2007) and WALL-E (2008) were a tremendous success, with WALL-E winning the Oscar for Best Animated Feature. After acquiring most of Jetix Europe through the acquisition of Fox Family Worldwide, Disney bought the remainder of the company in 2008 for $318 million. Bob Iger introduced D23 in 2009 as Disney's official fan club, with a biennial exposition event named D23 Expo. In February, Disney announced a distribution deal with DreamWorks Pictures to distribute 30 of their films over the next five years through Touchstone Pictures, with Disney getting 10% of the gross. The 2009 film Up garnered Disney $735 million at the box office, and the film won Best Animated Feature at the Academy Awards. Later that year, Disney launched a television channel named Disney XD, which was aimed at older children. The company bought Marvel Entertainment and its assets for $4 billion in August, adding Marvel's comic-book characters to its merchandising line-up. In September, Disney partnered with News Corporation and NBCUniversal in a deal in which all parties would obtain 27% equity in streaming service Hulu, and Disney added ABC Family and Disney Channel to the streaming service. On December 16, Roy E. Disney died of stomach cancer; he was the last member of the Disney family to work for Disney. In March 2010, Haim Saban reacquired from Disney the Power Rangers franchise, including its 700-episode library, for around $100 million. Shortly after, Disney sold Miramax Films to an investment group headed by Ronald Tutor for $660 million. During that time, Disney released the live-action Alice in Wonderland and the Disney-Pixar film Toy Story 3, both of which grossed a little over $1 billion, making them the sixth-and-seventh films to do so; and Toy Story 3 became the first animated film to make over $1 billion and the highest-grossing animated film. That year, Disney became the first studio to release two $1-billion-dollar-earning films in one calendar year. In 2010, the company announced ImageMovers Digital, which it started in partnership with ImageMovers in 2007, would be closing by 2011. The following year, Disney released its last traditionally animated film Winnie the Pooh to theaters. The release of Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides garnered a little over $1 billion, making it the eighth film to do so and Disney's highest-grossing film internationally, as well as the third-highest ever. In January 2011, the size of Disney Interactive Studios was reduced and 200 employees were laid off. In April, Disney began constructing its new theme park Shanghai Disney Resort, costing $4.4 billion to build. In August, Bob Iger stated after the success of the Pixar and Marvel purchases, he and the Walt Disney Company were planning to "buy either new characters or businesses that are capable of creating great characters and great stories". On October 30, 2012, Disney announced it would be buying Lucasfilm for $4.05 billion from George Lucas. Through the deal, Disney gained access to franchises such as Star Wars, for which Disney said it would make a new film for every two-to-three years, with the first one being released in 2015. The deal also gave Disney access to the Indiana Jones franchise, visual-effects studio Industrial Light & Magic, and video game developer LucasArts. The sale was completed on December 21, 2012. In early February 2012, Disney completed its acquisition of UTV Software Communications, expanding its market further into India and the rest of Asia. By March, Iger became Disney's chairman. Marvel film The Avengers became the third-highest-grossing film of all time with an initial-release gross of $1.3 billion. Making over $1.2 billion at the box office, the Marvel film Iron Man 3 was released in 2013. The same year, Disney's animated film Frozen was released and became the highest-grossing animated film of all time at $1.2 billion. Merchandising for the film became so popular it made the company $1 billion within a year, and a global shortage of merchandise for the film occurred. In March 2013, Iger announced Disney had no 2D animation films in development, and a month, later the hand-drawn animnation division was closed, and several veteran animators were laid off. On March 24, 2014, Disney acquired Maker Studios, an active multi-channel network on YouTube, for $950 million. On February 5, 2015, Disney announced Thomas O. Staggs had been promoted to COO. In June, the company stated its consumer products and interactive divisions would merge to become new a subsidiary called Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media. In August, Marvel Studios was reorganized and placed under the division Walt Disney Studios. The company's 2015 releases include the successful animated film Inside Out, which grossed over $800 million, and the Marvel film Avengers: Age of Ultron, which grossed over $1.4 billion. Star Wars: The Force Awakens was released and grossed over $2 billion, making it the third-highest-grossing film of all time. In October, Disney announced the television channel ABC Family would be changing its name to Freeform in 2016 to broaden its audience. On April 4, 2016, Disney announced COO Thomas O. Staggs, who was thought to be next in line after Iger, would leave the company in May 2016, ending his 26-year career with Disney. Shanghai Disneyland opened on June 16, 2016, as the company's sixth theme-park resort. In a move to start a streaming service, Disney bought 33% of the stock in Major League Baseball technology company Bamtech for $1 billion in August. In 2016, four Disney film releases made over $1 billion; these were the animated film Zootopia, Marvel film Captain America: Civil War, Pixar film Finding Dory, and Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, making Disney the first studio to surpass $3 billion at the domestic box office. Disney also made an attempt to buy social media platform Twitter to market their content and merchandise but ultimately canceled the deal; Iger stated this was because he thought Disney would be taking on responsibilities it did not need and that it did not "feel Disney" to him. On March 23, 2017, Disney announced Iger had agreed to a one-year extension of his term as CEO to July 2, 2019, and to remain with the company as a consultant for three years. On August 8, 2017, Disney announced it would be ending its distribution deal with streaming service Netflix, with the intent of launching its own streaming platform built with BAMtech's technology by 2019. During that time, Disney paid $1.5 billion to acquire a 75% stake in BAMtech. Disney also planned to start an ESPN streaming service with about "10,000 live regional, national, and international games and events a year" by 2018. In November, CCO John Lasseter said he would take a six-month absence from the company because of "missteps", which were later reported to be sexual misconduct allegations. The same month, Disney and 21st Century Fox started negotiating a deal in which Disney would acquire most of Fox's assets. Beginning in March 2018, a strategic reorganization of the company led to the creation of business segments Disney Parks, Experiences and Products and Direct-to-Consumer & International. Parks & Consumer Products was primarily a merger of Parks & Resorts and Consumer Products & Interactive Media, while Direct-to-Consumer & International took over for Disney International and global sales, distribution, and streaming units from Disney-ABC TV Group and Studios Entertainment plus Disney Digital Network. CEO Iger described it as "strategically positioning our businesses for the future" while according to The New York Times, the reorganization was done in expectation of the 21st Century Fox purchase. In 2017, two of Disney's films had revenues of over $1 billion; the live-action Beauty and the Beast and Star Wars: The Last Jedi. Disney launched subscription sports streaming service ESPN+ on April 12. In June 2018, Lasseter's departure from the company by the end of the year was announced; he would stay as a consultant until then. To replace him; Disney promoted Jennifer Lee, co-director of Frozen and co-writer of Wreck-It Ralph (2012), as head of Walt Disney Animation Studios; and Pete Docter, who had been with Pixar since 1990 and directed Up, The Incredibles, and Inside Out, as head of Pixar. Later that month, Comcast offered to buy 21st Century Fox for $65 billion over Disney's $51 billion bid but withdrew its offer after Disney countered with a $71 billion bid; and Comcast shifted focus to buy Fox's Sky plc instead. Disney obtained an AntiTrust approval from the United States Department of Justice to acquire Fox. Disney again made $7 billion at the box office with three film that made $1 billion; Marvel films Black Panther and Avengers: Infinity War—the latter taking over $2 billion and becoming the fifth-highest-grossing film ever— and Pixar film Incredibles 2. On March 20, 2019, Disney acquired 21st Century Fox's assets for $71.3 billion from Rupert Murdoch, making it the biggest acquisition in Disney's history. After the purchase, The New York Times described Disney as "an entertainment colossus the size of which the world has never seen". Through the acquisition, Disney gained 20th Century Fox; 20th Century Fox Television; Fox Searchlight Pictures; National Geographic Partners; Fox Networks Group; Indian television broadcaster Star India; streaming service Hotstar; and a 30% stake in Hulu, bringing its ownership on Hulu to 60%. Fox Corporation and its assets were excluded from the deal because of antitrust laws. Disney also became the first film studio to have seven films gross $1 billion: Marvel's Captain Marvel, the live action Aladdin, Pixar's Toy Story 4, the CGI remake of The Lion King, Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker, and the highest-grossing film of all time up to that point at $2.797 billion Avengers: Endgame. On November 12, Disney's subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service Disney+, which had 500 movies and 7,500 episodes of television shows from Disney, Pixar, Marvel, Star Wars, National Geographic, and other brands, was launched in the United States, Canada, and the Netherlands. Within the first day, the streaming platform had over 10 million subscriptions; and by 2022 it had over 135 million subscribers, and was available in over 190 countries. At the beginning of 2020, Disney removed the Fox name from its assets, rebranding them as 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures. Bob Chapek, who had been with the company for 18 years and was chairman of Disney Parks, Experiences and Products, became CEO of Disney after Iger resigned on February 25, 2020. Iger said he would stay with the company as an Executive chairman until December 31, 2021, to help with its creative strategy. In April, Iger resumed operational duties as executive chairman to help the company during the COVID-19 pandemic, and Chapek was appointed to the board of directors. During the pandemic, Disney temporarily closed all of its theme parks, delayed the release of several movies, and stopped all operations on its cruise line. Due to the closures, Disney announced it would stop paying 100,000 employees but would still provide full healthcare benefits, and urged U.S. employees to apply for government benefits, saving the company $500 million a month. Iger gave up his $47.5 million salary and Chapek took a 50% salary reduction. In the company's second fiscal quarter of 2020, Disney reported a $1.4 billion loss, with a fall in earnings of 91% to $475 million from the previous year's $5.4 billion. By August, two-thirds of the company was owned by large financial institutions. In September, the company dismissed 28,000 employees, 67% of whom were part-time workers, from its Parks, Experiences and Products division. Chairman of the division Josh D'Amaro wrote; "We initially hoped that this situation would be short-lived, and that we would recover quickly and return to normal. Seven months later, we find that has not been the case." Disney lost $4.7 billion in its fiscal third quarter of 2020. In November, Disney laid off another 4,000 employees from the Parks, Experiences and Products division, raising the total to 32,000 employees. The following month, Disney named Alan Bergman as chairman of its Disney Studios Content division to oversee its film studios. Due to the COVID-19 recession, Touchstone Television ceased operations in December, Disney announced in March 2021 it would be launching a new division called 20th Television Animation to focus on mature audiences, and Disney closed its third animation studio Blue Sky Studios in April 2021. Later that month, Disney and Sony agreed to a multi-year licensing deal that would give Disney access to Sony's films from 2022 to 2026 to televise or stream on Disney+ once Sony's deal with Netflix ended. Although it performed poorly at the box office because of COVID-19, Disney's animated film Encanto (2021) was one of the biggest hits during the pandemic, with its song "We Don't Talk About Bruno" topping the US Billboard Hot 100 charts for five weeks. After Iger's term as executive chairman ended on December 31, he announced he would also resign as chairman of the board. To replace him, the company brought in an operating executive at The Carlyle Group and former board member Susan Arnold as Disney's first female chairperson. On March 10, Disney ceased all operations in Russia because of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and was the first major Hollywood studio to halt the release of a major motion picture due to Russia's invasion; other movie studios followed soon after. In March 2022, around 60 employees protested the company's silence on the Florida Parental Rights in Education Act that was dubbed the Don't Say Gay Bill, and prohibits non-age-appropriate classroom instruction on sexual orientation and gender identity in Florida's public-school districts. The protest was dubbed the "Disney Do Better Walkout"; employees protested near a Disney Studios lot for about a week, and some other employees voiced their concerns through social media. Employees called on Disney to stop campaign contributions to Florida politicians who supported the bill, to help protect employees from it, and to stop construction at Walt Disney World in Florida. Chapek responded by stating the company had made a mistake by staying silent and said; "We pledge our ongoing support of the LGBTQ+ community". Amid Disney's response to the bill, the Florida Legislature passed a bill to remove Disney's quasi-government district Reedy Creek; Florida Governor Ron DeSantis signed the bill, which took effect on June 1. On June 28, Disney's board members unanimously agreed to give Chapek a three-year contract extension. In August, Disney Streaming exceeded Netflix in total subscriptions with 221 million subscribers compared to Netflix's 220 million. On November 20, 2022, Iger accepted the position of Disney's CEO after Chapek was dismissed following poor earnings performance and a series of decisions that were unpopular with other executives. The board announced Iger would serve for two years with a mandate to develop a strategy for renewed growth and help identify a successor. In January 2023, Disney announced that Mark Parker would replace Arnold as the company's chairperson. In February 2023, Disney announced that it would be cutting $5.5 billion in costs, which includes eliminating 7,000 jobs representing 3% of its workforce. Disney also reorganized into three divisions: Entertainment, ESPN, and Parks, Experiences and Products. In the last week of April 2023, Disney implemented the second and largest wave of job cuts, affecting Disney Parks, Disney Entertainment, ESPN, and the Experiences and Product division. This move was part of the company's plan to cut costs by $5.5 billion. In 2023, Disney began its "100 Years of Wonder" campaign in celebration of the centennial anniversary of the company's founding. This included a new animated centennial logo intro for the Walt Disney Pictures division, a touring exhibition, special events at the parks and a well-received commemorative commercial that aired during Super Bowl LVII. In November 2023, Disney shortened the lengthy name of Disney Parks, Experiences and Products to Disney Experiences. In February 2024, Debra O'Connell, a longtime executive at Disney, was appointed president of a new news division that would include ABC News and local stations. Debra O'Connell will be responsible for ABC News's signature properties, including "Good Morning America" and "World News Tonight". It will serve as an intermediary between Dana Walden, co-chair of Disney Entertainment and Kim Godwin, the ABC News president. Other online news units have similar processes: Cesar Conde, the chairman of the so-called NBCUniversal news group, managing several NBC News executives and local news and cable networks such as MSNBC, CNBC, and Telemundo. Wendy McMahon, the chief executive of CBS News, oversees local stations, news and media outlets. In February, Walt Disney and Reliance Industries announced the merger of their India TV and streaming media assets. The Walt Disney Company operates three primary business segments: Disney Entertainment oversees the company's full portfolio of entertainment media and content businesses globally, including Walt Disney Studios, Disney General Entertainment Content, Disney Streaming and Disney Platform Distribution. The division is led by Alan Bergman and Dana Walden. ESPN is responsible for the management and supervision of the company's portfolio of sports content, products, and experiences across all of Disney's platforms worldwide, including its international sports channels. The division is led by James Pitaro. Disney Experiences is the global hub that brings Disney's stories, characters, and franchises to life through theme parks and resorts, cruise and vacation experiences, and consumer products—everything from toys to apparel, and books to video games. The division is led by Josh D'Amaro. A more extensive list can be found here. Leadership of the Walt Disney Company Board of directors Mark Parker (Chairman) Mary Barra Safra Catz Amy Chang Jeremy Darroch Francis deSouza Carolyn Everson Michael Froman James P. Gorman Bob Iger Maria Elena Lagomasino Calvin McDonald Derica W. Rice Executives Bob Iger, Chief Executive Officer Asad Ayaz, Chief Brand Officer Alan Bergman, Co-Chairman, Disney Entertainment Sonia Coleman, Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer Tinisha Agramonte, Senior Vice President and Chief Diversity Officer David Bowdich, Senior Vice President and Chief Security Officer Josh D'Amaro, Chairman, Disney Experiences Horacio Gutierrez, Senior Executive Vice President, Chief Legal and Compliance Officer Jolene Negre, Associate General Counsel and Secretary Hugh Johnston, Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer Carlos A. Gómez, Executive Vice President, Corporate Finance and Treasurer Alexia S. Quadrani, Executive Vice President, Investor Relations Brent Woodford, Executive Vice President, Controllership, Finance and Tax James Pitaro, Chairman, ESPN Kristina Schake, Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Communications Officer Dana Walden, Co-Chairman, Disney Entertainment Executive chairmen Bob Iger (2020–2021) Chairmen Walt Disney (1945–1960) Roy O. Disney (1964–1971) Donn Tatum (1971–1980) Card Walker (1980–1983) Raymond Watson (1983–1984) Michael Eisner (1984–2004) George J. Mitchell (2004–2006) John E. Pepper Jr. (2007–2012) Bob Iger (2012–2021) Susan Arnold (2022–2023) Mark Parker (2023–present) Vice chairmen Roy E. Disney (1984–2003) Sanford Litvack (1999–2000) Presidents Walt Disney (1923–1945) Roy O. Disney (1945–1968) Donn Tatum (1968–1971) Card Walker (1971–1980) Ron W. Miller (1980–1984) Frank Wells (1984–1994) Michael Ovitz (1995–1997) Michael Eisner (1997–2000) Bob Iger (2000–2012) Chief executive officers (CEO) Roy O. Disney (1929–1971) Donn Tatum (1971–1976) Card Walker (1976–1983) Ron W. Miller (1983–1984) Michael Eisner (1984–2005) Bob Iger (2005–2020; 2022–present) Bob Chapek (2020–2022) Chief operating officers (COO) Card Walker (1968–1976) Ron W. Miller (1980–1984) Frank Wells (1984–1994) Thomas O. Staggs (2015–2016) As of 2022, the Walt Disney Company has won 135 Academy Awards, 32 of them were awarded to Walt. The company has won 16 Academy Awards for Best Animated Short Film, 16 for Best Original Song, 15 for Best Animated Feature, 11 for Best Original Score, 5 for Best Documentary Feature, 5 for Best Visual Effects, and several others as well special awards. Disney has also won 29 Golden Globe Awards, 51 British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) awards, and 36 Grammy Awards as of 2022. The Walt Disney Company is one of the world's largest entertainment companies and is considered to be a pioneer in the animation industry, having produced 790 features, 122 of which are animated films. Many of their films are considered to be the greatest of all time, including Pinocchio, Toy Story, Bambi, Ratatouille, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and Mary Poppins. Disney has also created some of the most influential and memorable characters of all time, such as Mickey Mouse, Woody, Captain America (MCU), Jack Sparrow, Iron Man (MCU), and Elsa. Disney has been recognized for revolutionizing the animation industry; according to Den of Geek, the risk of making the first animated feature Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs has "changed cinema". The company, mainly through Walt, has introduced new technologies and more-advanced techniques for animating, as well as adding personalities to characters. Some of Disney's technological innovations for animation include invention of the multiplane camera, xerography, CAPS, deep canvas, and RenderMan. Many songs from the company's films have become extremely popular, and several have peaked at number one on Billboard's Hot 100. Some songs from the Silly Symphony series became immensely popular across the U.S. Disney has been ranked number 53 in the 2022 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue and fourth in Fortune's 2022 "World's Most Admired Companies". According to Smithsonian Magazine, there are "few symbols of pure Americana more potent than the Disney theme parks", which are "well-established cultural icons", with the company name and Mickey Mouse being "household names". Disney is one of the biggest competitors in the theme park industry with 12 parks, all of which were the top-25 most-visited parks in 2018. Disney theme parks worldwide had over 157 million visitors, making it the most-visited theme-park company in the world, doubling the attendance number of the second-most-visited company. Of the 157 million visitors, the Magic Kingdom had 20.8 million of the guests, making it the most-visited theme park in the world. When Disney first entered the theme park industry, CNN stated: "It changed an already legendary company. And it changed the entire theme park industry." According to The Orange County Register, Walt Disney World has "changed entertainment by showing how a theme park could help make a company into a lifestyle brand". The Walt Disney Company has been criticized for making purportedly sexist and racist content in the past, putting LGBT+ elements in their films, and not having enough LGBT+ representation. There have been controversies over alleged plagiarism, poor pay and working conditions, and poor treatment of animals. Disney has also been criticised for filming in the autonomous region of Xinjiang, where human rights abuses are taking place. Several of Disney's films have been considered to be racist; one of the company's most-controversial films Song of the South was criticized for portraying racial stereotypes. For that reason, the film was never released to home video in the U.S. or Disney+. Other characters that have been called racist are Sunflower, a black centaurette who serves a white centaurette in Fantasia; the Siamese cats in Lady and the Tramp, who are considered to be overexaggerated as Asians, stereotypes of Native Americans in Peter Pan; and crows in Dumbo, who are depicted as African Americans who use jive talk, with their leader being named Jim Crow, believed to be in reference to racial segregation laws in the U.S. When watching a film on Disney+ considered to have wrongful racist stereotypes, Disney added a disclaimer before the film starts to help avoid controversies. Disney has also been accused a number of times of plagiarizing already existing works in its films. Most notably, The Lion King has many similarities in its characters and events to an animated series called Kimba the White Lion by animator Osamu Tezuka. Atlantis: The Lost Empire also has many similarities to the anime show Nadia: The Secret of Blue Water that were considered so prevalent the latter show's creator Gainax was planning to sue Disney but was stopped by its series' network NHK. Kelly Wilson, creator of the short The Snowman (2014), filed two lawsuits, one which came after the first was rescinded, against Disney for copyright infringement in Disney's animated film Frozen. Disney later settled the lawsuit with Wilson, allowing the company to create a sequel to Frozen. Screenwriter Gary L. Goldman sued Disney over its film Zootopia, claiming he had earlier pitched an identical, same-titled story to the company. A judge dismissed the lawsuit, stating there was not enough evidence to prove any plagiarism. Disney has been criticized for both putting LGBT+ elements into its films and for having insufficient LGBT+ representation in its media. In the live-action film Beauty and the Beast, director Bill Condon announced LeFou would be depicted as a gay character, prompting Kuwait, Malaysia, and a theater in Alabama to ban the film, and Russia to give it a stricter rating. In Russia and several Middle Eastern countries, the Pixar movie Onward was banned for having Disney's first openly lesbian character Officer Specter, while others said Disney needed more representation of LGBT+ persons in its media. Because of a scene featuring two lesbians kissing, Pixar's Lightyear was banned in 13 predominantly Muslim countries, and barely broke even at the box office. In a leaked video of a Disney meeting, participants talked about pushing LGBT+ themes in the company's media, angering some people, who say the company is "trying to sexualize children", while others applauded its actions. Some Disney Princess films have been considered to be sexist toward women. Snow White is said to be too worried about her appearance while Cinderella is deemed to have no talents. Aurora is also said to be weak because she is always waiting to be rescued. In some of the princess films, men have more dialogue, and there are more speaking male characters than female. Disney's more-recent films are considered to be less sexist than its earlier films. In 1990, Disney paid $95,000 to avoid legal action over 16 animal-cruelty charges for beating vultures to death, shooting at birds, and starving some birds at Discovery Island. The company took these actions because they were attacking other animals and taking their food. When Animal Kingdom first opened, there were concerns about the animals because a few of them died. Animal rights groups protested but the United States Department of Agriculture found no violations of animal-welfare regulations. Disney has been accused of having poor working conditions. A protest by 2,000 workers at Disneyland in 2022 accused the company of poor pay at an average of $13 an hour, with some saying they were evicted from their homes. In 2010, at a factory in China where Disney products were being made, workers experienced working hours three times longer than those prescribed by law, and one of the workers committed suicide. Disney portal Animation portal Film portal Los Angeles portal Companies portal United States portal Lists of films released by Disney List of Disney television series Disney University Disneyfication Buena Vista Mandeville-Anthony v. Walt Disney Co., a federal court case in which Mandeville claimed Disney infringed on his copyrighted ideas by creating Cars List of conglomerates List of acquisitions by Disney His official title was co. vice chairman. List of references for Grammy Awards: Also named Films and Film Entertainment Merged into Creative Content in 1996, merged into Consumer Products and Interactive Media in 2016, which merged with Parks & Resorts in 2018 Called Walt Disney Attractions (1989–2000), Walt Disney Parks and Resorts (2000–2005), Disney Destinations (2005–2008), and Walt Disney Parks and Resorts Worldwide (2008–2018) Broadcasting from 1994 to 1996 Following the purchase of Capital Cities/ABC Inc. First year with Marvel Entertainment as part of results Not linked to WDIG, Disney reported a $300M loss due to financial modification regarding real estate "Walt Disney". Fortune. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Form 10-K". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. November 21, 2023. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Gibson, Kate (June 24, 2022). "Disney among slew of U.S. companies promising to cover abortion travel costs". CBS News. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Disney English Definition and Meaning". Lexico. Oxford. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. Davis, Elizabeth (June 25, 2019). "Historically yours: Mickey Mouse is born". Jefferson City News Tribune. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. "Disney Shocker! Bob Iger Back As CEO, Bob Chapek Out". Deadline. November 20, 2022. Archived from the original on August 15, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. "The Global 2000 2023". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Martin, Mackenzie (May 22, 2021). "Walt Disney Didn't Actually Draw Mickey Mouse. Meet the Kansas City Artist Who Did". NPR. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Pitcher, Ken (October 1, 2021). "50 years ago: Roy Disney made Walt's dream come true". ClickOrlando. Archived from the original on October 15, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Hayes, Carol (April 28, 1985). "Cartoon Producer Recalls Early Days". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Rockefeller 2016, p. 3. Barrier 2007, p. 42. Gabler 2007, p. 98. Rockefeller 2016, p. 4. "Could Oswald the Lucky Rabbit have been bigger than Mickey?". BBC. December 3, 2022. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Taylor, Drew (September 5, 2020). "The Incredible True Story of Disney's Oswald the Lucky Rabbit". Collider. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Susanin 2011, p. 182; Rockefeller 2016, p. 4. Suddath, Claire (November 18, 2008). "A Brief History of Mickey Mouse". Time. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Parkel, Inga (July 4, 2022). "Disney could lose Mickey Mouse as 95-year copyright expiry nears". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Feilding 1967, p. 187. Davis, Amy 2019, p. 9. Gabler, Neal (September 12, 2015). "Walt Disney, a Visionary Who Was Crazy Like a Mouse". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Lauren, Baltimore (June 24, 2017). "Rare First Appearance Mickey Mouse Animation Art Up For Auction". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Barrier 2003, p. 54. Susanin 2011, p. 261. Barrier 2007, p. 75-78. Kaufman, J.B. (April 1997). "Who's Afraid of ASCAP? Popular Songs in the Silly Symphonies". Animation World Magazine. Vol. 2, no. 1. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 77. Lynn, Capi (December 23, 2019). "Here's how Salem kids formed the first ever Mickey Mouse Club in the nation in 1929". Statesman Journal. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Krasniewicz 2010, p. 51. Kaufman & Gerstein 2018, pp. 84–85. Barrier 2007, p. 342. Iyer, Aishwarya (January 18, 2020). "A look back at Mickey Mouse, as the comic strip turns 90". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Rivkin, Mike (April 3, 2021). "Antiques: The Life and Times of Mickey Mouse". The Desert Sun. Archived from the original on May 7, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Krasniewicz 2010, p. 52. "How Mickey got Disney through the Great Depression". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. April 23, 2020. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Krasniewicz 2010, p. 55. Zavaleta, Jonathan (March 20, 2022). "A Brief History of the Mickey Mouse Watch (Plus, the Best Mickey Mouse Watches to Buy)". Spy.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Gabler 2007, pp. 199–201. Gabler 2007, pp. 201, 203. Barrier 2007, pp. 89, 136. Nye, Doug (December 28, 1993). "In Glorious Color". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Noonan, Kevin (November 4, 2015). "Technicolor's Major Milestones After 100 Years of Innovation". Variety. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Ryan, Desmond (July 24, 1987). "Disney Animator Recalls Gamble That Was Snow White". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Susanin 2011, p. 215. Lambie, Ryan (February 8, 2019). "Disney's Snow White: The Risk That Changed Filmmaking Forever". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Gabler 2007. Williams, Denney & Denney 2004, p. 116. Barrier 2007, p. 136. "Top of the box office: The highest-grossing movies of all time". The Daily Telegraph. May 1, 2018. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Gabler 2007, p. 271; Barrier 2007, p. 131. Barrier 2007, pp. 158–60. Gabler 2007, p. 287. Barrier 2007, p. 152. Martens, Todd (March 31, 2019). "The original Dumbo arguably was Disney's most important blockbuster". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Pinocchio: THR's 1940 Review". The Hollywood Reporter. February 23, 2020. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Barrier 2007, pp. 151–152. Gabler 2007, pp. 309–10. Violante, Anthony (November 1, 1991). "Late Bloomer Disney's Fantasia, a Commercial Flop in 1940, Come to Full Flower on Home Video". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Bergan 2011, p. 82. Gabler 2007, pp. 366, 370. Sito, Tom (July 19, 2005). "The Disney Strike of 1941: How It Changed Animation & Comics". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 171. Barrier 2007, p. 161, 180. Gabler 2007, pp. 370–71. Gabler 2007, p. 372. Gabler 2007, p. 374. Gabler 2007, p. 380. Allison, Austin (October 14, 2021). "How Disney Animation's Most Forgotten Era Saved the Studio During WWII". Collider. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Gabler 2007, pp. 381–82; Barrier 2007, p. 182. Gabler 2007, p. 383. Barrier 2007, p. 184. Barrier 2007, p. 180. Barrier 2007, p. 187-88. Gabler 2007, pp. 432–33. Lattanzio, Ryan (March 29, 2022). "Song of the South: 12 Things to Know About Disney's Most Controversial Movie". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Taylor, Drew (February 3, 2017). "A Rare Trip Inside Disney's Secret Animation Vault". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 5, 2022. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Larsen, Peter (December 5, 2006). "New life for Disney's True-Life Adventures". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 208. Hollis & Ehrbar 2006, p. 7-8. Barrier 2007, p. 221. Canemaker 2001, p. 110. Barrier 2007, p. 228; Gabler 2007, p. 503. Barrier 2007, p. 230; Gabler 2007, p. 487. Gabler 2007, p. 491. Barrier 2007, pp. 262–63. Tremaine, Julie (October 13, 2020). "The story behind the California attraction that inspired Disneyland". San Francisco Gate. Archived from the original on May 12, 2022. Retrieved May 12, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 191; Gabler 2007. Gabler 2007, pp. 488–89. Barrier 2007, p. 236. Barrier 2007, p. 235; Gabler 2007, p. 495. Barrier 2007, p. 240; Gabler 2007, pp. 498–99, 524. Gabler 2007, pp. 500–01. Barrier 2007, pp. 242–45, 248. Gabler 2007, p. 511. "Happy birthday, Disneyland! Iconic park celebrates 66th anniversary today". ABC7. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Gabler 2007, pp. 520–21. Gabler 2007, p. 522. Gabler 2007, p. 514. Gabler 2007, pp. 514–15. King, Jonathan (February 27, 1995). "The Crockett Craze : It's been 40 years since Fess Parker had us running around in coonskin caps. But the values his show inspired live on". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Newcomb 2000, p. 24. MacDonald, Brady (July 10, 2015). "Disneyland got off to a nightmare start in 1955, but 'Walt's Folly' quickly won over fans". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Dowd, Katie (July 15, 2020). "'Black Sunday': Remembering Disneyland's disastrous opening day on its 66th anniversary". San Francisco Gate. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Gabler 2007, p. 537. Brown 2022, p. 573. Gabler 2007, p. 585. Barrier 2003, p. 559. Zad, Martle (April 12, 1992). "101 Dalmatians, 6,469,952 Spots on Home Video". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Gabler 2007, p. 563. Lyons, Mike (April 1, 2000). "Sibling Songs: Richard & Robert Sherman and Their Disney Tunes". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Posner, Michael (August 19, 2009). "Disney songwriters' family feud". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 268. Folkart, Burt (November 6, 1991). "Movie and TV actor Fred MacMurray dies: Entertainer: He played comedic and dramatic roles during a career that began when he was 5". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Beauchamp, Cari (March 18, 2022). "Hayley Mills Finally Gets Her Oscar!". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Perez, Lexy (September 7, 2021). "Hayley Mills Reflects on Early Career, Walt Disney, Turning Down Lolita Role and More in Memoir". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Bergan, Ronald (October 12, 2015). "Kevin Corcoran obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Higgens, Bill (December 10, 2018). "Hollywood Flashback: Mary Poppins Success Helped Walt Create Disney World in 1964". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Patton, Charlie (January 20, 2013). "Oscar-winning composer talks the making of Mary Poppins". The Florida Times-Union. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Bergan, Ronald (September 4, 2015). "Dean Jones obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Puente, Maria (September 2, 2015). "Disney star Dean Jones dies". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Russian, Ale (July 10, 2017). "Kurt Russell Reflects on Mentor Walt Disney: I Learned 'How to Make Movies' from Him". People. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Zad, Martie (August 6, 2000). "Young Kurt Russell's Family Flicks". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Barrier 2007, p. 301. Barrier 2007, pp. 302–03; Gabler 2007, pp. 606–08. Harrison, Scott (April 30, 2017). "From the Archives: Walt and the pirates". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Martin, Garrett (October 13, 2021). "A Guide to Disney World's Opening Day Attractions". Paste Magazine. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Barrier 2007, pp. 306–07; Gabler 2007, p. 629. Barrier 2007, p. 307. Mikkelson, David (October 19, 1995). "Was Walt Disney Frozen?". Snopes. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Gabler 2007, pp. 626–31. Canemaker 2001, p. 51; Griffin 2000, p. 101. Spiegel, Josh (January 11, 2021). "A Crash Course in the History of Disney Animation Through Disney+". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Puig, Claudia (March 26, 2016). "Waking Sleeping Beauty documentary takes animated look at Disney renaissance". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Lambie, Ryan (June 26, 2019). "Exploring Disney's Fascinating Dark Phase of the 70s and 80s". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Sito, Tom (November 1, 1998). "Disney's The Fox and the Hound: The Coming of the Next Generation". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Dave, Kehr (April 13, 1987). "Aristocats Lacks Subtle Disney Hand". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Long, Rebecca (August 8, 2021). "The Anti-Fascist Bedknobs and Broomsticks Deserves Its Golden Jubilee". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Radulovic, Petrana (February 27, 2020). "Your complete guide to what the heck the Disney CEO change is and why you should care". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "Roy O. Disney, Aide of Cartoonist Brother, Dies at 78". The New York Times. December 22, 1971. p. 39. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Eades, Mark (December 22, 2016). "Remembering Roy O. Disney, Walt Disney's brother, 45 years after his death". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Levenson, Eric; Gallagher, Dianna (April 21, 2022). "Why Disney has its own government in Florida and what happens if that goes away". CNN. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Patches, Matt (May 20, 2015). "Inside Walt Disney's Ambitious, Failed Plan to Build the City of Tomorrow". Esquire. Archived from the original on March 5, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "49 years ago, Walt Disney World opened its doors in Florida". Fox 13 Tampa Bay. October 1, 2021. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Schneider, Mike (September 29, 2021). "Disney World Opened 50 Years Ago; These Workers Never Left". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Greg, Allen (October 1, 2021). "50 years ago, Disney World opened its doors and welcomed guests to its Magic Kingdom". NPR. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. "Donn B. Tatum". Variety. June 3, 1993. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. "E. Cardon 'Card' Walker". Variety. November 30, 2005. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Disney Empire Is Hardly Mickey Mouse". The New York Times. July 18, 1973. p. 30. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Disney's Dandy Detailed Data; Robin Hood Takes $27,500,000; Films Corporate Gravy-Maker". Variety. January 15, 1975. p. 3. Thompson, Howard (August 24, 1972). "Spirited Romp for Invisible Caper Crew". The New York Times. p. 0. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Herbie Rides Again". Variety. December 31, 1973. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Herbie Goes to Monte Carlo". Variety. December 31, 1977. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Canby, Vincent (July 3, 1975). "Screen: Witch Mountain: Disney Fantasy Shares Bill with Cinderella". The New York Times. p. 0. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Eder, Richard (January 29, 1977). "Disney Film Forces Fun Harmlessly". The New York Times. p. 11. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Schneider, Mike (November 3, 1999). "Nephew Is Disney's Last Disney". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2022. King, Susan (June 22, 2015). "Disney's animated classic The Rescuers marks 35th anniversary". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2022. Lucas 2019, p. 89. "Big Rental Films of 1978". Variety. January 3, 1979. p. 17. Kit, Borys (December 1, 2009). "Tron: Legacy team mount a Black Hole remake". Reuters. The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Weiner, David (December 13, 2019). ""We Never Had an Ending:" How Disney's Black Hole Tried to Match Star Wars". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Harmetz, Aljean (September 20, 1979). "11 Animators Quit Disney, Form Studio". The New York Times. p. 14. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Poletick, Rachel (February 2, 2022). "Don Bluth Entertainment: How One Animator Inspired a Disney Exodus". Collider. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Lucas 2019, p. 153. "World on Ice Show Opens July 14 in Meadowlands". The New York Times. Associated Press. June 28, 1981. p. 48. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Sherman, Natalie (April 7, 2014). "Howard site is a key player for shows like Disney on Ice and Monster Jam". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Eller, Claudia (January 9, 1990). "Mermaid Swims to Animation Record". Variety. p. 1. Thomas, Hayes (October 2, 1982). "Fanfare as Disney Opens Park". The New York Times. p. 33. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Wynne, Sharron Kennedy (September 27, 2021). "For Disney World's 50th anniversary, a look back at the Mouse that changed Florida". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "On This Day: Epcot opened at Walt Disney World in 1982". Fox 35 Orlando. October 1, 2021. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. King, Susan (January 7, 2017). "Tron at 35: Star Jeff Bridges, Creators Detail the Uphill Battle of Making the CGI Classic". Variety. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Harmetz, Aljean (February 16, 1984). "Touchstone Label to Replace Disney Name on Some Films". The New York Times. p. 19. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Shoji, Kaori (April 12, 2013). "Tokyo Disneyland turns 30!". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Shapiro, Margaret (December 16, 1989). "Unlikely Tokyo Bay Site Is a Holiday Hit". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Bedell, Sally (April 12, 1983). "Disney Channel to Start Next Week". The New York Times. p. 17. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Steve, Knoll (April 29, 1984). "The Disney Channel Has an Expensive First Year". The New York Times. p. 17. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. "Raymond Watson, former Disney chairman, dies". Variety. October 22, 2012. Archived from the original on May 27, 2022. Retrieved May 27, 2022. Bartlett, Rhett (February 10, 2019). "Ron Miller, Former President and CEO of The Walt Disney Co., Dies at 85". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. "Disney makes big splash at box office". UPI. March 12, 1984. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Abramovitch, Seth (March 13, 2021). "Hollywood Flashback: Down and Out in Beverly Hills Mocked the Rich in 1986". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Chapman, Glenn (March 29, 2011). "Looking back at Adventures in Babysitting". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 28, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Sanello, Frank (June 11, 1984). "Walt Disney Productions ended financier Saul Steinberg's takeover attempt..." UPI. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Hayes, Thomas (June 12, 1984). "Steinberg Sells Stake to Disney". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Hayes, Thomas (September 24, 1984). "New Disney Team's Strategy". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Aljean, Harmentz (December 29, 1985). "The Man Re-animating Disney". The New York Times. p. 13. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Taylor, Drew (May 20, 2020). "The Disney Renaissance Didn't Happen Because of Jeffrey Katzenberg; It Happened in Spite of Him". Collider. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Kois, Dan (October 19, 2010). "The Black Cauldron". Slate. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2022. "Briefly: E. F. Hutton raised $300 million for Disney". Los Angeles Times. February 3, 1987. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2012. "Disney, Japan Investors Join in Partnership : Movies: Group will become main source of finance for all live-action films at the company's three studios". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. October 23, 1990. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Disney Change". The New York Times. January 4, 1986. p. 33. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Harrison, Mark (November 21, 2019). "The Sherlockian Brilliance of The Great Mouse Detective". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Liles, Jordan (June 21, 2021). "Disney Store on Oxford Street Is Only Remaining UK Location". Snopes. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Sandoval, Ricardo (December 26, 1993). "Disney Enterprise Retail Splash". Chicago Tribune. San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Stevenson, Richard (May 4, 1990). "Disney Stores: Magic in Retail?". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Vaughan, Vicki (December 19, 1985). "Disney Picks Paris Area For European Theme Park". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Corliss, Richard (April 20, 1992). "Voila! Disney Invades Europe. Will the French Resist?". Time. Archived from the original on August 1, 2009. Retrieved June 1, 2022. "Advertisement: $53,279,000 The Biggest Animated Release in U.S. History". Variety. December 6, 1989. p. 19. "Disney Says Mermaid Swims To B.O. Record". Daily Variety. November 1, 1990. p. 6. Stein, Benjamin (October 2, 1988). "Viewpoints: The new and successful Disney: Walt Disney Co. is on the rebound in a big way, and its shareholders are benefiting from the company's growth as much as are the officers—a real rarity in the corporate world". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. Garrett, Martin (April 13, 2022). "The 10 Best Attractions at Disney's Hollywood Studios". Paste Magazine. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Butler & Russell 2010, p. 160. Chilton, Louis (August 30, 2021). "Disney's attempt to buy The Muppets 'is probably what killed' Jim Henson, claims Frank Oz". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Stevenson, Richard (August 28, 1989). "Muppets Join Disney Menagerie". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2017. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Burr, Ty (May 16, 1997). "The Death of Jim Henson". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 27, 2003). "Cartoon Coffers – Top-Grossing Disney Animated Features at the Worldwide B.O." Variety. p. 6. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "Ranking: The Disney Renaissance From Worst to Best". Time. November 17, 2014. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2022. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "A New Documentary Shines a Spotlight on the Lyricist Behind the Disney Renaissance". NPR. Morning Edition. August 6, 2020. Archived from the original on May 9, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Joanna, Robinson (April 20, 2018). "Inside the Tragedy and Triumph of Disney Genius Howard Ashman". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "Disney To Launch New Record Division". Chicago Tribune. November 29, 1989. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2014. "Hollywood Records". D23. Disney. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Allison, Austin (January 23, 2022). "Disney and Pixar's Top 5 Most Innovative Animation Technologies, Explained". Collider. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "The Rescuers Down Under (1990)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "The Rescuers Down Under (1990)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. November 16, 1990. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Bettineger, Brendan (June 24, 2012). "Pixar by the Numbers – From Toy Story to Brave". Collider. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Disney is named to list for Dow Jones industrial average". Tampa Bay Times. May 3, 1991. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Ebiri, Bilge (November 14, 2019). "The Story of the 1991 Beauty and the Beast Screening That Changed Everything". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Goldberg 2016, p. 173. Feinberg, Scott (March 23, 2022). "Beauty and the Beast and Its Unprecedented Oscar Run in 1992: "It Was a Giant Moment for Everyone"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Brew, Simon (November 13, 2019). "Why Beauty and the Beast Remains Disney's Best Animated Film". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Spiegel, Josh (November 16, 2016). "25 years later, Beauty And The Beast remains Disney's best modern movie". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Joe, Lapointe (December 11, 1992). "Hockey; N.H.L. Is Going to Disneyland, and South Florida, Too". The New York Times. p. 7. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Aladdin box office info". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on February 15, 2009. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Sokol, Tony (February 13, 2020). "Aladdin Sequel in Development". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "The 65th Academy Awards (1993) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2011. "1993 Grammy Award Winners". Grammy.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Phillips, Lior (May 21, 2019). ""Songs Are Like Love": Aladdin Songwriters Look Back on "A Whole New World"". Grammy.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Bart, Peter (September 19, 2019). "Peter Bart: A Disney Deal Gone Wrong: How Mouse Money Fueled Harvey Weinstein's Alleged Predation As Miramax Mogul". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Rutherford 2011, p. 78. "Disney president dies in helicopter crash". Tampa Bay Times. April 4, 1994. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Brevert, Brad (May 29, 2016). "X-Men & Alice Lead Soft Memorial Day Weekend; Disney Tops $4 Billion Worldwide". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Richard, Natale (December 30, 1994). "The Movie Year: Hollywood Loses Its Middle Class: Box office: Blockbusters helped make it a record-setting year, but there was a rash of complete flops, and moderate successes seemed to disappear altogether". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "The 67th Academy Awards (1995) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "The Lion King (1994)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. June 24, 1994. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Disney Says His Resignation Bars Bonuses to Katzenberg". The New York Times. Reuters. May 18, 1996. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2023. Hastings, Deborah (August 14, 1955). "From Mailroom to Mega-Agent: Michael Ovitz Becomes Disney President". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Thompson, Anne (August 25, 1995). "Michael Ovitz named President of Disney". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Rumors heat up on Disney-NBC deal". UPI. September 22, 1994. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Harris, Kathryn; John, Lippman (September 24, 1994). "Disney Said to End NBC Bid, Not Content With 49% Stake: Acquisition: The withdrawal may aid the position of Time Warner, which seeks a minor stake to avoid regulatory problems". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Michael, Dresser (August 1, 1995). "A media giant is born Merger is biggest in entertainment industry's history Disney, Capital Cities/ABC merger". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on July 2, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "Pocahontas (1995)". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "The 68th Academy Awards 1996". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Zorthian, Julia (November 19, 2015). "How Toy Story Changed Movie History". Time. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved June 29, 2022. King, Susan (September 30, 2015). "How Toy Story changed the face of animation, taking off 'like an explosion'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2022. "Disney's new tomorrowland: ABC". Tampa Bay Times. August 1, 1995. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. DiOrio, Carl (September 18, 2000). "Bain backing buyout of DIC". Variety. Archived from the original on January 10, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Goldberg 2016, p. 197. Michaelson, Judith (October 2, 1997). "For Kids' Ears, Mostly: Radio Disney says that its 5-week-old L.A. outlet on KTZN-AM is already a solid success". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Madej & Newton 2020, p. 147. "The Hunchback of Notre Dame". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on June 10, 2003. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Farell, Rita K. (November 13, 2004). "Ovitz Fired for Management Style, Ex-Disney Director Testifies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. O'Neill, Ann W. (September 28, 1997). "The Court Files: Mickey's Masters Killed Fellow Cartoon Critter, Judge Rules". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Ahrens, Frank (April 16, 2003). "Disney Finds Buyer For Anaheim Angels". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. Hernandez, Greg (May 15, 1996). "Anaheim Seals Disney Angels Deal". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. "Hercules (1997)". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. Lohr, Steve (February 25, 1997). "Disney in 10-Year, 5-Film Deal With Pixar". The New York Times. p. 8. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 1, 2022. Prince, Rosa (March 21, 2012). "Richard Gere: Pretty Woman a 'Silly Romantic Comedy'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Pretty Woman (1990)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Sister Act (1992) – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Con Air (1997)". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "1998 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Eades, Mark (August 30, 2017). "A former Disney Imagineer's guide to Disney's Animal Kingdom". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Disney's Animal Kingdom opened 24 years ago today on Earth Day". Fox 35 Orlando. April 22, 2022. Archived from the original on May 15, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Mulan". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. June 19, 1998. Archived from the original on March 30, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "A Bug's Life". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. November 14, 1998. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Bicknell, Craig; Brekke, Dan (June 18, 1998). "Disney Buys into Infoseek". Wired. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Fredrick, John (June 18, 1998). "Disney buys Infoseek stake". CNN. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Disney to acquire the rest of Infoseek, create Internet unit; Move comes amid effort to reverse slide in earnings; Cyberspace". The Baltimore Sun. Bloomberg News. July 13, 1999. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "GO Network premieres". CNN. January 12, 1999. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Dezern, Craig (February 20, 1994). "Disney Contemplating Creation Of Cruise Line". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved July 2, 2022. "Company News; Disney to Start its Own Cruise Line by 1998". The New York Times. Bloomberg News. May 4, 1994. p. 5. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Saunders 2013, pp. 76–78. "Tarzan". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Tarzan". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. June 18, 1999. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "The 72nd Academy Awards (2000) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Crow, David (March 17, 2017). "The Disney Renaissance: The Rise & Fall of a Generational Touchstone". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Toy Story 2 (1999)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on June 20, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Toy Story 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. November 24, 1999. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Bernard, Weinraub (January 25, 2000). "Disney Names New President In Reshuffling". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 3, 2009. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Disney taps new No. 2". CNN. January 24, 2000. Archived from the original on March 20, 2005. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Walt Disney Agrees to Sell DIC Entertainment". Los Angeles Times. Bloomberg News. November 18, 2000. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Disney Buys Fox Family Channel". CBS News. Associated Press. July 23, 2001. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Disney lays off 4,000 world wide". UPI. March 27, 2001. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Disney Plans More Cutbacks As Chief Forecasts Rebound". The New York Times. Reuters. January 4, 2002. p. 3. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Masunaga, Samantha (November 12, 2015). "From the Mighty Ducks to the Angels: Disney's track record with sports". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Holson, Laura (April 16, 2003). "Baseball; Disney Reaches a Deal For the Sale of the Angels". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. DiOrio, Carl (December 3, 2003). "Disney does $3 bil globally". Variety. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Roy Disney, ally quit Disney board". NBC News. Associated Press. December 1, 2003. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Disney's Eisner Rebuked in Shareholder Vote". ABC News. March 3, 2004. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Teather, David (March 4, 2004). "Disney shareholders force Eisner out of chairman's role". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Holson, Laura (March 10, 2004). "Former P. & G. Chief Named Disney Chairman". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Susman, Gary (February 18, 2004). "Disney buys the Muppets". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Abramovitch, Seth (November 2, 2020). "Disney's Muppets Problem: Can the Franchise Reckon With Its Boys' Club Culture?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Susman, Gary (July 28, 2003). "Nemo becomes the top-grossing 'toon of all time". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Finding Nemo (2003)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Holson, Laura (January 31, 2004). "Pixar to Find Its Own Way as Disney Partnership Ends". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 26, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Fritz, Ben (October 20, 2004). "Disney stores become a Children's Place". Variety. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Disney Finds Buyer for the Ducks". The New York Times. Associated Press. February 26, 2005. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Verrier, Richard (July 9, 2005). "Feud at Disney Ends Quietly". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Ahrens, Frank (March 14, 2005). "Disney Chooses Successor to Chief Executive Eisner". The Washington Post. p. 2. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2022. VanHoose, Benjamin (December 21, 2021). "Bob Iger Has 'No Interest in Running Another Company' After 15-Year Tenure as Disney CEO". People. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Disney opens theme park in Hong Kong". NBC News. Associated Press. September 12, 2005. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Debruge, Peter (November 22, 2016). "Disney's Pixar Acquisition: Bob Iger's Bold Move That Reanimated a Studio". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Holton, Laura (January 25, 2006). "Disney Agrees to Acquire Pixar in a $7.4 Billion Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Taylor, Drew (September 5, 2020). "The Incredible True Story of Disney's Oswald the Lucky Rabbit". Collider. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Arnall, Dan (February 6, 2006). "Disney Merges ABC Radio with Citadel Broadcasting". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Disney merging radio network with Citadel". NBC News. Associated Press. February 6, 2006. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Romano, Aja (November 13, 2019). "High School Musical – and its ongoing cultural legacy – explained". Vox. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Desowitz, Bill (September 11, 2006). "Dead Man's Chest Gets $1 Billion Booty". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "High School Musical 2 : OMG! It's a cable ratings record". Variety. August 18, 2007. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Kermit as Mogul, Farting Fozzie Bear: How Disney's Muppets Movie Has Purists Rattled". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2017. Barnes, Brooks (September 18, 2008). "Fuzzy Renaissance". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 14, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2012. "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Finke, Nikki (June 29, 2007). "Ratatouille Roasts Rivals, Die Hard #2; Michael Moore's Sicko Has Healthy Debut". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Goodman, Dean (June 29, 2008). "Disney's WALL-E wows box office". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Moody, Annemarie (February 22, 2009). "WALL-E Wins Oscar Best Animated Feature, La Maison Wins Best Animated Short". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Turner, Mimi (December 8, 2008). "Disney to acquire rest of Jetix shares". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Boucher, Geoff (July 10, 2009). "D23 at Comic-Con and beyond". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Chmielewski, Dawn C. (March 10, 2010). "Disneyland history event will replace D23 Expo this year". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Marc, Graser; Siegel, Tatiana (February 9, 2009). "Disney signs deal with DreamWorks". Variety. Archived from the original on October 8, 2009. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Barnes, Brooke; Cieply, Michael (February 9, 2009). "DreamWorks and Disney Agree to a Distribution Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. "Up". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved July 25, 2022. "Pixar's Up wins best animated film Oscar". Reuters. March 7, 2010. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Turner, Mimi. "Disney unveils Disney XD". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Thomasch, Paul; Gina, Keating (August 31, 2009). "Disney to acquire Marvel in $4 billion deal". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Kramer, Staci D. (April 30, 2009). "It's Official: Disney Joins News Corp., NBCU In Hulu; Deal Includes Some Cable Nets". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 4, 2011. Retrieved July 25, 2022. "Roy E Disney dies in California". The Guardian. Associated Press. December 16, 2009. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Finke, Nikki (May 12, 2010). "Haim Saban Buys Back Mighty Morphin Power Rangers Franchise & Brings It to Nickelodeon and Nicktoons". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 20, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Fritz, Ben (May 13, 2010). "Haim Saban buys back Power Rangers". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Horn, Heather (July 30, 2010). "Disney Sells Miramax, at Last". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Bettinger, Brendan (May 27, 2010). "Disney's Alice in Wonderland Becomes the Sixth Film Ever to Surpass $1 Billion Worldwide". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Finke, Nikki (August 27, 2010). "Disney Smashes Box Office Records: 'Toy Story 3' Crossing $1B, Studio First To Release 2 Billion-Dollar Pics In Single Year". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Desowitz, Bill (March 12, 2010). "Disney to Close Zemeckis' ImageMovers Digital Studio". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Ebiri, Bilge (July 23, 2019). "Bring Back the Animation". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Weinraub, Jake (July 2, 2022). "One Billion Dollars! Disney's Pirates 4 Is 8th Film to Cross Big Box-Office Mark". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Chmielewski, Dawn C. (January 26, 2011). "Disney Interactive lays off 200 as video game unit shifts focus". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Barboza, David; Barnes, Brooks (April 7, 2011). "Disney Plans Lavish Park in Shanghai". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Grover, Ronald (August 10, 2011). "Disney CEO Iger Seeks Acquisitions of 'Great Characters'". Bloomberg News. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Graser, Marc (October 30, 2012). "Disney Buys LucasFilm, New Star Wars Planned". Variety. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Matt, Krantz; Mike, Snider; Marco Della, Cava; Alexander, Bryan (October 30, 2012). "Disney buys Lucasfilm for $4 billion". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. "Disney Completes Acquisition Of Lucasfilm". Deadline Hollywood. December 21, 2012. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2013. "Disney to pay up to 1,100 rupees/shr to delist India's UTV". Reuters. February 2, 2012. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2012. Lieberman, David (March 1, 2012). "Investor Service Blasts Disney For Giving CEO Bob Iger Too Much Pay And Power". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. McClintock, Pamela (June 2, 2012). "Box Office Milestone: The Avengers Becomes No. 3 Pic of All Time With $1.331 Billion". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Howard, Kirsten (November 25, 2019). "Why Marvel Decided Against Iron Man 4". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Ray, Amber (March 30, 2014). "Frozen becomes the highest-grossing animated film of all time". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "Frozen (2013)". Box Office Mojo. IMDbPro. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Appelbaum, Binyamin (November 18, 2014). "How Disney Turned Frozen Into a Cash Cow". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 18, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Rich, Katey (April 15, 2014). "The Global Shortage of Frozen Merchandise Is Making Little Girls Cry". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Spangler, Todd (March 28, 2014). "Fresh Off Disney Deal, Maker Studios Comes to Cable TV (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on March 29, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Littleton, Cynthia (February 5, 2015). "Disney Promotes Tom Staggs to No. 2 Post, Positioning Him as Iger's Successor". Variety. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Rainey, James (June 29, 2015). "Disney Merges Its Consumer Products and Interactive Divisions". Variety. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Masters, Kim; Belloni, Matthew (August 31, 2015). "Marvel Shake-Up: Film Chief Kevin Feige Breaks Free of CEO Ike Perlmutter (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2022. "2015 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2023. Coggan, Devin (February 7, 2016). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens crosses $2 billion worldwide". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Eric, Deggans (January 12, 2016). "ABC Family Channel To Change Its Name To Freeform Network". NPR. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (October 6, 2015). "ABC Family to Rebrand Network 'Freeform' in January". Variety. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Barnes, Brooks (April 5, 2016). "Thomas Staggs, Disney's Heir Apparent, Is Stepping Down". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Levine, Arthur (June 23, 2016). "Bob Iger: Shanghai Disney isn't just Disneyland in China". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Castillo, Michelle (August 9, 2016). "Why Disney is spending $1 billion on the MLB's technology unit". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Doty, Meriah (January 3, 2017). "Disney Becomes First Studio to Top $3 Billion at Domestic Box Office". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Whitten, Sarah (December 19, 2016). "Rogue One could be Disney's fourth billion-dollar film of 2016". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Clifford, Tyler (September 24, 2019). "Disney CEO Bob Iger tells Jim Cramer why he had second thoughts on a Twitter deal — 'I got cold feet for the right reasons'". CNBC. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Lieberman, David (August 17, 2017). "Disney Extends Terms For Four Top Execs Ahead Of Bob Iger's 2019 Exit". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 4, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Lieberman, David (March 23, 2017). "Disney Extends Bob Iger's Contract To July 2019". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Jacob, Kastrenakes (August 8, 2017). "Disney to end Netflix deal and launch its own streaming service". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Castillo, Michelle (August 8, 2017). "Disney will pull its movies from Netflix and start its own streaming services". CNBC. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Zeitchik, Steven (November 21, 2017). "Disney animation guru John Lasseter takes leave after sexual misconduct allegations". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Faber, David (November 6, 2017). "21st Century Fox has been holding talks to sell most of the company to Disney: Sources". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Wang, Christine (March 14, 2018). "Disney announces strategic reorganization, effective immediately". CNBC. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018. Barnes, Brooks (March 14, 2018). "Disney Reorganization Anticipates 21st Century Fox Assets". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2018. Retrieved March 14, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 29, 2017). "No. 1 Star Wars: The Last Jedi Box Office Profits – 2017 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Goldberg, Matt (April 13, 2017). "Beauty and the Beast Waltzes to $1 Billion at the Worldwide Box Office". Collider. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Perez, A.J. (April 2, 2018). "ESPN to launch streaming service ESPN+ on April 12". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 13, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Barnes, Brooks (June 8, 2018). "Pixar co-founder to leave Disney after 'missteps'". CNBC. The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2018. Retrieved July 27, 2018. Faughnder, Ryan (June 19, 2022). "Disney picks two animation filmmakers to replace John Lasseter". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Burt, Kayti (June 19, 2018). "Jennifer Lee, Pete Docter to Replace John Lasseter at Disney, Pixar". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Gartenberg, Chaim (July 19, 2018). "Comcast gives up on buying 21st Century Fox assets and leaves Disney as the winner". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 19, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Atkinson, Claire (June 13, 2018). "Comcast offers $65 billion for 21st Century Fox assets". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. McNary, Dave (June 12, 2018). "Avengers: Infinity War Soars to $2 Billion at Worldwide Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2022. "Avengers: Infinity War now 5th highest grossing film of all time worldwide". CBS News. Associated Press. May 13, 2018. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Barnes, Brooks (March 20, 2019). "Disney Moves From Behemoth to Colossus With Closing of Fox Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. James, Emily St. (March 20, 2019). "Here's what Disney owns after the massive Disney/Fox merger". Vox. Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Hayes, Dade (February 23, 2021). "Disney Plus Launches Star, A Streaming Outlet With More Grown-Up Fare, In Europe And Other Global Territories". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Coyle, Jack (December 31, 2019). "In 2019, the box office belonged to Disney". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (March 13, 2021). "Avatar Overtakes Avengers: Endgame As All-Time Highest-Grossing Film Worldwide; Rises To $2.8B Amid China Reissue – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2022. Sprangler, Todd (November 13, 2019). "Disney Says Disney Plus Has Over 10 Million Sign-Ups After Launch Day". Variety. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Pierce, David (June 14, 2022). "Disney Plus is now live in more than 50 new countries and territories". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Vary, Adam (January 17, 2020). "Disney Drops Fox Name, Will Rebrand as 20th Century Studios, Searchlight Pictures". Variety. Archived from the original on January 19, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Tyko, Kelly; Snider, Mike (February 25, 2020). "Walt Disney Co. names Bob Chapek new CEO. Bob Iger to stay on as company executive chairman". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Zeitchik, Steven (February 25, 2020). "In a surprise move, Disney chief executive Robert Iger steps down and is replaced by a theme-park lieutenant". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Smith, Ben (April 13, 2020). "Bob Iger Thought He Was Leaving on Top. Now, He's Fighting for Disney's Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 13, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Goldsmith, Jill (April 15, 2020). "Walt Disney CEO Bob Chapek Takes A Seat On The Company's Board". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Julia, Alexander (March 12, 2020). "Disney closes all theme parks as coronavirus spreads globally". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Disney delays Marvel's 'Black Widow' debut due to coronavirus". Reuters. March 17, 2020. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Luscombe, Richard (March 16, 2020). "End of the cruise? Industry struggles through rough waters of coronavirus crisis". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 1, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Disney stops paying 100,000 workers during downturn". BBC. April 20, 2020. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Brooks, Khristopher J. (May 5, 2020). "Disney lost $1.4 billion due to coronavirus last quarter". CBS News. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Walt Disney Company (The) Common Stock – DIS Institutional Holdings". Nasdaq. Archived from the original on April 16, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Blair, Elizabeth (September 29, 2020). "Disney Lays Off 28,000 Workers, 67% Are Part-Time Employees". NPR. Archived from the original on April 30, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Disney to lay off 4,000 more employees amid pandemic". ABC News. Associated Press. November 27, 2020. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Dang, Sheila (December 21, 2020). "Disney names Bergman as chairman of Studios Content division". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2020. Holloway, Daniel (December 1, 2020). "Dana Walden Reorganizes Disney TV Team; Karey Burke Moves to 20th as Craig Erwich Adds ABC Entertainment". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. White, Peter (March 30, 2021). "Disney Launches 20th Television Animation, Promotes Veteran Exec Marci Proietto To Run New Unit Responsible For The Simpsons & Family Guy". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 9, 2022). "Disney Closing Blue Sky Studios, Fox's Once-Dominant Animation House Behind Ice Age Franchise". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Baysinger, Tim (April 21, 2022). "Disney Signs Licensing Deal for Sony Films". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Nolfi, Joey (January 18, 2022). "Encanto song 'We Don't Talk About Bruno' passes 'Let It Go' as highest-charting Disney animated hit in 26 years". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Encanto (2021)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Steinberg, Brian (December 1, 2021). "Susan Arnold Will Take Disney Chairman Role After Bob Iger's Departure". Variety. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Hipes, Patrick; Patten, Dominic (March 10, 2022). "Disney Expands Russia Pause To Include "All Other Businesses"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 14, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Richwine, Lisa; Chmielewski, Dawn (March 23, 2022). "Disney employees stage walkouts to protest company response to Florida bill". Reuters. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Schneider, Mike; Brendan, Farrington (March 22, 2022). "Disney in balancing act as some workers walk out in protest". Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Whitton, Sarah (April 21, 2022). "Florida Republicans vote to dissolve Disney's special district, eliminating privileges and setting up a legal battle". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Lang, Brent (June 28, 2022). "Embattled Disney CEO Bob Chapek Gets Contract Extension". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Goldsmith, Jill (August 10, 2022). "Disney's Streaming Services Passed Netflix In Total Subscriptions – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Toonkel, Joe Flint, Robbie Whelan, Erich Schwartzel, Emily Glazer and Jessica (December 17, 2022). "Bob Iger vs. Bob Chapek: Inside the Disney Coup". WSJ. Retrieved April 27, 2023.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) James, Meg (November 22, 2022). "Behind the stunning exit of Disney CEO Bob Chapek". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Hayes, Dominic Patten,Dade; Patten, Dominic; Hayes, Dade (November 21, 2022). "Disney Shocker! Bob Iger Back As CEO, Bob Chapek Out". Deadline. Retrieved November 21, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Galley, Jackie (January 11, 2023). "Disney Appoints Mark Parker As Chairman of the Board, Replacing Susan Arnold". www.wdwinfo.com. Retrieved January 14, 2023. Rizzo, Lillian; Whitten, Sarah (February 8, 2023). "Disney to cut 7,000 jobs and slash $5.5 billion in costs as it unveils vast restructuring". CNBC. Retrieved February 9, 2023. "Disney begins largest wave of layoffs, targeting thousands at ESPN, Parks, and other divisions". CNN. Zachary (February 12, 2023). "Disney Debuts Super Bowl LVII Commercial Celebrating 100 Years of Storytelling and Shared Memories" (Press release). The Walt Disney Company. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 12, 2023. "Disney's Super Bowl ad rated 'most effective'". February 13, 2023. Brzeski, Patrick (November 16, 2023). "Disney's "Turbocharging" of Theme Park Business Gathers Pace With 'Frozen Land' Launch in Hong Kong". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2023. "Debra O'Connell to Oversee News at Disney". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2024. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Frater, Naman Ramachandran,Patrick; Ramachandran, Naman; Frater, Patrick (February 28, 2024). "Disney, Reliance Seal $8.5 Billion Deal to Merge Indian Media Businesses". Variety. Retrieved February 28, 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Disney – Leadership". The Walt Disney Company. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Verrier, Richard (October 16, 2000). "Disney Executive Resignation Come As No Surprise". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Academy Awards". D23. Disney. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Johnson, Zach (March 15, 2021). "The Walt Disney Company Earns 15 Oscar® Nominations". D23. Disney. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Sarto, Dan (January 10, 2022). "Encanto Wins for Best Animated Feature at 79th Golden Globe Awards". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Wins 6 BAFTA Awards". Disney. April 12, 2021. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "1964 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Moy, Suelane (March 8, 2001). "Another Victory for The Little Mermaid". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Considine, J.D. (February 25, 2022). "Grammys, Not Tears For Clapton Beauty and the Beast Music Also Wins Big For Songwriters, Vocalists". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Pareles, Jon (March 2, 1994). "Top Grammy to Houston; 5 for Aladdin". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 2, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "1994 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "1995 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "1999 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "2000 Grammy Winners". Grammy Award. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Baisley, Sarah (February 24, 2003). "Monsters, Inc. Records Win At The Grammys". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2006 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on July 3, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2008 Grammy Awards". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2009 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2010 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2011 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. David, Bloom (February 8, 2014). "Frozen Slips In Two More Grammy Wins". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. Shepherd, Jack. "John Williams wins 23rd Grammy Award for work on Star Wars: The Force Awakens just days after 85th birthday". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "2017 Grammy Winners". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. White, Abbey (February 10, 2019). "Black Panther Wins Two Grammys". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "List of Disney Films". D23. The Walt Disney Company. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Cohen, Karl (January 1, 2000). "Milestones of the Animation Industry in The 20th Century". Animation World Magazine. Archived from the original on January 20, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "100 best films of all time, according to critics". Chicago Tribune. April 30, 2012. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "The 100 Best Movies of All Time". Esquire. March 15, 2022. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "Movies: Top 100". Entertainment Weekly. July 11, 2013. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters". Empire. August 10, 2020. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2022. D'addario, Daniel (December 3, 2014). "The 15 Most Influential Fictional Characters of 2014". Time. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Lambie, Ryan (February 8, 2019). "Disney's Snow White: The Risk That Changed Filmmaking Forever". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Dakks, Brian (November 1, 2006). "Walt Disney: More Than 'Toons, Theme Parks". CBS News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Unterberger, Andrew (April 6, 2022). "'We Don't Talk About Bruno' From Encanto Now Tops Billboard's Greatest of All Time Disney Songs Chart Ranking". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. "World's Most Admired Companies". Fortune. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Bemis, Bethanee (January 3, 2017). "How Disney Came to Define What Constitutes the American Experience". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on May 9, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Jordan, Adrienne (May 23, 2019). "These are the world's most-visited theme parks". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Craven, Scott (May 24, 2019). "Yes, Disney theme parks are getting more crowded. See which one got the most visitors". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Brown, Forrest (October 2, 2022). "Walt Disney World's 50th anniversary: See historical pics and how WDW is celebrating". CNN. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Niles, Robert (September 28, 2021). "Niles: 50 years later, it's all Walt Disney's world". The Orange County Register. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Wintour, Patrick (April 28, 2021). "Disney unapologetic over Mulan credit thanking Chinese Communist party". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved August 24, 2023. Tobias, Scott (November 19, 2019). "Song of the South: the difficult legacy of Disney's most shocking movie". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Summers, Alicia (November 13, 2019). "Disney+ warns that some of its older movies may include racist stereotypes". CBS8. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Disney adds content warning to Peter Pan, Dumbo, Fantasia". Today. Variety. Reuters. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Pietsch, Brian (October 18, 2020). "Disney Adds Warnings for Racist Stereotypes to Some Older Films". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Keeley, Pete (July 22, 2019). "Big Little Lions: Disney's New Lion King Dodges the Kimba Similarity Issue". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Bricken, Rob (April 20, 2022). "Evangelion Creator Hideaki Anno's First TV Series Nadia Comes to 4K". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Li, Shirley (June 25, 2015). "Disney settles Frozen copyright lawsuit over short film The Snowman". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Pedersen, Eric (July 11, 2017). "Judge Throws Out Zootopia Copyright Suit Against Disney". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Lawler, Kelly (March 20, 2017). "Beauty and the Beast's 'gay moment' may have been much ado about nothing". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Heller, Emily (March 6, 2020). "Onward's openly gay character still leaves Disney miles behind its competitors". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Wiseman, Andreas (March 6, 2020). "Disney/Pixar's Onward Banned In Multiple Middle East Countries Due To Lesbian Reference". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Gambrell, Jon (June 16, 2022). "Disney's Lightyear banned in Muslim world for lesbian kiss". Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Lightyear (2022)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on July 23, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Goldberg, Michelle (April 1, 2022). "The Right's Disney Freakout". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Guo, Jeff (January 25, 2016). "Researchers have found a major problem with The Little Mermaid and other Disney movies". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Levenson, Bob (January 6, 1990). "Disney Settles 16 Animal Cruelty Charges Attraction Will Pay $95,000 To Avoid Going To Court". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. "New Disney Kingdom Comes With Real-Life Obstacles". The New York Times. April 16, 1998. p. 14. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Sanders, Bernie (June 7, 2018). "Disneyland workers face ruthless exploitation. Their fight is our fight". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Chamberlain, Gethine (August 27, 2011). "Disney factory faces probe into sweatshop suicide claims". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Walt Disney Internet Group, from 1997 to 2000, next merged with Disney Media Networks, merged into Consumer Products and Interactive Media in 2016, which merged with Parks & Resorts in 2018 Disney Interactive Media Group, starting in 2008 with the merge of WDIG and Disney Interactive Studios "Disney Enterprises Inc · 10-K · For 9/30/93". SEC. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 1995 – Financial Highlights". Disney. Archived from the original on January 1, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Walt Disney Company Annual Report 1996 – Business Segments" (PDF). SEC. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2022. Form 10-K405, Filing Date: December 19, 1996. "Disney Enterprises Inc · 10-K · For 9/30/95". SEC. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Walt Disney Co · 10-K405 · For 9/30/96". SEC. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 1999 – Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations". Disney. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 2000" (PDF). Disney. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 8, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 2002" (PDF). Disney. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 7, 2010. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 2004" (PDF). Disney. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 3, 2007. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 2006 – Financial Highlights". Disney. Archived from the original on May 29, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Annual Report 2007 – Financial Highlights". Disney. Archived from the original on April 27, 2009. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney Factbook 2008 – Financial Information" (PDF). Disney. p. 50. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 11, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney 2009 Annual Report – Business Segment Results" (PDF). Disney. p. 31. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 20, 2010. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney 2010 Fourth quarter" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "Disney 2011 Annual Report – Business Segments Results" (PDF). Disney. p. 29. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2012" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 19, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2013" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2014" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 13, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2015" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2016" (PDF). Disney. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2017" (PDF). Disney. November 9, 2017. p. 2. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2018" (PDF). Disney. November 8, 2018. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "2018 Disney Annual Reporting – Business Segments Results". SEC. Disney. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2019" (PDF). Disney. November 7, 2019. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2020" (PDF). Disney. November 12, 2020. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2021" (PDF). Disney. November 10, 2021. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2022" (PDF). Disney. November 8, 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 8, 2022. "The Walt Disney Company Reports Fourth Quarter and Full Year Earning For Fiscal 2023" (PDF). Disney. November 8, 2023. Barrier, Michael (2003). Hollywood Cartoons: American Animation in Its Golden Age. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-516729-5. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Barrier, Michael (2007). The Animated Man: A Life of Walt Disney. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-25619-4. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Bergan, Ronald (2011). The Film Book: A Complete Guide to the World of Cinema. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-7566-9188-2. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022. Brown, Noel (2022). The Oxford Handbook of Children's Film. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-093935-9. Butler, Richard; Russell, Roslyn A., eds. (2010). Giants of Tourism. CABI. ISBN 978-1-84593-652-5. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Canemaker, John (2001). Walt Disney's Nine Old Men and the Art of Animation. Burbank, CA: Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-6496-6. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Davis, Amy, ed. (2019). Discussing Disney. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-86196-961-6. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Feilding, Raymond (1967). A Technological History of Motion Pictures and Television: An Anthology from the Pages of the Journal of the Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers. University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-03981-5. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Gabler, Neal (2007). Walt Disney: The Triumph of the American Imagination. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-75747-4. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Goldberg, Aaron H. (2016). The Disney Story: Chronicling the Man, the Mouse, and the Parks. Quaker Scribe. ISBN 978-0-692-76636-1. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022. Griffin, Sean (2000). Disney Company from the Inside Out Tinker Belles and Evil Queen: The Walt Disney Company from the Inside Out. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-3122-2. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Hollis, Tim; Ehrbar, Greg (2006). Mouse Tracks: The Story of Walt Disney Records. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-61703-433-6. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 12, 2022. Kaufman, J.B.; Gerstein, David (2018). Mickey Mouse: The Ultimate History. Cologne: Taschen. ISBN 978-3-8365-5284-4. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Krasniewicz, Louise (2010). Walt Disney: A Biography. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-35830-2. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Lucas, Christopher (2019). Top Disney: 100 Top Ten Lists of the Best of Disney, from the Man to the Mouse and Beyond. Lyons Press. ISBN 978-1-4930-3772-8. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2022. Madej, Krystina; Newton, Lee (2020). Disney Stories: Getting to Digital (2nd ed.). Springer Nature. ISBN 978-3-030-42738-2. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Newcomb, Horace (2000). Television: The Critical View. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-511927-4. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. Rockefeller, J. D. (2016). The Story of Walt Disney. CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. ISBN 978-1-5404-0120-5. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Rutherford, Stephanie (2011). Governing the Wild: Ecotours of Power. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-1-4529-3281-1. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Saunders, Aaron (2013). Giants of the Seas: The Ships that Transformed Modern Cruising. Seaforth Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84832-172-4. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Susanin, Timothy (2011). Walt before Mickey: Disney's Early Years, 1919–1928. Diane Disney Miller. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-62674-456-1. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Williams, Pat; Denney, James; Denney, Jim (2004). How to Be Like Walt: Capturing the Disney Magic Every Day of Your Life. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7573-0231-2. Bryman, Alan (2004). The Disneyization of society. SAGE Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7619-6765-1. Caroselli, Henry (2004). Cult of the Mouse: Can We Stop Corporate Greed from Killing Innovation in America?. Ten Speed Press. ISBN 978-1-58008-633-2. Dave, Smith (2016). Disney A to Z: The Official Encyclopedia (5th ed.). Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4847-3783-5. Dorfman, Ariel; Mattelart, Armand (1984). How to Read Donald Duck: Imperialist Ideology in the Disney Comic. International General. ISBN 978-0-88477-023-7. Dunlop, Beth (2011). Building a Dream: The Art of Disney Architecture. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4231-2918-9. Eisner, Michael (2011). Work in Progress: Risking Failure, Surviving Success. Disney Publishing Worldwide. ISBN 978-0-7868-7091-2. Foglesong, Richard (2001). Married to the Mouse: Walt Disney World and Orlando. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-09828-0. Green, Katherine; Greene, Richard; Barret, Katherine (1998). The Man Behind the Magic: The Story of Walt Disney. Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-88476-6. Grover, Ron (1997). The Disney Touch: Disney, ABC & the Quest for the World's Greatest Media Empire. Irwin Professional Publisher. ISBN 978-0-7863-1172-9. Hiaasen, Carl (2010). Team Rodent: How Disney Devours the World. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-76488-1. Iger, Robert (2019). The Ride of a Lifetime: Lessons Learned from 15 Years as CEO of the Walt Disney Company. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-399-59210-2. Iwerks, Don (2019). Walt Disney's Ultimate Inventor: The Genius of Ub Iwerks. Contributions from Leonard Maltin. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4847-4337-9. Johnson, Mindy; Disney, Walt (2017). Ink & Paint: The Women of Walt Disney's Animation. Contributions from June Foray and Walt Disney Productions. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4847-2781-2. Koenig, David (2005). Mouse Tales: A Behind-the-Ears Look at Disneyland, Golden Anniversary Special Edition. Bonaventure Press. ISBN 978-0-9640605-4-8. Masters, Kim (2009). The Keys To The Kingdom: The Rise of Michael Eisner and the Fall of Everybody Else. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-186024-9. Polsson, Ken. "Chronology of the Walt Disney Company". Retrieved December 15, 2013. Price, David (2009). The Pixar Touch: The Making of a Company. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-307-27829-6. Schikel, Richard (2019). The Disney Version: The Life, Times, Art and Commerce of Walt Disney. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-982115-23-4. Schweizer, Peter; Schweizer, Rochelle (1998). Disney: The Mouse Betrayed: Greed, Corruption, and Children at Risk. Regnery Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89526-387-2. Shale, Richard (1982). Donald Duck Joins Up: The Walt Disney Studio During World War II. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-8357-1310-8. Stewart, James (December 9, 2008). Disneywar: The Battle for the Magic Kingdom. 2008: Simon & Schuster UK. ISBN 978-1-84739-689-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) Taylor, John (1998). Storming the Magic Kingdom: Wall Street, the Raiders, and the Battle for Disney. Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-35407-5. Thomas, Bob (1998). Building a Company: Roy O. Disney and the Creation of an Entertainment Empire. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-6200-9. Thomas, Bob (2017). Walt Disney: An American Original. Disney Books Group. ISBN 978-1-368-02718-2. Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Walt Disney Company. Wikinews has news related to: Disney Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Disney tourism. Official website The Walt Disney Company companies grouped at OpenCorporates Business data for Disney: Bloomberg Google Reuters SEC filings Yahoo!