Xi Jinping (Chinese: 习近平; pinyin: Xí Jìnpíng, pronounced [ɕǐ tɕîn.pʰǐŋ]; born 15 June 1953) is a Chinese politician who has been the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC), and thus the paramount leader of China, since 2012. Xi has also been the president of the People's Republic of China (PRC) since 2013. He belongs to the fifth generation of Chinese leadership. The son of Chinese Communist veteran Xi Zhongxun, Xi was exiled to rural Yanchuan County as a teenager following his father's purge during the Cultural Revolution. He lived in a yaodong in the village of Liangjiahe, Shaanxi province, where he joined the CCP after several failed attempts and worked as the local party secretary. After studying chemical engineering at Tsinghua University as a worker-peasant-soldier student, Xi rose through the ranks politically in China's coastal provinces. Xi was governor of Fujian from 1999 to 2002, before becoming governor and party secretary of neighboring Zhejiang from 2002 to 2007. Following the dismissal of the party secretary of Shanghai, Chen Liangyu, Xi was transferred to replace him for a brief period in 2007. He subsequently joined the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC) of the CCP the same year and was the first-ranking secretary of the Central Secretariat in October 2007. In 2008, he was designated as Hu Jintao's presumed successor as paramount leader; to that end, Xi was appointed vice president of the PRC and vice chairman of the CMC. He officially received the title of leadership core from the CCP in 2016. Xi is the first CCP general secretary born after the establishment of the PRC. Since assuming power, Xi has introduced far-ranging measures to enforce party discipline and to impose internal unity. His anti-corruption campaign led to the downfall of prominent incumbent and retired CCP officials, including former PSC member Zhou Yongkang. He has also enacted or promoted a more aggressive foreign policy, particularly with regard to China's relations with the U.S., the nine-dash line in the South China Sea, and the Sino-Indian border dispute. He has sought to expand China's African and Eurasian influence through the Belt and Road Initiative. Xi has expanded support for state-owned enterprises (SOEs), advanced military-civil fusion, overseen targeted poverty alleviation programs, and has attempted to reform the property sector. He has also promoted "common prosperity," a series of policies designed with stated goal to increase equality, oversaw a broad crackdown and major slew of regulations against the tech and tutoring sectors in 2021. Xi met with Taiwanese president Ma Ying-jeou in 2015, the first time PRC and Republic of China leaders met, though relations deteriorated after Tsai Ing-wen of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the presidential elections in 2016. He responded to the COVID-19 pandemic in mainland China with a zero-COVID approach from January 2020 until December 2022, afterwards shifting towards a mitigation strategy. Xi also oversaw the passage of a national security law in Hong Kong, clamping down on political opposition in the city, especially pro-democracy activists. Often described as an authoritarian leader by political and academic observers, Xi's tenure has included an increase of censorship and mass surveillance, deterioration in human rights, including the internment of a million Uyghurs in Xinjiang, a cult of personality developing around Xi, and the removal of term limits for the presidency in 2018. Xi's political ideas and principles, known as Xi Jinping Thought, have been incorporated into the party and national constitutions. As the central figure of the fifth generation of leadership of the PRC, Xi has centralized institutional power by taking on multiple positions, including new CCP committees on national security, economic and social reforms, military restructuring and modernization, and the Internet. He and the CCP Central Committee passed a "historical resolution" in November 2021. In October 2022, Xi secured a third term as CCP General Secretary, and was reelected state president for a third term in March 2023. Xi Jinping was born in Beijing on 15 June 1953, the third child of Xi Zhongxun and his second wife Qi Xin. After the founding of the PRC in 1949, Xi's father held a series of posts, including Party propaganda chief, vice-premier, and vice chairperson of the National People's Congress. Xi had two older sisters, Qiaoqiao, born in 1949 and An'an (安安; Ān'ān), born in 1952. Xi's father was from Fuping County, Shaanxi. Xi went to the Beijing Bayi School, and then the Beijing No. 25 School, in the 1960s. He became friends with Liu He, who attended Beijing No. 101 School in the same district, who later became China's vice premier and a close advisor to Xi after he became China's paramount leader. In 1963, when he was aged 10, his father was purged from the CCP and sent to work in a factory in Luoyang, Henan. In May 1966, the Cultural Revolution cut short Xi's secondary education when all secondary classes were halted for students to criticise and fight their teachers. Student militants ransacked the Xi family home and one of Xi's sisters, Xi Heping, "was persecuted to death." Later, his mother was forced to publicly denounce his father, as he was paraded before a crowd as an enemy of the revolution. His father was later imprisoned in 1968 when Xi was aged 15. Without the protection of his father, Xi was sent to work in Liangjiahe Village, Wen'anyi, Yanchuan County, Yan'an, Shaanxi, in 1969 in Mao Zedong's Down to the Countryside Movement. He worked as the party secretary of Liangjiahe, where he lived in a cave house. According to people who knew him, this experience led him to feel affinity with the rural poor. After a few months, unable to stand rural life, he ran away to Beijing. He was arrested during a crackdown on deserters from the countryside and sent to a work camp to dig ditches, but he later returned to the village. He then spent a total of seven years there. The misfortunes and suffering of his family in his early years hardened Xi's view of politics. During an interview in 2000, he said, "People who have little contact with power, who are far from it, always see these things as mysterious and novel. But what I see is not just the superficial things: the power, the flowers, the glory, the applause. I see the bullpens and how people can blow hot and cold. I understand politics on a deeper level." The "bullpens" (牛棚) was a reference to Red Guards' detention houses during the Cultural Revolution. After seven rejections, Xi joined the Communist Youth League of China in 1971 on his eighth attempt after he befriended a local official. He reunited with his father in 1972, because of a family reunion ordered by premier Zhou Enlai. From 1973, he applied to join the CCP ten times and was finally accepted on his tenth attempt in 1974. From 1975 to 1979, Xi studied chemical engineering at Tsinghua University as a worker-peasant-soldier student in Beijing. The engineering majors there spent about 15 percent of their time studying Marxism–Leninism and 5 percent of their time doing farm work and "learning from the People's Liberation Army." From 1979 to 1982, Xi was secretary for his father's former subordinate Geng Biao, the then vice premier and secretary-general of the CMC. In 1982, he was sent to Zhengding County in Hebei as deputy party secretary of Zhengding County. He was promoted in 1983 to secretary, becoming the top official of the county. Xi subsequently served in four provinces during his regional political career: Hebei (1982–1985), Fujian (1985–2002), Zhejiang (2002–2007), and Shanghai (2007). Xi held posts in the Fuzhou Municipal Party Committee and became the president of the Party School in Fuzhou in 1990. In 1997, he was named an alternate member of the 15th Central Committee of the CCP. However, of the 151 alternate members of the Central Committee elected at the 15th Party Congress, Xi received the lowest number of votes in favour, placing him last in the rankings of members, ostensibly due to his status as a princeling. From 1998 to 2002, Xi studied Marxist theory and ideological education in Tsinghua University, graduating with a doctorate in law and ideology in 2002. In 1999, he was promoted to the office of Vice Governor of Fujian, and became governor a year later. In Fujian, Xi made efforts to attract investment from Taiwan and to strengthen the private sector of the provincial economy. In February 2000, he and then-provincial party secretary Chen Mingyi were called before the top members of PSC – general secretary Jiang Zemin, premier Zhu Rongji, vice president Hu Jintao and Discipline Inspection secretary Wei Jianxing – to explain aspects of the Yuanhua scandal. In 2002, Xi left Fujian and took up leading political positions in neighbouring Zhejiang. He eventually took over as provincial Party Committee secretary after several months as acting governor, occupying a top provincial office for the first time in his career. In 2002, he was elected a full member of the 16th Central Committee, marking his ascension to the national stage. While in Zhejiang, Xi presided over reported growth rates averaging 14% per year. His career in Zhejiang was marked by a tough and straightforward stance against corrupt officials. This earned him a name in the national media and drew the attention of China's top leaders. Between 2004 and 2007, Li Qiang acted as Xi's chief of staff through his position as secretary-general of the Zhejiang Party Committee, where they developed close mutual ties. Following the dismissal of Shanghai Party secretary Chen Liangyu in September 2006 due to a social security fund scandal, Xi was transferred to Shanghai in March 2007, where he was the party secretary there for seven months. In Shanghai, Xi avoided controversy and was known for strictly observing party discipline. For example, Shanghai administrators attempted to earn favour with him by arranging a special train to shuttle him between Shanghai and Hangzhou for him to complete handing off his work to his successor as Zhejiang party secretary Zhao Hongzhu. However, Xi reportedly refused to take the train, citing a loosely enforced party regulation that stipulated that special trains can only be reserved for "national leaders." While in Shanghai, he worked on preserving unity of the local party organisation. He pledged there would be no 'purges' during his administration, despite the fact many local officials were thought to have been implicated in the Chen Liangyu corruption scandal. On most issues, Xi largely echoed the line of the central leadership. Xi was appointed to the nine-man PSC at the 17th Party Congress in October 2007. He was ranked above Li Keqiang, an indication that he was going to succeed Hu Jintao as China's next leader. In addition, Xi also held the first secretary of the CCP's Central Secretariat. This assessment was further supported at the 11th National People's Congress in March 2008, when Xi was elected as vice president of the PRC. Following his elevation, Xi held a broad range of portfolios. He was put in charge of the comprehensive preparations for the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, as well as being the central government's leading figure in Hong Kong and Macau affairs. In addition, he also became the new president of the Central Party School of the CCP, its cadre-training and ideological education wing. In the wake of the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, Xi visited disaster areas in Shaanxi and Gansu. He made his first foreign trip as vice president to North Korea, Mongolia, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Yemen from 17 to 25 June 2008. After the Olympics, Xi was assigned the post of committee chair for the preparations of the 60th Anniversary Celebrations of the founding of the PRC. He was also reportedly at the helm of a top-level CCP committee dubbed the 6521 Project, which was charged with ensuring social stability during a series of politically sensitive anniversaries in 2009. Xi's position as the apparent successor to become the paramount leader was threatened with the rapid rise of Bo Xilai, the party secretary of Chongqing at the time. Bo was expected to join the PSC at the 18th Party Congress, with most expecting that he would try to eventually maneuver himself into replacing Xi. Bo's policies in Chongqing inspired imitations throughout China and received praise from Xi himself during Xi's visit to Chongqing in 2010. Records of praises from Xi were later erased after he became paramount leader. Bo's downfall would come with the Wang Lijun incident, which opened the door for Xi to come to power without challengers. Xi is considered one of the most successful members of the Princelings, a quasi-clique of politicians who are descendants of early Chinese Communist revolutionaries. Former prime minister of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, when asked about Xi, said he felt he was "a thoughtful man who has gone through many trials and tribulations." Lee also commented: "I would put him in the Nelson Mandela class of persons. A person with enormous emotional stability who does not allow his personal misfortunes or sufferings affect his judgment. In other words, he is impressive." Former U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson described Xi as "the kind of guy who knows how to get things over the goal line." Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd said that Xi "has sufficient reformist, party and military background to be very much his own man." In February 2009, in his capacity as vice-president, Xi embarked on a tour of Latin America, visiting Mexico, Jamaica, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil, and Malta, after which he returned to China. On 11 February 2009, while visiting Mexico, Xi spoke in front of a group of overseas Chinese and explained China's contributions during the international financial crisis, saying that it was "the greatest contribution towards the whole of human race, made by China, to prevent its 1.3 billion people from hunger." He went on to remark: "There are some bored foreigners, with full stomachs, who have nothing better to do than point fingers at us. First, China doesn't export revolution; second, China doesn't export hunger and poverty; third, China doesn't come and cause you headaches. What more is there to be said?" The story was reported on some local television stations. The news led to a flood of discussions on Chinese Internet forums and it was reported that the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs was caught off-guard by Xi's remarks, as the actual video was shot by some accompanying Hong Kong reporters and broadcast on Hong Kong TV, which then turned up on various Internet video websites. In the European Union, Xi visited Belgium, Germany, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania from 7 to 21 October 2009. He visited Japan, South Korea, Cambodia, and Myanmar on his Asian trip from 14 to 22 December 2009. He later visited the United States, Ireland and Turkey in February 2012. This visit included meeting with then U.S. president Barack Obama at the White House and vice president Joe Biden (with Biden as the official host); and stops in California and Iowa. In Iowa, he met with the family that previously hosted him during his 1985 tour as a Hebei provincial official. A few months before his ascendancy to the party leadership, Xi disappeared from official media coverage and cancelled meeting with foreign officials for several weeks beginning on 1 September 2012, causing rumors. He then reappeared on 15 September. On 15 November 2012, Xi was elected to the posts of general secretary of the CCP and chairman of the CMC by the 18th Central Committee of the CCP. This made him, informally, the paramount leader and the first to be born after the founding of the PRC. The following day Xi led the new line-up of the PSC onto the stage in their first public appearance. The PSC was reduced from nine to seven, with only Xi and Li Keqiang retaining their seats; the other five members were new. In a marked departure from the common practice of Chinese leaders, Xi's first speech as general secretary was plainly worded and did not include any political slogans or mention his predecessors. Xi mentioned the aspirations of the average person, remarking, "Our people ... expect better education, more stable jobs, better income, more reliable social security, medical care of a higher standard, more comfortable living conditions, and a more beautiful environment." Xi also vowed to tackle corruption at the highest levels, alluding that it would threaten the CCP's survival; he was reticent about far-reaching economic reforms. In December 2012, Xi visited Guangdong in his first trip outside Beijing since taking the Party leadership. The overarching theme of the trip was to call for further economic reform and a strengthened military. Xi visited the statue of Deng Xiaoping and his trip was described as following in the footsteps of Deng's own southern trip in 1992, which provided the impetus for further economic reforms in China after conservative party leaders stalled many of Deng's reforms in the aftermath of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre. On his trip, Xi consistently alluded to his signature slogan, the "Chinese Dream." "This dream can be said to be the dream of a strong nation. And for the military, it is a dream of a strong military," Xi told sailors. Xi's trip was significant in that he departed from the established convention of Chinese leaders' travel routines in multiple ways. Rather than dining out, Xi and his entourage ate regular hotel buffet. He travelled in a large van with his colleagues rather than a fleet of limousines, and did not restrict traffic on the parts of the highway he travelled. Xi was elected president on 14 March 2013, in a confirmation vote by the 12th National People's Congress in Beijing. He received 2,952 for, one vote against, and three abstentions. He replaced Hu Jintao, who retired after serving two terms. In his new capacity as president, on 16 March 2013 Xi expressed support for non-interference in China–Sri Lanka relations amid a United Nations Security Council vote to condemn that country over government abuses during the Sri Lankan Civil War. On 17 March, Xi and his new ministers arranged a meeting with the chief executive of Hong Kong, CY Leung, confirming his support for Leung. Within hours of his election, Xi discussed cyber security and North Korea with U.S. President Barack Obama over the phone. Obama announced the visits of treasury and state secretaries Jacob Lew and John F. Kerry to China the following week. “To speak the truth” means to focus on the nature of things, to speak frankly, and follow the truth. This is an important embodiment of a leading official’s characteristics of truth seeking, embodying justice, devotion to public interests, and uprightness. Moreover, he highlighted that the premise of telling the truth is to listen to the truth. — Xi Jinping during a speech in 2012 Xi vowed to crack down on corruption almost immediately after he ascended to power at the 18th Party Congress. In his inaugural speech as general secretary, Xi mentioned that fighting corruption was one of the toughest challenges for the party. A few months into his term, Xi outlined the Eight-point Regulation, listing rules intended to curb corruption and waste during official party business; it aimed at stricter discipline on the conduct of party officials. Xi also vowed to root out "tigers and flies," that is, high-ranking officials and ordinary party functionaries. Xi initiated cases against former CMC vice-chairmen Xu Caihou and Guo Boxiong, former PSC member and security chief Zhou Yongkang and former Hu Jintao chief aide Ling Jihua. Along with new disciplinary chief Wang Qishan, Xi's administration spearheaded the formation of "centrally-dispatched inspection teams" (中央巡视组). These were essentially cross-jurisdictional squads of officials whose main task was to gain more in-depth understanding of the operations of provincial and local party organizations, and in the process, also enforce party discipline mandated by Beijing. Many of the work teams also had the effect of identifying and initiating investigations of high-ranking officials. Over one hundred provincial-ministerial level officials were implicated during a massive nationwide anti-corruption campaign. These included former and current regional officials (Su Rong, Bai Enpei, Wan Qingliang), leading figures of state-owned enterprises and central government organs (Song Lin, Liu Tienan), and highly ranked generals in the military (Gu Junshan). In June 2014, the Shanxi provincial political establishment was decimated, with four officials dismissed within a week from the provincial party organization's top ranks. Within the first two years of the campaign alone, over 200,000 low-ranking officials received warnings, fines, and demotions. The campaign has led to the downfall of prominent incumbent and retired CCP officials, including members of the PSC. Xi's anti-corruption campaign is seen by critics, such as The Economist, as a political tool with the aim of removing potential opponents and consolidating power. Xi's establishment of a new anti-corruption agency, the National Supervision Commission, ranked higher than the supreme court, has been described by Amnesty International's East Asia director as a "systemic threat to human rights" that "places tens of millions of people at the mercy of a secretive and virtually unaccountable system that is above the law." Xi has overseen significant reforms of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (CCDI), CCP's highest internal control institution. He and CCDI Secretary Wang Qishan further institutionalized CCDI's independence from the day-to-day operations of the CCP, improving its ability to function as a bona fide control body. According to The Wall Street Journal, any anti-corruption punishment to officials at or above the vice ministerial level need approval from Xi. Another article from The Wall Street Journal said that when he wants to neutralize a political rival, he asks inspectors to prepare hundreds of pages of evidence. The article also said that he sometimes authorizes investigations on close associates of a high-ranking politician to replace them with his own proteges and puts political rivals in less important positions to separate them from their political bases. Reportedly, these tactics have even been used against Wang Qishan, Xi's close friend. According to historian and sinologist Wang Gungwu, Xi Jinping inherited a political party that was faced with pervasive corruption. Xi believed that the amount of corruption at the higher levels of the CCP put both the party and the country at risk of collapse. Wang further adds that Xi has a belief that only the CCP is capable of governing China, and that a collapse of the party would be disastrous for the Chinese people. Xi and the new generational leaders reacted by launching the anti-corruption campaign to eliminate corruption at the higher levels of the government. Since Xi became the CCP general secretary, censorship, including internet censorship, has been significantly stepped up. Chairing the 2018 China Cyberspace Governance Conference on 20 and 21 April 2018, Xi committed to "fiercely crack down on criminal offenses including hacking, telecom fraud, and violation of citizens' privacy." During a visit to Chinese state media, Xi stated that "party and government-owned media must hold the family name of the party" (党和政府主办的媒体必须姓党) and that the state media "must embody the party's will, safeguard the party's authority." His administration has overseen more Internet restrictions imposed in China, and is described as being "stricter across the board" on speech than previous administrations. Xi has taken a very strong stand to control internet usage inside China, including Google and Facebook, advocating Internet censorship in the country under the concept of internet sovereignty. The censorship of Wikipedia has also been stringent; in April 2019, all versions of Wikipedia were blocked in China. Likewise, the situation for users of Weibo has been described as a change from fearing that individual posts would be deleted, or at worst one's account, to fear of arrest. A law enacted in September 2013 authorized a three-year prison term for bloggers who shared more than 500 times any content considered "defamatory." The State Internet Information Department summoned a group of influential bloggers to a seminar instructing them to avoid writing about politics, the CCP, or making statements contradicting official narratives. Many bloggers stopped writing about controversial topics, and Weibo went into decline, with much of its readership shifting to WeChat users speaking to very limited social circles. In 2017, telecommunications carriers in China were instructed by the government to block individuals' use of Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) by February 2018. Political observers have called Xi the most powerful Chinese leader since Mao Zedong, especially since the ending of presidential two-term limits in 2018. Xi has notably departed from the collective leadership practices of his post-Mao predecessors. He has centralised his power and created working groups with himself at the head to subvert government bureaucracy, making himself become the unmistakable central figure of the new administration. In the opinion of at least one political scientist, Xi "has surrounded himself with cadres he met while stationed on the coast, Fujian and Shanghai and in Zhejiang." Since coming to power, various observers have said that Xi has seriously diluted the influence of the once-dominant "Tuanpai," also called the Youth League Faction, which were CCP officials who rose through the Communist Youth League (CYLC). He criticized the cadres of the CYLC, saying that [these cadres] can't talk about science, literature and art, work or life [with young people]. All they can do is just repeat the same old bureaucratic, stereotypical talk." In March 2018, the National People's Congress (NPC) passed a set of constitutional amendments including removal of term limits for the president and vice president, the creation of a National Supervisory Commission, as well as enhancing the central role of the CCP. Xi was reappointed as president, now without term limits, while Li Keqiang was reappointed premier. According to the Financial Times, Xi expressed his views of constitutional amendment at meetings with Chinese officials and foreign dignitaries. Xi explained the decision in terms of needing to align two more powerful posts—general secretary of the CCP and chairman of the CMC—which have no term limits. However, Xi did not say whether he intended to be party general secretary, CMC chairman and state president, for three or more terms. In its sixth plenary session in November 2021, CCP adopted a historical resolution, a kind of document that evaluated the party's history. This was the third of its kind after ones adopted by Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping. In comparison with the other historical resolutions, Xi's one did not herald a major change in how the CCP evaluated its history. To accompany the historical resolution, the CCP promoted the terms Two Establishes and Two Safeguards, calling the CCP to unite around and protect Xi's core status within the party. The 20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, held between 16 and 22 October 2022, has overseen amendments in the CCP constitution and the re-election of Xi as general secretary of the CCP and chairman of the CMC for a third term, with the overall result of the Congress being further strengthening of Xi's power. Xi's re-election made him the first party leader since Mao Zedong to be chosen for a third term, though Deng Xiaoping ruled the country informally for a longer period. The new Politburo Standing Committee elected just after the CCP Congress was filled almost completely with people close to Xi, with four out of the seven members of the previous PSC stepping down. Xi was further re-elected as the PRC president and chairman of the PRC Central Military Commission on 10 March 2023 during the opening of the 14th National People's Congress, while Xi ally Li Qiang succeeded Li Keqiang as the Premier. Xi has had a cult of personality constructed around himself since entering office with books, cartoons, pop songs and dance routines honouring his rule. Following Xi's ascension to the leadership core of the CCP, he had been referred to as Xi Dada (习大大, Uncle or Papa Xi), though this stopped in April 2016. The village of Liangjiahe, where Xi was sent to work, has become a "modern-day shrine" decorated with CCP propaganda and murals extolling the formative years of his life. The CCP's Politburo named Xi Jinping lingxiu (领袖), a reverent term for "leader" and a title previously only given to Mao Zedong and his immediate successor Hua Guofeng. He is also sometimes called the "pilot at the helm" (领航掌舵). On 25 December 2019, the Politburo officially named Xi as "People's Leader" (人民领袖; rénmín lǐngxiù), a title only Mao had held previously. Xi was initially seen as a market reformist, and the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee under him announced that "market forces" would begin to play a "decisive" role in allocating resources. This meant that the state would gradually reduce its involvement in the distribution of capital, and restructure China's state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to allow further competition, potentially by attracting foreign and private sector players in industries that were previously highly regulated. This policy aimed to address the bloated state sector that had unduly profited from an earlier round of re-structuring by purchasing assets at below-market prices, assets that were no longer being used productively. Xi also launched the Shanghai Free-Trade Zone in August 2013, which was seen as part of the economic reforms. In However, by 2017, Xi's promise of economic reforms has been said to stall by experts. In 2015, the Chinese stock market bubble popped, which led Xi to use state forces to fix the issue. From 2012 to 2022, the share of the market value of private sector firms in China's top listed companies has increased from around 10% to over 40%. He has also overseen the relaxation of restrictions on foreign direct investment (FDI) and increased cross-border holdings of stocks and bonds. Xi has increased state control over China's economy, voicing support for SOEs, while also supporting the country's private sector. CCP control of SOEs has increased under Xi, while some limited steps towards market liberalization, such as increasing mixed ownership of SOEs were also undertaken. Under Xi, "government guidance funds," public-private investment funds set up by or for government bodies, have raised more than $900 billion for early funding to companies that work in sectors the government deems as strategic. According to an article from The Economist, some scholars have argued that Xi's grip on Chinese enterprise is moving China from state capitalism to “party-state capitalism”, in which it is organised around the interests of the Communist Party. His administration made it easier for banks to issue mortgages, increased foreign participation in the bond market, and increased the national currency renminbi's global role, helping it to join IMF's basket of special drawing right. In the 40th anniversary of the launching of Chinese economic reforms in 2018, he has promised to continue reforms but has warned that nobody "can dictate to the Chinese people." Xi has also personally made eradicating extreme poverty through "targeted poverty alleviation" a key goal. In 2021, Xi declared a "complete victory" over extreme poverty, saying that nearly 100 million people have been lifted out of poverty under his tenure, though some experts said that China's poverty threshold was relatively lower than the one set by the World Bank. In 2020, premier Li Keqiang, citing the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) said that China still had 600 million people living with less than 1000 yuan ($140) a month, although an article from The Economist said that the methodology NBS used was flawed, stating that the figure took the combined income, which was then equally divided. When Xi took office in 2012, 51.4% of people in China were living on less than $6.85 per day, in 2020, 7 years into Xi's tenure, this figure had fallen by more than half to 24.7%. China's economy has grown under Xi, with GDP in nominal terms more than doubling from $8.53 trillion in 2012 to $17.73 trillion in 2021, while China's nominal GDP per capita surpassed the world average in 2021, though the rate of growth has slowed from 7.9% in 2012 to 6% in 2019. Xi has stressed the importance of "high-quality growth" rather than "inflated growth." He has additionally stated that China will focus on quality of economic growth and that it has abandoned a growth-at-all-costs strategy which Xi refers to as "GDP heroism.": 22  Instead, Xi said that other social issues such as environmental protection are important.: 22  Xi has circulated a policy called "dual circulation," meaning reorienting the economy towards domestic consumption while remaining open to foreign trade and investment. Xi has also made boosting productivity in the economy a priority. Xi has attempted to reform the property sector to combat the steep increase in the property prices and to cut Chinese economy's dependence on the real estate sector. In the 19th CCP National Congress, Xi declared "Houses are built to be inhabited, not for speculation." In 2020, Xi's government formulated the "three red lines" policy that aimed to deleverage the heavily indebted property sector. Xi additionally has supported a property tax, for which he has faced resistance from members of the CCP. His administration pursued a debt-deleveraging campaign, seeking to slow and cut the unsustainable amount of debt China has accrued during its economic growth. Xi's administration has promoted "Made in China 2025" plan that aims to make China self-reliant in key technologies, although publicly China de-emphasised this plan due to the outbreak of a trade war with the U.S. Since the outbreak of the trade war in 2018, Xi has revived calls for "self-reliance," especially on the matters of technology. Domestic spending on R&D has significantly increased under Xi, surpassing the total of the European Union (EU) and reaching a record $564 billion in 2020. The Chinese government has also supported technology companies like Huawei through grants, tax breaks, credit facilities and other forms of assistance, enabling their rise but also leading to countermeasures by the U.S. In 2023, Xi put forwarded "new productive forces" during his inspection tour to northeast China, refers to a new form of productive forces derived from continuous sci-tech breakthroughs and innovation that drive strategic emerging industries and future industries in a more intelligent information era. Xi has also been personally involved in the development of Xiong'an, a new area announced in 2017, planned to become a major metropolis near Beijing and Tianjin in Hebei province; the relocation aspect is estimated to last until 2035 while it is planned to developed into a "modern socialist city" by 2050. Common prosperity is an essential requirement of socialism and a key feature of Chinese-style modernization. The common prosperity we are pursuing is for all, affluence both in material and spiritual life, but not for a small portion nor for uniform egalitarianism. — Xi Jinping during a speech in 2021 In November 2020, The Wall Street Journal reported that Xi personally ordered a halt to Ant Group's initial public offering (IPO), in reaction to its founder Jack Ma criticizing government regulation in finance. Xi's administration has also overseen a decrease in offshore IPOs by Chinese companies, with most Chinese IPOs taking place either in Shanghai or Shenzhen as of 2022[update], and has increasingly directed funding to IPOs of companies that works in sectors it deems as strategic, including electric vehicles, biotechnology, renewable energy, artificial intelligence, semiconductors and other high-technology manufacturing. Since 2021, Xi has promoted the term "common prosperity," a term which he defined as an "essential requirement of socialism," described as affluence for all and said entailed reasonable adjustments to excess incomes. Common prosperity has been used as the justification for large-scale crackdowns and regulations towards the perceived "excesses" of several sectors, most prominently tech and tutoring industries. The examples of actions taken against tech companies have included fining large tech companies and passing of laws such as the Data Security Law. China also introduced severe restrictions on private tutoring companies, effectively destroying the whole industry. Xi additionally opened a new stock exchange in Beijing targeted for small and medium enterprises (SMEs). There have also been other numerous cultural regulations including restrictions on minors playing video games and crackdowns on celebrity culture. In November 2013, at the conclusion of the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee, the Communist Party delivered a far-reaching reform agenda that alluded to changes in both economic and social policy. Xi signaled at the plenum that he was consolidating control of the massive internal security organization that was formerly the domain of Zhou Yongkang. A new National Security Commission was formed with Xi at its helm, which commentators have said would help Xi consolidate over national security affairs. The Central Leading Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms—another ad hoc policy coordination body led by Xi upgraded to a commission in 2018—was also formed to oversee the implementation of the reform agenda. Termed "comprehensive deepening reforms" (全面深化改革; quánmiàn shēnhuà gǎigé), they were said to be the most significant since Deng Xiaoping's 1992 Southern Tour. The plenum also announced economic reforms and resolved to abolish the laogai system of "re-education through labour," which was largely seen as a blot on China's human rights record. The system has faced significant criticism for years from domestic critics and foreign observers. In January 2016, a two-child policy replaced the one-child policy, which was in turn was replaced with a three-child policy in May 2021. In July 2021, all family size limits as well as penalties for exceeding them were removed. Xi's administration taken a number of changes to the structure of the CCP and state bodies, especially in a large overhaul in 2018. Beginning in 2013, the CCP under Xi has created a series of Central Leading Groups: supra-ministerial steering committees, designed to bypass existing institutions when making decisions, and ostensibly make policy-making a more efficient process. Xi was also believed to have diluted the authority of premier Li Keqiang, taking authority over the economy which has generally been considered to be the domain of the premier. February 2014 oversaw the creation of the Central Leading Group for Cybersecurity and Informatization with Xi as its leader. The State Internet Information Office (SIIO), previously under the State Council Information Office (SCI), was transferred to the central leading group and renamed in English into the Cyberspace Administration of China. As part of managing the financial system, the Financial Stability and Development Committee, a State Council body, was established in 2017. Chaired by vice premier Liu He during its existence, the committee was disestablished by the newly established Central Financial Commission during the 2023 Party and state reforms. Xi has increased the role of the Central Financial and Economic Affairs Commission at the expense of the State Council. 2018 has seen larger reforms to the bureaucracy. In that year, several central leading groups including reform, cyberspace affairs, finance and economics. and foreign affairs were upgraded to commissions. The powers of the Central Propaganda Department was strengthened, which now oversaw the newly established China Media Group (CMG). Two State Council departments. one dealing with overseas Chinese, and other one dealing with religious affairs, were merged into the United Front Work Department while another commission dealing with ethnic affairs was brought under formal UFWD leadership. In 2020, all elections at all levels of the people's congress system and NPC were mandated to adhere to the leadership of the CCP. 2023 has seen further reforms to the CCP and state bureaucracy, most notably the strengthening of Party control over the financial and technology domains. This included the creation of two CCP bodies for overseeing finance; the Central Financial Commission (CFC), as well as the revival of the Central Financial Work Commission (CFWC) that was previously dissolved in 2002. Additionally, a new CCP Central Science and Technology Commission would be established to broadly oversee the technology sector, while a newly created Social Work Department was tasked with CCP interactions with several sectors, including civic groups, chambers of commerce and industry groups, as well as handling public petition and grievance work. Regulatory bodies saw large overhauls. Several regulatory responsibilities were also transferred from the People's Bank of China (PBoC) to another regulatory body, while the PBoC reopened offices around the country that were closed in a previous reorganization. In 2024, the CCP's role was strengthened further with the State Council required to follow CCP ideology and policies. Efforts should be made to enable the people to see that justice is served in every judicial case. — Xi Jinping during a speech in November 2020 The party under Xi announced a raft of legal reforms at the Fourth Plenum held in the fall 2014, and he called for "Chinese socialistic rule of law" immediately afterwards. The party aimed to reform the legal system, which had been perceived as ineffective at delivering justice and affected by corruption, local government interference and lack of constitutional oversight. The plenum, while emphasizing the absolute leadership of the party, also called for a greater role of the constitution in the affairs of state and a strengthening of the role of the National People's Congress Standing Committee in interpreting the constitution. It also called for more transparency in legal proceedings, more involvement of ordinary citizens in the legislative process, and an overall "professionalization" of the legal workforce. The party also planned to institute cross-jurisdictional circuit legal tribunals as well as giving provinces consolidated administrative oversight over lower level legal resources, which is intended to reduce local government involvement in legal proceedings. Since taking power in 2012, Xi has undertaken an overhaul of the People's Liberation Army, including both political reform and its modernization. Military-civil fusion has advanced under Xi. Xi has been active in his participation in military affairs, taking a direct hands-on approach to military reform. In addition to being the Chairman of the CMC and leader of the Central Leading Group for Military Reform founded in 2014 to oversee comprehensive military reforms, Xi has delivered numerous high-profile pronouncements vowing to clean up malfeasance and complacency in the military. Xi has repeatedly warned that the depoliticization of the PLA from the CCP would lead to a collapse similar to that of the Soviet Union. Xi held the New Gutian Conference in 2014, gathering China's top military officers, re-emphasizing the principle of "the party has absolute control over the army" first established by Mao at the 1929 Gutian Conference. In the USSR, where the military was depoliticized, separated from the party and nationalized, the party was disarmed. When the Soviet Union came to crisis point, a big party was gone just like that. Proportionally, the Soviet Communist Party had more members than we do, but nobody was man enough to stand up and resist. — Xi Jinping during a speech Xi announced a reduction of 300,000 troops from the PLA in 2015, bringing its size to 2 million troops. Xi described this as a gesture of peace, while analysts such as Rory Medcalf have said that the cut was done to reduce costs as well as part of PLA's modernization. On 2016, he reduced the number of theater commands of the PLA from seven to five. He has also abolished the four autonomous general departments of the PLA, replacing them with 15 agencies directly reporting to the CMC. Two new branches of the PLA were created under his reforms, the Strategic Support Force and the Joint Logistics Support Force. In 2018, the PAP was placed under the sole control of the CMC; the PAP was previously under the joint command of the CMC and the State Council through the Ministry of Public Security.: 15  On 21 April 2016, Xi was named commander-in-chief of the country's new Joint Operations Command Center of the PLA by Xinhua News Agency and the broadcaster China Central Television. Some analysts interpreted this move as an attempt to display strength and strong leadership and as being more "political than military." According to Ni Lexiong, a military affairs expert, Xi "not only controls the military but also does it in an absolute manner, and that in wartime, he is ready to command personally." According to a University of California, San Diego expert on Chinese military, Xi "has been able to take political control of the military to an extent that exceeds what Mao and Deng have done." Under Xi, China's official military budget has more than doubled, reaching a record $224 billion in 2023. hough predating Xi, his administration has taken a more assertive stance towards maritime affairs, and has boosted CCP control over the maritime security forces.The PLA Navy has grown rapidly under Xi, with China adding more warships, submarines, support ships and major amphibious vessels than the than the entire number of ships under the United Kingdom navy between 2014 and 2018. In 2017, China established the navy's first overseas base in Djibouti. Xi has also undertaken an expansion of China's nuclear arsenal, with him calling China to "establish a strong system of strategic deterrence." The Federation of American Scientists (FAS) has estimated China's total amount of nuclear arsenals to be 410 in 2023, with the US Department of Defense estimating that China's arsenal could reach 1,000 by 2030. Xi has taken a harder line on security issues as well as foreign affairs, projecting a more nationalistic and assertive China on the world stage. His political program calls for a China more united and confident of its own value system and political structure. Foreign analysts and observers have frequently said that Xi's main foreign policy objective is to restore China's position on the global stage as a great power. Xi advocates "baseline thinking" in China's foreign policy: setting explicit red lines that other countries must not cross. In the Chinese perspective, these tough stances on baseline issues reduce strategic uncertainty, preventing other nations from misjudging China's positions or underestimating China's resolve in asserting what it perceives to be in its national interest. Xi stated during the 20th CCP National Congress that he wanted to ensure China "leads the world in terms of composite national strength and international influence" by 2049. Xi has promoted "major-country diplomacy" (大国外交), stating that China is already a "big power" and breaking away from previous Chinese leaders who had a more precautious diplomacy. He has adopted a hawkish foreign policy posture called "wolf warrior diplomacy," while his foreign policy thoughts are collectively known as "Xi Jinping Thought on Diplomacy." In March 2021, he said that "the East is rising and the West is declining" (东升西降), saying that the power of the Western world was in decline and their COVID-19 response was an example of this, and that China was entering a period of opportunity because of this. Xi has frequently alluded to "community with a shared future for mankind," which Chinese diplomats have said doesn't imply an intention to change the international order, but which foreign observers say China wants a new order that puts it more at the centre. Under Xi, China has, along with Russia, also focused on increasing relations with the Global South in order to blunt the effect of international sanctions. Xi has put an emphasis on increasing China's "international discourse power" (国际话语权) to create a more favorable global opinion of China in the world. In this pursuit, Xi has emphasised the need to "tell China's story well" (讲好中国故事), meaning expanding China's external propaganda (外宣) and communications. Xi has expanded the focus and scope of the united front, which aims to consolidate support for CCP in non-CCP elements both inside and outside China, and has accordingly expanded the United Front Work Department. Xi has unveiled the Global Development Initiative (GDI), the Global Security Initiative (GSI), and the Global Civilisation Initiative (GCI), in 2021, 2022 and 2023, respectively, aiming to increase China's influence in the international order. During the Xi administration, China seeks to shape international norms and rules in emerging policy areas where China has an advantage as an early participant.: 188  Xi describes such areas as "new frontiers," and they include policy areas such as space, deep sea, polar regions, the Internet, nuclear safety, anticorruption, and climate change.: 188  Under Xi, China has promoted reformation of the international system, with Xi calling for a "rejection of hegemonic power structures in global governance." Addressing a regional conference in Shanghai on 21 May 2014, he called on Asian countries to unite and forge a way together, rather than get involved with third party powers, seen as a reference to the United States. "Matters in Asia ultimately must be taken care of by Asians. Asia's problems ultimately must be resolved by Asians and Asia's security ultimately must be protected by Asians," he told the conference. His proposed Global Security Initiative has been aiming to create a new global security architecture, incorporating the term "indivisible security," a concept also supported by Russia. He has also advocated for international security cooperation; during a meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) in September 2021, he spoke out against "interference in other countries' internal affairs," and called for joint cooperation in warding off against "colour revolutions." During Xi's administration, China has maintained cordial relationships with each Africa government except Eswatini, which recognizes Taiwan but not the PRC. Under Xi, China has cut back lending to Africa after fears that African countries couldn't repay their debts to China. Xi has also promised that China would write off debts of some African countries. While China has historically been wary of getting closer to the Middle East countries, Xi has changed this approach. China has grown closer to both Iran and Saudi Arabia under Xi. Relations between China and India had ups and downs under Xi, later deteriorating due to various factors. In 2013, the two countries had a standoff in Depsang for three weeks, which ended with no border change. In 2017, the two countries again had a standoff over a Chinese construction of a road in Doklam, a territory both claimed by Bhutan, India's ally, and China, though by 28 August, both countries mutually disengaged. The most serious crisis in the relationship came when the two countries had a deadly clash in 2020 at the Line of Actual Control, leaving some soldiers dead. The clashes created a serious deterioration in relations, with China seizing 2,000 km2 territory that India controlled. China–Japan relations have initially soured under Xi's administration; the most thorny issue between the two countries remains the dispute over the Senkaku islands, which China calls Diaoyu. In response to Japan's continued robust stance on the issue, China declared an Air Defense Identification Zone in November 2013. However, the relations later started to improve, with Xi being invited to visit in 2020, though the trip was later delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under Xi, China initially took a more critical stance on North Korea due to its nuclear tests. However, starting in 2018, the relations started to improve due to meetings between Xi and North Korean leader Kim Jong Un. Xi has also supported denuclearization of North Korea, and has voiced support for economic reforms in the country. Xi has initially improved relationships with South Korea, and the two countries signed a free-trade agreement in December 2015. Starting in 2017, China's relationship with South Korea soured over the Terminal High Altitude Area Defence (THAAD), a missile defence system. Ultimately, South Korea halted the purchase of the THAAD after China imposed unofficial sanctions. Xi has cultivated stronger relations with Russia, particularly in the wake of the Ukraine crisis of 2014. He seems to have developed a strong personal relationship with president Vladimir Putin. Both are viewed as strong leaders with a nationalist orientation who are not afraid to assert themselves against Western interests. Xi attended the opening ceremonies of the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. Under Xi, China signed a $400 billion gas deal with Russia; China has also become Russia's largest trading partner. Xi and Putin met on 4 February 2022 during the run up to the 2022 Beijing Olympics during the massive Russian build-up of force on the Ukrainian border, with the two expressing that the two countries are nearly united in their anti-US alignment and that both nations shared "no limits" to their commitments. U.S. officials said that China had asked Russia to wait for the invasion of Ukraine until after the Beijing Olympics ended on 20 February. In April 2022, Xi Jinping expressed opposition to sanctions against Russia. On 15 June 2022, Xi Jinping reasserted China's support for Russia on issues of sovereignty and security. However, Xi also said China is committed to respecting "the territorial integrity of all countries," and said China was "pained to see the flames of war reignited in Europe." China has additionally kept a distance from Russia's actions, instead putting itself as a neutral party. In February 2023, China released a 12-point peace plan to "settle the acute crisis in Ukraine"; the plan was praised by Putin but criticized by the U.S. and European countries. Since Xi came to power, China has been rapidly building and militarizing islands in the South China Sea, a decision Study Times of the Central Party School said was personally taken by Xi. In April 2015, new satellite imagery revealed that China was rapidly constructing an airfield on Fiery Cross Reef in the Spratly Islands of the South China Sea. In November 2014, in a major policy address, Xi called for a decrease in the use of force, preferring dialogue and consultation to solve the current issues plaguing the relationship between China and its South East Asian neighbors. In 2015, Xi met with Taiwanese president Ma Ying-jeou, which marked the first time the political leaders of both sides of the Taiwan Strait met since the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1950. Xi said that China and Taiwan are "one family" that cannot be pulled apart. However, the relations started deteriorating after Tsai Ing-wen of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won the presidential elections in 2016. In the 19th Party Congress held in 2017, Xi reaffirmed six of the nine principles that had been affirmed continuously since the 16th Party Congress in 2002, with the notable exception of "Placing hopes on the Taiwan people as a force to help bring about unification." According to the Brookings Institution, Xi used stronger language on potential Taiwan independence than his predecessors towards previous DPP governments in Taiwan. He said that "we will never allow any person, any organisation, or any political party to split any part of the Chinese territory from China at any time at any form." In January 2019, Xi Jinping called on Taiwan to reject its formal independence from China, saying: "We make no promise to renounce the use of force and reserve the option of taking all necessary means." Those options, he said, could be used against "external interference." Xi also said that they "are willing to create broad space for peaceful reunification, but will leave no room for any form of separatist activities." President Tsai responded to the speech by saying Taiwan would not accept a one country, two systems arrangement with the mainland, while stressing the need for all cross-strait negotiations to be on a government-to-government basis. Xi has called China–United States relations in the contemporary world a "new type of great-power relations," a phrase the Obama administration had been reluctant to embrace. Under his administration the U.S.–China Strategic and Economic Dialogue that began under Hu Jintao has continued, until it was suspended by the administration of Donald Trump. On China–U.S. relations, Xi said, "If [China and the United States] are in confrontation, it would surely spell disaster for both countries." Xi has also indirectly spoken out critically on the U.S. "strategic pivot" to Asia. Relations with the U.S. soured after Donald Trump became president in 2017. Since 2018, U.S. and China have been engaged in an escalating trade war. In 2020, the relations further deteriorated due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The foundation of China-U.S. relations lies among the people, the hope is in the people, the future lies in the youth, and the vitality lies in sub-national areas. — Xi Jinping told visiting California Governor Gavin Newsom in 2023 The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) was unveiled by Xi in September and October 2013 during visits to Kazakhstan and Indonesia, and was thereafter promoted by Premier Li Keqiang during state visits to Asia and Europe. Xi made the announcement for the initiative while in Astana, Kazakhstan, and called it a "golden opportunity." BRI has been called Xi's "signature project," involving numerous infrastructure development and investment projects throughout Asia, Europe, Africa, and the Americas. BRI was added to the CCP Constitution at the closing session of the 19th Party Congress on 24 October 2017, further elevating its importance. Since the BRI was launched, China became the world's largest lender, lending about $1 trillion in a decade to almost 150 countries. However, by 2022, many BRI projects have stalled leading the Chinese leaders to adopt a more conservative approach to BRI, dubbed as "Belt and Road Initiative 2.0." Xi officially proposed the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) in October 2013 during a visit to Indonesia, which officially launched in January 2016. The membership of the AIIB has included numerous countries, including some allies of the United States and Western countries, despite opposition from the US. Since its launch until 2022, AIIB has invested $36.43 billion to 190 projects. Xi's tenure has seen a signing of several free-trade deals, including with Australia in 2014, South Korea in 2015, and the larger Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in 2020. Xi has also expressed his interest in China joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), with China formally applying to join in September 2021. During Xi Jinping's administration, China has often extended state-backed loans for energy and infrastructure-building in exchange for natural resources in regions like Central Asia and Africa.: 87  Xi has devoted a large amount of work towards national security, calling for a "holistic national security architecture" that encompasses "all aspects of the work of the party and the country." He introduced the holistic security concept in 2014, which he defined as taking "the security of the people as compass, political security as its roots, economic security as its pillar, military security, cultural security, and cultural security as its protections, and that relies on the promotion of international security.": 3  During a private talk with U.S. president Obama and vice president Biden, he said that China had been a target of "colour revolutions," foreshadowing his focus on national security. Since its creation by Xi, the National Security Commission has established local security committees, focusing on dissent. In the name of national security, Xi's government has passed numerous laws including a counterespionage law in 2014, national security and a counterterrorism law in 2015, a cybersecurity law and a law restricting foreign NGOs in 2016, a national intelligence law in 2017, and a data security law in 2021. Under Xi, China's mass surveillance network has dramatically grown, with comprehensive profiles being built for each citizen. During his leadership, Xi has supported and pursued a greater political and economic integration of Hong Kong to mainland China, including through projects such as the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macau Bridge. He has pushed for the Greater Bay Area project, which aims to integrate Hong Kong, Macau, and nine other cities in Guangdong. Xi's push for greater integration has created fears of decreasing freedoms in Hong Kong. Many of the views held by the central government and eventually implemented in Hong Kong were outlined in a white paper published by the State Council in 2014 named The Practice of the 'One Country, Two Systems' Policy in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, which outlined that the China's central government has "comprehensive jurisdiction" over Hong Kong. Under Xi, the Chinese government also declared the Sino-British Joint Declaration to be legally void. In August 2014, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC) made a decision allowing universal suffrage for the 2017 election of the chief executive of Hong Kong, but also requiring the candidates to "love the country, and love Hong Kong," as well as other measures that ensured the Chinese leadership would be the ultimate decision-maker on the selection, leading to protests, and the eventual rejection of the reform bill in the Legislative Council due to a walk-out by the pro-Beijing camp to delay to vote. In the 2017 chief executive election, Carrie Lam was victorious, reportedly with the endorsement of the CCP Politburo. Xi has supported the Hong Kong Government and Carrie Lam against the protesters in the 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests, which broke out after a proposed bill that would allow extraditions to China. He has defended the Hong Kong police's use of force, saying that "We sternly support the Hong Kong police to take forceful actions in enforcing the law, and the Hong Kong judiciary to punish in accordance with the law those who have committed violent crimes." While visiting Macau on 20 December 2019 as part of the 20th anniversary of its return to China, Xi warned of foreign forces interfering in Hong Kong and Macau, while also hinting that Macau could be a model for Hong Kong to follow. In 2020, the NPCSC passed a national security law in Hong Kong that dramatically expanded government clampdown over the opposition in the city; amongst the measures were the dramatic restriction on political opposition and the creation of a central government office outside Hong Kong jurisdiction to oversee the enforcement of the law. This was seen as the culmination of a long-term project under Xi to further closely integrate Hong Kong with the mainland. Xi visited Hong Kong as president in 2017 and 2022, in the 20th and 25th anniversary of the handover of Hong Kong respectively. In his 2022 visit, he swore in John Lee as chief executive, a former police officer that was backed by the Chinese government to expand control over the city. According to the Human Rights Watch, Xi has "started a broad and sustained offensive on human rights" since he became leader in 2012. The HRW also said that repression in China is "at its worst level since the Tiananmen Square massacre." Since taking power, Xi has cracked down on grassroots activism, with hundreds being detained. He presided over the 709 crackdown on 9 July 2015, which saw more than 200 lawyers, legal assistants and human rights activists being detained. His term has seen the arrest and imprisonment of activists such as Xu Zhiyong, as well as numerous others who identified with the New Citizens' Movement. Prominent legal activist Pu Zhiqiang of the Weiquan movement was also arrested and detained. In 2017, the local government of the Jiangxi province told Christians to replace their pictures of Jesus with Xi Jinping as part of a general campaign on unofficial churches in the country. According to local social media, officials "transformed them from believing in religion to believing in the party." According to activists, "Xi is waging the most severe systematic suppression of Christianity in the country since religious freedom was written into the Chinese constitution in 1982," and according to pastors and a group that monitors religion in China, has involved "destroying crosses, burning bibles, shutting churches and ordering followers to sign papers renouncing their faith." Under Xi, the CCP has embraced assimilationist policies towards ethnic minorities, scaling back affirmative action in the country by 2019, and scrapping a wording in October 2021 that guaranteed the rights of minority children to be educated in their native language, replacing it with one that emphasized teaching the national language. In 2020, Chen Xiaojiang was appointed as head of the National Ethnic Affairs Commission, the first Han Chinese head of the body since 1954. On 24 June 2022, Pan Yue, another Han Chinese, became the head of the commission, with him reportedly holding assimilationist policies toward ethnic minorities. Xi outlined his official views relations between the majority Han Chinese and ethnic minorities by saying "[n]either Han chauvinism nor local ethnic chauvinism is conducive to the development of a community for the Chinese nation." Following several terrorist attacks in Xinjiang in 2013 and 2014, the CCP leaders held a secret meeting to find a solution to the attacks, leading to Xi to launch the Strike Hard Campaign Against Violent Terrorism in 2014, which involved mass detention, and surveillance of ethnic Uyghurs there. Xi made an inspection tour in Xinjiang between 27 and 30 April in 2014. The program was massively expanded in 2016, after the appointment of Chen Quanguo as the Xinjiang CCP secretary. The campaign included the detainment of 1.8 million people in internment camps, mostly Uyghurs but also including other ethnic and religious minorities, by 2020, and a birth suppression campaign that led to a large drop in the Uyghur birth rate by 2019. Human rights groups and former inmates have described the camps as "concentration camps," where Uyghurs and other minorities have been forcibly assimilated into China's majority ethnic Han society. This program has been called a genocide by western observers, while a report by the UN Human Rights Office said they may amount to crimes against humanity. Internal Chinese government documents leaked to the press in November 2019 showed that Xi personally ordered a security crackdown in Xinjiang, saying that the party must show "absolutely no mercy" and that officials use all the "weapons of the people's democratic dictatorship" to suppress those "infected with the virus of extremism." The papers also showed that Xi repeatedly discussed about Islamic extremism in his speeches, likening it to a "virus" or a "drug" that could be only addressed by "a period of painful, interventionary treatment." However, he also warned against the discrimination against Uyghurs and rejected proposals to eradicate Islam in China, calling that kind of viewpoint "biased, even wrong." Xi's exact role in the building of internment camps has not been publicly reported, though he's widely believed to be behind them and his words have been the source for major justifications in the crackdown in Xinjiang. In the Xinjiang Police Files leaked in 2022, a document quoting Minister of Public Security Zhao Kezhi suggested that Xi had been aware of the internment camps. During a four-day visit to Xinjiang in July 2022, Xi urged local officials to always listen to the people's voices and to do more in preservation of ethnic minority culture. He also inspected the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps and praised its "great progress" in reform and development. During another visit to Xinjiang in August 2023, Xi said in a speech that the region was "no longer a remote area" and should open up more for tourism to attract domestic and foreign visitors. On 20 January 2020, Xi commented for the first time on the emerging COVID-19 pandemic in Wuhan, and ordered "efforts to curb the spread" of the virus. He gave premier Li Keqiang some responsibility over the COVID-19 response, in what has been suggested by The Wall Street Journal was an attempt to potentially insulate himself from criticism if the response failed. The government initially responded to the pandemic with a lockdown and censorship, with the initial response causing widespread backlash within China. He met with Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director-general of the World Health Organization (WHO), on 28 January. Der Spiegel reported that in January 2020 Xi pressured Tedros Adhanom to hold off on issuing a global warning about the outbreak of COVID-19 and hold back information on human-to-human transmission of the virus, allegations denied by the WHO. On 5 February, Xi met with Cambodian prime minister Hun Sen in Beijing, the first foreign leader allowed into China since the outbreak. After the COVID-19 outbreak got under control in Wuhan, Xi visited the city on 10 March. After getting the outbreak in Wuhan under control, Xi has favoured what has officially been termed "dynamic zero-COVID policy" that aims to control and suppress the virus as much as possible within the country's borders. This has involved local lockdowns and mass-testing. While initially credited for China's suppression of the COVID-19 outbreak, the policy was later criticized by foreign and some domestic observers for being out of touch with the rest of the world and taking a heavy toll on the economy. This approach has especially come under criticism during a 2022 lockdown on Shanghai, which forced millions to their homes and damaged the city's economy, denting the image of Li Qiang, close Xi ally and Party secretary of the city. Conversely, Xi has said that the policy was designed to protect people's life safety. On 23 July 2022, the National Health Commission reported that Xi and other top leaders have taken the local COVID-19 vaccines. At the 20th CCP Congress, Xi confirmed the continuation of the zero-COVID policy, stating he would "unswervingly" carry out "dynamic zero-COVID" and promising to "resolutely win the battle," though China started a limited easing of the policies in the following weeks. In November 2022, protests broke out against China's COVID-19 policies, with a fire in a high-rise apartment building in Ürümqi being the trigger. The protests were held in multiple major cities, with some of the protesters demanding the end of Xi's and the CCP's rule. The protests were mostly suppressed by December, though the government further eased COVID-19 restrictions in the time since. On 7 December 2022, China announced large-scale changes to its COVID-19 policy, including allowing quarantine at home for mild infections, reducing of PCR testing, and decreasing the power of local officials to implement lockdowns. Xi identifies environmental protection as one of China's five major priorities for national progress.: 164  In September 2020, Xi announced that China will "strengthen its 2030 climate target (NDC), peak emissions before 2030 and aim to achieve carbon neutrality before 2060." If accomplished, this would lower the expected rise in global temperature by 0.2–0.3 °C – "the biggest single reduction ever estimated by the Climate Action Tracker." Xi mentioned the link between the COVID-19 pandemic and nature destruction as one of the reasons for the decision, saying that "Humankind can no longer afford to ignore the repeated warnings of nature." On 27 September, Chinese scientists presented a detailed plan how to achieve the target. In September 2021, Xi announced that China will not build "coal-fired power projects abroad, which was said to be potentially "pivotal" in reducing emissions. The Belt and Road Initiative did not include financing such projects already in the first half of 2021. Xi has popularized a metaphor of "two mountains" to emphasize the importance of environmental protection.: 164  The concept is that a mountain made of gold or silver is valuable, but green mountains with clear waters are more valuable.: 164  The slogan's meaning is that economic development priorities must also provide for economic protection.: 164  Xi Jinping did not attend COP26 personally. However, a Chinese delegation led by climate change envoy Xie Zhenhua did attend. During the conference, the United States and China agreed on a framework to reduce GHG emission by co-operating on different measures. Known as a very secretive leader, little is known publicly about how Xi makes political decisions, or how he came to power. Xi's speeches generally get released months or years after they are made. Xi has also never given a press conference since becoming paramount leader, except in rare joint press conferences with foreign leaders. The Wall Street Journal reported that Xi prefers micromanaging in governance, in contrast to previous leaders such as Hu Jintao who left details of major policies to lower-ranking officials. Reportedly, ministerial officials try to get Xi's attention in various ways, with some creating slide shows and audio reports. The Wall Street Journal also reported that Xi created a performance-review system in 2018 to give evaluations on officials on various measures, including loyalty. According to The Economist, Xi's orders have generally been vague, leaving lower level officials to interpret his words. Chinese state media Xinhua News Agency said that Xi "personally reviews every draft of major policy documents" and "all reports submitted to him, no matter how late in the evening, were returned with instructions the following morning." With regard to behavior of Communist Party members, Xi emphasizes the "Two Musts" (members must not be arrogant or rash and must keep their hard-working spirit) and the "Six Nos" (members must say no to formalism, bureaucracy, gift-giving, luxurious birthday celebrations, hedonism, and extravagance).: 52  Xi called for officials to practice self-criticism which, according to observers, is in order to appear less corrupt and more popular among the people. Xi and CCP ideologues coined the phrase "Chinese Dream" to describe his overarching plans for China as its leader. Xi first used the phrase during a high-profile visit to the National Museum of China on 29 November 2012, where he and his Standing Committee colleagues were attending a "national revival" exhibition. Since then, the phrase has become the signature political slogan of the Xi era. The origin of the term "Chinese Dream" is unclear. While the phrase has been used before by journalists and scholars, some publications have posited the term likely drew its inspiration from the concept of the American Dream. The Economist noted the abstract and seemingly accessible nature of the concept with no specific overarching policy stipulations may be a deliberate departure from the jargon-heavy ideologies of his predecessors. Xi has linked the "Chinese Dream" with the phrase "great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation." In recent years, top political leaders of the CCP such as Xi have overseen the rehabilitation of ancient Chinese philosophical figures like Han Fei into the mainstream of Chinese thought alongside Confucianism. At a meeting with other officials in 2013, he quoted Confucius, saying "he who rules by virtue is like the Pole Star, it maintains its place, and the multitude of stars pay homage." While visiting Shandong, the birthplace of Confucius, in November, he told scholars that the Western world was "suffering a crisis of confidence" and that the CCP has been "the loyal inheritor and promoter of China's outstanding traditional culture." According to several analysts, Xi's leadership has been characterised by a resurgence of the ancient political philosophy Legalism. Han Fei gained new prominence with favourable citations; one sentence of Han Fei's that Xi quoted appeared thousands of times in official Chinese media at the local, provincial, and national levels. Xi has additionally supported the Neo-Confucian philosopher Wang Yangming, telling local leaders to promote him. Xi has also overseen a revival of traditional Chinese culture, breaking from the CCP's previous path, which had often attacked it. He has called traditional culture the "soul" of the nation and the "foundation" of the CCP's culture. Xi has also called for integrating the basic tenets of Marxism with China's traditional culture. Hanfu, the traditional dress of Han Chinese, has seen a revival under him, associated with the revival of traditional culture. He has established the "four matters of confidence," which has later been added to the CCP constitution, calling for CCP members, government officials and the Chinese people to be "confident in our chosen path, confident in our guiding theories, confident in our political system, and confident in our culture." He has unveiled Global Civilisation initiative in 2023, calling for "respecting the diversity of civilisations, advocating the common values of humanity, valuing the inheritance and innovation of civilisations, and strengthening international people-to-people exchanges and cooperation" On 15 October 2014, Xi Jinping emulated the Yan'an Talks with his 'Speech at the Forum on Literature and Art.': 15  Consistent with Mao's view in the Yan'an Talks, Xi believes works of art should be judged by political criteria.: 16  In 2021, Xi quoted the Yan'an Talks during the opening ceremony of the 11th National Congress of the China Federation of Literary and Art Circles and the 10th National Congress of the Chinese Writers Association.: 174  According to Xi, art should be judged by political criteria.: 16  This view rejects the concept of art-for-art's-sake and contends that art should serve the goal of national rejuvenation.: 16  Xi criticizes market-driven art which he deems sensationalist, particularly works which "exaggerate society's dark side" for profit.: 16  He ordered the arts industry to "tell China's stories and spread Chinese voices to strengthen the country's international communication capacity." Xi has said that "only socialism can save China." Xi has also declared socialism with Chinese characteristics to be the "only correct path to realize national rejuvenation." According to BBC News, while the CCP was perceived to have abandoned its communist ideology since it initiated economic reforms in the 1970s, Xi is believed by some observers to be more believing in the "idea of a communist project," being described as a Marxist–Leninist by former Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd. Xi's emphasis on prioritizing ideology has included re-asserting the Party's goal of eventually realizing communism and reprimanding those who dismiss communism as impractical or irrelevant. Xi described the communist ideal as the "calcium" in a Party member's spine, without which the Party member would suffer the "osteoporosis" of political decay and be unable to stand upright. Subscribing to the view that socialism will eventually triumph over capitalism, Xi has said "Marx and Engels's analysis of the basic contradictions of capitalist society is not outdated, nor is the historical materialist view that capitalism is bound to die out and socialism bound to win." Xi has overseen the increase of "Socialist Political Economy With Chinese Characteristics" as a major study topic for academics in China, aiming to decrease the influence of Western-influenced economics. Though he has called a stop to what he considers to be "disorderly expansion of capital," he has also said that "it is necessary to stimulate the vitality of capital of all types, including nonpublic capital, and give full play to its positive role." China's success proves that socialism is not dead. It is thriving. Just imagine this: had socialism failed in China, had our communist party collapsed like the party in the Soviet Union, then global socialism would lapse into a long dark age. And communism, like Karl Marx once said, would be a haunting spectre lingering in limbo. — Xi Jinping during a speech in 2018 Xi has supported greater CCP control over the PRC, saying "government, the military, society and schools, north, south, east and west – the party leads them all." During the 100th anniversary of the CCP in 2021, he said that "without the Communist Party of China, there would be no new China and no national rejuvenation," and that "the leadership of the Party is the defining feature of socialism with Chinese characteristics and constitutes the greatest strength of this system." He has said that China, despite many setbacks, has achieved great progress under the CCP, saying that "socialism with Chinese characteristics has become the standard-bearer of 21st-century socialist development." However, he has also warned that it will take a long time for China under the CCP to complete its rejuvenation, and during this timeframe, party members must be vigilant to not let CCP rule collapse. Xi has spoken out against "historical nihilism," meaning historical viewpoints that challenge the official line of the CCP. Xi said that one of the reasons for the collapse of the Soviet Union has been historical nihilism. Xi has ruled out a multi-party system for China, saying that "constitutional monarchy, imperial restoration, parliamentarism, a multi-party system and a presidential system, we considered them, tried them, but none worked." However, Xi considers China to be a democracy, saying that "China's socialist democracy is the most comprehensive, genuine and effective democracy." China's definition of democracy is different from liberal democracies and is rooted in Marxism–Leninism, and is based on the phrases "people's democratic dictatorship" and "democratic centralism." Xi has additionally coined the term "whole-process people's democracy" which he said was about having "the people as masters." Foreign analysts and observers have widely disputed that China is a democracy, saying that it is a one-party authoritarian state and Xi an authoritarian leader. Some observers, including German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock, have called Xi a dictator, citing the large centralisation of power around him unseen compared to his predecessors. Xi has additionally rejected Westernisation as the only way to modernize, instead promoting what he says is "Chinese-style modernisation." He has identified five concepts as part of Chinese-style modernisation, including modernisation of a huge population, common prosperity, material and cultural-ethical advancement, harmony between humanity and nature, and peaceful development. In September 2017, the CCP Central Committee decided that Xi's political philosophies, generally referred to as "Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era," would become part of the Party Constitution. Xi first made mention of the "Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" in his opening day speech delivered to the 19th Party Congress in October 2017. His Politburo Standing Committee colleagues, in their own reviews of Xi's keynote address at the Congress, prepended the name "Xi Jinping" in front of "Thought." On 24 October 2017, at its closing session, the 19th Party Congress approved the incorporation of Xi Jinping Thought into the Constitution of the CCP, while in March 2018, the National People's Congress changed the state constitution to include Xi Jinping Thought. Xi himself has described the Thought as part of the broad framework created around socialism with Chinese characteristics, a term coined by Deng Xiaoping that places China in the primary stage of socialism. In official party documentation and pronouncements by Xi's colleagues, the Thought is said to be a continuation of Marxism–Leninism, Mao Zedong Thought, Deng Xiaoping Theory, the Three Represents, and the Scientific Outlook on Development, as part of a series of guiding ideologies that embody "Marxism adopted to Chinese conditions" and contemporary considerations. It has additionally been described as the "21st century Marxism" by two professors in the Central Party School of the CCP. Wang Huning, a top political adviser and a close ally of Xi, has been described as pivotal to developing Xi Jinping Thought. The concepts and context behind Xi Jinping Thought are elaborated in Xi's The Governance of China book series, published by the Foreign Languages Press for an international audience. Volume one was published in September 2014, followed by volume two in November 2017. Xuexi Qiangguo, an app for teaching Xi Jinping Thought had become the most popular smartphone app in China in 2019, as the country's ruling CCP launched a new campaign that calls on its cadres to immerse themselves in the political doctrine every day. In 2021, the government included Xi Jinping Thought in the curriculum including to students from primary schools to university, which created pushback from parents. For much of the preceding 30 years, political ideology and communist doctrine were not a standard taught in Chinese schools until middle school, and textbooks featured a wider set of Chinese leaders with less emphasis on a single leader like Xi. Xi's first marriage was to Ke Lingling, the daughter of Ke Hua, China's ambassador to the United Kingdom in the early 1980s. They divorced within a few years. The two were said to fight "almost every day," and after the divorce Ke moved to England. In 1987, Xi married the prominent Chinese folk singer Peng Liyuan. Xi and Peng were introduced by friends as many Chinese couples were in the 1980s. Xi was reputedly academic during their courtship, inquiring about singing techniques. Peng Liyuan, a household name in China, was better known to the public than Xi until his political elevation. The couple frequently lived apart due largely to their separate professional lives. Peng has played a much more visible role as China's "first lady" compared to her predecessors; for example, Peng hosted U.S. First Lady Michelle Obama on her high-profile visit to China in March 2014. Xi and Peng have a daughter named Xi Mingze, who graduated from Harvard University in the spring of 2015. While at Harvard, she used a pseudonym and studied Psychology and English. Xi's family has a home in Jade Spring Hill, a garden and residential area in north-western Beijing run by the CMC. In June 2012, Bloomberg News reported that members of Xi's extended family have substantial business interests, although there was no evidence he had intervened to assist them. The Bloomberg News website was blocked in mainland China in response to the article. Since Xi embarked on an anti-corruption campaign, The New York Times reported members of his family were selling their corporate and real estate investments beginning in 2012. Relatives of highly placed Chinese officials, including seven current and former senior leaders of the Politburo of the CCP, have been named in the Panama Papers, including Deng Jiagui, Xi's brother-in-law. Deng had two shell companies in the British Virgin Islands while Xi was a member of the Politburo Standing Committee, but they were dormant by the time Xi became general secretary of the CCP in November 2012. Peng described Xi as hardworking and down-to-earth: "When he comes home, I've never felt as if there's some leader in the house. In my eyes, he's just my husband." In 1992, The Washington Post journalist Lena H. Sun had an interview with Xi, then CCP secretary of Fuzhou; Sun described Xi as considerably more at ease and confident than many officials his age, and said that he talked without consulting notes. He was described in a 2011 The Washington Post article by those who know him as "pragmatic, serious, cautious, hard-working, down to earth and low-key." He was described as a good hand at problem solving and "seemingly uninterested in the trappings of high office." Xi is an avid soccer fan. While working in Hebei, it was reported that Xi often asked his friend Nie Weiping, a professional Go player, for soccer tickets. During a visit to Ireland in 2012 as China's vice-president, Xi showcased his soccer technique at Croke Park. In 2011, Xi outlined a vision to turn China from a footballing minnow to a soccer superpower. He outlined a three-stage plan for the national team: to qualify for another World Cup, to host a World Cup and to win a World Cup. In 2015, Xi approved China's 50-point plan for the sport, which included including soccer in the national school curriculum and setting up 50,000 soccer schools in the country by 2025. However, according to CNN, poor financial decisions and alleged high-level corruption coupled with a three-year pandemic have left the sport in tatters. In 2023, Xi said he is "not so sure" of the abilities of the national team. It is hard to gauge the opinion of the Chinese public on Xi, as no independent surveys exist in China and social media is heavily censored. However, he is believed to be widely popular in the country. According to a 2014 poll co-sponsored by the Harvard Kennedy School's Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation, Xi ranked 9 out of 10 in domestic approval ratings. A YouGov poll released in July 2019 found that about 22% of people in mainland China list Xi as the person they admire the most, a plurality, although this figure was less than 5% for residents of Hong Kong. In the spring of 2019, the Pew Research Center made a survey on confidence on Xi Jinping among six-country medians based on Australia, India, Indonesia, Japan, Philippines and South Korea, which indicated that a median 29% have confidence in Xi Jinping to do the right thing regarding world affairs, meanwhile a median of 45% have no confidence; these numbers are slightly higher than those of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un (23% confidence, 53% no confidence). A poll by Politico and Morning Consult in 2021 found that 5% of Americans have a favorable opinion of Xi, 38% unfavorable, 17% no opinion and 40%, a plurality, never hearing of him. In 2017, The Economist named him the most powerful person in the world. In 2018, Forbes ranked him as the most powerful and influential person in the world, replacing Russian President Vladimir Putin, who had been ranked so for five consecutive years. Since 2013, Reporters Without Borders, an international non-profit and non-governmental organization with the stated aim of safeguarding the right to freedom of information, included Xi among the list of press freedom predators. Unlike previous Chinese leaders, Chinese state media has given a more encompassing view of Xi's private life, although still strictly controlled. According to Xinhua News Agency, Xi would swim one kilometer and walk every day as long as there was time, and is interested in foreign writers, especially Russian. He is known to love films and TV shows such as Saving Private Ryan, The Departed, The Godfather and Game of Thrones, also praising the independent film-maker Jia Zhangke. The Chinese state media has also cast him as a fatherly figure and a man of the people, determined to stand up for Chinese interests. Xi holds a "key to the city," an honor granted to attending guests to symbolize their significance, in: Muscatine, Iowa, United States (26 April 1985) Montego Bay, Jamaica (13 February 2009) Muscatine, Iowa, United States (14 February 2012)  San José, Costa Rica (3 June 2013)  Mexico City, Mexico (5 June 2013)  Buenos Aires, Argentina (19 July 2014)  Prague, Czech Republic (29 March 2016) Madrid, Spain (28 November 2018) Nazarbayev University (7 September 2013) University of Johannesburg (11 April 2019) Saint Petersburg State University (6 June 2019) King Saud University (8 December 2022) Xi, Jinping (1999). Theory and Practice on Modern Agriculture. Fuzhou: Fujian Education Press. Xi, Jinping (2001). A Tentative Study on China's Rural Marketization (PDF). Beijing: Tsinghua University (Doctoral Dissertation). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 January 2013. Xi, Jinping (2007). Zhijiang Xinyu. Hangzhou: Zhengjiang People's Publishing House. ISBN 9787213035081. Xi, Jinping (2014). The Governance of China. Vol. I. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. ISBN 9787119090573. Xi, Jinping (2014). General Secretary Xi Jinping important speech series. Vol. I. Beijing: People's Publishing House & Study Publishing House. ISBN 9787119090573. Xi, Jinping (2016). General Secretary Xi Jinping important speech series. Vol. II. Beijing: People's Publishing House & Study Publishing House. ISBN 9787514706284. Xi, Jinping (2017). The Governance of China. Vol. II. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. ISBN 9787119111643. Xi, Jinping (2018). Quotations from Chairman Xi Jinping. Some units of the PLA. Xi, Jinping (2019). The Belt And Road Initiative. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. ISBN 978-7119119960. Xi, Jinping (2020). The Governance of China. Vol. III. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. ISBN 9787119124117. Xi, Jinping (2020). On Propaganda and Ideological Work of Communist Party. Beijing: Central Party Literature Press. ISBN 9787507347791. Xi, Jinping (2021). On History of the Communist Party of China. Beijing: Central Party Literature Press. ISBN 9787507348033. Xi, Jinping (2022). The Governance of China. Vol. IV. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press. ISBN 9787119130941. The closest pronunciation using sounds common in spoken English is English: /ˈʃiː tʃɪnˈpɪŋ/ SHEE chin-PING. Liu Yandong, Wang Qishan, and Deng Pufang (Deng Xiaoping's son) all placed among the bottom of the alternate member list. Like Xi, all three were seen as "princelings". Bo Xilai was not elected to the Central Committee at all; that is, Bo placed lower in the vote count than Xi. Original simplified Chinese: 在国际金融风暴中，中国能基本解决13亿人口吃饭的问题，已经是对全人类最伟大的贡献; traditional Chinese: 在國際金融風暴中，中國能基本解決13億人口吃飯的問題，已經是對全人類最偉大的貢獻 Original: simplified Chinese: 有些吃饱没事干的外国人，对我们的事情指手画脚。中国一不输出革命，二不输出饥饿和贫困，三不折腾你们，还有什么好说的？; traditional Chinese: 有些吃飽沒事干的外國人，對我們的事情指手畫腳。中國一不輸出革命，二不輸出飢餓和貧困，三不折騰你們，還有什麽好說的？ Chinese: 中华民族伟大复兴, which can also be translated as the "Great Renaissance of the Chinese nation" or the "Great revival of the Chinese people". "Association for Conversation of Hong Kong Indigenous Languages Online Dictionary". hkilang.org. 1 July 2015. Archived from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Wong 2023, p. 229. "Profile: Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 7 November 2012. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 26 August 2013. 與丈夫習仲勛相伴58年 齊心：這輩子無比幸福 [With her husband Xi Zhongxun for 58 years: very happy in this life] (in Traditional Chinese). Xinhua News Agency. 28 April 2009. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 18 March 2013. Xu, Xinyi (27 May 2013). 習近平"家風"揭秘 齊心自述與習仲勛婚姻往事 [Xi Jinping's "family traditions" are unmasked: Qi Xin's autobiographical account of her marriage to Xi Zhongxun]. People's Daily (in Traditional Chinese). Archived from the original on 28 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. Chan, Alfred L. (24 March 2022). "Childhood and Youth: Privilege and Trauma, 1953–1979". Xi Jinping: Political Career, Governance, and Leadership, 1953-2018. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-761525-6. Takahashi, Tetsushi (1 June 2002). "Connecting the dots of the Hong Kong law and veneration of Xi". Nikkei Shimbun. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 23 October 2020. Osnos, Evan (30 March 2015). "Born Red". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Li, Cheng. "Xi Jinping's Inner Circle (Part 2: Friends from Xi's Formative Years)" (PDF). Hoover Institution. pp. 6–22. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2020. Tisdall, Simon (29 December 2019). "The power behind the thrones: 10 political movers and shakers who will shape 2020". The Guardian. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2020. Wei, Lingling (27 February 2018). "Who Is 'Uncle He?' The Man in Charge of China's Economy". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2020. Bouée 2010, p. 93. "习近平："我坚信我的父亲是一个大英雄"" [Xi Jinping: "I firmly believe my father is a great hero"]. General Administration of Press and Publication (in Chinese). 国家新闻出版广电总局. 14 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2018. 女儿习和平...在"文化大革命"中被迫害致死，是习仲勋难以抹去的心痛。 Buckley, Chris; Tatlow, Didi Kirsten (24 September 2015). "Cultural Revolution Shaped Xi Jinping, From Schoolboy to Survivor". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2018. 不忘初心：是什么造就了今天的习主席？ [What Were His Original Intentions? The President Xi of Today]. Youku (in Simplified Chinese). 30 January 2018. Archived from the original on 30 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. Lim, Louisa (9 November 2012). "For China's Rising Leader, A Cave Was Once Home". NPR. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 27 October 2018. Page, Jeremy (23 December 2020). "How the U.S. Misread China's Xi: Hoping for a Globalist, It Got an Autocrat". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 24 December 2020. Retrieved 25 December 2020. Demick, Barbara; Pierson, David (14 February 2012). "China's political star Xi Jinping is a study in contrasts". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. Matt Rivers (19 March 2018). "This entire Chinese village is a shrine to Xi Jinping". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2021. "Xi Jinping 习近平" (PDF). Brookings Institution. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021. ""The Current" – Wednesday February 28, 2018 Full Text Transcript". CBC Radio. 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 24 March 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2018. Ranade, Jayadva (25 October 2010). "China's Next Chairman – Xi Jinping". Centre for Air Power Studies. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013. Retrieved 27 May 2012. Simon & Cong 2009, pp. 28–29. Johnson, Ian (30 September 2012). "Elite and Deft, Xi Aimed High Early in China". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 September 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2023. "Xi Jinping: From graft-fighting governor to China's most powerful leader since Mao Zedong". The Straits Times. 11 March 2018. Archived from the original on 18 August 2019. Retrieved 18 August 2019. "中共十五大习近平位列候补委员最后一名为何" 中共十五大习近平位列候补委员最后一名为何 [Why Is Xi Jinping, At the 15th CCP National Congress, Being Waited On To Fill The Last Committee Member Position?]. Canyu.org (in Simplified Chinese). 22 April 2011. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Xi Jinping – Politburo Standing Committee member of CPC Central Committee". People's Daily. 22 October 2007. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2019. Watts, Jonathan (26 October 2007). "Most corrupt officials are from poor families but Chinese royals have a spirit that is not dominated by money". The Guardian. London, England. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2008. Tiezzi, Shannon (4 November 2014). "From Fujian, China's Xi Offers Economic Olive Branch to Taiwan". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. Yu, Xiao (18 February 2000). "Fujian leaders face Beijing top brass". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Ho, Louise (25 October 2012). "Xi Jinping's time in Zhejiang: doing the business". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 29 April 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2019. Wang, Lei (25 December 2014). 习近平为官之道 拎着乌纱帽干事 [Xi Jinping's Governmental Path – Carries Official Administrative Posts]. Duowei News (in Simplified Chinese). Archived from the original on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Tian, Yew Lun; Chen, Laurie; Cash, Joe (11 March 2023). "Li Qiang, Xi confidant, takes reins as China's premier". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023. Retrieved 24 May 2023. 习近平任上海市委书记 韩正不再代理市委书记 [Xi Jinping is Secretary of Shanghai Municipal Party Committee – Han Zheng is No Longer Acting Party Secretary]. Sohu (in Simplified Chinese). 24 March 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "China new leaders: Xi Jinping heads line-up for politburo". BBC News. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. 从上海到北京 习近平贴身秘书只有钟绍军 [From Shanghai to Beijing, Zhong Shaojun Has Been Xi Jinping's Only Personal Secretary]. Mingjing News (in Simplified Chinese). 11 July 2013. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Lam 2015, p. 56. 新晋政治局常委：习近平 [Newly Appointed Member of Politburo Standing Committee: Xi Jinping]. Caijing (in Simplified Chinese). 22 October 2007. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Wen Jiabao re-elected China PM". Al Jazeera. 16 March 2008. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Vice-President Xi Jinping to Visit DPRK, Mongolia, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Yemen". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 5 June 2008. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2010. Wines, Michael (9 March 2009). "China's Leaders See a Calendar Full of Anniversaries, and Trouble". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 21 July 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Anderlini, Jamil (20 July 2012). "Bo Xilai: power, death and politics". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Palmer, James (19 October 2017). "The Resistible Rise of Xi Jinping". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 6 February 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Ansfield, Jonathan (22 December 2007). "Xi Jinping: China's New Boss And The 'L' Word". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 20 October 2010. Elegant, Simon (19 November 2007). "China's Nelson Mandela". Time. Archived from the original on 28 July 2009. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Elegant, Simon (15 March 2008). "China Appoints Xi Vice President, Heir Apparent to Hu". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 20 October 2010. Uren, David (5 October 2012). "Rudd seeks to pre-empt PM's China white paper with his own version". The Australian. Archived from the original on 22 November 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "Chinese vice president arrives in Mexico for official visit". People's Daily. 10 February 2009. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Chinese VP Receives Key to the City of Montego Bay". Jamaica Information Service. 15 February 2009. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Chinese vice president continues visit in Colombia". People's Daily. 17 February 2009. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Chinese VP praises friendly cooperation with Venezuela, Latin America". CCTV. Xinhua. 18 February 2009. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Xi Jinping proposes efforts to boost cooperation with Brazil". China Daily. 20 February 2009. Archived from the original on 6 February 2011. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Chinese vice president begins official visit". Times of Malta. 22 February 2009. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Sim, Chi Yin (14 February 2009). "Chinese VP blasts meddlesome foreigners". AsiaOne. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2010. Lai, Jinhong (18 February 2009). 習近平出訪罵老外 外交部捏冷汗 [Xi Jinping Goes and Scolds at Foreigners, Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Cold Sweat]. United Daily News (in Simplified Chinese). Archived from the original on 21 February 2009. Retrieved 27 February 2009. "A Journey of Friendship, Cooperation and Culture – Vice Foreign Minister Zhang Zhijun Sums Up Chinese Vice President Xi Jinping's Trip to 5 European Countries". Permanent Representative of China to the United Nations. 21 October 2009. Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Raman, B. (25 December 2009). "China's Cousin-Cousin Relations with Myanmar". South Asia Analysis Group. Archived from the original on 17 March 2010. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Bull, Alister; Chris Buckley (24 January 2012). "China leader-in-waiting Xi to visit White House next month". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 28 October 2018. Johnson, Kirk (15 February 2012). "Xi Jinping of China Makes a Return Trip to Iowa". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Beech, Hannah (15 September 2012). "China's Heir Apparent Xi Jinping Reappears in Public After a Two-Week Absence". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 20 August 2022. "China Confirms Leadership Change". BBC News. 17 November 2012. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2012. "Xi Jinping: China's 'princeling' new leader". Hindustan Times. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 28 October 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2018. Wong, Edward (14 November 2012). "Ending Congress, China Presents New Leadership Headed by Xi Jinping". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 December 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. FlorCruz, Jaime A; Mullen, Jethro (16 November 2012). "After months of mystery, China unveils new top leaders". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 November 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. Johnson, Ian (15 November 2012). "A Promise to Tackle China's Problems, but Few Hints of a Shift in Path". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Full text: China's new party chief Xi Jinping's speech". BBC News. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Page, Jeremy (13 March 2013). "New Beijing Leader's 'China Dream'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 11 October 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Chen, Zhuang (10 December 2012). "The symbolism of Xi Jinping's trip south". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Demick, Barbara (3 March 2013). "China's Xi Jinping formally assumes title of president". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 16 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. "China's Xi Jinping hints at backing Sri Lanka against UN resolution". NDTV. Press Trust of India. 16 March 2013. Archived from the original on 16 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. Cheung, Tony; Ho, Jolie (17 March 2013). "CY Leung to meet Xi Jinping in Beijing and explain cross-border policies". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. "China names Xi Jinping as new president". Inquirer.net. Agence France-Presse. 15 March 2013. Archived from the original on 17 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. People's Daily, Department of Commentary (20 November 2019). "Stories of Incorrupt Government: "The Corruption and Unjustness of Officials Give Birth to the Decline of Governance"". Narrating China's Governance. Singapore: Springer Singapore. pp. 3–39. doi:10.1007/978-981-32-9178-2_1. ISBN 978-981-329-177-5. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) "習近平:不提不切實際的口號 - 快訊-文匯網". 香港文匯網. 29 May 2012. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 28 September 2023. "Xi Jinping's inaugural Speech". BBC News. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Jacobs, Andrew (27 March 2013). "Elite in China Face Austerity Under Xi's Rule". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Oster, Shai (4 March 2014). "President Xi's Anti-Corruption Campaign Biggest Since Mao". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Heilmann 2017, pp. 62–75. "China's Soft-Power Deficit Widens as Xi Tightens Screws Over Ideology". Brookings Institution. 5 December 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Charting China's 'great purge' under Xi". BBC News. 22 October 2017. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2022. "Tiger in the net". The Economist. 11 December 2014. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 17 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "China's former military chief of staff jailed for life for corruption". The Guardian. 20 February 2019. Archived from the original on 10 October 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2019. "China's anti-corruption campaign expands with new agency". BBC News. 20 March 2018. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2019. "31个省级纪委改革方案获批复 12省已完成纪委"重建"" [31 Provincial Commission for Discipline Inspection Reform Plans Approved 12 Provinces Have Completed "Reconstruction"]. Xinhua News Agency. 13 June 2014. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Chin, Josh (15 December 2021). "Xi Jinping's Leadership Style: Micromanagement That Leaves Underlings Scrambling". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Wong, Chun Han (16 October 2022). "Xi Jinping's Quest for Control Over China Targets Even Old Friends". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "China re-connects: joining a deep-rooted past to a new world order". Jesus College, Cambridge. 19 March 2021. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 11 February 2023. Wang, Gungwu (7 September 2019). "Ancient past, modern ambitions: historian Wang Gungwu's new book on China's delicate balance". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 11 February 2023. Denyer, Simon (25 October 2017). "China's Xi Jinping unveils his top party leaders, with no successor in sight". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2017. Censorship has been significantly stepped up in China since Xi took power. Economy, Elizabeth (29 June 2018). "The great firewall of China: Xi Jinping's internet shutdown". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 October 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2019. Before Xi Jinping, the internet was becoming a more vibrant political space for Chinese citizens. But today the country has the largest and most sophisticated online censorship operation in the world. "Xi outlines blueprint to develop China's strength in cyberspace". Xinhua News Agency. 21 April 2018. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018. Zhuang, Pinghui (19 February 2016). "China's top party mouthpieces pledge 'absolute loyalty' as president makes rare visits to newsrooms". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Risen, Tom (3 June 2014). "Tiananmen Censorship Reflects Crackdown Under Xi Jinping". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Bougon 2018, pp. 157–65. Tiezzi, Shannon (24 June 2014). "China's 'Sovereign Internet'". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2017. Ford, Peter (18 December 2015). "On Internet freedoms, China tells the world, 'leave us alone'". The Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2017. "Wikipedia blocked in China in all languages". BBC News. 14 May 2019. Archived from the original on 15 May 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2019. Phillips, Tom (6 August 2015). "'It's getting worse': China's liberal academics fear growing censorship". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Grigg, Angus (4 July 2015). "How China stopped its bloggers". The Australian Financial Review. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "China Tells Carriers to Block Access to Personal VPNs by February". Bloomberg News. 10 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Phillips, Tom (24 October 2017). "Xi Jinping becomes most powerful leader since Mao with China's change to constitution". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. "China elevates Xi to most powerful leader in decades". CBC News. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. "China elevates Xi Jinping's status, making him the most powerful leader since Mao". Irish Independent. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Collins, Stephen (9 November 2017). "Xi's up, Trump is down, but it may not matter". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Holtz, Michael (28 February 2018). "Xi for life? China turns its back on collective leadership". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. Andrésy, Agnès (2015). Xi Jinping: Red China, The Next Generation. UPA. p. 88. ISBN 9780761866015. Pollard, Martin (26 October 2022). "China's Xi deals knockout blow to once-powerful Youth League faction". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023. Retrieved 24 May 2023. Gan, Nectar (23 September 2017). "Latest Xi Jinping book gives clues on decline of Communist Party's youth wing". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 8 October 2017. Shi, Jiangtao; Huang, Kristin (26 February 2018). "End to term limits at top 'may be start of global backlash for China'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018. Phillips, Tom (4 March 2018). "Xi Jinping's power play: from president to China's new dictator?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 March 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. Wen, Philip (17 March 2018). "China's parliament re-elects Xi Jinping as president". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018. Bodeen, Christopher (17 March 2018). "Xi reappointed as China's president with no term limits". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018. Zhou, Xin (18 March 2018). "Li Keqiang endorsed as China's premier; military leaders confirmed". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Mitchell, Tom (7 September 2019). "China's Xi Jinping says he is opposed to life-long rule". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018. Retrieved 17 April 2018. President insists term extension is necessary to align government and party posts Wang, Cat (7 November 2021). "The significance of Xi Jinping's upcoming 'historical resolution'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Ni, Vincent (11 November 2021). "Chinese Communist party elevates Xi's status in 'historical resolution'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Wong, Chun Han; Zhai, Keith (17 November 2021). "How Xi Jinping Is Rewriting China's History to Put Himself at the Center". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Bandurski, David (8 February 2022). "Two Establishes". China Media Project. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Davidson, Helen; Graham-Harrison, Emma (23 October 2022). "China's leader Xi Jinping secures third term and stacks inner circle with loyalists". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. Wingfield-Hayes, Rupert (23 October 2022). "Xi Jinping's party is just getting started". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Shake-up at the top of China's Communist Party as Xi Jinping starts new term". South China Morning Post. 22 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Xi Jinping unanimously elected Chinese president, PRC CMC chairman". Xinhua News Agency. 10 March 2023. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. "The power of Xi Jinping". The Economist. 18 September 2014. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017. Jiayang, Fan; Taisu, Zhang; Ying, Zhu (8 March 2016). "Behind the Personality Cult of Xi Jinping". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Phillips, Tom (19 September 2015). "Xi Jinping: Does China truly love 'Big Daddy Xi' – or fear him?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2017. Blanchard, Ben (28 October 2016). "All hail the mighty uncle – Chinese welcome Xi as the 'core'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. "Xi's Nickname Becomes Out of Bounds for China's Media". Bloomberg News. 28 April 2015. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Rivers, Matt (19 March 2018). "This entire Chinese village is a shrine to Xi Jinping". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. Gan, Nectar (28 December 2017). "Why China is reviving Mao's grandiose title for Xi Jinping". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Xi Jinping is no longer any old leader". The Economist. 17 February 2018. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Shepherd, Christian; Wen, Philip (20 October 2017). "With tears and song, China welcomes Xi as great, wise leader". Reuters. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Qian, Gang (2 November 2020). "A Brief History of the Helmsmen". China Media Project. Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2022. Nakazawa, Katsuji (9 January 2020). "China crowns Xi with special title, citing rare crisis". Nikkei Asian Review. Archived from the original on 9 January 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Whyte, Martin K. (15 March 2021). "China's economic development history and Xi Jinping's "China dream:" an overview with personal reflections". Chinese Sociological Review. 53 (2): 115–134. doi:10.1080/21620555.2020.1833321. ISSN 2162-0555. S2CID 228867589. Kroeber, Arthur R. (17 November 2013). "Xi Jinping's Ambitious Agenda for Economic Reform in China". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. Denyer, Simon (25 August 2013). "Creeping reforms as China gives Shanghai Free Trade Zone go-ahead". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2023. Buckley, Chris; Bradsher, Keith (4 March 2017). "Xi Jinping's Failed Promises Dim Hopes for Economic Change in 2nd Term". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Wong 2023, p. 146. Orlik, Tom; Hancock, Tom (3 March 2023). "What Wall Street Gets Wrong About Xi Jinping's New Money Men". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Wang, Orange; Leng, Sidney (28 September 2018). "Chinese President Xi Jinping's show of support for state-owned firms 'no surprise', analysts say". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Gan, Nectar (28 September 2018). "Xi says it's wrong to 'bad mouth' China's state firms... but country needs private sector as well". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Pieke & Hofman 2022, p. 48. Lockett, Hudson (12 June 2022). "How Xi Jinping is reshaping China's capital markets". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "Xi Jinping's grip on Chinese enterprise gets uncomfortably tight". The Economist. 26 November 2023. Bradsher, Keith (4 March 2017). "China and Economic Reform: Xi Jinping's Track Record". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Wildau, Gabriel (18 December 2018). "Xi says no one can 'dictate to the Chinese people'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2020. "Xi Puts His Personal Stamp on China's Fight Against Poverty". Bloomberg News. 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 18 February 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "China's Xi declares victory in ending extreme poverty". BBC News. 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "China's poverty line is not as stingy as commentators think". The Economist. Hong Kong. 18 June 2020. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "World Bank Open Data". "GDP (current US$) – China | Data". World Bank. Archived from the original on 6 September 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2023". International Monetary Fund. April 2023. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "GDP growth (annual %) – China | Data". World Bank. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Hui, Mary (16 February 2022). "What China means when it says it wants "high quality" GDP growth". Quartz. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Marquis, Christopher; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022). Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise. Kunyuan Qiao. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6. OCLC 1348572572. Wei, Lingling (12 August 2020). "China's Xi Speeds Up Inward Economic Shift". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "China's future economic potential hinges on its productivity". The Economist. 14 August 2021. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "China's Escalating Property Curbs Point to Xi's New Priority". Bloomberg News. 27 July 2021. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "Housing Should Be for Living In, Not for Speculation, Xi Says". Bloomberg News. 18 October 2017. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Lin, Andy; Hale, Thomas; Hudson, Hudson (8 October 2021). "Half of China's top developers crossed Beijing's 'red lines'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Wei, Lingling (19 October 2021). "In Tackling China's Real-Estate Bubble, Xi Jinping Faces Resistance to Property-Tax Plan". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Tran, Hung (14 March 2023). "China's debt-reduction campaign is making progress, but at a cost". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Fifield, Anna (2 November 2018). "As China settles in for trade war, leader Xi emphasizes 'self reliance'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Han, Chen; Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (15 October 2022). "What China looks like after a decade of Xi Jinping's rule". Axios. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2023. Yap, Chuin-Wei (25 December 2019). "State Support Helped Fuel Huawei's Global Rise". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 25 December 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Xinhua Commentary: "New productive forces" a winning formula for China's future". Xinhuanet. 21 September 2023. "Xiongan is Xi Jinping's pet project". The Economist. 18 May 2023. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "Full Text: Xi Jinping's Speech on Boosting Common Prosperity – Caixin Global". Caixin Global. 19 October 2021. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Wei, Jing Yang and Lingling (12 November 2020). "China's President Xi Jinping Personally Scuttled Jack Ma's Ant IPO". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 13 November 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Hass, Ryan (9 September 2021). "Assessing China's "common prosperity" campaign". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 3 July 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Shen, Samuel; Ranganathan, Vidya (3 November 2021). "China stock pickers reshape portfolios on Xi's 'common prosperity'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Moore, Elena (10 April 2021). "China Fines Alibaba $2.8 Billion For Breaking Anti-Monopoly Law". NPR. Archived from the original on 16 September 2021. Retrieved 16 September 2021. "China's Education Crackdown Pushes Costly Tutors Underground". Bloomberg News. 12 August 2021. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Trading kicks off on Beijing Stock Exchange, 10 stocks surge". Reuters. 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 27 November 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Stevenson, Alexandra; Chien, Amy Chang; Li, Cao (27 August 2021). "China's Celebrity Culture Is Raucous. The Authorities Want to Change That". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Buckley, Chris (30 August 2021). "China Tightens Limits for Young Online Gamers and Bans School Night Play". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Wuthnow, Joel (30 June 2016). "China's Much-Heralded NSC Has Disappeared". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Lampton, David M. (3 September 2015). "Xi Jinping and the National Security Commission: policy coordination and political power". Journal of Contemporary China. 24 (95): 759–777. doi:10.1080/10670564.2015.1013366. ISSN 1067-0564. S2CID 154685098. Jun, Mai (21 March 2018). "China unveils bold overhaul to tighten Communist Party control". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Keck, Zachary (7 January 2014). "Is Li Keqiang Being Marginalized?". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Sridahan, Vasudevan (27 December 2015). "China formally abolishes decades-old one-child policy". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Wee, Sui-Lee (31 May 2021). "China Says It Will Allow Couples to Have 3 Children, Up From 2". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Cheng, Evelyn (21 July 2021). "China scraps fines, will let families have as many children as they'd like". CNBC. Archived from the original on 28 January 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Li Keqiang: China's marginalised premier". BBC News. 28 September 2020. Archived from the original on 17 October 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. Wei, Lingling (11 May 2022). "China's Forgotten Premier Steps Out of Xi's Shadow as Economic Fixer". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2022. Attrill, Nathan; Fritz, Audrey (24 November 2021). "China's cyber vision: How the Cyberspace Administration of China is building a new consensus on global internet governance" (PDF). Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Chen, Laurie; Tang, Ziyi (16 March 2023). "China to create powerful financial watchdog run by Communist Party". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2023. Mitchell, Tom (25 July 2016). "Xi's China: The rise of party politics". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2020. "CPC releases plan on deepening reform of Party and state institutions". People's Daily. 22 March 2018. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Buckley, Chris (21 March 2018). "China Gives Communist Party More Control Over Policy and Media". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "三台合一，发出更强"中国之声"" [Merge of Three Stations into One, Sending Out a Stronger "Voice of China"]. People's Daily. 22 March 2018. Archived from the original on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Hao, Mingsong; Ke, Xiwang (5 July 2023). "Personal Networks and Grassroots Election Participation in China: Findings from the Chinese General Social Survey". Journal of Chinese Political Science. 29 (1): 159–184. doi:10.1007/s11366-023-09861-3. ISSN 1080-6954. Wong, Chun Han; Zhai, Keith (16 March 2023). "China's Communist Party Overhaul Deepens Control Over Finance, Technology". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "China Overhauls Financial Regulatory Regime to Control Risks". Bloomberg News. 7 March 2023. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2023. Bradsher, Keith; Che, Chang (10 March 2023). "Why China Is Tightening Its Oversight of Banking and Tech". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "China passes law granting Communist Party more control over cabinet". Reuters. 11 March 2024. Retrieved 11 March 2024. "习近平出席中央全面依法治国工作会议并发表重要讲话". Chinadaily.com.cn. 18 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Zhou, Laura; Huang, Cary (24 October 2014). "Communist Party pledges greater role for constitution, rights in fourth plenum". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Doyon, Jerome; Winckler, Hugo (20 November 2014). "The Fourth Plenum, Party Officials and Local Courts". Jamestown Foundation. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Lague, David; Lim, Benjamin Kang (23 April 2019). "How China is replacing America as Asia's military titan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Bitzinger, Richard A. (2021). "China's Shift from Civil-Military Integration to Military-Civil Fusion". Asia Policy. 28 (1): 5–24. doi:10.1353/asp.2021.0001. ISSN 1559-2960. S2CID 234121234. B. Kania, Elsa; Laskai, Lorand (28 January 2021). "Myths and Realities of China's Military-Civil Fusion Strategy". Center for a New American Security. JSTOR resrep28654. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 30 August 2022. Fifield, Anna (29 September 2019). "China's Communist Party has one more reason to celebrate – a year longer in power than the U.S.S.R." The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 1 February 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Meng, Chuan (4 November 2014). 习近平军中"亮剑" 新古田会议一箭多雕 [Xi Jinping And Central Army's New "Bright Sword" Conference In Gutian Killed Many Birds With Only A Single Stone]. Duowei News (in Simplified Chinese). Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Grammaticas, Damian (14 March 2013). "President Xi Jinping: A man with a dream". BBC News. Archived from the original on 20 May 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Wong, Edward; Perlez, Jane; Buckley, Chris (2 September 2015). "China Announces Cuts of 300,000 Troops at Military Parade Showing Its Might". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 September 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Tiezzi, Shannon (2 February 2016). "It's Official: China's Military Has 5 New Theater Commands". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Kania, Elsa (18 February 2017). "China's Strategic Support Force: A Force for Innovation?". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Blanchard, Ben (14 September 2016). "China sets up new logistics force as part of military reforms". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 December 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2020. Wuthnow, Joel (16 April 2019). China's Other Army: The People's Armed Police in an Era of Reform (PDF). Washington: Institute for National Strategic Studies. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2019. "Xi Jinping named as 'commander in chief' by Chinese state media". The Guardian. 21 April 2016. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Kayleigh, Lewis (23 April 2016). "Chinese President Xi Jinping named as military's 'commander-in-chief'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Sison, Desiree (22 April 2016). "President Xi Jinping is New Commander-in-Chief of the Military". China Topix. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "China's Xi moves to take more direct command over military". Columbia Daily Tribune. 24 April 2016. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Buckley, Chris; Myers, Steven Lee (11 October 2017). "Xi Jinping Presses Military Overhaul, and Two Generals Disappear". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. He, Laura; McCarthy, Simone; Chang, Wayne (7 March 2023). "China to increase defense spending 7.2%, sets economic growth target of 'around 5%' for 2023". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2023. Miura, Kacie. "The Domestic Sources of China's Maritime Assertiveness Under Xi Jinping" (PDF). Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Lague, David; Kang Lim, Benjamin (30 April 2019). "China's vast fleet is tipping the balance in the Pacific". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2023. Sun, Degang; Zoubir, Yahia H. (4 July 2021). "Securing China's 'Latent Power': The Dragon's Anchorage in Djibouti". Journal of Contemporary China. 30 (130): 677–692. doi:10.1080/10670564.2020.1852734. ISSN 1067-0564. S2CID 229393446. Jacobs, Andrew; Perlez, Jane (25 February 2017). "U.S. Wary of Its New Neighbor in Djibouti: A Chinese Naval Base". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 May 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2023. "Xi Jinping has nurtured an ugly form of Chinese nationalism". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Meng, Angela (6 September 2014). "Xi Jinping rules out Western-style political reform for China". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Buckley, Chris (26 February 2018). "Xi Jinping Thought Explained: A New Ideology for a New Era". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Barrass, Gordon; Inkster, Nigel (2 January 2018). "Xi Jinping: The Strategist Behind the Dream". Survival. 60 (1): 41–68. doi:10.1080/00396338.2018.1427363. ISSN 0039-6338. S2CID 158856300. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Zhao, Suisheng (2023). The Dragon Roars Back: Transformational Leaders and Dynamics of Chinese Foreign Policy. Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. p. 86. doi:10.1515/9781503634152. ISBN 978-1-5036-3088-8. OCLC 1331741429. "Xi's Vow of World Dominance by 2049 Sends Chill Through Markets". Bloomberg News. 26 October 2022. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Hu, Weixing (2 January 2019). "Xi Jinping's 'Major Country Diplomacy': The Role of Leadership in Foreign Policy Transformation". Journal of Contemporary China. 28 (115): 1–14. doi:10.1080/10670564.2018.1497904. ISSN 1067-0564. S2CID 158345991. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Auto, Hermes (5 April 2021). "China's 'wolf warrior' diplomats back to howl at Xinjiang critics". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Bishop, Bill (8 March 2019). "Xi's thought on diplomacy is "epoch-making"". Axios. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Buckley, Chris (3 March 2021). "'The East Is Rising': Xi Maps Out China's Post-Covid Ascent". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Zhang, Denghua (May 2018). "The Concept of 'Community of Common Destiny' in China's Diplomacy: Meaning, Motives and Implications". Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies. 5 (2): 196–207. doi:10.1002/app5.231. hdl:1885/255057. Tobin, Liza (2018). "Xi's Vision for Transforming Global Governance: A Strategic Challenge for Washington and Its Allies (November 2018)". Texas National Security Review. The University Of Texas At Austin, The University Of Texas At Austin. doi:10.26153/TSW/863. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Seib, Gerald F. (15 July 2022). "Putin and Xi's Bet on the Global South". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Jones, Hugo (24 November 2021). "China's Quest for Greater 'Discourse Power'". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. "Telling China's Story Well". China Media Project. 16 April 2021. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Kynge, James; Hornby, Lucy; Anderlini, Jamil (26 October 2017). "Inside China's secret 'magic weapon' for worldwide influence". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "China's Global Development Initiative is not as innocent as it sounds". The Economist. 9 June 2022. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Yao, Kevin; Tian, Yew Lun (22 April 2022). "China's Xi proposes 'global security initiative', without giving details". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Cai, Jane (12 June 2023). "How China's Xi Jinping promotes mix of Marxism and traditional culture to further Communist Party and 'Chinese dream'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. Tsang, Steve; Cheung, Olivia (2024). The Political Thought of Xi Jinping. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780197689363. Yao, Kevin (20 April 2021). "China's Xi calls for fairer world order as rivalry with U.S. deepens". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 March 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2023. "Asian nations should avoid military ties with third party powers, says China's Xi". China National News. 21 May 2014. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Chik, Holly (16 September 2022). "SCO summit: China urges member states to ward off foreign-backed 'colour revolutions'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Shinn, David H.; Eisenman, Joshua (2023). China's Relations with Africa: a New Era of Strategic Engagement. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-21001-0. Hille, Kathrin; Pilling, David (11 January 2022). "China applies brakes to Africa lending". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. He, Laura (19 June 2020). "China is promising to write off some loans to Africa. It may just be a drop in the ocean". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 July 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Vohra, Anchal (1 February 2022). "Xi Jinping Has Transformed China's Middle East Policy". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022. "India says China agrees retreat to de facto border in faceoff deal". Reuters. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 29 August 2022. "China says India violates 1890 agreement in border stand-off". Reuters. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Hernández, Javier C. (28 August 2017). "China and India Agree to Ease Tensions in Border Dispute". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Janjua, Haroon (10 May 2020). "Chinese and Indian troops injured in border brawl". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 12 May 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2020. "Indian and Chinese soldiers injured in cross-border fistfight, says Delhi". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 11 May 2020. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 12 May 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2020. Siddiqui, Imran Ahmed (16 June 2023). "'Subjugation and surrender': Military veterans slam Modi government's continuing silence on Galwan". Telegraph India. Myers, Steven Lee; Abi-Habib, Maria; Gettleman, Jeffrey (17 June 2020). "In China-India Clash, Two Nationalist Leaders With Little Room to Give". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Osawa, Jun (17 December 2013). "China's ADIZ over the East China Sea: A "Great Wall in the Sky"?". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Albert, Eleanor (16 March 2019). "China and Japan's Rapprochement Continues – For Now". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Kelly, Tim (28 February 2021). "China's Xi will not make a state visit to Japan this year -Sankei". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Li, Cheng (26 September 2014). "A New Type of Major Power Relationship?". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Shi, Jiangtao; Chan, Minnie; Zheng, Sarah (27 March 2018). "Kim's visit evidence China, North Korea remain allies, analysts say". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 25 July 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. Song, Jung-a; Shepherd, Christian (21 June 2019). "Xi Jinping vows active role in Korea denuclearisation talks". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Bodeen, Christopher (20 April 2021). "China's Xi pushes economic reform at North Korea summit". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Kim, Bo-eun (26 July 2022). "China, South Korea renew service sector talks, opening up a 'win-win for both economies'". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Huang, Cary (2 April 2017). "Why China's economic jabs at South Korea are self-defeating". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Kim, Christine; Blanchard, Ben (31 October 2017). "China, South Korea agree to mend ties after THAAD standoff". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Baker, Peter (8 November 2014). "As Russia Draws Closer to China, U.S. Faces a New Challenge". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Chao Deng; Ann M. Simmons; Evan Gershkovich; William Mauldin (4 February 2022). "Putin, Xi Aim Russia-China Partnership Against U.S." The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 24 February 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2022. Buckley, Chris; Myers, Steven Lee (7 March 2022). "'No Wavering': After Turning to Putin, Xi Faces Hard Wartime Choices for China". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2022. Ng, Teddy (2 April 2022). "Chinese President Xi Jinping warns it could take decades to repair economic damage caused by Ukraine crisis". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Lau, Stuart (15 June 2022). "China's Xi gives most direct backing to Putin since invasion". Politico. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "China's Xi Says International Disputes Should be Resolved Via Dialogue, Not Sanctions". Voice of America. 21 April 2022. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "China's Xi: Beijing supports peace talks between Russia, Ukraine". Al Jazeera. 9 March 2022. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Putin to Xi: We will discuss your plan to end the war in Ukraine". BBC News. 22 March 2023. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "Journal of Current Chinese Affairs" (PDF). giga-hamburg.de. May 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2010. "China building runway in disputed South China Sea island". BBC News. 17 April 2015. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Miller, Matthew (7 September 2019). "China's Xi tones down foreign policy rhetoric". CNBC. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2014. Perlez, Jane; Ramzy, Austin (4 November 2015). "China, Taiwan and a Meeting After 66 Years". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "One-minute handshake marks historic meeting between Xi Jinping and Ma Ying-jeou". The Straits Times. 7 November 2015. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2019. Huang, Kristin (15 June 2021). "Timeline: Taiwan's relations with mainland China under Tsai Ing-wen". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Bush, Richard C. (19 October 2017). "What Xi Jinping said about Taiwan at the 19th Party Congress". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2018. Kuo, Lily (2 January 2019). "'All necessary means': Xi Jinping reserves right to use force against Taiwan". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Griffiths, James (2 January 2019). "Xi warns Taiwan independence is 'a dead end'". CNN. Archived from the original on 3 October 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Lee, Yimou (2 January 2019). "Taiwan president defiant after China calls for reunification". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Hiroyuki, Akita (22 July 2014). "A new kind of 'great power relationship'? No thanks, Obama subtly tells China". Nikkei Asia. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 11 November 2014. Zhou, Cissy (19 July 2021). "US-China economic talks 'infinitely far away' with 'emphasis on competition over cooperation'". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Ng, Teddy; Kwong, Man-ki (9 July 2014). "President Xi Jinping warns of disaster if Sino-US relations sour". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Blanchard, Ben (3 July 2014). "With one eye on Washington, China plots its own Asia 'pivot'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 October 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Brown, Adrian (12 May 2019). "China-US trade war: Sino-American ties being torn down brick by brick". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2019. Swanson, Ana (5 July 2018). "Trump's Trade War With China Is Officially Underway". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "Relations between China and America are infected with coronavirus". The Economist. 26 March 2020. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Xi meets U.S. California governor". Xinhuanet. 25 October 2023. "The path ahead for China's Belt and Road Initiative". The Economist. 6 September 2023. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 7 September 2023. Jiao, Wu (8 September 2013). "Xi proposes a 'new Silk Road' with Central Asia". China Daily. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "Xi Jinping Says China's Belt and Road Initiative Is Not Saddling Poor Countries With Debt". Time. 26 April 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2020. ""Belt and Road" incorporated into CPC Constitution". Xinhua News Agency. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Tan, Huileng (31 October 2017). "China wrote Belt and Road Initiative into the party constitution. That makes it riskier than ever". CNBC. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Wei, Lingling (26 September 2022). "China Reins In Its Belt and Road Program, $1 Trillion Later". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "Only connect". The Economist. 4 October 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 4 January 2023. Wong, Sue-Lin (16 January 2016). "China launches new AIIB development bank as power balance shifts". Reuters. Retrieved 4 January 2023. "To show that it can follow global rules, China built its own multilateral institution". The Economist. 10 October 2022. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 4 January 2023. "Australia and China seal major free trade deal". BBC News. 17 November 2014. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Bradsher, Keith; Swanson, Ana (15 November 2020). "China-Led Trade Pact Is Signed, in Challenge to U.S." The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 14 March 2023. CK, Tan (5 November 2021). "Xi says open to discussion on state-owned companies in CPTPP talks". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Garlick, Jeremy (2024). Advantage China: Agent of Change in an Era of Global Disruption. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-350-25231-8. "Xi Sees Threats to China's Security Everywhere Heading Into 2021". Bloomberg News. 30 December 2020. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Shinn, David H.; Eisenman, Joshua (2023). China's Relations with Africa: a New Era of Strategic Engagement. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-21001-0. Buckley, Chris; Myers, Steven Lee (6 August 2022). "In Turbulent Times, Xi Builds a Security Fortress for China, and Himself". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "China passes counter-espionage law". Reuters. 1 November 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Wong, Chun Han (1 July 2015). "China Adopts Sweeping National-Security Law". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Blanchard, Ben (28 December 2015). "China passes controversial counter-terrorism law". Reuters. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Wagner, Jack (1 June 2017). "China's Cybersecurity Law: What You Need to Know". The Diplomat. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Wong, Edward (28 April 2015). "Clampdown in China Restricts 7,000 Foreign Organizations". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "China passes tough new intelligence law". Reuters. 27 June 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Haldane, Matt (1 September 2021). "What China's new data laws are and their impact on Big Tech". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Mozur, Paul; Xiao, Muyi; Liu, John (26 June 2022). "'An Invisible Cage': How China Is Policing the Future". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Bland, Ben (2 September 2018). "Greater Bay Area: Xi Jinping's other grand plan". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Yu, Verna (5 November 2019). "China signals desire to bring Hong Kong under tighter control". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Buckley, Chris; Wang, Vivian; Ramzy, Austin (28 June 2021). "Crossing the Red Line: Behind China's Takeover of Hong Kong". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Buckley, Chris; Forsythe, Michael (31 August 2014). "China Restricts Voting Reforms for Hong Kong". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Chan, Wilfred (19 June 2015). "Hong Kong legislators reject China-backed reform bill". CNN. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Cheng, Kris (7 February 2017). "Carrie Lam is the only leadership contender Beijing supports, state leader Zhang Dejiang reportedly says". Hong Kong Free Press. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Sin, Noah; Kwok, Donny (16 December 2019). "China's Xi vows support for Hong Kong leader during 'most difficult' time". Reuters. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Zhou, Laura (14 November 2019). "Xi Jinping again backs Hong Kong police use of force in stopping unrest". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 11 January 2020. "China's Xi warns of 'foreign forces' at Macao anniversary". Deutsche Welle. 20 December 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Siu, Phila; Cheung, Gary (19 December 2019). "Xi Jinping seen as indirectly lecturing Hong Kong as he tells Macau residents to make 'positive voices' heard and resolve problems with rationality". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Yip, Martin; Fraser, Simon (30 June 2022). "China's President Xi arrives in Hong Kong for handover anniversary". BBC News. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Ioanes, Ellen (2 July 2022). "Xi Jinping asserts his power on Hong Kong's handover anniversary". Vox. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Chan, Ho-him; Riordan, Primrose (8 May 2022). "Beijing-backed hardliner John Lee chosen as Hong Kong's next leader". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "China: Events of 2017". World Report 2018: Rights Trends in China. Human Rights Watch. 9 January 2018. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Withnall, Adam (17 January 2019). "Repression in China at worst level since Tiananmen Square, HRW warns". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "China widens crackdown against grassroot activists". Financial Times. 9 May 2019. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2020. Sudworth, John (22 May 2017). "Wang Quanzhang: The lawyer who simply vanished". BBC News. Retrieved 11 January 2020. "Chinese dream turns sour for activists under Xi Jinping". Bangkok Post. 10 July 2014. Retrieved 17 July 2014. Gan, Nectar (14 November 2017). "Replace pictures of Jesus with Xi to escape poverty, Chinese villagers urged". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Denyer, Simon (14 November 2017). "Jesus won't save you – President Xi Jinping will, Chinese Christians told". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Haas, Benjamin (28 September 2018). "'We are scared, but we have Jesus': China and its war on Christianity". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Bodeen, Christopher (10 September 2018). "Group: Officials destroying crosses, burning bibles in China". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Lau, Mimi (5 December 2019). "From Xinjiang to Ningxia, China's ethnic groups face end to affirmative action in education, taxes, policing". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Zhai, Keith (8 October 2021). "China's Communist Party Formally Embraces Assimilationist Approach to Ethnic Minorities". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 14 March 2023. Linda, Lew (19 December 2020). "China puts Han official in charge of ethnic minority affairs as Beijing steps up push for integration". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 9 October 2021. Aaron, Glasserman (2 March 2023). "China's Head of Ethnic Affairs Is Keen to End Minority Culture". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Xi Focus: Xi stresses high-quality development of Party's work on ethnic affairs". Xinhua News Agency. 28 August 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Khatchadourian, Raffi (5 April 2021). "Surviving the Crackdown in Xinjiang". The New Yorker. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Shepherd, Christian (12 September 2019). "Fear and oppression in Xinjiang: China's war on Uighur culture". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2020. Ramzy, Austin; Buckley, Chris (16 November 2019). "'Absolutely No Mercy': Leaked Files Expose How China Organized Mass Detentions of Muslims". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 December 2019. "President Xi Jinping makes inspection tour in Xinjiang". Ministry of Agriculture of the People's Republic of China (from Xinhua News Agency). 4 May 2014. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2020. Xi made an inspection tour in Xinjiang from April 27 to 30. "China cuts Uighur births with IUDs, abortion, sterilization". Associated Press. 28 June 2020. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2020. "More than 20 ambassadors condemn China's treatment of Uighurs in Xinjiang". The Guardian. 11 July 2019. Archived from the original on 11 July 2019. Retrieved 11 July 2019. "China's Xi responsible for Uyghur 'genocide', unofficial tribunal says". Reuters. 10 December 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "U.N. says China may have committed crimes against humanity in Xinjiang". Reuters. 1 September 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. Tugendhat, Tom (19 January 2020). "Huawei's human rights record needs scrutiny before Britain signs 5G contracts". Hong Kong Free Press. Retrieved 19 January 2020. "Even in secret, China's leaders speak in code". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Chin, Josh (30 November 2021). "Leaked Documents Detail Xi Jinping's Extensive Role in Xinjiang Crackdown". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Zenz, Adrian (24 May 2022). "Public Security Minister's Speech Describes Xi Jinping's Direction of Mass Detentions in Xinjiang". ChinaFile. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Momen Langka! Presiden China Xi Jinping Kunjungi Kampung Muslim Uighur, Kompas TV, 19 July 2022 – via Youtube, Selama 4 hari, Xi Jinping mengunjungi sejumlah situs di Xinjiang termasuk perkebunan kapas, zona perdagangan dan museum. Penduduk Uighur pun menyambut Presiden Xi Jinping. Dalam kunjungannya, Xi mendesak agar pejabat Xinjiang selalu mendengarkan suara rakyat demi memenangkan hati dan membuat rakyat bersatu. China's President Xi visits far western Xinjiang region for first time in 8 years, SCMP, 15 July 2022 – via Youtube "Xi Jinping visits Xinjiang for first time since crackdown". Deutsche Welle. 15 July 2022. ONG HAN SEAN (20 November 2023). "China's Xinjiang: A marvel of wild beauty and a land full of culture and charm". The Star. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Our visit came on the heels of Chinese President Xi Jinping's visit to Ürümqi, where he reportedly stressed on the positive promotion of the region to show an open and confident Xinjiang. Xi also called for Xinjiang to be opened more widely for tourism to encourage visits from domestic and foreign tourists. "China: How is Beijing whitewashing its Xinjiang policy?". Deutsche Welle. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2024. But amid growing global attention on Xinjiang, China has been eager to portray the region as a "success story" by welcoming more tourists. In a speech that he made while visiting the region last month, Xi said Xinjiang was "no longer a remote area" and should open up more to domestic and foreign tourism. Griffiths, James (17 February 2020). "Did Xi Jinping know about the coronavirus outbreak earlier than first suggested?". CNN. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Page, Jeremy (27 January 2020). "China's Xi Gives His No. 2 a Rare Chance to Shine in Coronavirus Fight, With Risks for Both". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Griffiths, James (24 January 2020). "Wuhan is the latest crisis to face China's Xi, and it's exposing major flaws in his model of control". CNN. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Steger, Isabella (10 February 2020). "Xi Jinping emerges to meet the people for the first time in China's coronavirus outbreak". Quartz. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "WHO dementiert Telefongespräch mit Chinas Präsident". Der Spiegel (in German). 10 May 2020. Yew, Lun Tian; Se, Young Lee (10 March 2022). "Xi visits Wuhan, signaling tide turning in China's coronavirus battle". Reuters. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Cao, Desheng. "Xi: Dynamic zero-COVID policy works". China Daily. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Wong, Chun Han (25 July 2022). "China's Zero-Covid Policy Drags on Vaccination Drive". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Davidson, Helen (10 June 2022). "Xi Jinping says 'persistence is victory' as Covid restrictions return to Shanghai and Beijing". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Hadano, Tsukasa; Doi, Noriyuki (29 June 2022). "Xi ally Li Qiang keeps Shanghai party chief job, but star fades". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Cai, Jane; Tang, Frank (29 June 2022). "China to press on with 'zero Covid', despite economic risks: Xi". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Covid in China: Xi Jinping and other leaders given domestic vaccine". BBC News. 23 July 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. McDonell, Stephen (16 October 2022). "Xi Jinping speech: Zero-Covid and zero solutions". BBC News. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Xi Jinping tied himself to zero-Covid. Now he keeps silent as it falls apart". CNN. 17 December 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. Ramzy, Austin (11 November 2022). "China Eases Zero-Covid Rules as Economic Toll and Frustrations Mount". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Che, Chang; Buckley, Chris; Chien, Amy Chang; Dong, Joy (5 December 2022). "China Stems Wave of Protest, but Ripples of Resistance Remain". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Olcott, Eleanor; Mitchell, Tom (4 December 2022). "Chinese cities ease Covid restrictions following nationwide protests". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2022. Che, Chang; Chien, Amy Chang; Stevenson, Alexandra (7 December 2022). "What Has Changed About China's 'Zero Covid' Policy". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 8 December 2022. Li, David Daokui (2024). China's World View: Demystifying China to Prevent Global Conflict. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0393292398. "China going carbon neutral before 2060 would lower warming projections by around 0.2 to 0.3 degrees C". Climate Action Tracker. 23 September 2020. Retrieved 27 September 2020. "China, the world's top global emitter, aims to go carbon-neutral by 2060". ABC News. 23 September 2020. Retrieved 29 September 2020. "China's top climate scientists unveil road map to 2060 goal". The Japan Times. Bloomberg News. 29 September 2020. Retrieved 29 September 2020. Brant, Robin (22 September 2021). "China pledges to stop building new coal energy plants abroad". BBC News. Retrieved 29 September 2021. Faulconbridge, Guy (15 October 2021). "China's Xi will not attend COP26 in person, UK PM Johnson told". Reuters. Retrieved 20 August 2022. Harvey, Fiona (10 November 2021). "China's top Cop26 delegate says it is taking 'real action' on climate targets". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Volcovici, Valeria; James, William; Spring, Jake (11 November 2021). "U.S. and China unveil deal to ramp up cooperation on climate change". Reuters. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "An investigation into what has shaped Xi Jinping's thinking". The Economist. 28 September 2022. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Myers, Steven Lee (5 March 2018). "Behind Public Persona, the Real Xi Jinping Is a Guarded Secret". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 August 2022. McGregor, Richard (21 August 2022). "Xi Jinping's Radical Secrecy". The Atlantic. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Blachard, Ben (17 November 2017). "Glowing profile cracks door open on private life of China's Xi". Reuters. Retrieved 9 December 2019. Forde, Brendan (9 September 2013). "China's 'Mass Line' Campaign". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. Levin, Dan (20 December 2013). "China Revives Mao-Era Self-Criticism, but This Kind Bruises Few Egos". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. Tiezzi, Shannon (27 December 2013). "The Mass Line Campaign in the 21st Century". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 23 June 2018. "Xi Jinping and the Chinese dream". The Economist. 4 May 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Moore, Malcolm (17 March 2013). "Xi Jinping calls for a Chinese dream". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 March 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2013. Fallows, James (3 May 2013). "Today's China Notes: Dreams, Obstacles". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. M., J. (6 May 2013). "The role of Thomas Friedman". The Economist. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2019. "Chasing the Chinese dream". The Economist. 4 May 2013. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 28 October 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Tao, Xie (14 March 2014). "Opinion: Is the Chinese dream fantasy or reality?". CNN. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Buckley, Chris (12 October 2014). "Leader Taps into Chinese Classics in Seeking to Cement Power". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Schneider, David K. (2016). "China's New Legalism". The National Interest (143): 19–25. JSTOR 26557304. Crane, Sam (29 June 2018). "Why Xi Jinping's China is Legalist, Not Confucian". China Channel. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Mitchell, Ryan Mi (16 January 2015). "Is 'China's Machiavelli' Now Its Most Important Political Philosopher?". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Johnson, Ian (18 October 2017). "Forget Marx and Mao. Chinese City Honors Once-Banned Confucian". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "The Communist Party is redefining what it means to be Chinese". The Economist. 17 August 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Zi, Yang (6 July 2016). "Xi Jinping and China's Traditionalist Restoration". The Jamestown Foundation. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Buckley, Chris (30 November 2018). "China's 'Hanfu' movement is making it hip to be old-fashioned. Here's why". The Australian Financial Review. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Sorace, Christian (2019). "Aesthetics". Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi. Acton, Australia: Australian National University Press. ISBN 9781760462499. Joyce Cheng; Bang Xiao (31 July 2022). "Globally acclaimed author Yan Geling considering giving up writing in native Chinese over censorship". ABC. Tian, Yew Lun (9 September 2021). "Analysis: Unleashing reforms, Xi returns to China's socialist roots". Reuters. Retrieved 17 September 2022. "Socialism with Chinese characteristics only correct path toward national rejuvenation: Xi". China Daily. 9 October 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2022. McDonell, Stephen (22 September 2021). "Changing China: Xi Jinping's effort to return to socialism". BBC News. Retrieved 17 September 2022. Rudd, Kevin (10 October 2022). "The World According to Xi Jinping". Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 12 October 2022. Hancock, Tom (6 June 2022). "Marxism Makes a Comeback in China's Crackdown on 'Disorderly Capital'". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 17 September 2022. Zheng, William (16 September 2022). "Xi article gives insight into China's direction ahead of party congress". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 17 September 2022. Gan, Nectar (25 October 2017). "The Communist Party's tighter grip on China in 16 characters". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Full text of Xi Jinping's speech on the CCP's 100th anniversary". Nikkei Asia. 1 July 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Wong 2023, p. 181. "China is struggling to keep control over its version of the past". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Xi says multi-party system didn't work for China". Reuters. 2 April 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Democracy". Decoding China. 4 February 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Chen, Stella (23 November 2021). "Whole-Process Democracy". China Media Project. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Brady, Anne-Marie (2015). "China's Foreign Propaganda Machine". Journal of Democracy. 26 (4): 51–59. doi:10.1353/jod.2015.0056. ISSN 1086-3214. S2CID 146531927. Amako, Satoshi (2 January 2018). "China's authoritarian path to development: is democratization possible?, by Liang Tang, Abingdon, Routledge, 2017, 263pp., ISBN: 978-1-138-01647-7". Journal of Contemporary East Asia Studies. 7 (1): 81–83. doi:10.1080/24761028.2018.1483700. ISSN 2476-1028. Tung, Hans H. (2019). Economic Growth and Endogenous Authoritarian Institutions in Post-Reform China. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-3-030-04828-0. Howell, Jude; Pringle, Tim (2019). "Shades of Authoritarianism and State–Labour Relations in China" (PDF). British Journal of Industrial Relations. 57 (2): 223–246. doi:10.1111/bjir.12436. ISSN 1467-8543. S2CID 158485609. Düben, Björn Alexander (3 March 2020). "Xi Jinping and the End of Chinese Exceptionalism". Problems of Post-Communism. 67 (2): 111–128. doi:10.1080/10758216.2018.1535274. ISSN 1075-8216. S2CID 158657283. Tung, Hans H. (2019). Economic Growth and Endogenous Authoritarian Institutions in Post-Reform China. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-3-030-04828-0. "Germany's Baerbock calls China's Xi Jinping a dictator". POLITICO. 16 September 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2023. Phillips, Tom (26 February 2018). "'Dictator for life': Xi Jinping's power grab condemned as step towards tyranny". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 August 2019. Gueorguiev, Dimitar (4 December 2019). "Is China a dictatorship?". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 July 2021. Yes, Xi Jinping is a dictator. "Xi Rejects Westernization in Show of Faith in Self Reliance". Bloomberg News. 8 February 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Xi, Jinping (16 October 2022). "Hold High the Great Banner of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics and Strive in Unity to Build a Modern Socialist Country in All Respects". Qiushi. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Liu, Xiaodong; Chen, Yu (18 September 2017). 中共中央政治局召开会议 研究拟提请党的十八届七中全会讨论的文件-新华网 [The Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee Convened to Study the Documents to be Submitted to the Seventh Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee] (in Simplified Chinese). Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017. Rudolph, Josh (19 September 2017). "CCP Constitution Amendment May Signal Xi's Power – China Digital Times (CDT)". China Digital Times (CDT). Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017. Zhang, Ling (18 October 2017). "CPC creates Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2017. Ken, Suzuki (27 November 2018). "China's New "Xi Jinping Constitution": The Road to Totalitarianism". nippon.com. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Yang, Yi (7 November 2017). "Second volume of Xi's book on governance published". Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 6 December 2017. Huang, Zheping (14 February 2019). "China's most popular app is a propaganda tool teaching Xi Jinping Thought". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 20 September 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Sun, Yu (29 August 2021). "Lessons on Xi Jinping's political philosophy alarm Chinese parents". Irish Times. Retrieved 7 September 2021. A campaign to make Chinese children as young as 10 study President Xi Jinping's political philosophy has been labelled by some parents as 'disgusting', and evoked memories of Mao Zedong's personality cult. Yuan, Elizabeth (8 November 2012). "Xi Jinping: From 'sent-down youth' to China's top". CNN. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2012. Magnier, Mark (23 October 2007). "China's 'fifth generation' of leaders reflects nation's shifts". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 21 December 2009. Page, Jeremy (12 February 2012). "Meet China's Folk Star First Lady-in-Waiting". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 7 November 2012. Beech, Hannah (21 March 2014). "Michelle Obama Tours Beijing With China's First Lady". Time. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 17 July 2014. Osnos, Evan (6 April 2015). "What Did China's First Daughter Find in America?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. Qiao, Long (20 February 2015). "Beijing Police Detain Hundreds For Trying to Visit Chinese Leaders Over New Year". Radio Free Asia. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Bennett, Amanda; Hirschberg, Peter (29 June 2012). "Xi Jinping Millionaire Relations Reveal Fortunes of Elite". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Branigan, Tania (29 June 2012). "China blocks Bloomberg for exposing financial affairs of Xi Jinping's family". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 November 2013. Retrieved 11 September 2012. Forsythe, Michael (17 June 2012). "As China's Leader Fights Graft, His Relatives Shed Assets". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. Rauhala, Emily (4 April 2016). "The Panama Papers are super awkward for Beijing". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 21 April 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Schmitz, Rob (4 April 2016). "Xi Jinping's family linked to Panama Papers". Marketplace. Archived from the original on 7 April 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2016. "China's Leaders". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 August 2013. Retrieved 26 August 2013. Sun, Lena H. (8 June 1992). "Post for a 'princeling'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 12 June 2023. Richburg, Keith B. (15 August 2011). "Xi Jinping, likely China's next leader, called pragmatic, low-key". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 29 October 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Xi shows off his football skill". China Daily. 10 October 2023. "What saddens President Xi Jinping?". China Daily. 11 October 2014. Andrew McNicol; Andrew Raine (7 April 2023). "Xi Jinping wanted China to be a global soccer power. What went wrong?". CNN. Tariq Panja (29 March 2023). "China's Soccer Experiment Was a Flop. Now It May Be Over". The New York Times. "Xi says 'not so sure' of Chinese football team's abilities". Channel NewsAsia. 19 November 2023. Lin, Liza (13 October 2022). "Do Chinese People Like Xi Jinping? You Won't Find an Easy Answer Online". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 17 October 2022. Phillips, Tom (14 October 2017). "Chairman Xi crushes dissent but poor believe he's making China great". The Guardian. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. Zhou, Christina; Mantesso, Sean (6 March 2019). "'No room for mercy in this system': Xi Jinping's rise from cave dweller to post-modern chairman". ABC News (Australia). Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. Tiezzi, Shannon (20 December 2014). "The World's Most Popular Leader: China's President Xi". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 27 October 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Smith, Matthew (18 July 2019). "Michelle Obama is the world's most admired woman". YouGov. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Silver, Laura; Devlin, Kat; Huang, Christine (5 December 2019). "China's Economic Growth Mostly Welcomed in Emerging Markets, but Neighbors Wary of Its Influence". Pew Research Center. Retrieved 4 August 2020. "National Tracking Poll #2103129". Morning Consult and Politico. 19–22 March 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2022. "Xi Jinping has more clout than Donald Trump. The world should be wary". The Economist. 14 October 2017. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Ewalt, David M. (31 May 2018). "The World's Most Powerful People 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 May 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Xi Jinping". Reporters Without Borders. 17 November 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2021. Buckley, Chris (8 February 2012). "China leader-in-waiting carries heavy political baggage to U.S." Reuters. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Buckley, Chris (15 November 2013). "Xi, in 'Godfather' Mold, Looks Assertive and Even Imperial". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 August 2022. "Xi Jinping shows his love of Game of Thrones but warns reality must not mirror fantasy". South China Morning Post. 28 April 2019. Archived from the original on 5 May 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2019. Branigan, Tania (13 February 2012). "The Guardian profile: Xi Jinping". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 6 November 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Xi Jinping Meets with International Olympic Committee President Thomas Bach and Receives the Olympic Order in Gold". Consulate-General of the People's Republic of China in San Francisco. 23 November 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "China's Xi receives royal welcome in Belgium before EU talks". EUbusiness. "Xi Jinping Receives the Order of the Liberator from Venezuela". fmprc.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2020. "Xi Jinping Receives Order of José Marti of Cuba". fmprc.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2020. "Pakistan confers Nishan-e-Pakistan on Chinese president Xi Jinping". Hindustan Times. 21 April 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2020. "Xi Jinping Holds Talks with King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia Two Heads of State Jointly Announce Establishment of China-Saudi Arabia Comprehensive Strategic Partnership". fmprc.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 25 June 2020. "Chinese president receives Order of Republic of Serbia". B92. 18 June 2016. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Lukashenko awards Order for Strengthening Peace and Friendship to Xi Jinping". Belarusian Telegraph Agency. 9 September 2016. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Xi Jinping Delivers Important Speech at Peruvian Congress". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Luz Salgado welcomed Xi Jinping's visit to the Congress and conferred Xi Jinping the Grand-Cross Medal of Honor, the highest level of honor of the Peruvian Congress. "Presenting the Order of St Andrew the Apostle to President of China Xi Jinping". The Kremlin. 4 July 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "PM Modi conferred 'Grand Collar of the State of Palestine". The Times of India. 10 February 2018. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Dennehy, John (20 July 2018). "China visit: UAE leadership strikes strategic deals with Xi Jinping". The National. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Wang Yi Talks About President Xi Jinping's Asian and African Visits: Good Friends Feel Close to Each Other Even When They are Thousands of Miles Away". mfa.gov.cn. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "El Gobierno condecoró a Xi Jinping con la Orden del Libertador San Martín". infobae. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Xi Jinping Attends a Ceremony and Receives the Manas Order of the First Degree Awarded by President Sooronbay Jeenbekov of Kyrgyzstan". Foreign Ministry of the People's Republic of China. 13 June 2019. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Sooronbay Jeenbekov awarded Xi Jinping the Manas Order of the First Degree. The Manas Order is the highest national prize of Kyrgyzstan awarded by Kyrgyz President and has three degrees, of which the first degree is the highest one. Си Цзиньпин награждён высшим орденом Таджикистана [Xi Jinping awarded the highest order of Tajikistan]. NEWSru (in Russian). 15 June 2019. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2019. Виктор Николаев (14 September 2022). ""I value this order very much": how the award ceremony for Xi Jinping was held" "Я очень дорожу этим орденом": как прошла церемония награждения Си Цзиньпина. Nur.kz [ru]. Archived from the original on 29 October 2022. "Si Szinpin "Oliy Darajali Do'stlik" ordeni bilan mukofotlandi". Xabar.uz [uz]. 15 September 2022. Archived from the original on 7 March 2024. Khoza, Amanda (22 August 2023). "Ramaphosa honours Chinese President Xi Jinping with Order of SA for his 'principled commitment'". TimesLIVE. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "A Familiar Face Back in Iowa: China's Vice President". NPR. 14 February 2012. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. Dailey, Kate (15 February 2012). "The early adventures of Xi Jinping". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 7 September 2019. "Xi Jinping recibe las llaves de la ciudad de San José – Vídeo Dailymotion". Dailymotion (in European Spanish). 10 February 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2021. "Mancera entrega llaves de la ciudad a Xi Jinping". El Informador (in European Spanish). Retrieved 4 May 2021. "Xi Jinping Recibió Llaves de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires". co.china-embassy.org. Retrieved 4 May 2021. "President Xi Jinping presented with 'key to Prague,' continuing the 'freedom of the city' tradition". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Xi Jinping recibe la llave de Madrid, ciudad que considera "inolvidable"". efe.com (in Spanish). Retrieved 4 May 2021. Wu, Jiao; Yunbi, Zhang (8 September 2013). "Xi proposes a 'new Silk Road' with Central Asia". China Daily. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "UJ acknowledges Chinese President Xi Jinping's role in advancing the Fourth Industrial Revolution with honorary doctoral degree". University of Johannesburg. 11 April 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "China's Xi awarded Dr. h.c. degree of St. Petersburg State University". TASS. 7 June 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Crown Prince, Chinese President hold official talks in Riyadh". Saudi Gazette. 8 December 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2024. After the exchange of the agreements and MoUs, a ceremony was held to award the Chinese President an honorary doctorate at King Saud University as a tribute to the President's achievements and his great efforts in management and leadership. "Xi receives honorary doctorate from King Saud University". China Daily. 9 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. Bouée, Charles-Edouard (2010). China's Management Revolution: Spirit, Land, Energy. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-28545-3. Simon, Denis Fred; Cong, Cao (2009). China's Emerging Technological Edge: Assessing the Role of High-End Talent. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-88513-3. Lam, Willy (2015). Chinese Politics in the Era of Xi Jinping: Renaissance, Reform, or Retrogression?. Routledge. ISBN 978-0765642097. Heilmann, Sebastian (2017). China's Political System. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1442277342. Bougon, François (2018). Inside the Mind of Xi Jinping. C. Hurst & Co. ISBN 9781849049849. Goodman, David S. G. (2015). Handbook of the Politics of China. Edward Elga. ISBN 9781782544371. Economy, Elizabeth C. (2018). The Third Revolution: Xi Jinping and the New Chinese State. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780190866075. Pieke, Frank N.; Hofman, Bert, eds. (2022). CPC Futures: The New Era of Socialism with Chinese Characteristics. Singapore: National University of Singapore Press. doi:10.56159/eai.52060. ISBN 9789811852060. OCLC 1354535847. Wong, Chun Han (2023). Party of One: The Rise of Xi Jinping and China's Superpower Future. Simon & Schuster. p. 48. ISBN 9781982185732. Bulman, David J.; A. Jaros, Kyle (2021). "Localism in retreat? Central-provincial relations in the Xi Jinping era". Journal of Contemporary China. 30 (131): 697–716. doi:10.1080/10670564.2021.1889228. S2CID 233928573. Denton, Kirk (2014). "China Dreams and the 'Road to Revival". Current Events in Historical Perspective. 8 (3): –1–12. Economy, Elizabeth C. (2018). "China's New Revolution: The Reign of Xi Jinping" (PDF). Foreign Affairs. 97: 60. Foot, Rosemary; King, Amy (2019). "Assessing the deterioration in China–US relations: US governmental perspectives on the economic-security nexus". China International Strategy Review. 1: 1–12. doi:10.1007/s42533-019-00005-y. S2CID 195241090. Cabestan, Jean-Pierre (2020). "China's foreign and security policy institutions and decision-making under Xi Jinping". British Journal of Politics and International Relations: 1369148120974881. Dhar, Bablu Kumar; Mahazan, Mutalib (2020). "Leadership of Xi Jinping behind Unstoppable Sustainable Economic Growth of China" (PDF). International Journal of Organizational Leadership. 9: 39–47. Goldstein, Avery (2020). "China's Grand Strategy under Xi Jinping: Reassurance, Reform, and Resistance" (PDF). International Security. 45 (1): 164–201. doi:10.1162/isec_a_00383. S2CID 220633947. Johnson, Ian (29 September 2012). "Changing of the Guard: Elite and Deft, Xi Aimed High Early in China". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 September 2012. McGregor, Richard (2019). Xi Jinping: The Backlash. Penguin Books Australia. ISBN 978-1760893040. includes McGregor, Richard. "Xi Jinping's Quest to Dominate China." Foreign Affairs 98 (Sept 2019): 18+. Magnus, George. Red Flags: Why Xi's China is in Danger (Yale UP, 2018). Li, Cheng (2016). Chinese Politics in the Xi Jinping Era: Reassessing Collective Leadership. Brookings Institution Press. ISBN 978-0-8157-2694-4. Mulvad, Andreas Møller (2019). "Xiism as a hegemonic project in the making: Sino-communist ideology and the political economy of China's rise". Review of International Studies. 45 (3): 449–470. doi:10.1017/S0260210518000530. S2CID 150473371. Osnos, Evan (14 February 2012). "China's Valentine's Day in Washington". The New Yorker. Review of comment accompanying Xi's visit. Osnos, Evan (30 March 2015). "Born Red: How Xi Jinping, an unremarkable provincial administrator, became China's most authoritarian leader since Mao". The New Yorker. Describes Xi Jinping's life. Osnos, Evan, "China's Age of Malaise: Facing a grim economy, disillusioned youth, and fleeing entrepreneurs, Xi Jinping turns to the past," The New Yorker, 30 October 2023, pp. 34–45. "Xi [...] has abandoned Deng [Xiaoping]'s 'courageous experiments' and ushered [China] into a straitened new age." (p. 34.) "Year by year, Xi appears more at home in the world of the man he calls his 'best and closest friend,' Vladimir Putin." (p. 36.) "Can Xi's China still manage the pairing of autocracy and capitalism?" (p. 37.) "At his core, a longtime observer told me, Xi is 'Mao with money.'" (p. 38.) "Xi [has] got[ten] rid of anyone with power, [an] entrepreneur said: 'If you have influence, you have power. If you have capital, you have power.'" (p. 40.) Smith, Stephen N. (2021). "Harmonizing the periphery: China's neighborhood strategy under Xi Jinping". Pacific Review. 34 (1): 56–84. doi:10.1080/09512748.2019.1651383. S2CID 202329851. Vogel, Ezra (2021). "The Leadership of Xi Jinping: A Dengist Perspective". Journal of Contemporary China. 30 (131): 693–696. doi:10.1080/10670564.2021.1884955. Zhang, Feng (2019). "The Xi Jinping Doctrine of China's International Relations". Asia Policy. 14 (3). Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. Xi Jinping at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Library resources about Xi Jinping Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Biography at Chinavitae.com Appearances on C-SPAN Xi Jinping collected news and commentary at the China Digital Times Xi Jinping collected news and commentary at The Guardian Xi Jinping collected news and commentary at The New York Times Xi Jinping 2012 profile on BBC Radio Four Portals:  Biography  China  Politics