Look up ai or AI in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. AI is artificial intelligence, intellectual ability in machines and software. Ai, AI or A.I. may also refer to: Ai (chimpanzee), an individual experimental subject in Japan Ai (sloth) or the pale-throated sloth, a northern Amazonian mammal species Ai (album), a 2004 release by Seraphim A.I. Artificial Intelligence, a 2001 American film A.I. Rising, a 2018 Serbian film AI: The Somnium Files, a 2019 video game American Idol, a televised singing contest The American Interest, a bimonthly magazine (2005–2020) I (2015 film), an Indian Tamil film (initial title: Ai) A.i. (band), a Californian rock–electroclash group All in (poker), wagering one's entire stake Appreciation Index, a British measure of broadcast programme approval Non-player character, in gaming (colloquially, an AI) Ad interim (a.i.), a phrase in job titles Appreciative inquiry, an organizational development method All-inclusive, a full service at a vacation resort including meals and drinks Adventure International, a video game publisher The Art Institutes, a chain of American art schools Air India, the flag carrier airline of India Alitalia, the former flag carrier airline of Italy Astra International, an Indonesian automotive company Accuracy International, a firearms manufacturer Alexis I. duPont High School, Delaware, U.S. Amnesty International, a human rights organisation Appraisal Institute, an association of real estate appraisers Ai (surname), a Chinese surname Ai (given name), a given name and list of people and characters with the name King Ai of Zhou (died 441 BC) Emperor Ai of Han (27–1 BC) Emperor Ai of Jin (341–365) Emperor Ai of Tang (892–908) Ai (poet) (1947–2010), American poet Ai (singer) (born 1981), Japanese-American singer and songwriter Allen Iverson (born 1975), American retired professional basketball player ("A.I.") Andre Iguodala (born 1984), American professional basketball player ("A.I. 2.0") Anguilla, a Caribbean territory (by ISO 3166-1 code) Appenzell Innerrhoden, a Swiss canton Armenia (by LOC MARC code) Ai (Canaan), Biblical city Ai, Alabama Ai, Georgia Ai, North Carolina Ai, Ohio Love River (Chinese: 愛河; pinyin: Ài Hé), a Taiwanese canal Ai River (Gifu), Japan Ai River (Dandong), China Ái, a Norse god Ai (Canaan), Biblical city Ai (Chinese: 愛; pinyin: ài), Sinic concepts of love from Confucianism and Buddhism Agios, colloquially Ai, a Greek word for 'saint' Ai Toyon, the Yakut god of light Active ingredient, part of a pesticide Artificial insemination of livestock and pets, in animal breeding Airborne Internet, a proposed air-to-air data network Airborne Interception radar, a Royal Air Force air-to-air system Air interdiction, an aerial military capability Attitude indicator, a flight instrument on aircraft .ai, a top-level domain Accommodative insufficiency of the eye Amelogenesis imperfecta of teeth Aortic insufficiency of the heart Active ingredient, part of a drug Adequate intake, a Dietary Reference Intake nutritional parameter Aromatase inhibitor, a class of breast-cancer drug Articulation Index, a method of measuring hearing loss Artificial insemination, a method of fertilisation Automated immunoassay, automated clinical analyses of blood Adobe Illustrator, a vector graphics editor .ai, Adobe Illustrator Artwork filename extension Automatic Maximum-Aperture Indexing, aperture coupling on Nikon camera lenses Artificial intelligence (disambiguation) Art Institute (disambiguation) All In (disambiguation) A1 (disambiguation) AL (disambiguation) AY (disambiguation) Aye (disambiguation) Eye (disambiguation) This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Ai. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.