The 1976 Ice Hockey World Championships were the 43rd Ice Hockey World Championships and the 54th European Championships in ice hockey. The tournament took place in Poland from 8 to 25 April, and the games were played in Katowice. Eight teams took part in the main tournament, with each team first playing each other once. The four best teams then took part in a medal play off, and the teams placed 5–8 took part in a relegation play-off. The teams took the results from the first round through to the second round with them. In response to charges of the rules regarding amateurism being unfair a change was implemented for this year. The 1976 IHWC tournament was first to feature major league professionals from the NHL and WHA, although in the end only the United States made use of the new rule, recalling eight pros from the Minnesota North Stars and Minnesota Fighting Saints. Some nations, such as the Soviet Union, had been using pros all along, while circumventing their status by listing them in the military. The Americans promptly made the medal play off for the first time since 1962 after beating Sweden and tying Finland in the first round. The Czechoslovakia national ice hockey team won nine games and were unbeaten, becoming world champions for the fourth time. The defending champions from the USSR finished 2nd after sensationally losing the opening game 4–6 to hosts Poland. Sweden won the bronze after beating the Americans 7-3 in the medal round. In the European standings Sweden moved up one position leaving the Soviets with the bronze for the first time ever. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Notes: 5 head-to-head points 5 head-to-head points 2 head-to-head points East Germany was relegated to Group B. Poland was also relegated to make room for the return of team Canada. Played in Aarau and Bienne 18–27 March. Source:[citation needed] Romania was promoted to Group A, and both Italy and Bulgaria were relegated to Group C. Played in Gdańsk 8–13 March. Source:[citation needed] Both Austria and Hungary were promoted to Group B. Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Jiří Holeček Best Defenceman: František Pospíšil Best Forward: Vladimír Martinec Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Jiří Holeček Defence: František Pospíšil, Mats Waltin Forwards: Valeri Kharlamov, Vladimír Martinec, Milan Nový The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European championships according to IIHF: Podnieks page 145 Duplacey page 506 "Soviet Amateur Athlete: A Real Pro (Published 1974)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Salming-less Sweden skips Washburn, J. N. (21 July 1974). "Soviet Amateur Athlete: A Real Pro". The New York Times. IIHF (2008). "Poland scores biggest shocker in World Championship history". IIHF.com. Retrieved 6 May 2017. Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. p. 145.