David Howell Petraeus (/pɪˈtreɪ.əs/; born November 7, 1952) is a retired United States Army general and public official. He served as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency from September 6, 2011, until his resignation on November 9, 2012. Prior to his assuming the directorship of the CIA, Petraeus served 37 years in the United States Army. His last assignments in the Army were as commander of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and commander, U.S. Forces – Afghanistan (USFOR-A) from July 4, 2010, to July 18, 2011. His other four-star assignments include serving as the 10th commander, U.S. Central Command (USCENTCOM) from October 13, 2008, to June 30, 2010, and as commanding general, Multi-National Force – Iraq (MNF-I) from February 10, 2007, to September 16, 2008. As commander of MNF-I, Petraeus oversaw all coalition forces in Iraq. Petraeus was the General George C. Marshall Award winner as the top graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College class of 1983. He later served as assistant professor of international relations at the United States Military Academy and also completed a fellowship at Georgetown University. Since 2022, he has taught courses in international relations at Yale University as a Kissinger Senior Fellow of the university's Jackson Institute for Global Affairs. Petraeus has repeatedly stated that he has no plans to run for elected political office. On June 23, 2010, President Barack Obama nominated Petraeus to succeed General Stanley McChrystal as commanding general of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, technically a step down from his position as Commander of United States Central Command, which oversees the military efforts in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Central Asia, the Arabian Peninsula, and Egypt. On June 30, 2011, Petraeus was unanimously confirmed as the Director of the CIA by the U.S. Senate 94–0. Petraeus relinquished command of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan on July 18, 2011, and retired from the U.S. Army on August 31, 2011. On November 9, 2012, he resigned from his position as director of the CIA, citing his extramarital affair with his biographer Paula Broadwell, which was reportedly discovered in the course of an FBI investigation. In January 2015, officials reported the FBI and Justice Department prosecutors had recommended bringing felony charges against Petraeus for allegedly providing classified information to Broadwell while serving as director of the CIA. Eventually, Petraeus pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor charge of mishandling classified information. He was later sentenced to two years of probation and fined $100,000 for the unauthorized removal and retention of classified material he gave to Broadwell. Petraeus was born in Cornwall-on-Hudson, New York, the son of Miriam Sweet (née Howell; 1912–1991), a librarian, and Sixtus Petraeus (1915–2008), a sea captain. His father was a Dutch merchant mariner who emigrated to the United States at the start of World War II, from Franeker, the Netherlands, and his mother was American, a resident of Brooklyn, New York. They met at the Seamen's Church Institute of New York and New Jersey and married. Sixtus Petraeus commanded a Liberty ship for the U.S. for the duration of World War II. The family moved after the war, settling in Cornwall-on-Hudson, where David Petraeus grew up and graduated from Cornwall Central High School in 1970. Petraeus went on to the United States Military Academy at West Point. Petraeus was on the intercollegiate soccer and ski teams, was a cadet captain on the brigade staff, and was a "distinguished cadet" academically, graduating in the top 5% of the Class of 1974 (ranked 40th overall). In the class yearbook, Petraeus was remembered as "always going for it in sports, academics, leadership, and even his social life." While a cadet, Petraeus started dating the daughter of Army General William A. Knowlton (the West Point superintendent at the time), Holly. Two months after Petraeus graduated, they married. Holly, who is multi-lingual, was a National Merit Scholar in high school, and graduated summa cum laude from Dickinson College. They have a daughter and son, Anne and Stephen. Petraeus administered the oath of office at his son's 2009 commissioning into the Army after his son's graduation from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His son went on to serve as an officer in Afghanistan as a member of 3rd Platoon, Alpha Company, 1st Battalion, 503rd Infantry Regiment, 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team. Petraeus's official residence in the United States is a small property in the small town of Springfield, New Hampshire, which his wife inherited from her family. Petraeus once told a friend that he was a Rockefeller Republican. Petraeus graduated from West Point in 1974, receiving a B.S. degree in Military Science. He earned the General George C. Marshall Award as the top graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College Class of 1983 at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. He subsequently earned an M.P.A. degree in 1985 and a Ph.D. in international relations in 1987 from Princeton University's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, where he was mentored by Richard H. Ullman. At that time, he also served as an assistant professor of international relations at the U.S. Military Academy from 1985 to 1987. His doctoral dissertation was titled "The American Military and the Lessons of Vietnam: A Study of Military Influence and the Use of Force in the Post-Vietnam Era". He completed a military fellowship at Georgetown University's Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service in 1994–1995, although he was called away early to serve in Haiti as the Chief of Operations for NATO there in early 1995.[citation needed] From late 2005 through February 2007, Petraeus served as commanding general of Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and the U.S. Army Combined Arms Center (CAC) located there. As commander of CAC, Petraeus was responsible for oversight of the Command and General Staff College and seventeen other schools, centers, and training programs as well as for developing the Army's doctrinal manuals, training the Army's officers, and supervising the Army's center for the collection and dissemination of lessons learned. During his time at CAC, Petraeus and Marine Lt. Gen. James F. Amos jointly oversaw the publication of Field Manual 3–24, Counterinsurgency, the body of which was written by an extraordinarily diverse group of military officers, academics, human rights advocates, and journalists who had been assembled by Petraeus and Amos. At both Fort Leavenworth and throughout the military's schools and training programs, Petraeus integrated the study of counterinsurgency into lesson plans and training exercises. In recognition of the fact that soldiers in Iraq often performed duties far different from those for which they trained, Petraeus stressed the importance of teaching soldiers how to think and how to fight, and the need to foster flexibility and adaptability in leaders. Petraeus called this change the most significant part of The Surge, saying in 2016, "the surge that mattered most was the surge of ideas. It was the change of strategy, and in many respects, this represented quite a significant change to what it was we were doing before the surge." Petraeus has been called "the world's leading expert in counter-insurgency warfare". Later, having refined his ideas on counterinsurgency based on the implementation of the new counterinsurgency doctrine in Iraq, he published both in Iraq as well as in the Sep/Oct 2008 edition of Military Review his "Commander's Counterinsurgency Guidance" to help guide leaders and units in the Multi-National Force-Iraq. Upon his graduation from West Point in 1974, Petraeus was commissioned an infantry officer. After completing Ranger School (Distinguished Honor Graduate and other honors), Petraeus was assigned to the 509th Airborne Battalion Combat Team, a light infantry unit stationed in Vicenza, Italy. Ever since, light infantry has been at the core of his career, punctuated by assignments to mechanized units, unit commands, staff assignments, and educational institutions. After leaving the 509th as a first lieutenant, Petraeus began a brief association with mechanized units when he became assistant operations officer on the staff of the 2nd Brigade, 24th Infantry Division (Mechanized), at Fort Stewart, Georgia. In 1979, he assumed command of a company in the same division: A Company, 2nd Battalion, 19th Infantry Regiment (Mechanized), and then served as that battalion's operations officer, a major's position that he held as a junior captain. In 1981, Petraeus became aide-de-camp to General John Galvin, then commanding general of the 24th Infantry Division (Mechanized). He spent the next few years furthering his military and civilian education, including spending 1982–83 at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, attending the Command and General Staff College. At graduation in 1983, he was the General George C. Marshall Award winner as the top graduate of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. From 1983 to 1985, he was at Princeton; and 1985–87 at West Point. After earning his Ph.D. and teaching at West Point, Petraeus continued up the rungs of the command ladder, serving as military assistant to Gen. John Galvin, the Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. From there, he moved to the 3rd Infantry Division (Mechanized). During 1988–1989, he served as operations officer to the 3rd Infantry Division (Mechanized)'s 30th Infantry Regiment. He was then posted as an aide and assistant executive officer to the U.S. Army Chief of Staff, General Carl Vuono, in Washington, D.C. Upon promotion to lieutenant colonel, Petraeus moved from the office of the chief of staff to Fort Campbell, Kentucky, where he commanded the 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault)'s 3rd Battalion 187th Infantry Regiment, known as the "Iron Rakkasans",[citation needed] from 1991 to 1993. During this period, he suffered one of the more dramatic incidents in his career; in 1991 he was accidentally shot in the chest with an M-16 rifle during a live-fire exercise when a soldier tripped and his rifle discharged. He was taken to Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, where he was operated on by future U.S. Senator Bill Frist. The hospital released him early after he did fifty push-ups without resting, just a few days after the accident. During 1993–94, Petraeus continued his long association with the 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) as the division's assistant chief of staff, G-3 (plans, operations, and training) and installation director of plans, training, and mobilization (DPTM). In 1995, he was assigned to the United Nations Mission in Haiti Military Staff as its chief operations officer during Operation Uphold Democracy. His next command, from 1995 to 1997, was the 1st Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, centered on the 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment. At that post, his brigade's training cycle at Fort Polk's Joint Readiness Training Center for low-intensity warfare was chronicled by novelist and military enthusiast Tom Clancy in his book Airborne. From 1997 to 1999, Petraeus served in the Pentagon as executive assistant to the director of the Joint Staff and then to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, Gen. Henry Shelton, who described Petraeus as "a high-energy individual who likes to lead from the front, in any field, he is going into." In 1999, as a brigadier general, Petraeus returned to the 82nd, serving as the assistant division commander for operations and then, briefly, as acting commanding general. During his time with the 82nd, he deployed to Kuwait as part of Operation Desert Spring, the continuous rotation of combat forces through Kuwait during the decade after the Gulf War. From the 82nd, he moved on to serve as chief of staff of XVIII Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg during 2000–2001. In 2000, Petraeus suffered his second major injury, when, during a civilian skydiving jump, his parachute collapsed at low altitude due to a hook turn, resulting in a hard landing that broke his pelvis. He was selected for promotion to major general in 2001. During 2001–2002, as a brigadier general, Petraeus served a ten-month tour in Bosnia and Herzegovina as part of Operation Joint Forge. In Bosnia, he was the NATO Stabilization Force assistant chief of staff for operations as well as the deputy commander of the U.S. Joint Interagency Counter-Terrorism Task Force, a command created after the September 11 attacks to add counterterrorism capability to the U.S. forces attached to the NATO command in Bosnia. In 2004, he was promoted to lieutenant general. In 2007, he was promoted to General. On April 23, 2008, Secretary of Defense Gates announced that President Bush was nominating General Petraeus to command U.S. Central Command (USCENTCOM), headquartered in Tampa, Florida. In 2010, Petraeus was nominated to command the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, which required Senate confirmation. He was confirmed on June 30, 2010, and took over command from temporary commander Lieutenant-General Sir Nick Parker on July 4, 2010. In 2003, Petraeus, then a major general, saw combat for the first time when he commanded the 101st Airborne Division during V Corps's drive to Baghdad. In a campaign chronicled in detail by Pulitzer Prize-winning author Rick Atkinson of The Washington Post in the book In the Company of Soldiers, Petraeus led his division through fierce fighting south of Baghdad, in Karbala, Hilla and Najaf. Following the fall of Baghdad, the division conducted the longest heliborne assault on record in order to reach Nineveh Governorate, where it would spend much of 2003. The 1st Brigade was responsible for the area south of Mosul, the 2nd Brigade for the city itself, and the 3rd Brigade for the region stretching toward the Syrian border. An often-repeated story of Petraeus's time with the 101st is his asking of embedded The Washington Post reporter Rick Atkinson to "Tell me how this ends", an anecdote he and other journalists have used to portray Petraeus as an early recognizer of the difficulties that would follow the fall of Baghdad. In Mosul, a city of nearly two million people, Petraeus and the 101st employed classic counterinsurgency methods to build security and stability, including conducting targeted kinetic operations and using force judiciously, jump-starting the economy, building local security forces, staging elections for the city council within weeks of their arrival, overseeing a program of public works, reinvigorating the political process, and launching 4,500 reconstruction projects in Iraq. This approach can be attributed to Petraeus, who had been steeped in nation-building during his previous tours in nations such as Bosnia and Haiti and thus approached nation-building as a central military mission and who was "prepared to act while the civilian authority in Baghdad was still getting organized", according to Michael Gordon of The New York Times. Some Iraqis gave Petraeus the nickname 'King David', which was later adopted by some of his colleagues. In 2004, Newsweek stated that "It's widely accepted that no force worked harder to win Iraqi hearts and minds than the 101st Airborne Division led by Petraeus." One of the General's major public works was the restoration and re-opening of the University of Mosul. Petraeus strongly supported the use of commanders' discretionary funds for public works, telling Coalition Provisional Authority director L. Paul Bremer "Money is ammunition" during the director's first visit to Mosul. Petraeus's often repeated catchphrase was later incorporated into official military briefings and was also eventually incorporated into the U.S. Army Counterinsurgency Field Manual drafted with Petraeus's oversight. In February 2004, the 101st was replaced in Mosul by a portion of I Corps headquarters, but operational forces consisted solely of a unit roughly one quarter its size—a Stryker brigade. The following summer, the governor of Nineveh Province was assassinated, and most of the Sunni Arab Provincial Council members walked out in the ensuing selection of the new governor, leaving Kurdish members in charge of a predominantly Sunni Arab province. Later that year, the local police commander defected to the Kurdish Minister of Interior in Irbil after repeated assassination attempts against him, attacks on his house, and the kidnapping of his sister. The largely Sunni Arab police collapsed under insurgent attacks launched at the same time Coalition Forces attacked Fallujah in November 2004. There are differing explanations for the apparent collapse of the police force in Mosul. The Guardian quoted an anonymous U.S. diplomat saying, "Mosul basically collapsed after he [Petraeus] left." Former diplomat Peter Galbraith criticized Petraeus's command of the 101st, saying his achievements had been exaggerated and his reputation inflated. He wrote for The New York Review of Books that "Petraeus ignored warnings from America's Kurdish allies that he was appointing the wrong people to key positions in Mosul's local government and police." On the other hand, in the book Fiasco, The Washington Post reporter Tom Ricks wrote that "Mosul was quiet while he (Petraeus) was there, and likely would have remained so had his successor had as many troops as he had—and as much understanding of counterinsurgency techniques." Ricks went on to say that "the population-oriented approach Petraeus took in Mosul in 2003 would be the one the entire U.S. Army in Iraq was trying to adopt in 2006." Time columnist Joe Klein largely agreed with Ricks, writing that the Stryker brigade that replaced the 101st "didn't do any of the local governance that Petraeus had done." Moving away from counterinsurgency principles, "they were occupiers, not builders". The New York Times reporter Michael Gordon and retired General Bernard Trainor echoed Ricks and Klein, including in their book Cobra II a quote that Petraeus "did it right and won over Mosul." In June 2004, less than six months after the 101st returned to the U.S., Petraeus was promoted to lieutenant general and became the first commander of the Multi-National Security Transition Command - Iraq. This newly created command had responsibility for training, equipping, and mentoring Iraq's growing army, police, and other security forces, as well as developing Iraq's security institutions and building associated infrastructure, such as training bases, police stations, and border forts. During Petraeus's fifteen months at the helm of MNSTC-I, he stood up a three-star command virtually from scratch and in the midst of serious fighting in places like Fallujah, Mosul, and Najaf. By the end of his command, some 100,000 Iraqi Security Forces had been trained; Iraqi Army and Police were being employed in combat; countless reconstruction projects had been executed; and hundreds of thousands of weapons, body armor, and other equipment had been distributed in what was described as the "largest military procurement and distribution effort since World War II", at a cost of over $11 billion. In September 2004, Petraeus wrote an article for The Washington Post in which he described the tangible progress being made in building Iraq's security forces from the ground up while also noting the many challenges associated with doing so. "Although there have been reverses – not to mention horrific terrorist attacks," Petraeus wrote, "there has been progress in the effort to enable Iraqis to shoulder more of the load for their own security, something they are keen to do." Some of the challenges involved in building security forces had to do with accomplishing this task in the midst of a tough insurgency—or, as Petraeus wrote, "making the mission akin to repairing an aircraft while in flight—and while being shot at." Other challenges included allegations of corruption as well as efforts to improve Iraq's supply accountability procedures. For example, according to former Interim Iraq Governing Council member Ali A. Allawi in The Occupation of Iraq: Winning the War, Losing the Peace, "under the very noses of the security transition command, officials both inside and outside the ministry of defense were planning to embezzle most, if not all, of the procurement budget of the army." The Washington Post stated in August 2007 that the Pentagon had lost track of approximately 30% of weapons supplied to the Iraqi security forces. The General Accounting Office said that the weapons distribution was haphazard, rushed, and did not follow established procedures—particularly from 2004 to 2005, when security training was led by Petraeus and Iraq's security forces began to see combat in places like Najaf and Samarra. Over a hundred thousand AK-47 assault rifles and pistols were delivered to Iraqi forces without full documentation, and some of the missing weapons may have been abducted by Iraqi insurgents. Thousands of body armour pieces have also been lost. The Independent has stated that the military believed "the situation on the ground was so urgent, and the agency responsible for recording the transfers of arms so short-staffed, that field commanders had little choice in the matter." The Pentagon conducted its own investigation, and accountability was subsequently regained for many of the weapons. Following his second tour in Iraq, Petraeus authored a widely read article in Military Review, listing fourteen observations he had made during two tours in Iraq, including: do not do too much with your own hands, money is ammunition, increasing the number of stakeholders is critical to success, success in a counterinsurgency requires more than just military operations, ultimate success depends on local leaders, there is no substitute for flexible and adaptable leaders, and, finally, a leader's most important task is to set the right tone. The intervening time between the Iraq commands was spent at Fort Leavenworth, where Petraeus further developed his military doctrine and pursued an important White House contact in Meghan O'Sullivan who was the principal adviser to the president on the war. In January 2007, as part of his overhauled Iraq strategy, President George W. Bush announced that Petraeus would succeed Gen. George Casey as commanding general of MNF-I to lead all U.S. troops in Iraq. In his memoirs, President Bush likened his selection of Petraeus to the elevations of other great generals of American history, writing, "Lincoln discovered Generals Grant and Sherman. Roosevelt had Eisenhower and Bradley. I found David Petraeus and Ray Odierno." On January 23, the Senate Armed Services Committee held Petraeus's nomination hearing, during which he testified on his ideas for Iraq, particularly the strategy underpinning the "surge" of forces. During his opening statement, Petraeus stated that "security of the population, especially in Baghdad, and in partnership with the Iraqi Security Forces, will be the focus of the military effort." He went on to state that security would require establishing a persistent presence, especially in Iraq's most threatened neighborhoods. He also noted the critical importance of helping Iraq increase its governmental capacity, develop employment programs, and improve daily life for its citizens. Throughout Petraeus's tenure in Iraq, Multi-National Force-Iraq endeavored to work with the Government of Iraq to carry out this strategy that focused on securing the population. Doing so required establishing—and maintaining—persistent presence by living among the population, separating reconcilable Iraqis from irreconcilable enemies, relentlessly pursuing the enemy, taking back sanctuaries and then holding areas that had been cleared, and continuing to develop Iraq's security forces and to support local security forces, often called Sons of Iraq, and integrate them into the Iraqi Army and Police and other employment programs. The strategy underpinning the "surge" of forces, as well as the ideas Petraeus included in U.S. Army Field Manual 3–24, Counterinsurgency, have been referred to by some journalists and politicians as the "Petraeus Doctrine", although the surge itself was proposed a few months before Petraeus took command. Despite the misgivings of most Democratic and a few Republican senators over the proposed implementation of the "Petraeus Doctrine" in Iraq, specifically regarding the troop surge, Petraeus was unanimously confirmed as a four-star general and MNF-I commander on January 27. Before leaving for Iraq, Petraeus recruited a number of highly educated military officers, nicknamed "Petraeus guys" or "designated thinkers", to advise him as commander, including Col. Mike Meese, head of the Social Sciences Department at West Point and Col. H.R. McMaster, famous for his leadership at the Battle of 73 Easting in the Gulf War and in the pacification of Tal Afar more recently, as well as for his doctoral dissertation on Vietnam-era civil-military relations titled Dereliction of Duty. While most of Petraeus's closest advisers were American military officers, he also hired Lt. Col. David Kilcullen of the Australian Army, who was working for the U.S. State Department. Kilcullen upon his return from Iraq published The Accidental Guerrilla, and has discussed the central front of the war and lessons learned in Iraq in The Washington Post. After taking command of MNF-I on February 10, 2007, Petraeus inspected U.S. and Iraqi units all over Iraq, visiting outposts in greater Baghdad, Tikrit, Baquba, Ramadi, Mosul, Kirkuk, Bayji, Samarra, Basrah and as far west as al-Hit and Al Qaim. In April 2007, Petraeus made his first visit to Washington as MNF-I Commander, reporting to President Bush and Congress on the progress of the "surge" and the overall situation in Iraq. During this visit he met privately with members of Congress and reportedly argued against setting a timetable for U.S. troop withdrawal from Iraq. By late May 2007, Congress had not imposed any timetables in war funding legislation for troop withdrawal. The enacted legislation did mandate that Petraeus and the U.S. Ambassador to Iraq, Ryan Crocker, deliver a report to Congress by September 15, 2007, detailing their assessment of the military, economic and political situation of Iraq. In June 2007, Petraeus stated in an interview that there were "astonishing signs of normalcy" in Baghdad, and this comment drew criticism from Senate majority leader Harry Reid. In the same interview, however, Petraeus stated that "many problems remain" and he noted the need to help the Iraqis "stitch back together the fabric of society that was torn during the height of sectarian violence" in late 2006. Petraeus also warned that he expected that the situation in Iraq would require the continued deployment of the elevated troop level of more than 150,000 beyond September 2007; he also stated that U.S. involvement in Iraq could last years afterward. These statements are representative of the fact that throughout their time in Iraq, Petraeus and Crocker remained circumspect and refused to classify themselves as optimists or pessimists, noting, instead, that they were realists and that the reality in Iraq was very hard. They also repeatedly emphasized the importance of forthright reports and an unvarnished approach. Indeed, Petraeus's realistic approach and assessments were lauded during the McLaughlin Group's 2008 Year-End Awards, when Monica Crowley nominated Petraeus for the most honest person of the year, stating, "[H]e spoke about the great successes of the surge in Iraq, but he always tempered it, never sugar-coated it." In July 2007, the White House submitted to Congress the interim report on Iraq, which stated that coalition forces had made satisfactory progress on 6 of 18 benchmarks set by Congress. On September 7, 2007, in a letter addressed to the troops he was commanding, Petraeus wrote that much military progress had been made, but that the national-level political progress that was hoped for had not been achieved. Petraeus's Report to Congress on the Situation in Iraq was delivered to Congress on September 10, 2007. On August 15, 2007, the Los Angeles Times had stated that, according to unnamed administration officials, the report "would actually be written by the White House, with inputs from officials throughout the government." However, Petraeus declared in his testimony to Congress that "I wrote this testimony myself." He further elaborated that his testimony to Congress "has not been cleared by, nor shared with, anyone in the Pentagon, the White House, or Congress." In his September Congressional testimony, Petraeus stated, "As a bottom line up front, the military objectives of the surge are, in large measure, being met." He cited numerous factors for this progress, to include the fact that Coalition and Iraqi Forces had dealt significant blows to Al-Qaeda Iraq and had disrupted Shia militias, that ethno-sectarian violence had been reduced, and that the tribal rejection of Al-Qaeda had spread from Anbar Province to numerous other locations across Iraq. Based on this progress and additional progress expected to be achieved, Petraeus recommended drawing down the surge forces from Iraq and gradually transitioning increased responsibilities to Iraqi Forces, as their capabilities and conditions on the ground permitted. Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada argued Petraeus's "plan is just more of the same" and "is neither a drawdown or a change in mission that we need." Democratic Representative Robert Wexler of Florida accused Petraeus of "cherry-picking statistics" and "massaging information". Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee Tom Lantos of California called Petraeus and U.S. Ambassador to Iraq Ryan Crocker "two of our nation's most capable public servants" and said Democrats feel "esteem for their professionalism." But he also said that "We can no longer take their assertions on Iraq at face value"; concluding, "We need to get out of Iraq, for that country's sake as well as our own." Republican Presidential candidate Duncan Hunter called the report "a candid, independent assessment given with integrity." Republican senator Jon Kyl of Arizona stated, "I commend General Petraeus for his honest and forthright assessment of the situation in Iraq." Anti-war Republican senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska criticized the report while praising Petraeus, saying "It's not your fault, general. ... It's not Ambassador Crocker's fault. It's this administration's fault." A USA Today/Gallup poll taken after Petraeus's report to Congress showed virtually no change in negative public opinion toward the war. A Pew Research Center survey, however, found that most Americans who had heard about the report approved of Petraeus's recommendations. On September 20, the Senate passed an amendment by Republican John Cornyn III of Texas designed to "strongly condemn personal attacks on the honor and integrity of General Petraeus." Cornyn drafted the amendment in response to a controversial full-page ad by the liberal group Moveon.org in the September 10, 2007, edition of The New York Times. All forty-nine Republican senators and twenty-two Democratic senators voted in support. The House passed a similar resolution by a 341–79 vote on September 26. In December 2007, The Washington Post's "Fact Checker" stated that "While some of Petraeus's statistics are open to challenge, his claims about a general reduction in violence have been borne out over subsequent months. It now looks as if Petraeus was broadly right on this issue at least." Based on the conditions on the ground, in October 2007, Petraeus and U.S. Ambassador to Iraq Ryan Crocker revised their campaign plan for Iraq. In recognition of the progress made against Al Qaeda Iraq, one of the major points would be "shifting the U.S. military effort to focus more on countering Shiite militias." On February 18, 2008, USA Today stated that "the U.S. effort has shown more success" and that, after the number of troops reached its peak in fall 2007, "U.S. deaths were at their lowest levels since the 2003 invasion, civilian casualties were down, and street life was resuming in Baghdad." In light of the significant reduction in violence and as the surge brigades began to redeploy without replacement, Petraeus characterized the progress as tenuous, fragile, and reversible and repeatedly reminded all involved that much work remained to be done. During an early February trip to Iraq, Defense Secretary Robert Gates endorsed the idea of a period of consolidation and evaluation upon completion of the withdrawal of surge brigades from Iraq. Petraeus and Crocker continued these themes at their two full days of testimony before Congress on April 8 and 9. During his opening statement, Petraeus stated that "there has been significant but uneven security progress in Iraq", while also noting that "the situation in certain areas is still unsatisfactory and that innumerable challenges remain" and that "the progress made since last spring is fragile and reversible." He also recommended a continuation of the drawdown of surge forces as well as a 45-day period of consolidation and evaluation after the final surge brigade had redeployed in late July. Analysts for USA Today and The New York Times stated that the hearings "lacked the suspense of last September's debate," but they did include sharp questioning as well as both skepticism and praise from various Congressional leaders. In late May 2008, the Senate Armed Services Committee held nomination hearings for Petraeus and Lieutenant General Ray Odierno to lead United States Central Command and Multi-National Force-Iraq, respectively. During the hearings, Committee Chairman Carl Levin praised these two men, stating that "we owe Gen. Petraeus and Gen. Odierno a debt of gratitude for the commitment, determination and strength that they brought to their areas of responsibility. And regardless of how long the administration may choose to remain engaged in the strife in that country, our troops are better off with the leadership these two distinguished soldiers provide." During his opening statement, Petraeus discussed four principles that would guide his efforts if confirmed as CENTCOM Commander: seeking to strengthen international partnerships; taking a "whole of government" approach; pursuing comprehensive efforts and solutions; and, finally, both supporting efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan and ensuring readiness for possible contingency operations in the future. Petraeus also noted that during the week before his testimony, the number of security incidents in Iraq was the lowest in over four years. After Petraeus's return to Baghdad, and despite the continued drawdown of surge forces as well as recent Iraqi-led operations in places like Basrah, Mosul, and Baghdad, the number of security incidents in Iraq remained at their lowest level in over four years. In September 2008, Petraeus gave an interview to BBC News stating that he did not think using the term "victory" in describing the Iraq war was appropriate, saying "This is not the sort of struggle where you take a hill, plant the flag and go home to a victory parade ... it's not war with a simple slogan." Petraeus had discussed the term 'victory' before in March 2008, saying to NPR News that "an Iraq that is at peace with itself, at peace with its neighbors, that has a government that is representative of—and responsive to—its citizenry and is a contributing member of the global community" could arguably be called 'victory'. On the eve of his change of command, in September 2008, Petraeus stated that "I don't use terms like victory or defeat ... I'm a realist, not an optimist or a pessimist. And the reality is that there has been significant progress but there are still serious challenges." On September 16, 2008, Petraeus formally gave over his command in Iraq to General Raymond T. Odierno in a government ceremony presided by Defense Secretary Robert Gates. During the ceremony, Gates stated that Petraeus "played a historic role" and created the "translation of a great strategy into a great success in very difficult circumstances." Gates also told Petraeus he believed "history will regard you as one of our nation's greatest battle captains." He presented Petraeus with the Defense Distinguished Service Medal. At the event, Petraeus mentioned the difficulty in getting the Sons of Iraq absorbed into the central Government of Iraq and warned about future consequences if the effort stalled. When speaking of these and other challenges, Petraeus noted that "the gains [achieved in Iraq] are tenuous and unlikely to survive without an American effort that outlasts his tenure." Even so, as Petraeus departed Iraq, it appeared to many that he was leaving a much different Iraq than the one that existed when he took command in February 2007. As described by Dexter Filkins, "violence has plummeted from its apocalyptic peaks, Iraqi leaders are asserting themselves, and streets that once seemed dead are flourishing with life." The January 3, 2009, Iraq Trends (a chart produced weekly by the MNF-I) seemed to illustrate an increase in incidents followed by the sharp decline described by Dexter Filkens and others. Petraeus' command of coalition forces during the Surge in Iraq was lauded by a number of observers. In his book The Savior Generals historian Victor Davis Hanson wrote, "that without David Petraeus, the American effort in Iraq—along with the reputation of the U.S. military in the Middle East—would have been lost long ago." In her introduction of Petraeus at the Baccalaureate ceremony for the Class of 2009 at Princeton University, President Shirley Tilghman described his accomplishments. While acknowledging that much remained to be accomplished in Iraq, Tilghman paid tribute to Petraeus's "leadership in rethinking American military strategy through his principles of counterinsurgency," which are, she said, "eliminating 'simplistic definitions of victory and defeat in favor of incremental and nuanced progress.'" On October 31, 2008, Petraeus assumed command of the United States Central Command (USCENTCOM) headquartered in Tampa, Florida. Petraeus was responsible for U.S. operations in 20 countries spreading from Egypt to Pakistan—including Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. During his time at CENTCOM, Petraeus advocated that countering the terrorist threats in the CENTCOM region required more than just counter-terrorism forces, demanding instead whole-of-government, comprehensive approaches akin to those of counterinsurgency. One of his closest colleagues said that Petraeus knew that defeating an insurgency required living among the people, convincing them that we were better than the insurgents. "[Y]ou can't kill 'em all ... [Y]ou can't kill your way out of an insurgency. ... You have to find other kinds of ammunition, and it's not always a bullet." Petraeus reiterated this view in a 2009 interview published in Parade magazine. In an interview for Newsweek magazine's "Interview Issue: The View From People Who Make a Difference," Petraeus expressed his support for President Obama's announced Afghanistan strategy and discussed his view that reconciliation efforts in Afghanistan should for the time being occur "at the lower and midlevels." In mid-August 2009, Petraeus established the Afghanistan-Pakistan Center of Excellence within the USCENTCOM Directorate of Intelligence to provide leadership to coordinate, integrate and focus analysis efforts in support of operations in Afghanistan and Pakistan. During a February 2010 World Affairs Council event in Philadelphia, General Petraeus discussed the ways in which diplomacy, history, and culture impact overall military strategy, then explained how these issues informed the U.S. approach to counterinsurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan. On March 16, 2010, in testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee, Petraeus described the continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict as a challenge to U.S. interests in the region. According to the testimony, the conflict was "fomenting anti-American sentiment" due to "a perception of U.S. favoritism for Israel." This was widely commented on in the media. When questioned by journalist Philip Klein, Petraeus said the original reporter "picked apart" and "spun" his speech. He said he believed there were many important factors standing in the way of peace, including "a whole bunch of extremist organizations, some of which by the way deny Israel's right to exist. There's a country that has a nuclear program who denies that the Holocaust took place. So again we have all these factors in there. This [Israel] is just one." In March 2010, Petraeus visited the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at Saint Anselm College to speak about Iraq and Afghanistan. Petraeus spoke a few days after the seventh anniversary of the U.S. invasion of Iraq, noting the successful changes in Iraq since the U.S. troop surge. The visit to Saint Anselm created rumors that Petraeus was contemplating a run for the presidency; however, he denied the speculation, saying that he was not aware that the college had been the site of numerous presidential debates. Toward the close of his tenure as CENTCOM Commander, including in his interview published in Vanity Fair, Petraeus discussed the effort to determine and send to Afghanistan the right "inputs" for success there; these inputs included several structures and organizations that proved important in Iraq, including "an engagement cell to support reconciliation ... a finance cell to go after financing of the enemy ... [a] really robust detainee-operations task force, a rule-of-law task force, an energy-fusion cell—all these other sort of nonstandard missions that are very important." On May 5, 2010, The New York Times published an article suggesting there was mounting evidence of a Taliban role in the Times Square bombing plot. On May 7, 2010, Petraeus announced that Times Square bombing suspect Faisal Shahzad was a "lone wolf" terrorist who did not work with others. On May 10, 2010, Attorney General Eric Holder said that the evidence showed the Pakistani Taliban directed this plot. General Petraeus was diagnosed with early-stage prostate cancer in February 2009 and underwent two months of successful radiation treatment at Walter Reed Army Medical Center. The diagnosis and treatment were not publicly disclosed until October 2009 because Petraeus and his family regarded his illness as a personal matter that did not interfere with the performance of his duties. On June 15, 2010, Petraeus momentarily fainted while being questioned by the Senate Armed Services Committee. He quickly recovered and was able to walk and exit the room without assistance. He attributed the episode to possible dehydration. On June 23, 2010, President Obama announced that he would nominate Petraeus to succeed General Stanley A. McChrystal as the commander of U.S. Forces in Afghanistan. The change of command was prompted by McChrystal's comments about the Obama administration and its policies in Afghanistan during an interview with Rolling Stone magazine. The nomination was technically a positional step down from his position as commander of Central Command; however, the President said that he believed that he was the best man for the job. After being confirmed by the Senate on June 30, Petraeus formally assumed command on July 4. During the assumption-of-command remarks, Petraeus provided his vision and goals to NATO, the members of his command, and his Afghan partners. As he was known to do while the commander in Iraq, Petraeus delivered his first Letter to the Troops on the same day he assumed command. In December, 2009, then President Obama announced that there would be a 30,000 troop surge in Afghanistan, but that in 18 months there would be a troop drawdown to take these forces out of the country again. Petraeus later shared his surprise at this decision, noting that he didn't agree with the choice to announce a drawdown given that it limited bargaining power with the enemy. On August 1, 2010, shortly after the disclosure of the Afghan war logs on WikiLeaks, which included reports of high civilian deaths and increased Taliban attacks, Petraeus issued his updated Tactical Directive for the prevention of civilian casualties, providing guidance and intent for the use of force by the U.S. military units operating in Afghanistan (replacing the July 1, 2009, version). This directive reinforced the concept of "disciplined use of force in partnership with Afghan Security Forces" in the fight against insurgent forces. We must never forget that the center of gravity in this struggle is the Afghan people; it is they who will ultimately determine the future of Afghanistan ... Prior to the use of fires, the commander approving the strike must determine that no civilians are present. If unable to assess the risk of civilian presence, fires are prohibited, except under of the following two conditions (specific conditions deleted due to operational security; however, they have to do with the risk to ISAF and Afghan forces). In the October 2010 issue of Army Magazine, Petraeus discussed changes that had taken place over the previous 18 months, including sections discussing "setting the conditions for progress," "capitalizing on the conditions for progress," "improving security," "supporting governance expansion," "promoting economic development," "reducing corruption," and "our troopers: carrying out a difficult mission." Sources interviewed by Steve Coll were critical of aspects of Petraeus's tenure as ISAF commander. Some described Petraeus as being physically exhausted from his previous tours abroad (as well as his recovery from prostate cancer), having a proclivity to see Afghanistan through the prism of his experience in Iraq—to the point of occasionally referring to Afghanistan as "Iraq"—and being slow to react to "green-on-blue" or "insider attacks" by Afghan soldiers against their American partners. Petraeus sought to recreate the "Sunni Awakening" in Iraq by offering financial inducements to former Taliban insurgents to integrate into Hamid Karzai's government, but the results were not impressive. As commander in Afghanistan, Petraeus joined President Obama as a primary target for Osama bin Laden. After his death, documents recovered from bin Laden's compound unveiled a plot to assassinate the two men as they traveled by plane. Bin Laden's communications with a top deputy stated, "The reason for concentrating on them is that Obama is the head of infidelity and killing him automatically will make [Vice President] Biden take over the presidency. Biden is totally unprepared for that post, which will lead the U.S. into a crisis. As for Petraeus, he is the man of the hour ... and killing him would alter the war's path" in Afghanistan. In early March 2011, Petraeus made a "rare apology" following a NATO helicopter airstrike under his command that resulted in the deaths of nine Afghan boys and the wounding of a 10th, as they gathered firewood in Eastern Afghanistan. In a statement, Petraeus apologized to the members of the Afghan government, the people of Afghanistan, and the surviving family members, and said, "These deaths should have never happened." Several journalists and observers noted the humanitarian candor in Petraeus's open regrets. Petraeus relinquished command of U.S. and NATO forces in Afghanistan on July 18, 2011. He received the Defense Distinguished Service Medal and the NATO Meritorious Service Medal for his service. Petraeus retired from the U.S. Army on August 31, 2011. His retirement ceremony was held at Joint Base Myer–Henderson Hall. During this ceremony, he was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal by Deputy Secretary of Defense William J. Lynn. During the ceremony, Lynn noted that Petraeus had played an important role as both a combat leader and strategist in the post-9/11 world. Lynn also cited General Petraeus's efforts in current counter insurgency strategy. Admiral Michael Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in his remarks compared General Petraeus to Ulysses S. Grant, John J. Pershing, George Marshall and Dwight D. Eisenhower as one of the great battle captains of American history. With his four-star rank, Petraeus receives an annual pension of about $220,000. On April 28, 2011, President Barack Obama announced that he had nominated Petraeus to become the new Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. The nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate 94–0 on June 30, 2011. Petraeus was sworn in at the White House on September 6 and then ceremonially sworn in by Vice President Joe Biden at CIA Headquarters in Langley, Virginia on October 11, 2011. Petraeus's tenure at the CIA was more low profile than that of his predecessor, Leon Panetta, declining to give media interviews while director and speaking to Congress in closed sessions. He also differed from Panetta in management style, as an article in The New York Times published just days before his resignation said; Panetta "wooed the work force and often did not question operational details, [while] Petraeus is a demanding boss who does not hesitate to order substandard work redone or details of plans adjusted". Petraeus's philosophy on leadership at the time was summarized in a twelve-point article published by Newsweek on November 5, 2012. Although Petraeus was given good marks by most observers for his work heading the CIA, during October 2012 some critics took issue with the availability of accurate information from the CIA concerning an attack in Benghazi, Libya, the month prior. On September 11 four Americans had been killed, including the ambassador, and more than thirty evacuated. Only seven of those evacuated did not work for the CIA. According to a Wall Street Journal story, other government agencies complained about being left "largely in the dark about the CIA's role," with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton telephoning Petraeus directly the night of the attacks seeking assistance. Although the "State Department believed it had a formal agreement with the CIA to provide backup security," "the CIA didn't have the same understanding about its security responsibilities," reported The Wall Street Journal. Petraeus reportedly began an affair with Paula Broadwell, principal author of his biography, All In: The Education of General David Petraeus, after Petraeus left his ISAF command on July 18, 2011, to become CIA director. Petraeus reportedly ended the affair in the summer of 2012, around the time that he learned that Broadwell had been sending harassing emails to a longstanding family friend of the Petraeuses, Jill Kelley. Kelley, a Florida socialite who frequently entertained senior military personnel at her and her husband's Tampa mansion, had approached an acquaintance who worked for the FBI Tampa Field Office in the late spring with regard to anonymous emails she considered threatening. The Bureau traced the emails to Broadwell, and noted that Broadwell appeared to be exchanging intimate messages with an email account belonging to Petraeus, which instigated an investigation into whether that account had been hacked into or was someone posing as Petraeus. According to an Associated Press report, rather than transmit emails to each other's inbox, which would have left a more obvious email trail, Petraeus and Broadwell left messages in a draft folder and the draft messages were then read by the other person when they logged into the same account. Although U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder was aware that the FBI had discovered the affair, it was not until November 6, 2012, that Petraeus's nominal superior, Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper, was advised. That same evening Clapper called Petraeus and urged him to resign. Clapper notified the White House the next day, November 7. After being briefed on November 8, President Obama summoned Petraeus to the White House where Petraeus offered his resignation. Obama accepted his resignation on November 9, and Petraeus cited his affair when announcing that same day that he would resign as CIA Director. Eventually, Petraeus pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of mishandling the classified information that he provided to his mistress and biographer. On November 13, 2012, Reagan administration Assistant Secretary of Defense Lawrence Korb, CIA analyst and Veteran Intelligence Professionals for Sanity co-founder Ray McGovern, and investigative journalist Gareth Porter appeared on Al Jazeera English. Together they assessed the general's extensive military-media strategy, linking his writings on counterguerrilla operations and subsequent military media efforts to his downfall with his female biographer. Critics said that the Petraeus media strategy would prove damaging for American policy in the future because of omissions and distorted interpretations that Washington policymakers, other experts, and the American public accepted from Petraeus's media contacts. Military historians have noted the absence of field records for the Iraq and Afghanistan military campaigns, but have not been personally critical of the commanders in theater. One additional aspect of Petraeus's career that has come under increased scrutiny since his affair came to light has been his lack of a direct combat record in relation to the many awards he received. In particular, his Bronze Star Medal with Valor device has been mentioned in several media reports and questioned by several former Army officers. The citation for Petraeus's Bronze Star with "V" device also notes his "leadership under fire", as does award of the Combat Action Badge, but neither provides a detailed account of his actions. In January 2015, The New York Times reported that the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Justice Department had recommended bringing felony charges against Petraeus for providing classified information to Broadwell. Petraeus denied the allegations and was reported to have had no interest in a plea deal. However, on Tuesday, March 3, 2015, the U.S. Justice Department announced that Petraeus agreed to plead guilty in federal court in Charlotte, North Carolina to a charge of unauthorized removal and retention of classified information. In the 15-page statement of facts filed by the government along with the plea agreement, the government stated that Petraeus had provided Broadwell access to documents containing Top Secret Sensitive Compartmented Information, had later moved those documents to his personal residence and stored them in an unsecured drawer, and had deliberately and intentionally lied to Federal investigators about both providing Broadwell access to the documents and their improper storage. These facts were acknowledged to be true by Petraeus as part of his plea agreement. On April 23, 2015, a federal judge sentenced Petraeus to two years' probation plus a fine of $100,000. The fine was more than double the amount the Justice Department had requested. Press accounts in January 2016 indicated that Department of Defense staff were reviewing Department of Justice documents from the Petraeus prosecution and considering whether to recommend to the Secretary of Defense that Petraeus be demoted on the Army's retired list. Laws and regulations indicate that members of the military are retired at the last rank in which they are deemed to have served successfully; Petraeus's admission of an extramarital affair and guilty plea with regard to removing and retaining classified information while serving in the grade of general could be grounds for reduction in rank to lieutenant general. The matter was reviewed by then-Secretary of the Army John M. McHugh before he left office in October 2015; he recommended no further action. On January 29, press accounts indicated that Stephen C. Hedger, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs, had written to the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee. In his letter, Hedger informed the committee that Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter had concurred with the Army's recommendation, and would not impose any further punishment on Petraeus. In March 2013, Petraeus accepted the role of honorary chairman of the OSS Society. Petraeus was named a visiting professor at Macaulay Honors College at the City University of New York in July 2013. According to a statement from Petraeus, "I look forward to leading a seminar at Macaulay that examines the developments that could position the United States—and our North American partners—to lead the world out of the current global economic slowdown." After his anticipated $200,000 salary for the academic year drew fire from critics, Petraeus agreed to take on the teaching position for just $1 in order to keep the focus on the students and away from any monetary controversy. In September 2013 Petraeus was harassed by students at CUNY while walking on campus. On May 1, 2013, the University of Southern California named David Petraeus as a Judge Widney Professor, "a title reserved for eminent individuals from the arts, sciences, professions, business and community and national leadership". The president of the Currahee board of trustees announced May 6, 2013, that Petraeus agreed to serve on the board of trustees that preserves Camp Toccoa. During WWII, four of the main parachute infantry regiments of the Army trained at Camp Toccoa prior to their deployment. Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. L.P., a New York investment firm, hired Petraeus as chairman of the firm's newly created KKR Global Institute in May 2013. Part of his work would support KKR's investment teams and portfolio companies when studying new investments, especially in new locations. In December 2014, Petraeus was named a partner at KKR and remains chairman of the KKR Global Institute. Petraeus joined the board of advisers of Team Rubicon on June 18, 2013. Royal United Services Institute (RUSI) named Petraeus as a senior vice president of the organization in August 2013. According to RUSI, "The honorary role was created by RUSI's trustees and advisory council in recognition of General Petraeus's long association with the Institute and his distinguished contribution to the study and development of defence and international security concepts, as well as his implementation of those concepts in operations in the Balkans, Iraq, and Afghanistan." In October 2013, Petraeus joined Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government as a non-resident senior fellow at the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. According to the school, Petraeus joined to lead a new project focusing on the technological, scientific and economic dynamics that are spurring renewed North American competitiveness. "The Coming North America Decades" project would analyze how potential policy choices could effect this ongoing transformation. In 2016, the center announced a new project involving Petraeus and focusing on strategic leadership. On February 10, 2014, the University of Exeter in England named Petraeus as an honorary visiting professor of the Strategy and Security Institute. Alongside the other honorary faculty, the appointment would help inform the institute's key objectives of exploring policymaking, strategy, and security. General Petraeus was one of the "11 legendary generals" profiled in the 2014 National Geographic Channel feature "American War Generals". In 2015, Petraeus suggested the U.S. should arm members of the terror group Al-Nusra Front (an offshoot of Al-Qaeda) in Syria to fight ISIS. On June 10, 2016, Petraeus and Mark Kelly, a retired NASA astronaut and later senator from Arizona, announced the creation of the now defunct gun control group Veterans Coalition for Common Sense. Petraeus delivered the inaugural lecture in a series dedicated to his mentor and the former dean of The Fletcher School at Tufts University, General Jack Galvin. He also delivered the inaugural lecture in a series dedicated to Admiral Stansfield Turner at the U.S. Naval War College on August 7, 2018. The lecture series honors the achievements of Turner, who served as the college's president from 1972 to 1974. As a member of a panel discussion in October 2018 concerning a film documenting the Stars and Stripes newspaper, Petraeus shared his personal experiences with the newspaper with the audience. On June 12, 2019, Petraeus accepted the invitation of a three-year honorary professorship in the Institute of Conflict, Cooperation and Security (ICSS) at the University of Birmingham in England. The university's announcement of the appointment stated that Petraeus "will share insights from his career with students and researchers through a variety of interactions in Birmingham and virtually." General Petraeus was the guest speaker at the 500th Night celebration for the U.S. Military Academy's Class of 2020 at West Point, held on January 26, 2019. On November 18, 2016, an article by The Guardian cited "diplomatic sources" as having said that Petraeus had entered the race for U.S. Secretary of State in the Trump administration. Petraeus confirmed his interest in the position during a BBC Radio 4 interview, stating that he would serve if asked. Petraeus met with then President-elect Donald Trump at Trump Tower on November 28 to discuss the position and world affairs. Both Petraeus and Trump expressed favorable views of the meeting, with Trump taking to Twitter to announce, "Just met with General Petraeus—was very impressed!" Petraeus joined a short list of potential candidates for the position, including Mitt Romney and Rudy Giuliani. There was public speculation that his nomination could hurt Trump's administration, but Republican senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham advocated for Petraeus, calling him "an extraordinary pick". Petraeus also received support from Democratic senator Dianne Feinstein, suggesting that Democrats would keep an open mind concerning his confirmation. On December 13, 2016, Trump officially selected Rex Tillerson for the role of Secretary of State. Petraeus expressed his gratitude for Trump's consideration and deferred to former secretary of defense Robert Gates' endorsement when asked his opinion of Tillerson. On April 14, 2021, President Joe Biden announced that all U.S. troops in Afghanistan would be withdrawn from the country by September 11, 2021, against the advice of many of his top generals and many diplomats. Petraeus has been an outspoken opponent of the U.S.'s strategy for withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the agreements made with the Taliban in preparation thereof. In a Fox News interview on August 17, 2021, Petraeus called former President Donald Trump's decision to release 5,000 detainees of the Taliban held by the Afghanistan government in 2020 flawed and disastrous, with a tragic outcome. In another interview with the Wall Street Journal on August 20, 2021, he noted that the U.S. negotiated with the Taliban expecting to get something in return for withdrawing, which, he said, "didn't work out". During an interview with Fox News on May 12, 2021, Petraeus discussed his opposition to the withdrawal of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, stating, "I fear that we will come to regret this decision." He warned of the possible psychological effects on Afghan forces following removal of U.S. support, the erosion of Afghan Air Force maintenance, and the risk of a "brutal civil war". Following a military blitz by the Taliban that ended in the group capturing the country's capital, Kabul, Petraeus again questioned the poor planning of troop withdrawal from the region and reiterated the dangers the world would face from the potential establishment of Al Qaeda or the Islamic State in the Hindu Kush. In an email interview with Die Weltwoche, Petraeus stated "I do not believe that either terrorist group will pose a near-term threat to the U.S. homeland or our NATO allies. The longer-term threat will depend on our ability to identify, disrupt, and degrade any such sanctuaries." Petraeus suggested that the removal of 18,000 contractors who maintained aircraft contributed to the surrender of Afghan government forces who ended up lacking air support against the Taliban. In an interview with Brian Kilmeade Petraeus drew parallels between the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan, the Dunkirk evacuation, and the Fall of Saigon. He advised that American forces, drones, and close air support be used to secure Kabul Airport while the U.S. communicates with the Taliban to prevent them from impeding the movement of individuals that are trying to evacuate. During a discussion with CNN's Peter Bergen, Petraeus predicted that the Taliban would struggle to fund their new government following the withdrawal of U.S. and other donor nation financial support. He suggested that the resultant degradation of basic services and salaries for Afghan workers could ultimately force the Taliban to change their approach with the international community, but that it was too early to tell if the Taliban were reformed. Discussing the topic with NBC's Lester Holt, he expressed his belief that the Taliban's actions on the ground showed that they were "the same old Taliban", and that he was fairly confident that Al-Qaeda and the Islamic State would be able to re-establish sanctuaries in the region with the Taliban in power. He expressed doubt that the U.S. would become involved in the country while the Taliban was in power, outside of military and intelligence actions to protect U.S. interests, and suggested that even the establishment of an embassy for diplomatic relations would not happen "any time soon". Petraeus has been vocally critical of Russia's 2022 invasion of Ukraine, joining three other retired military generals to form the Strategic Advisory Council for the Defense of Ukraine in July 2022 to provide strategic expertise and operational assistance to Ukrainian forces. Early in 2022, as tensions mounted between Russia and Ukraine, Petraeus attended a tabletop panel with Admiral Michael Mullen, Michèle Flournoy, and Thomas Donilon to discuss economic sanctions, cyber defenses, and anti-Russian insurgency in Ukraine. In public appearances and interviews, Petraeus has criticized not only Russia's motives for the invasion, but also the tactics and standards of the country's military effort. In the weeks following the invasion of Ukraine, Petraeus spoke with Jake Tapper and Anderson Cooper, examining Russia's strategy in attempts to seize Kyiv. On March 12, 2022, Petraeus spoke on One Nation with Brian Kilmeade, criticizing the Russian military's failed attempt to achieve a combined arms effect, which, according to Petraeus, wasn't up to the normal standards anticipated by the United States or other NATO countries' militaries. In May 2022, Petraeus commented that, in an attempt to create a stronger Russia, President Putin had instead strengthened the alliance between NATO countries. In a later interview, Petraeus said that the Russian military was nowhere near as good as NATO had thought it would be. He described the Russian military's preferred tactic as that of overwhelming artillery strikes, leading to the question of whether Russia's military valued volume over accuracy. In October 2022, he called Russia's military mobilization in Ukraine "irreversible and disastrous." In addition to criticisms of Russia's war effort, Petraeus also discussed the negative implications that Russian sanctions have for worldwide financial markets, food supplies, and other commodities, and he commended the Ukrainian military for its impressive counter-attacks, specifically a raid on Russian tanks, the killing of five Russian generals, and the destruction of the Russian warship, Saratov. In mid- to late 2022, Petraeus spoke further on the Western response to Russia's aggression and the impacts U.S. involvement had on Ukraine's defense. In an interview with CNN's Jim Sciutto regarding Russia's plans to annex more regions in Ukraine, he said that US- and UK-supplied high-mobility artillery rocket systems had prompted Russian forces to relocate their headquarters and fuel supplies, which had significantly slowed Russia's advances in Ukraine. In another interview, he said that Western support had improved counteroffensive strategies, resulting in retaking Crimea and Donbas territories from Russia. Petraeus has been a strong proponent of continued aid to Ukraine and increased NATO readiness for potential escalations by Russia and its allies. He spoke of the need for the United States to prioritize military readiness to counter China and to increase aid for Ukraine in the annual defense policy bill. He also discussed the importance of deploying Patriot missile systems in Ukraine as an anti-ballistic missile system and discussed measures that the US and NATO would employ if Russia were to carry out a nuclear attack in Ukraine. In an Atlantic Council discussion concerning additional aid to Ukraine he emphasized the need for the deployment of Western aircraft and support staff, a stronger defense guarantee, and diplomatic and economic pressures on Russia to hasten peace talks. Petraeus expressed the belief that President Putin would eventually realize that the war is not sustainable on the battlefield and would agree to a negotiated resolution with Ukraine. In an article published by Foreign Policy magazine, Petraeus joined other experts to derive lessons from the Russian-Ukraine war that would prevent, deter, and combat forthcoming world conflicts. During a trip to Kyiv, Petraeus joined a group from the Atlantic Council in presenting the council's Global Citizen Award to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, recognizing his exceptional leadership in defending Ukraine against Russian aggression. While in Kyiv, Petraeus visited the American University of Kyiv, discussing his confidence in well-equipped Ukrainian troops and the challenges faced by Russian forces. He emphasized the effectiveness of Ukraine's newly formed brigades equipped with Western tanks and fighting vehicles, offering valuable insights and support to Ukraine's efforts in countering the Russian forces. In an interview with CNN, Petraeus shared his view that alleged Ukrainian drone attacks on Russian soil were a way to not only attack valid military targets but also to acquaint the Russian people with the fact that a war was happening. He also described a shift in the Ukrainian strategy in their summer offensive as "starve, stretch and strike," a tactic used to create greater opportunity for success later in the conflict. Speaking with CNN's Christiane Amanpour in response to the slow pace of Ukraine's counteroffensive in the summer of 2023, Petraeus noted that while the Russian military hadn't distinguished itself in many ways, the depth of their defenses in territory seized in Ukraine had proven formidable. In the same interview, he stated his opinion that Ukraine's forces had adapted well to Russian entrenchment, taking their time to pick through mine fields without the aid of air support. Petraeus once again argued for more military aid for Ukraine, and increased sanctions against Russia, in an effort to force a diplomatic resolution to the conflict. In another conversation with Amanpour, he warned that if Putin succeeds in achieving his substantial objectives in Ukraine, then Moldova or one of the Baltic states could be invaded next. Petraeus expressed his strong agreement with Henry Kissinger’s statement that “NATO’s defense now begins at the border between Ukraine and Russia." According to Petraeus, he does not vote in elections, having stopped following his promotion to major general in 2002 as part of a desire to be seen as apolitical. He has confirmed that he did not vote in the 2016 election. Co-chairman, Task Force on North America, Council on Foreign Relations (June 2013 – December 2015) Member, board of directors, Atlantic Council (April 2016 – present) Washington Speakers Bureau (June 2013 – present) Member, board of advisors, Team Rubicon (April 2013 – present) Member, board of directors, Optiv Inc (March 2017 – present) Co-chairman, global advisory council, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars (August 2015 – present) Member, advisory council, Veterans Coalition for Common Sense (June 2016 – present) Member, conservation council, Panthera (February 2016 – present) Senior vice president, Royal United Services Institute (June 2013 – present) Member, board of directors, Institute for the Study of War (November 2013 – present) Member, advisory council, American Corporate Partners (April 2013 – present) Faculty advisor, USC Student Veterans Association (September 2013 – August 2019) Chairman, KKR Vets at Work (May 2014 – present) Member, board of directors, Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America (IAVA) (October 2015 – present) Member, Concordia Leadership Council, The Concordia Summit (September 2015 – present) Member, board of trustees, The McCain Institute for International Leadership (December 2015 – present) Member, academic advisory board, Warrior-Scholar Project (February 2016 – present) Advisor, Global War on Terror Memorial Foundation (February 2016 – June 2019) Member, national security advisory council, U.S. Global Leadership Coalition (April 2016 – present) Trustee, Arthur F. Burns Fellowship (April 2016 – present) Member, board of directors, Fort Campbell Historical Foundation (September 2015 – present) Member, board of advisors, The Alexander Hamilton Society (October 2016 – present) Member, board of advisors, Partnership for a Secure America (March 2017 – present) Churchill Fellow of Westminster College, Westminster College (Fulton, MO) (April 2017 – present) Member, council of advisors, Army Heritage Center Foundation (June 2017 – present) Member, Golden Plate Award Council, Academy of Achievement (October 2012 – present) Advisory trustee, The Camp Tocca At Currahee (June 2013 – present) Honorary chairman, The OSS Society (January 2013 – present) Honorary fellow, Ivy Club, Princeton University (May 2012 – present) Member, board of advisors, National Council on U.S. – Arab Relations (October 2016 – Present) Advisor to the board, United States-India Strategic Partnership Forum (January 2018 – present) Member, network experts (August 2018 – present) Member, board of advisors, Third Option Foundation (March 2019 – present) Member, The Trilateral Commission (August 2019 – present) Petraeus's decorations and badges include the following: Eckerd College, May 23, 2010, honorary doctorate in laws University of Pennsylvania, May 14, 2012, honorary doctorate of laws Dickinson College, May 20, 2012, honorary doctorate of public service American University of Afghanistan, June 17, 2019, honorary doctorate of humane letters Petraeus's civilian awards and honors include: 2007: 100 Most Influential Leaders and Revolutionaries of the Year, Time magazine 2007: Second Most Influential American Conservative, The Daily Telegraph 2007: Person of the Year 2007 runner-up, Time magazine 2007: Man of the Year, The Daily Telegraph 2008: Leader of the Year, GQ 2008: One of World's Top 100 Public Intellectuals, Foreign Policy and Prospect magazines 2008: 16th Most Powerful Person in the World, Newsweek 2009: George F. Kennan Award, National Committee on American Foreign Policy 2009: Distinguished Service Medal, The American Legion 2009: Military Leadership Award, The Atlantic Council 2009: Abraham Lincoln Award, Union League of Philadelphia 2009: Father of the Year Award, National Father's Day Committee 2009: Eisenhower Award, National Defense Industrial Association 2009: William Donovan Award, Office of Strategic Services 2009: Freedom Award, No Greater Sacrifice 2009: Distinguished Citizen Award, Congressional Medal of Honor Society 2009: Sam Gibbons Lifetime Achievement Award, The World Trade Center Tampa Bay 2010: James Madison Medal, The Woodrow Wilson School 2010: Leader of Principle Award, The Citadel at Baker School of Business 2010: Irving Kristol Award, American Enterprise Institute 2010: Intrepid Freedom Award, Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum 2010: Named No. 12 of 50 People Who Mattered in 2010, New Statesman 2010: Top 100 Global Thinkers, Foreign Policy 2010: Dwight D. Eisenhower Award, Veterans of Foreign Wars 2010: Dedicated Room, Thayer Hotel 2011: 100 Most Influential People in the World, Time magazine 2012: Golden Plate Award, American Academy of Achievement 2012: Golden Eagle Award, Society of American Military Engineers 2013: 35th Chesney Gold Metal, Royal United Services Institute 2013: History Makers Award, New-York Historical Society 2013: Gold Medal for Distinguished Achievement, The Holland Society of New York 2015: Luminary Award, WashingtonExec Leadership Council 2016: C3 Global Solutions Award, C3 US-Arab Business and Healthcare 2016: American Spirit Award, The Common Good 2017: Winston S Churchill National Leadership Award, The International Churchill Society 2018: Soldier Citizen Award, American College of Financial Services 2019: Recanati-Kaplan Award for Civic Excellence and Cultural Engagement, 92nd Street Y 2020: Currahee Crest Award, 506th Infantry Regiment 2021: Leadership Award, The Voices Center for Resilience 2021: Top Voices in the Military Community, LinkedIn 2022: Decoration Commemorating 200 Years of Diplomatic Relations Between the Republic of Colombia and USA Grade of Grand Cross, The Embassy of Colombia-US 2022: American History Award, The Union League Club of New York 2022: Sanctioned by Russia for support of Ukraine, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation 2022: Veteran Leadership Award, Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America 2023: Kissinger Senior Fellow, Yale Jackson School of Global Affairs 2023: The 21 Greatest Generals in American History 2023: C3 Global Valor Award 2023: Dickinson College President’s Award 2023: U.S.-Arab Bridge Building Award 2024: Ticonderoga Award for a Continental Vision In 2005, Petraeus was identified as one of America's top leaders by U.S. News & World Report. In 2007, Time named Petraeus one of the 100 most influential leaders and revolutionaries of the year as well as one of its four runners up for Time Person of the Year. He was also named the second most influential American conservative by The Daily Telegraph as well as The Daily Telegraph's 2007 Man of the Year. His Ph.D. dissertation, The American Military and the Lessons of Vietnam: A Study of Military Influence and the Use of Force in the Post-Vietnam Era, published by Princeton University in 1987, was number two on the list of best-selling dissertations in 2007. In 2008, a poll conducted by Foreign Policy and Prospect magazines selected Petraeus as one of the world's top 100 public intellectuals. Also in 2008, the Static Line Association named Petraeus as its 2008 Airborne Man of the Year, and Der Spiegel named him "America's most respected soldier". As 2008 came to a close, Newsweek named him the 16th most powerful person in the world in its December 20, 2008, edition, and Prospect magazine named him the "Public Intellectual of the Year". He was also named as one of the "75 Best People in the World" in the October 2009 issue of Esquire. On March 7, 2009, Petraeus received the Distinguished Citizen Award from the Congressional Medal of Honor Society at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. Gen. David H. Petraeus, the top U.S. commander in the war against terrorism in the Middle East and Central Asia, was the spring commencement convocation speaker at Texas A&M University on May 13, a relatively new practice at Texas A & M. On December 9, 2010, Barbara Walters picked Petraeus for the Most Fascinating Person of 2010. Walters called the top commander in Afghanistan "an American hero". Petraeus was chosen as "one of Time magazine's 50 "People Who Mattered" in December 2010. The same year he was named number 12 of 50 people who mattered in 2010 by the New Statesmen magazine, and Petraeus was listed as number 8 of 100 Foreign Policy Top 100 Global Thinkers for 2011. The New Statesman annual survey presents the most influential people from pop stars and dissident activists to tech gurus and heads of state, the people doing most to shape our world keep changing. September 26, 2011, Petraeus was listed as number 2 of the 50 for 2011. The Association of Special Operations Professionals named Petraeus as its 2011 Man of the Year for 2011, and was presented the award at Ft. Bragg on November 2, 2011, at its annual Special Operations Exposition. In January 2012, Petraeus was named one of "The 50 Most Powerful People in Washington" by GQ magazine. Petraeus was inducted January 29, 2012, into the Reserve Officers Association's (ROA) Minuteman Hall of Fame as the 2011 Inductee during the 2012 ROA National Security Symposium. The German Order of Merit was presented to Petraeus February 14, by the German Secretary of Defense Thomas de Maizière. According to de Maizière, he is an "outstanding strategist and a true friend of the German people". On March 16, 2012, the Dutch Minister of Defense Hans Hillen knighted Petraeus at the Hague with the Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau with swords. The Minister thanked Petraeus in his speech for his, "unconditional support to the Dutch troops and for being a driving force behind a successful mission. Through his personal efforts for cooperation between the Netherlands and America, the Netherlands could achieve significant operational successes with the Task Force Uruzgan." In 2012, Petraeus received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. The following year, in 2013, the New-York Historical Society established the Petraeus-Hertog Lecture Leadership Library series. Petraeus was featured alongside 18 other graduates of the United States Military Academy in West Point Leadership: Profiles of Courage, a collection of leadership biographies published in 2013." Captured correspondence from Osama bin Laden "Letters from Abbottabad" revealed that in May 2010, Bin Laden wanted to target President Barack Obama and General Petraeus. Bin Laden wrote: "The reason for concentrating on them is that Obama is the head of infidelity and killing him automatically will make Biden take over the presidency for the remainder of the term, as it is the norm over there. Biden is totally unprepared for that post, which will lead the U.S. into a crisis." It further went on to say, "As for Petraeus, he is the man of the hour in this last year of the war, and killing him would alter the war's path." Petraeus and Dr. Henry Kissinger were the inaugural recipients of the Recanati-Kaplan Award for Civic Excellence and Cultural Engagement, presented by the 92nd Street Y on May 19, 2019. 92Y later established an Online Master Class in Leadership featuring a library series of lectures by Petraeus. On November 19, 2020, General Petraeus became the first American military professional to deliver the annual Lee Knowles Lecture at Cambridge University's Trinity College. On December 7, 2020, the Institute for the Study of War launched "The General David H. Petraeus Center for Emerging Leaders" to offer new educational and professional development programs to its students. Petraeus has been on the board of ISW since November 2013. National Committee on American Foreign Policy George F. Kennan Award Acceptance Remarks. American Foreign Policy Interests, 31(4) July/August 2009. "The Foreign Policy Interview with Gen. David H. Petraeus", Foreign Policy January/February 2009. Petraeus, David H. (2009). "2009 Baccalaureate Remarks". Princeton University (published May 31, 2009). "The Surge: The Whole Story 2009. "Remarks by General David H. Petraeus (Days of Remembrance 2010)". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. "Institutionalizing Change: Transformation in the US Army, 2005–2007", at the May 2010 American Enterprise Institute annual dinner. Petraeus, David H.; Goodfriend, Sydney E. (2013). "Training Veterans for Their Next Mission". The Wall Street Journal (published March 26, 2013). Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2013). "An American future filled with promise". The Washington Post (published April 7, 2013). Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2013). "Fund – don't cut U.S. soft power". Politico. Arlington, Va. (published April 30, 2013). Bremmer, Ian; Petraeus, David (2013). "Abe's electoral win is great news for Japan". Financial Times (published July 22, 2013). Petraeus, David; O'Hanlon, Michael (2013). "Petraeus and O'Hanlon: Compromise on budget". USA Today (published August 4, 2013). Petraeus, David H. (2013). "Reflections on the Counter-Insurgency Era". RUSI Journal. Vol. 158, no. 4 (published August 14, 2013). pp. 82–87. doi:10.1080/03071847.2013.826514. "Small Wars Journal Interview with General David H. Petraeus", Small Wars Journal (September 2013) Petraeus, David; O'Hanlon, Michael (2013). "The success story next door". Politico (published September 24, 2013). Petraeus, David H. (2013). "How we won in Iraq: And why all the hard-won gains of the surge are in grave danger of being lost today". Foreign Policy (published October 29, 2013). Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Petraeus, David H.; Zoellick, Robert (2014). "Perfect Partners". Foreign Affairs (published February 18, 2014). Petraeus, David H.; Bremmer, Ian (2014). "The changing geopolitics of energy". Financial Times (published February 20, 2014). Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2014). "Democracy Dividends from the Afghanistan Investment". The Wall Street Journal (published April 8, 2014). Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2017. Petraeus, David H.; Serchuk, Vance (2014). "U.S. needs to plan for the day after an Iran deal". The Washington Post (published April 9, 2014). O'Hanlon, Michael; Petraeus, David H. (2014). "The Great American Comeback". Politico (published April 27, 2014). "Fletcher Security Review Sits Down with Former ISAF Commander and CIA Director", May 2014. Petraeus, David H. (2014). "Point of View: Success of TPP negotiations is a national security necessity". The Asahi Shimbun (published July 3, 2014). Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Petraeus, David H.; Brown, Neil R. (2014). "Mexico's miracle: Political productivity". Houston Chronicle (published July 11, 2014). Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2014). "Petraeus and O'Hanlon: Export-Import Bank an easy call". USA Today (published September 5, 2014). "Report Launch of the CFR-Sponsored Independent Task Force on North America", October 2, 2014 "Petraeus and Zoellick urge U.S. to pay attention to North America", October 22, 2014 Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2015). "America on the way up". The Washington Post (published January 30, 2015). "Petraeus: The Islamic State isn't our biggest problem in Iraq", The Washington Post (March 20, 2015) Serchuk, Vance; Petraeus, David H.; Okun, Steven (2015). "The Case for the Trans-Pacific Partnership". Institutional Investor (published April 21, 2015). Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015. "Q & A David Petraeus GS '85 GS '87", The Daily Princetonian (June 2015) Open Letter (2015). "Public Statement on U.S. Policy Toward the Iran Nuclear Negotiations". Washington Institute (published June 24, 2015). Petraeus, David H.; Bhayani, Paras (2015). "An agenda of prosperity for America". CNN (published June 25, 2015). Petraeus, David H.; Bhayani, Paras D. (2015). "North America: the Next Great Emerging Market?". Foreign Policy (published June 25, 2015). Petraeus, David H.; Bhayani, Paras D. (2015). "The Next Great Emerging Market?". Belfer Center (published June 25, 2015). Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 25, 2015. Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2015). "The U.S. needs to keep troops in Afghanistan". The Washington Post (published July 7, 2015). "Petraeus explains how jihadists could be peeled away to fight ISIS – and Assad" Jake Tapper of CNN; September 1, 2015 "A Grand Strategy for 'Greater' Asia", the Lowy Lecture (September 2015) Petraeus, David H. (2016). "Brexit would weaken the West's war on terror". The Telegraph (published March 26, 2016). Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Petraeus, David H. (2016). "David Petraeus: Anti-Muslim bigotry aids Islamist terrorists". The Washington Post (published May 13, 2016). Petraeus, David (2016). "Native son John Galvin laid to rest". Boston Web Group (published May 25, 2016). Patel, Deep K. (2016). A Paperboy's Fable : The 11 Principles of Success. New York: Post Hill Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-1682610046. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Petraeus, David (2016). "Breaking Bread: David H. Petraeus and Ulysses S. Grant". The New York Times (published June 9, 2016). Petraeus, David H.; O'Hanlon, Michael (2016). "The Myth of a U.S. Military 'Readiness' Crisis". The Wall Street Journal (published August 9, 2016). Petraeus, David H. (2016). "The challenge in Mosul won't be to defeat the Islamic State. It will be what comes after". The Washington Post (published August 12, 2016). O'Hanlon, Michael E.; Petraeus, David H. (2016). "America's awesome military". Brookings Institution (published August 16, 2016). O'Hanlon, Michael E.; Petraeus, David H. (2016). "America's awesome military". Foreign Affairs (published September 2016). Petraeus, David H. (2016). "Gen. David Petraeus: Why I salute John McCain, a steadfast supporter of our military". Fox News (published October 14, 2016). Petraeus, David (2016). "David Petraeus On The Complexities Of Re-Taking And Stabilizing Mosul". NPR (published October 19, 2016). Petraeus, David (2016). "Petraeus says there's a bigger challenge to come once Iraq retakes Mosul from ISIS". PBS (published October 20, 2016). Petraeus, David H. (2017). "The State of the World" (PDF). House Armed Services Committee (published February 1, 2017). Petraeus, David H. (2017). "As Machines Wage War, Human Nature Endures". Berggruen Institute (published March 29, 2017). Petraeus, David H. (2017). "Around the World in 60 Minutes". Aspen Ideas (published June 29, 2017). Babich, Jennifer. (2018). "Gen. David Petraeus recalls being shot while commanding at Fort Campbell". Leaf Chronicle (published October 2, 2018). Reiss, Robert. (2018). "The Leadership Issue" (PDF). The CEO Forum (published October 2018). Petraeus, David; Whitehouse, Sheldon (March 8, 2019). "Putin and other authoritarians' corruption is a weapon – and a weakness". The Washington Post. "David Petraeus Offers Big Ideas for Leadership, Foreign Policy". Intelligence Matters. CBS News Radio. March 19, 2019. Guy Raz (May 21, 2019). "General David Petraeus". Wisdom From the Top (Podcast). Built-It Productions. "General David Petraeus: The Perils of Victory". What It Takes (Podcast). Academy of Achievement. June 3, 2019. Petraeus, David; Serchuk, Vance (April 1, 2020). "Can America Trust the Taliban to Prevent Another 9/11?". Foreign Affairs. Rubenstein, David (2020). "How to Lead: Wisdom from the World's Greatest CEOs, Founders, and Game Changers". Simon and Schuster (published September 1, 2020). pp. 223–41. Petraeus, David (2020). "General David Petraeus – Why fortune favours the prepared mind: how to surge your ideas". ChangeMakers (published September 25, 2020). Petraeus, David; Shulkin, David; Butler, Jeremy (2021). "A Memorial Day appeal to Congress: Help service members with toxic burn pit exposure". NBC News (published May 30, 2021). Petraeus, David (2021). "Gen. David Petraeus says the 'Taliban has the momentum' in Afghanistan". Fox News (published July 24, 2021). Petraeus, David (2021). "Gen. David Petraeus: Not Inconceivable For US to Recognize Taliban Government". Amanpour and Company (published September 2, 2021). Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Lewis, Duncan; Petraeus, David (2021). Twenty years since 9/11 with Major General Duncan Lewis and General David Petraeus. United States Studies Centre (published September 10, 2021). Retrieved February 10, 2022. Petraeus, David (December 23, 2021). Leadership Forged in Fire - General Petraeus. GovCon. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Stillwell, Blake (2021). "General Petraeus returned to duty days after being shot in the chest with an M-16". We Are The Mighty (published January 31, 2021). Petraeus, David; Chernow, Ronald; White, Ronald (April 27, 2022). The Presidency Ulysses Grant Bicentennial Dinner. C-Span. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Ex-CIA chief predicts Chinese President's next moves after Pelosi's Taiwan trip". CNN. August 3, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Petraeus, David (August 8, 2022). "Afghanistan Did Not Have to Turn Out This Way". The Atlantic. Retrieved August 12, 2022. "Putin's annexation announcement significant, but it's also desperate': Petraeus". ABC News. October 2, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2022. Turak, Natasha (October 4, 2022). "Ex-CIA chief's greatest concern in the Russia-Ukraine conflict is escalation 'spiraling out of control'". CNBC News. Retrieved October 11, 2022. Muratore, Andrea (February 3, 2023). "Putin Has Made NATO Great Again: A Dialogue With David Petraeus". Inside Over. Retrieved February 23, 2023. "Former Intelligence Officials Testify on National Security". C-Span. February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Lippman, Daniel (March 24, 2023). "Petraeus on the legacy of the Iraq invasion". Politico. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "America and the Taliban: Part One". YouTube. FrontLine PBS. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "Twenty Years After Saddam: The Future of the U.S.-Iraq Relationship A Conversation with David Petraeus". The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Retrieved April 14, 2023. Tavberidze, Vazha (April 18, 2023). "Ukraine War A Clear-Cut Case Of 'Right Versus Wrong,' Says Petraeus". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Bergen, Peter. Episode 2: What Keeps General David Petraeus Up at Night?. In The Room with Peter Bergen. Retrieved May 24, 2023 – via Audible. "Retired Army General weighs in after anti-Putin Russians claim Belgorod attack". YouTube. CNN. Retrieved May 26, 2023. Lorenz, G. C.; Willbanks, James H.; Petraeus, David H.; Stuart, Paul A.; Crittenden, Burr L.; George, Dewey P. (1983). "Operation Junction City, Vietnam 1967 : battle book". Ft. Leavenworth, KS: United States Army Command and General Staff College, Combat Studies Institute. OCLC 15637627. DTIC ADA139612. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Petraeus, David H. (1983). "What is Wrong with a Nuclear Freeze", Military Review v.63:49–64, November 1983. Petraeus, David H. (1984). "Light Infantry in Europe: Strategic Flexibility and Conventional Deterrence", Military Review v.64:33–55, December 1984. Petraeus, David H. (1985). "Review of Richard A. Gabriel's The Antagonists: A Comparative Combat Assessment of the Soviet and American Soldier". Military Affairs. 49 (1). Lexington, Va.: Society for Military History (published January 1985): 17–22. doi:10.2307/1988272. JSTOR 1988272. OCLC 37032240. Petraeus, David H. (1986), "Lessons of history and lessons of Vietnam", Parameters (Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army War College) 16(3): 43–53, Autumn 1986. Petraeus, David H. (1987). "The American military and the lessons of Vietnam: a study of military influence and the use of force in the post-Vietnam era". Princeton, NJ: Princeton University. OCLC 20673428. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Petraeus on Vietnam's Legacy, Rachel Dry, The Washington Post, January 14, 2007, excerpts from Petraeus's doctoral dissertation, "The American Military and the Lessons of Vietnam". Clark, Asa A., Kaufman, Daniel J., and Petraeus, David H. (1987). "Why an Army?" Army Magazine v38(2)26–34, February 1987. Petraeus, David H. (1987). "El Salvador and the Vietnam Analogy", Armed Force Journal International, February 1987. Taylor, William J. Jr.; Petraeus, David H. (1987). "The legacy of Vietnam for the U.S. military". In Osborn, George K. (ed.). Democracy, strategy, and Vietnam : implications for American policy making. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0669163407. OCLC 15518468. Petraeus, David H. (1987). "Korea, the Never-Again Club, and Indochina". Parameters. Vol. 17, no. 4. Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army War College (published December 1987). pp. 59–70. ISSN 0031-1723. OCLC 1039883. SuDoc No. D 101.72:17/4, GPO Item No. 0325-K, PURL LPS1511. Golden, James R.; Kaufman, Daniel J.; Clark, Asa A.; Petraeus, David H. (Eds) (1989), NATO at Forty: Change Continuity, & Prospects. Westview Press Petraeus, David H. (Summer 1989). "Military Influence And the Post-Vietnam Use of Force". Armed Forces & Society. 15 (4). Piscataway, NJ: 489–505. doi:10.1177/0095327X8901500402. OCLC 49621350. S2CID 145680799.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: date and year (link) Petraeus, David H.; Brennan, Robert A. (1997). "Walk and Shoot Training". Infantry Magazine. Vol. 87, no. 1. Ft. Benning, GA: U.S. Army Infantry School (published January–February 1997). pp. 36–40. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2011. Petraeus, David H.; Carr, Damian P.; Abercrombie, John C. (1997). "Why We Need FISTs – Never Send a Man When You Can Send a Bullet" (PDF). Field Artillery. Vol. 1997, no. 3. Fort Sill, OK: U.S. Army Field Artillery School (published May–June 1997). pp. 3–5. ISSN 0899-2525. OCLC 16516511. HQDA PB6-97-3, USPS 309-010, PURL, SuDoc No. D 101.77/2: 1997/3. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2007., "Lessons of the Iraq War and Its Aftermath". Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 2004. Archived from the original on April 14, 2013. (2006) "Learning Counterinsurgency: Observations from Soldiering in Iraq", Military Review Petraeus, David H. (2006). "A Conversation with Lieutenant General David H. Petraeus" (PDF). Insights. Vol. 3, no. 1. Suffolk, Va.: Lockheed Martin (published March 2006). pp. 2–5, 28–29. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 6, 2009. (2007) The U.S. Army/Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual (Foreword) "FM-3-24" (2007) "Beyond the Cloister", The American Interest Magazine Petraeus, David H. (2007). "Iraq: Progress in the Face of Challenge" (PDF). Army Magazine. Vol. 57, no. 10. Arlington, Va.: Association of the United States Army (published October 2007). pp. 115–23. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 26, 2007. Petraeus, David H. (2010). "Counterinsurgency Concepts: What We Learned in Iraq". Global Policy. 1 (1): 116–17. doi:10.1111/j.1758-5899.2009.00003.x. Petraeus, David H. (2010) "Shoulder to shoulder in Afghanistan", Policy Options, April 2010. Petraeus, David H. (2011). "Ryan C. Crocker: Diplomat and Partner Extraordinaire" (PDF). Army Magazine. Vol. 61, no. 4. Arlington, Va.: Association of the United States Army (published April 2011). pp. 16, 18. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 30, 2011. Petraeus, David H. (Summer–Fall 2012). "CIA's Directorate of Science and Technology, In-Q-Tel, and the Private Sector". Intelligencer: Journal of U.S. Intelligence Studies. Falls Church, Va.: Association of Former Intelligence Officers. pp. 7–10. Petraeus, David; Crocker, Ryan. "The General and the Ambassador: General David Petraeus, Ambassador Ryan Crocker". SoundCloud. Academy of Diplomacy. Retrieved May 11, 2023. Petraeus, David; Caruso, Philip (March 2019). "Coherence and Comprehensiveness: An American Foreign Policy Imperative". Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs. Petraeus, David; Serchuk, Vance (June 2019). "A Return to Pointe du Hoc: The Ideas that Defined President Reagan's Approach to the World and Why They Still Matter Today" (PDF). Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation & Institute. Petraeus, David (September 2019). The Cyber Defense Review: A Conversation with General (Ret.) David H. Petraeus (PDF). The Army Cyber Institute. pp. 15–19. Petraeus, David (October 28, 2020). "Tell Me How This Ends" (PDF). Domestic & International (Dis)Order: A Strategic Response (PDF). Aspen Strategy Group. pp. 109–14. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 2, 2020. Retrieved November 5, 2020. Pires, Nuno L.; Petraeus, David (2021). Holistic Command of War: Wellington, Spínola and Petraeus. Independently published. ISBN 979-8581778630. Petraeus, David; Woodson, Chuck (April 2021). "The CTX Interview General David Petraeus, US Army, retired". CTX. 2 (2): 36–47. Retrieved July 27, 2021. McMillion, Joshua; Petraeus, David. "E36 General David H.Petraeus". Tales of Leadership. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Petraeus, David; Roberts, Andrew (October 17, 2023). Conflict: The Evolution of Warfare from 1945 to Ukraine. Harper. ISBN 978-0063293137."Conflict" was #13 on The New York Times best seller list for the week of November 5, 2023, and #12 on USA Today's best seller list the week of October 25, 2023. It was named Aspects of History's Book of the Year in 2023 and appeared on Publishers Weekly's best seller list on November 3, 2023. It was included in The National Business Review’s annual selection of summer reading on December 24, 2023. It was listed under “Best Reads Of 2023” by: The Cipher Brief | December 17 Foreign Policy Research Institute | December 26 Modern War Institute | December 29 Petraeus appeared at the 2024 New Orleans Book Festival and spoke with ex-Mayor Mitch Landrieu about Conflict and the evolution of warfare. Biography portal United States portal Politics portal Hood event Iraq War troop surge of 2007 List of American federal politicians convicted of crimes MoveOn.org ad controversy "The General's Dilemma". The New Yorker. September 8, 2008. Petraeus is registered to vote as a Republican in New Hampshire—he once described himself to a friend as a northeastern Republican, in the tradition of Nelson Rockefeller—but he said that around 2002 after he became a two-star general, he stopped voting. "Lunch with the FT: David Petraeus". Financial Times. May 6, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2016. 'I'm completely non-partisan,' Petraeus continues. "Petraeus sworn in as CIA director". CNN. Retrieved September 7, 2011. Johnson, Kevin (November 9, 2012). "David Petraeus resigns from CIA". USA Today. Retrieved November 9, 2012. "Gates Notes Shift in Mission as Iraq Command Changes Hands". Defenselink.mil. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Holusha, John (January 23, 2007). "General Calls Iraq Situation Dire". The New York Times. Gordon, Michael (January 5, 2007). "Bush to Name a New General to Oversee Iraq". The New York Times. "Profile: Gen. David Petraeus". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. "David H. Petraeus – Central Intelligence Agency". CIA. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2012. "Overview – Yale Jackson Institute for Global Affairs". Retrieved January 24, 2024. Hames, Tim (February 11, 2008). "McCain and Petraeus the dream ticket". The Times. London. Retrieved March 31, 2010. "Generally Speaking". The New York Times. April 6, 2008. Retrieved March 31, 2010. "Petraeus says he's not interested in presidency". NBC News. December 23, 2007. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Obama replaces McChrystal with Petraeus". Houston Chronicle. June 23, 2010. Retrieved June 23, 2010.[dead link] Cooper, Helene; Shanker, Thom; Filkins, Dexter (June 23, 2010). "Gen. McChrystal Is Relieved of Command". The New York Times. Retrieved June 23, 2010. Peter Grier (June 23, 2010). "Gen. David Petraeus takes over in Afghanistan: Will it make a difference?". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Kathleen Hennessey (June 30, 2011). "Senate confirms David Petraeus as CIA director". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 30, 2011. Karen Parrish (July 1, 2011). "Petraeus Confirmed as CIA Director". U.S. Department of Defense. American Forces Press Service. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2011. Whitlock, Craig (February 3, 2015). "In e-mails, glimpses of a striving Tampa socialite and smitten military brass at U.S. Central Command" – via washingtonpost.com. Johnson, Kevin (November 9, 2012). "NBC: David Petraeus resigns from CIA". USA Today. Retrieved November 9, 2012. Schmidt, Michael; Apuzzo, Matt (January 9, 2015). "F.B.I. and Justice Dept. Said to Seek Charges for Petraeus". The New York Times. Pierre Thomas; Mike Levine; Jack Cloherty; Jack Date (March 3, 2015). "Former CIA Head David Petraeus to Plead Guilty". ABC News. Chappell, Bill (April 23, 2015). "Petraeus Sentenced To 2 Years' Probation, Fine For Sharing Classified Info". NPR News. "Miriam Sweet Howell". geni.com. March 27, 1912. "Sixtus Petraeus". geni.com. September 23, 1915. Editorial. "37-jarige 'familievriendin' ontving intimiderende mails minnares Petraeus". De Volkskrant. Carol Rock (June 21, 2008). "General David Petraeus' Father Dies In Santa Clarita Home". KHTS Radio. Retrieved November 18, 2012. "David Petraeus' Winning Streak". Vanity Fair. March 30, 2010. Retrieved July 9, 2010. Rick Atkinson (March 7, 2004). "Unexpected Challenges Tested Petraeus in Iraq". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2012. Bruno, Greg; January 11, 2007; New Iraq commander is Cornwall's favorite son Archived January 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine; Times-Herald Record. Retrieved January 13, 2007. "What About the Petraeus-Broadwell Spouses?". ABC News. November 15, 2012. Retrieved March 15, 2015. Thompson, Mark (November 14, 2012). "The Rise and Fall of 'General Peaches'". Time. "Hollister Knowlton Betrothed To David H. Petraeus, a Cadet". The New York Times. May 12, 1974. p. GN57. "General Petraeus Inducts ROTC Graduates". MIT Alumni Association. June 11, 2009. Archived from the original on June 9, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2010. "Gen. Petraeus Commissions His Son and 11 Other '09 Graduates". MIT Alumni Association. June 6, 2009. Archived from the original on June 3, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2010. "Petraeus reveals that son served in Afghanistan". Army Times. Retrieved November 9, 2011. "Gen. Petraeus owns property in New Hampshire". The Portsmouth Herald. Portsmouth, New Hampshire. Associated Press. October 7, 2008. Retrieved December 7, 2010. "Princeton University – Diplomatic historian and foreign policy scholar Richard Ullman dies". Princeton University. Petraeus, David H. (1987). "The American military and the lessons of Vietnam: A Study of Military Influence and the Use of Force in the Post-Vietnam Era". Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University. OCLC 20673428. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Jaffe, Greg; Cloud, David (2009). The Fourth Star: Four Generals and the Epic Struggle for the Future of the United States Army. New York: Crown Publishing. p. 97. ISBN 978-0307409072. petraeus georgetown fellowship 1995. Denn, William J. (October 7, 2016). "Strategic Command: General David Petraeus". armyupress.army.mil. "FM 3–24 text – Counterinsurgency – December 2006" (PDF). Usacac.army.mil. August 31, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2011. Retrieved May 3, 2011. Nutt, Cullen; March 2, 2008; The Star-Ledger Section 2-page 1 and 4. Ricks, Thomas Fiasco New York: Penguin Press, 2006, page 419. Barnes, Julian E.; October 31, 2005; "An Open Mind for a New Army" Archived August 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine; U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved April 2, 2008. "General David Petraeus Reflects on His Command in Iraq". Conversations with Bill Kristol. "Michael Gove: Triumph of freedom over evil". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2010. Petraeus, D. (September–October 2008) Multi-national Force-Iraq Commander's Counterinsurgency Guidance. Military Review English Edition. Retrieved May 17, 2010. Fred Kaplan, The Insurgents: David Petraeus and the Plot to Change the American Way of War, Simon & Schuster, 2013, pages 14-20. Gal Perl Finkel, "How to win a modern war", The Jerusalem Post, September 7, 2016. "Petraeus Set for Another Shot at Iraq". NPR. January 23, 2007. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Inskeep, Steve (February 6, 2007). "Lasting Ties Mark Gen. Petraeus's Career". NPR. Retrieved June 22, 2010. Atkinson, Rick (January 7, 2007). "Iraq Will be Petraeus' Knot to Untie". The Washington Post. p. A15. Atkinson, Rick, In the Company of Soldiers: A Chronicle of Combat (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 2004, ISBN 0641788037), p. 38. Barnes, Julian "An Open Mind for a New Army" Archived February 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine May 31, 2005. Retrieved April 2, 2008. "General Officer Announcements". DefenseLink. June 19, 2001. Retrieved October 29, 2007. "Army General Officer Announcement". DefenseLink. May 5, 2004. Retrieved October 29, 2007. "General Officer Announcements". DefenseLink. January 17, 2007. Retrieved October 29, 2007. Shanker, Thom (April 24, 2008). "2 Commanders Picked to Lead War Efforts Beyond 2008". The New York Times. Retrieved April 25, 2008. "Petraeus confirmed as commander". The Irish Times. June 30, 2010. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2010. "Gen. Petraeus to Assume Command of ISAF". ISAF Public Affairs Office. July 2, 2010. Archived from the original on July 20, 2010. Retrieved July 3, 2010. Dickey, Christopher (April 4, 2004). "The Story of O". The New York Times. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Buncombe, Andrew (April 11, 2007). "US general who acknowledges that the way ahead is not easy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on November 23, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Atkinson, Rick (January 7, 2007). "Iraq Will Be Petraeus' Knot to Untie". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Jennifer Hoar (March 18, 2007). "Iraq: Tell Me How This Ends, David Martin: It's Not Worth Arguing About Who Made Mistakes, Just How To End The War". CBS News. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Mark Hemingway (September 10, 2007). "General's Media Playbook". National Review. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Badkhen, Anna (April 15, 2007). "Can Petraeus lead U.S. to victory? / General may be military's best – and last – hope in Iraq". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Iraq's Repairman". Newsweek. July 4, 2004. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "CaseWeb: 1834.0 The Accidental Statesman: General Petraeus and the City of Mosul, Iraq". Harvard Kennedy School. October 4, 2006. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Ricks, Thomas. Fiasco (New York: Penguin Press, 2006) page 228-232. "Frontline: Beyond Baghdad: Interviews: Maj. Gen. David Petraeus". PBS. February 12, 2004. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Gordon, Michael (September 4, 2003). "The Struggle For Iraq: Reconstruction; 101st Airborne Scores Success In Northern Iraq". The New York Times. "Biggest challenge for 'pied piper of N. Iraq'". The Daily Telegraph. London. January 6, 2007. Archived from the original on November 23, 2007. Retrieved May 3, 2011. "Petraeus, Our Old New Man in Iraq". Military.com. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Leader of the Fabled 101st to Command in Iraq". NPR. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Atkinson, Rick (January 9, 2007). "New Iraq commander tough and driven". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 24, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Newsweek Cover: 'Can This Man Save Iraq?'". PR Newswire. June 27, 2004. Retrieved November 13, 2012. "Welcome support from Petraeus, Crocker for the Assyrian Christians of Iraq". Assistnews.net. September 13, 2007. Archived from the original on June 27, 2009. Retrieved July 5, 2010. David Petraeus (January–February 2006). "Learning Counterinsurgency: Observations from Soldiering in Iraq" (PDF). Military Review. pp. 45–56. Retrieved May 4, 2011. Dennis Steele (November 2003). "The race to win the peace" (PDF). Army Magazine. pp. 8–13. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 30, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Major Robert S. Widmann USAF. "The Commander's Emergency Response Program Part II". U.S. Cavalry. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "MSN | Outlook, Office, Skype, Bing, Breaking News, and Latest Videos". msn.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2004. Gordon, Michael R. (September 4, 2003). "101st Airborne Scores Success in Reconstruction of Northern Iraq". The New York Times. Retrieved May 3, 2011. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 27, 2007. Retrieved October 17, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Paradoxes of Counterinsurgency Operations from the U.S. Army/Marine Corps Counterinsurgency Field Manual". University of Chicago. Retrieved July 5, 2010. More by Peter W. Galbraith. "The Surge". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Fiasco by Thomas Ricks (New York: Penguin Press, 2006) page 232. Klein, Joe. "When Bad Missions Happen to Good Generals" Time January 22, 2007. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Gordon, Michael, and Bernard Trainor. Cobra II New York: Panetheon Books, 2006, pp. 455–56. Ajami, Faoud. The Foreigner's Gift (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2006) pp. 295–98. Petraeus, David H. (September 26, 2004). "Battling for Iraq". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 22, 2012. Allawi, Ali A. (2008). The Occupation of Iraq: Winning the War, Losing the Peace. Yale University Press. p. 361. ISBN 978-0300110159. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Kessler, Glenn (August 6, 2007). "Weapons Given to Iraq Are Missing on August 7, 2007". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "The Daily Beast". The Daily Beast. "U.S. shoots self in foot with lost weapons in Iraq". The Oakland Tribune. August 14, 2007. "US 'loses track' of Iraq weapons". BBC News. August 6, 2007. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Cornwell, Rupert (August 7, 2007). "Pentagon admits 190,000 weapons missing in Iraq". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Kessler, Glenn. "Weapons Given to Iraq Are Missing". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 1, 2010. "Learning Counterinsurgency: Observations from Soldiering in Iraq" in Military Review. "Book Discussion Insurgents" (Video). C-SPAN.org. Bush, George W. (2010). Decision Points. New York: Crown Publishing. p. 389. ISBN 978-0307888242. General Petraeus compared to other famous historical military Generals Mattingly, Matthew. (2019). "Purely Military Advice: Military Translation of Strategic Policy in Wars of Limited Aims" (PDF). Kansas: US Army Command and General Staff College: 17. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 29, 2020. Bush's comparison of General Petraeus with other historical U.S. military Generals {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "General Petraeus' Opening Statement". The New York Times. January 23, 2007. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Klein, Joe. "Operation Last Chance". Time. June 28, 2007. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Robinson, Linda. "Petraeus Tries to Make Headway in Iraq Archived April 1, 2008, at the Wayback Machine U.S. News & World Report May 28, 2007. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Baker, Peter. "General Is Front Man For Bush's Iraq Plan", The Washington Post, February 7, 2007. Retrieved February 8, 2007. Sennott, Charles M. "The Petraeus doctrine", The Boston Globe, January 28, 2007. Retrieved February 8, 2007. Ricks, Thomas E. "Petraeus selects team of warrior-intellectuals", NBC News, February 5, 2007. Retrieved February 7, 2007. Jung, Alex (March 11, 2009). "Meet the accidental guerrillas – Laura Miller". Salon. Retrieved July 4, 2010. Lozada, Carlos (March 22, 2009). "A Conversation With David Kilcullen". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 31, 2010. "Senate passes Iraq withdrawal bill; veto threat looms". CNN. April 26, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007. "Congress surrenders to Bush, FinalCall". Final Call. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Reid Blasts Generals on Iraq (June 15, 2007), Capital Hill Blue". Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. DeYoung, Karen (June 18, 2007). "Petraeus: Iraq 'Challenges' to Last for Years". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Burns, John F. "For Top General in Iraq, Role is a Mixed Blessing" The New York Times August 18, 2007. Retrieved April 16, 2008. "Petraeus lauds Iraq violence fall". BBC News. December 21, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2012. "The McLaughlin Group". Mclaughlin.com. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "The Official Web Site | United States Forces – Iraq" (PDF). Mnf-iraq.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 9, 2009. Retrieved July 4, 2010. Barnes, Julian E.; Spiegel, Peter (August 15, 2007). "Top general may propose pullbacks". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 22, 2012. "U.S. Department of Defense". U.S. Department of Defense. "Testimony to Congress on the Situation in Iraq" (PDF). The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Cloud, David S.; Shanker, Thom (September 11, 2007). "Petraeus Warns Against Quick Pullback in Iraq". The New York Times. Retrieved May 1, 2010. "Democratic response to president's address". MarketWatch. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Cloud, David S. (September 11, 2007). "Petraeus Warns Against Quick Pullback in Iraq". The New York Times. Iraq. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "Senator Jon Kyl Press Office". Kyl.senate.gov. September 10, 2007. Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Eric Weiner; Scott Neuman. "Political Junkie: The Impact of the Iraq Reports". NPR. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Page, Susan (September 19, 2007). "Poll: Public not swayed by Petraeus". USA Today. Retrieved May 1, 2010. "Summary of Findings: Petraeus' Proposals Favored, But No Lift in War Support". People-press.org. September 18, 2007. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "U.S. Senate: Legislation & Records Home – Votes – Roll Call Vote". U.S. Senate. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "Most Revealing Fibs: Hillary Clinton". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2010. Scott, Ann (October 23, 2007). "Finding a way forward in Iraq". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Dilanian, Ken (February 18, 2008). "Progress in Iraq reshapes debate over war". USA Today. Retrieved May 22, 2012. Robinson, Linda. "Why David Petraeus Wants to Go Slowly on Troop Drawdowns", U.S. News & World Report January 17, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Duffy, Michael. "The Surge At Year One" Time January 31, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. "Gates: US may slow Iraq drawdown". NBC News. February 11, 2008. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Myers, Stephen Lee and Thom Shanker. "Petraeus Urges Halt in Weighing Troop New Cut in Force" The New York Times April 9, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Michaels, Jim and David Jackson "Petraeus' Testimony Met with Praise, Skepticism" USA Today April 9, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Brown, Angela K. (May 22, 2008). ""A Top Senate Democrat Signals Support for Petraeus" Flaherty, Anne". Salon. Retrieved May 22, 2012.[dead link] ""US Central Command Opening Statement" May 22, 2008". Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. "Operational Update by MG Kevin Bergner, spokesman for Multi-National Force-Iraq, and MajGen Qassim Atta, spokesman for Operation Fardh Al Qanoon, Baghdad, Iraq, June 4, 2008". Mnf-iraq.com. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2012. "No victory in Iraq, says Petraeus". BBC News. September 11, 2008. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Gen. Petraeus Defines Victory in Iraq. NPR. Published March 18, 2008. Shanker, Thom; Farrell, Stephen (September 16, 2008). "Gates Praises Petraeus on Eve of Duty Transfer". The New York Times. Filkins, Dexter (August 20, 2008). "Exiting Iraq, Petraeus Says Gains Are Fragile". The New York Times. Iraq. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Hanson, Victor (2013). The Savior Generals: How Five Great Commanders Saved Wars That Were Lost – From Ancient Greece to Iraq. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1608191635. MacPherson, K. (May 31, 2009). Petraeus challenges seniors to pursue life of public service. Princeton University: News at Princeton. Retrieved August 13, 2011. Petraeus, Gen. David H. (May 28, 2009). "Commander's speech: NCAFP George F. Kennan Award, Union League Club, NYC, May 28". Parade: Entertainment, Recipes, Health, Life, Holidays. U.S. Central Command. Retrieved April 18, 2010. Depaulo, Lisa (October 31, 2008). "Leader of the Year: Right Man, Right Time". GQ. Retrieved February 19, 2017. Jacobs, Col. Jack (November 29, 2009). "General Petraeus Gives A War Briefing". Parade. Retrieved April 18, 2010. Zakaria, Fareed (January 4, 2009). "The General". Newsweek. Retrieved April 18, 2010. "US CentCom establishes center for Afghanistan, Pakistan analysts". Arab News. August 25, 2009. Archived from the original on December 13, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "General David Petraeus on Military Operations". C-Span. February 12, 2010. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "US General: Israeli-Palestinian Conflict Affects US Interests". Voice of America News. March 16, 2010. Archived from the original on August 28, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2010. "Statement of General David H. Petraeus, U.S. Army Commander U.S. Central Command before the Senate Armed Services Committee on the Posture of U.S. Central Command Mar 16, 2010" (PDF). U.S. Senate. March 16, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2010. Kampeas, Ron (March 18, 2010). "ADL: Petraeus testimony 'counterproductive'". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Retrieved March 22, 2010. "US General: Perceived Israel bias 'hurts us'". Aljazeera. March 17, 2010. Retrieved April 4, 2010. Klein, Philip (March 25, 2010). "Petraeus Sets the Record Straight on Israel". The American Spectator. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. Retrieved April 29, 2010. Boot, Max (March 25, 2010). "From the Horse's Mouth: Petraeus on Israel". Commentary. Retrieved April 29, 2010. Collins, Lauren (March 24, 2010). "General David Petraeus speaks at St. Anselm College". New England Cable News. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2010. "Petraeus Denies Presidential Primary Town Trip Is Linked to Politics". Fox News. March 24, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Professor of War". Vanity Fair. May 2010. Mazzetti, Mark; Shane, Scott (May 5, 2010). "Evidence Mounts for Taliban Role in Bomb Plot". The New York Times. "Gen. Petraeus: Shahzad Acted Alone". CBS News. May 7, 2010. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "Holder: Pakistani Taliban helped direct Times Square plot". CNN. May 9, 2010. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "David Petraeus Collapses During Senate Hearing". Politically Illustrated. June 15, 2010. Archived from the original on July 15, 2011. Retrieved July 20, 2010. Schmitt, Eric (October 6, 2009). "General Petraeus Has Prostate Cancer". The New York Times. Retrieved March 31, 2010. Fritze, John (June 15, 2010). "Gen. David Petraeus passes out on Capitol Hill – On Politics: Covering the US Congress, Governors, and the 2010 Election". USA Today. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Petraeus takes command in Afghanistan". CBC News. July 4, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Remarks by Gen. David H. Petraeus upon Assumption of Command". International Security Assistance Force, Afghanistan. July 4, 2010. Archived from the original on July 15, 2010. Retrieved July 9, 2010. "Letter to the Troops from Gen. David H. Petraeus". International Security Assistance Force, Afghanistan. July 4, 2010. Archived from the original on July 8, 2010. Retrieved July 9, 2010. Al Pessin (August 2, 2010). "Petraeus Issues First Guidance to Allied Troops in Afghanistan". VOA News. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Peter Bergen (August 1, 2023). "How Was Afghanistan Lost to the Taliban - Again? Ep. 1" (Podcast). Audible. "Gen. Petraeus updates guidance on use of force". Centcom.mil. Retrieved May 21, 2012. "Setting – and Capitalizing on – Conditions for Progress in Afghanistan" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on February 17, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2011. Coll, Steve (2019). Directorate S: The C.I.A. and America's Secret Wars in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Penguin Group. pp. 486–489, 570–571, 593–595. ISBN 9780143132509. "The bin Laden plot to kill President Obama". The Washington Post. March 16, 2012. "Usama bin Laden wanted to kill Obama so 'totally unprepared' Biden would be president, declassified docs show". Fox News. April 22, 2020. "Nine Afghan Boys Collecting Firewood Killed by NATO Helicopters", The New York Times Nissenbaum, Dion; Habib Khan Totakhil (March 3, 2011). "Coalition Apologizes for Deaths of Afghan Children". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "Petraeus hands over command in Afghanistan". CNN. July 18, 2011. Jim Garamone (August 31, 2011). "Petraeus Garners Praise at Retirement Ceremony". American Forces Press Service. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2011. "David Petraeus - Military Retirement Speech". YouTube. AmericanRhetoric. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. Kimberly Dozier; Robert Burns (August 31, 2011). "Petraeus: Budget cuts must not impair military". Army Times. Associated Press. Retrieved September 1, 2011. "Remarks at the Retirement Ceremony for General David H. Petraeus". U.S. Department of Defense. August 31, 2011. Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved September 1, 2011. "Armed forces farewell tribute and retirement ceremony in honor of Gen. David H. Petraeus". Joint Chiefs of Staff. August 31, 2011. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011. Retrieved September 1, 2011. Tom Vanden Brook (January 30, 2016). "Pentagon won't demote Petraeus for sharing classified information". USA Today. Retrieved July 29, 2016. "Nominations Before the Senate Armed Services Committee, Second Session, 110th Congress" (PDF). Shear, Michael D. (April 28, 2011). "Obama Announces Changes to National Security Team". The New York Times. Kathleen Hennessey (June 30, 2011). "Senate confirms David Petraeus as CIA director". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 30, 2011. For the three Democrats and three Republicans who did not cast a vote on this confirmation, see Obama confirmations, 2010. David H. Petraeus Takes Helm as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency Archived October 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine cia.gov September 6, 2011 Vice President Biden Visits CIA Headquarters for Ceremony with Director Petraeus Archived October 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine cia.gov October 12, 2011 Scott Shane, Petraeus's Quieter Style at C.I.A. Leaves Void on Libya Furor The New York Times November 2, 2012 Broadwell, Paula (November 5, 2012). "General David Petraeus's Rules for Living". Newsweek. Adam Entous, Siobhan Gorman, and Margaret Coker CIA Takes Heat for Role in Libya The Wall Street Journal November 1, 2012 Petraeus told biographer to stop harassing family friend, officials say The Washington Post November 12, 2012 "The other ... other woman: Florida housewife emerges at center of Petraeus scandal" Fox News November 13, 2012 Scott Shane and Charlie Savage, Officials Say F.B.I. Knew of Petraeus Affair in the Summer The New York Times November 11, 2012 Petraeus resigns after affair with biographer turned up in FBI probe, Fox News confirms Fox News, November 9, 2012 Petraeus' biographer Paula Broadwell under FBI investigation over access to his email, law enforcement officials say NBC News, November 9, 2012 Kimberly Dozier and Pete Yost, Petraeus shocked to hear of emails, associates say Archived November 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Associated Press November 12, 2012 "Holder notified of Petraeus probe in late summer -- did he tell anyone?". Fox News. November 12, 2012. Sari Horwitz and Greg Miller, FBI probe of Petraeus triggered by e-mail threats from biographer, officials say The Washington Post November 11, 2012 CIA director David Petraeus resigns over extramarital affair Archived November 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine CNN, November 9, 2012 "CIA chief David Petraeus' resignation over extramarital affair shocks Washington". The Times Of India. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2012. Halkett, Kimberly (November 13, 2012), "David Petraeus: A US war hero?", Inside Story Americas, Al Jazeera, archived from the original on November 16, 2012, retrieved November 16, 2012. Sleeth, Peter; Bernton, Hal (November 9, 2012), Lost to History: Missing War Records Complicate Benefit Claims by Iraq, Afghanistan Veterans, ProPublica, retrieved November 12, 2012. Ingersoll, Geoffrey (November 16, 2012), "Petraeus Allegedly Earned A Bronze Star For Combat Valor 'Without Firing his Rifle'", Business Insider, Business Insider, retrieved December 18, 2012. "Ex-CIA chief Petraeus to plead guilty, admits giving mistress secrets". MSN.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2015. Lamothe, Dan (March 3, 2015). "'There's code word stuff in there': Case against David Petraeus laid out in court documents". The Washington Post. "David Petraeus Is Sentenced to Probation in Leak Investigation". The New York Times. April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. Starr, Barbara (January 19, 2016). "Demotion for Petraeus an option as Pentagon reviews case". CNN. Atlanta. Whitlock, Craig; Goldman, Adam (January 30, 2016). "Pentagon won't punish David Petraeus any further in sex-and-secrets scandal". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 30, 2016. "William J. Donovan Award Dinner" (PDF). The OSS Society. October 26, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2014. "New Role for David Petraeus: Professor". CNN. April 23, 2013. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2013. "Ex-CIA director Petraeus accepts $1-a-year job". Associated Press. July 15, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. UPDATE: College students harass retired Gen. David Petraeus Archived September 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Military Times September 9, 2013 "Gen. David Petraeus joins faculty at USC". LA Observed. May 2, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2013. "Former Gen. Petraeus to serve on Camp Toccoa board". Gainesville Times. May 7, 2013. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2013. "David Petraeus joins private-equity firm KKR". Politico. May 30, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013. "David H. Petraeus Member, Chairman of the KKR Global Institute". July 24, 2014. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Gen. David Petraeus Joins Team Rubicon's Board of Advisors" (Press release). June 18, 2013. Archived from the original on July 7, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "General (Retd) David H Petraeus named RUSI Senior Vice President" (Press release). August 20, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013. "Petraeus joins Harvard's Kennedy School". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013. "David Petraeus on Strategic Leadership". Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University. Archived from the original on February 12, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "Our network". University of Exeter Strategy and Security Institute. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. "General Keane on General Petraeus's Strategy". National Geographic YouTube. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Timm, Trevor (September 2, 2015). "David Petraeus' bright idea: give terrorists weapons to beat terrorists". The Guardian. Retrieved March 23, 2021. "David Petraeus, Mark Kelly launch gun control group". CNN. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "David Petreaus Visits Campus, Discusses Time as Commander of U.S., Allied Forces in Iraq and Afghanistan" (Press release). Tufts Fletcher School. March 10, 2016.[permanent dead link] Ullman, Harlan (August 6, 2018). "Stansfield Turner, David Petraeus true soldiers, scholars, statesmen". United Press International. Sturgeon, Kenna (October 2, 2018). "Film celebrating Stars and Stripes military newspaper premieres in DC". The Hill. "General David Petraeus joins Institute for Conflict, Cooperation and Security". University of Birmingham. June 12, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "Class of 2020 celebrated 500 nights until graduation". U.S. Army. Borger, Julian; Smith, David (November 18, 2016). "Michael Flynn said to be offered job of Trump national security adviser". The Guardian. Clarke, Hilary (November 23, 2016). "Petraeus says he is willing to serve in Trump administration". CNN. Landler, Mark (November 28, 2016). "David Petraeus, Secretary of State Candidate, Meets With Trump". The New York Times. Landler, Mark; Steinhauer, Jennifer (December 1, 2016). "Secretary of State David Petraeus? Supporters Make Their Case". The New York Times. Lippman, Daniel (December 13, 2016). "Petraeus: I'm 'grateful' Trump considered me for secretary of state". Politico. Cronk, Terri (April 14, 2021). "Biden Announces Full U.S. Troop Withdrawal From Afghanistan by Sept. 11". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Thomas, Ken; Salama, Vivian (August 17, 2021). "Biden Wanted to Leave Afghanistan. He Knew the Risks". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Former CIA director on 'disastrous outcome' of US exit from Afghanistan". Fox News. August 17, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Varadarajan, Tunku (August 20, 2021). "David Petraeus Reflects on the Afghan Debacle". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Gen. Petraeus on Biden's planned pull-out from Afghanistan: 'I fear we are going to regret this decision'". Fox News. May 12, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Cohen, David (July 18, 2021). "Retired U.S. general: Afghanistan is disintegrating". Politico. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Cornish, Audie (August 13, 2021). "Former CIA Director Gen. Petraeus Discusses The Taliban's Resurgence In Afghanistan". NPR. All Things Considered. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Urs, Gehriger (August 15, 2021). ""What is unfolding in Afghanistan is truly catastrophic and did not have to happen"". DIE Weltwoche. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Kilmeade, Brian (August 16, 2021). "Taliban Now In Control of Afghanistan For First Time Since 2001". Brian Kilmeade Show. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Bergen, Peter (August 25, 2021). "General Petraeus: The 'disheartening and sad' endgame". CNN News. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Gen. Petraeus speaks on Afghanistan collapse, U.S. withdrawal". NBC News. August 16, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Ukrainian World Congress launches strategic advisory council for defence of Ukraine". YouTube. CPAC. "Former officials analyze U.S. options if Russia invades Ukraine in tabletop exercise". Andrea Mitchell Reports. MSNBC. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Ret. Gen. David Petraeus breaks down Russia's war strategy". CNN Politics. CNN. March 6, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "'Staggering': Retired general on Russian convoy's tactics". Anderson Cooper 360. CNN. March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Former CIA director explains the missteps of Russia's 'underwhelming performance'". Fox News Flash. Fox News. March 12, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "David Petraeus: What Putin Has Really Done Is Make NATO Great Again". YouTube. MSNBC. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Russia's invasion after 100 days: Ukraine goes on the offensive". Sunday Morning. CBS News. June 7, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Schogol, Jeff (June 13, 2022). "Russia is hammering Ukraine with up to 60,000 artillery shells and rockets every day". Task and Purpose. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Watch CNBC's full interview with David Petraeus, former CIA director and retired army general". CNBC. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Gen. David Petraeus – Ukraine conflict, is a world war threat". The Cats Roundtable with John Catsimatidis. CATS Roundtable. March 13, 2022. "Retired Gen. Petraeus explains how Ukrainians are taking out Russian generals". State of the Union. CNN. March 20, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Inside Politics With John King". SnapStream. CNN. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "'Huge impact': Ex-CIA director on success of US rocket systems in Ukraine". YouTube. CNN. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Ex-CIA director predicts 'terrible, painful retreat' for Russia". YouTube. CNN. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "David Petraeus on new Western aid for the war in Ukraine and Russian military shake-up". The Washington Post Live. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Nagorski, Tom (May 17, 2023). "Petraeus: Ukraine Counteroffensive Likely To Set Russians Back". The Messenger. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "General Petraeus: The spring offensive will be 'much more successful' than many think". YouTube. Deutsche Welle News. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Laco, Kelly; Murray, Andrew (December 13, 2022). "Gen. Petraeus says Ukraine, military readiness top priorities for NDAA, vax mandate outrage 'manufactured'". Fox News. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Gen. David Petraeus: Putin has completely miscalculated from the beginning". Your World Cavuto. Fox News. December 21, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Petraeus: US would 'take out' Russia's forces if Putin uses nuclear weapons". YouTube. AP Archive. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Retired general explains why tanks are so significant on the battlefield". YouTube. CNN. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "What does Ukraine need to win in 2023?". Atlantic Council. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Salisbury, Susan (January 11, 2023). "Petraeus: Russia and Ukraine will agree to negotiated resolution of war". Palm Beach Daily News. Special to the Daily News. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Bergen, Peter (February 14, 2023). "Gen. David Petraeus: How the war in Ukraine will end". CNN. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Rasmussen, Anders; Slaughter, Anne-Marie; Petraeus, David; Hsi-min, Lee; Allison, Graham; Gottemoeller, Rose; Braw, Elisabeth; Krebs, Chris; Shagina, Maria; Gilli, Mauro; Serchuk, Vance; Theil, Stefan (January 5, 2023). "Lessons for the Next War". Foreign Policy. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy honored with Atlantic Council Global Citizen Award in Kyiv". Atlantic Council. May 30, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. "Former CIA chief optimistic about Ukraine's looming counteroffensive". Ukrinform. June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Boot, Max (June 9, 2023). "The Ukrainian offensive is beginning. David Petraeus is optimistic". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 19, 2023. "Ex-CIA director identifies key factor in Ukrainian counteroffensive". YouTube. CNN. Amanpour, Christiane (August 29, 2023). "'The Ukrainians know best': General David Petraeus on counteroffensive". Amanpour. CNN. Amanpour, Christiane (January 8, 2024). "Putin 'won't stop there' if he wins in Ukraine, says fmr top US general". Amanpour. CNN. Coll, Steve (September 8, 2008). "The General's Dilemma". The New Yorker. Retrieved December 4, 2016. Shelbourne, Mallory (December 4, 2016). "'Apolitical' Petraeus says he did not vote in election". The Hill. Retrieved December 4, 2016. "New York Launch of the CFR-Sponsored Independent Task Force Report "North America: Time for a New Focus"". Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Board of Directors". Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Speakers". Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Team Rubicon Team & Board". Retrieved February 26, 2018. "Optiv Security Appoints Dave DeWalt and General (Ret.) David Petraeus to Board of Directors". September 7, 2017. Retrieved February 26, 2018. "Wilson Center Global Advisory Council". Retrieved February 26, 2018. "Giffords Press Release Announcing Veterans Coalition for Common Sense". Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 26, 2018. "Panthera Conservation Council". Retrieved February 26, 2018. "Petraeus". RUSI. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Institute for the Study of War: 2017 Impact Highlights" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Advisory Council". American Corporate Partners. "Gen. Petraeus joins SVA as USC Chapter Advisor". Student Veterans of America. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Vets @ Work". kkr.com. February 23, 2015. Tamburin, Adam (November 18, 2014). "David Petraeus: Veterans are 'precious resources'". Tennessean. USA Today. "Staff And Board » Iraq And Afghanistan Veterans Of America (IAVA)". September 29, 2014. Archived from the original on May 18, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "General (Ret.) David H. Petraeus Joins Concordia Leadership Council". Concordia. September 21, 2015. "Sen. Joseph Lieberman and Gen David Petraeus, USA (Ret.) Join McCain Institute Board of Trustees". The McCain Institute for International Leadership. December 17, 2015. "Gen. David Petraeus, Distinguished Academics Form Board of Academic Advisors for the Warrior-Scholar Project". Warrior-Scholar Project. February 17, 2016. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Advisory Board". Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "National Security Advisory Council". USGLC. "Arthur F. Burns Fellowship Trustees". International Center for Journalists. "Ft. Campbell Historical Foundation Form 990" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 8, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "AHS Welcomes General Petraeus to its Board of Advisors". Alexander Hamilton Society. October 17, 2016. "Gen. David H. Petraeus (U.S. Army, Ret.) Joins PSA Advisory Board". Partnership for a Secure America. March 23, 2017. Archived from the original on March 27, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Churchill Fellows inducted at Westminster College". Fulton Sun. April 9, 2017. "Board of Directors and Council of Advisors – Army Heritage Center Foundation". armyheritage.org. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. "Golden Plate Awards Council". Academy of Achievement. "About Us". Camp Toccoa at Currahee Inc. "Leadership". The OSS Society. "CIA Director David Petraeus Visits The Ivy Club" (PDF). The Ivy Club. "General (Ret.) David Petraeus Joins NCUSAR International Advisory Committee". National Council on US-Arab Relations. October 31, 2016. "Advisors to the Boards". US-India Strategic Partnership Forum. November 6, 2020. "The Cipher Brief Expert". The Cipher Brief. "People". Third Option Foundation. "Membership List" (PDF). The Trilateral Commission. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2020. Retrieved June 28, 2021. "CIA Leadership". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2012. "United Nations Mission in Haiti". United Nations. Archived from the original on March 26, 2009. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Lisa Millar, Order of Australia for General Petraeus, November 4, 2009, abc.net.au Honorary Officer (AO) in the Military Division Archived April 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, November 3, 2009, Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, Special Issue No. S172 Canada, Service (August 31, 2016). "News". aem. Comellini, Luca Marco. "Croce d'Oro al Merito dell'Arma dei carabinieri al generale David Howell Petraeus, un controsenso" (in Italian). Tiscali SpA. Retrieved June 28, 2011. Select Committee on Intelligence (June 14, 2011). "Questionnaire for Completion by Presidential Appointees" (PDF). United States Senate. Retrieved June 28, 2011. "Saakashvili gives Hillary Clinton the Golden Fleece award". Democracy & Freedom Watch. November 17, 2013. "Former CIA Director and retired General David Petraeus received the "200 Years of Diplomatic Relations" distinction in the degree of Grand Cross, a special honor for his work strengthening the Colombia-U.S. strategic alliance". Twitter. The Embassy of Colombia-US. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "General David H. Petraeus, Commander of the United States Central Command, is Eckerd College Commencement Speaker". Eckerd College News and Events. March 16, 2010. "Honorary Degrees, May 2012". University of Pennsylvania Commencement. May 14, 2012. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "CIA Director David Petraeus urges Dickinson College graduates to serve others and work through frustration". The Patriot News (Pennlive.com). May 20, 2012. "Politico New York Playbook". Politico. June 18, 2019. McCain, John (May 3, 2007). "The 2007 Time 100". Time. Retrieved June 15, 2021. "The most influential US conservatives 2007: 81-100". The Telegraph. October 29, 2007. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2021. Klein, Joe (December 19, 2007). "Person of the Year 2007". Time. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "General Petraeus: man with a message of hope". The Telegraph. December 30, 2007. DePaulo, Lisa (October 31, 2008). "Leader of the Year: Right Man, Right Time". GQ. Retrieved June 19, 2021. Crabtree, James (December 17, 2008). "Public intellectual of 2008: David Petraeus". Prospect. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "The world's most powerful people". RedCliff News. December 28, 2008. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Petraeus, David H. (2009). "Remarks on Accepting the George F. Kennan Award for Distinguished Public Service from the National Committee on American Foreign Policy on May 28, 2009". American Foreign Policy Interests. 31 (4): 275–79. doi:10.1080/10803920903136320. S2CID 153860260. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Brooks, Steve. "Petraeus receives Legion service medal". The American Legion. Retrieved April 13, 2021. "2009 Leadership Awards: Bush, Kohl, Petraeus, Palmisano and Hampson". Atlantic Council. December 28, 2008. Retrieved June 22, 2021. "Union League of Philadelphia Silver Medal". The Heritage Center of the Union League of Philadelphia. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Father Of The Year". The Father's Day / Mother's Day Council. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Dwight D. Eisenhower Award". National Defense Industrial Association. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "OSS Reborn". Gen. David Petraeus Receives the William J. Donovan Award. June 2009. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "OSS Reborn". 2009 Freedom Award Gala. May 1, 2009. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Congressional Medal of Honor Society Awards and Recognitions". Congressional Medal of Honor Society. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Recognizing outstanding leadership in the business community". Military Hall of Honor. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Quiñones, Eric. "Leach, Petraeus to receive top alumni awards". Princeton University. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Knich, Diane (April 15, 2010). "Citadel honors Petraeus". The Post and Courier. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Top Award". U.S. Dept of Defense. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "General David H. Petraeus Receives Intrepid Freedom Award". Intrepid Museum. Retrieved April 12, 2021. "50 People Who Matter 2010". NewStatesman. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Swift, Andrew (April 15, 2010). "Citadel honors Petraeus". Foreign Policy. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Vice President to Speak Monday at VFW Convention". Veterans of Foreign Wars. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "General David H. Petraeus USMA 1974". The Thayer Hotel. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Gates, Robert (April 21, 2011). "The 2011 Time 100". Time. Retrieved April 4, 2021. "Gold Plate Awardees". Academy of Achievement. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Golden Eagle Awards". Society of American Military Engineers. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. "General David Petraeus Awarded RUSI Chesney Gold Medal". RUSI. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "Chesney Gold Medal Awarded to General David H Petraeus 2013". YouTube. RUSI. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "New-York Historical Society's History Markers Gala". Black Tie Magazine. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "The Holland Society of New York". Way Back Machine. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Walsh, Kate (October 2015). "WashingtonExec Leadership Council Honors Gen. David Petraeus with Luminary Award". WashingtonExec. Retrieved April 19, 2021. "US-Arab Business and Healthcare Summit, NYC". July 30, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2021. "General Petraeus". The Common Good Us. May 27, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "Churchill Leadership Award to General David Petraeus". International Churchill Society. October 15, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Mawr, Bryn (September 19, 2018). "General David H. Petraeus Receives 2018 Soldier Citizen Award". The American College of Financial Services. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. "2019 Recanati-Kaplan Award for Civic Excellence and Cultural Engagement". 92Y. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Announcing Voices 2021 Gala Honorees". International Churchill Society. September 22, 2021. Retrieved November 4, 2021. "Top Voices in the Military Community: 10 U.S. creators to follow on LinkedIn". LinkedIn News. Retrieved November 18, 2022. "The Bulletin". The Union League Club. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "US citizens under personal sanctions, including a ban on entry into the Russian Federation". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation. Retrieved November 18, 2022. "IAVA's Annual Heroes Gala". Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America. Retrieved November 22, 2022. "David Petraeus appointed Kissinger Senior Fellow". Yale Jackson School of Global Affairs. McIntyre, Douglas. "The 21 Greatest Generals in American History". 24/7 Wall St. "General David H. Petraeus to Keynote the 12th Annual C3 Summit on September 11 in New York City". Yahoo! Finance. August 30, 2023. "David and Holly Petraeus to Receive Inaugural Dickinson College President's Award". "40th Anniversary Gala Celebration". "Fort Ti honors General David H. Petraeus". Barnes, Julian E. (May 28, 2009). "An open mind for a new Army: David Petraeus". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on August 11, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "The Time 100". Time. May 3, 2007. Archived from the original on May 5, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2010. "Person of the Year 2007". Time. December 19, 2007. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2010. "The most influential US conservatives: 1–20". The Daily Telegraph. London. October 31, 2007. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2010. "General Petraeus: man with a message of hope". The Daily Telegraph. London. December 30, 2007. Retrieved March 31, 2010. "US-Präsidentschaftswahlen: Bush geht – seine Außenpolitik bleibt". Der Spiegel. May 27, 2008. Retrieved July 5, 2010. "National Security Dissertations Top ProQuest's Best-Selling Dissertations List". ProQuest. Retrieved May 4, 2021. "Top 100 Public Intellectuals". Foreign Policy. Retrieved July 4, 2010. Hamill, Ken (May 2008). "Static Line Awards 2008" (PDF). Devils Digest. 3 (2). 508th Airborne Chapter, 82nd Airborne Division Association. Retrieved November 9, 2012. Jon Meacham (December 19, 2008). "The Story of Power". Newsweek. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "An intellectual surge". Prospect-magazine.co.uk. January 17, 2009. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved July 4, 2010. Richardson, John H. (October 2009). "The 75 Best People in the World". Esquire. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Awards and Recognitions". Congressional Medal of Honor Society. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "Alumni Class Notes". Department of Communications University of Washington. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "PROFNET EXPERT ALERTS: 2010 Commencement Speakers". Bloomberg News. May 5, 2010. "Barbara Walters Most Fascinating People of 2010". ABC News. "12. People Who Mattered". Time. December 15, 2010. Archived from the original on December 19, 2010. "50 People Who Matter 2010". New Statesman. September 21, 2010. "Foreign Policy's Second Annual List of the 100 Top Global Thinkers". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on September 4, 2011. Retrieved October 1, 2011. "50 People Who Matter in 2011". New Statesman. September 26, 2011. "Special Operations Forces Symposium and Exposition 2011". Sofex.org. Archived from the original on November 4, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Cherlin, Reid; Fischer, Rob; Horowitz, Jason; Zengerle, Jason (February 2012). "The 50 Most Powerful People in Washington". GQ. "2012 ROA National Security Symposium, January 29 – February 1, 2012: Program" (PDF). Reserve Officers Association. p. 11/21. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 1, 2012. "Distinguished Service Cross for "Mister mission Impossible"". Retrieved February 15, 2012. "General David Petraeus Receives Royal Honor from the Netherlands". The Netherlands Embassy in Washington, D.C. March 20, 2012. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2012. "Golden Plate Awardees of the American Academy of Achievement". achievement.org. American Academy of Achievement. "Petraeus-Hertog Lecture Leadership". New-York Historical Society. "New-York Historical Society's History Makers Gala". Black Tie Magazine. Rice, Daniel; Vigna, John (July 4, 2013). West Point Leadership: Profiles of Courage. Leadership Educational Foundation. ISBN 978-0989147309. "Letters from Abbottabad: Bin Ladin Sidelined?". Combating Terrorism Center. May 3, 2012. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012. "Bin Laden: Kill Obama to Make Biden President". ABC News. May 3, 2012. "Annual Gala". 92nd Street Young Men's and Young Women's Hebrew Association. Retrieved February 12, 2021. "92Y Spring Gala – A One of a Kind Night for a One of a Kind Place". New York Social Diary. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "An Online Master Class in Leadership with General (Ret.) David H. Petraeus". 92nd Street Young Men's and Young Women's Hebrew Association. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Pinsky, Seth (June 13, 2020). "How culture can evade its near-death experience during coronavirus". CNN. Retrieved February 12, 2021. "General David Petraeus to give Lees Knowles Lecture". Cambridge University's Trinity College. November 16, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2022. "Lees Knowles Lecture". Cambridge University's Trinity College. November 16, 2021. "The General David H. Petraeus Center For Emerging Leaders". The Institute For The Study Of War. Retrieved February 23, 2021. "The General David H. Petraeus Center for Emerging Leaders". Intel Hubspot. January 19, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2021.[permanent dead link] "Counterinsurgency Field Manual: Afghanistan Edition – By Nathaniel C. Fick & John A. Nagl". Foreign Policy. January 5, 2009. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Documentary". The Institute for the Study of War. December 1, 2009. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Annual Dinner 2010". American Enterprise Institute. June 24, 2010. Archived from the original on August 4, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Reflections on the "Counterinsurgency Decade": Small Wars Journal Interview with General David H. Petraeus". Small Wars Journal. September 1, 2013. Retrieved September 3, 2013. "FSR Exclusive with David Petraeus". Fletcher Security Review. May 22, 2014. Retrieved May 23, 2014. "Report Launch of the CFR-Sponsored Independent Task Force on North America". YouTube. October 2, 2014. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2014. "Petraeus and Zoellick urge U.S. to pay attention to North America". October 21, 2014. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2014. "Petraeus: The Islamic State isn't our biggest problem in Iraq". The Washington Post blogs. March 20, 2015. Retrieved March 20, 2015. "Q&A David Petraeus GS '85 GS '87". The Daily Princetonian. May 29, 2015. Archived from the original on June 3, 2015. Retrieved June 2, 2015. "Lowy Lecture 2015: General (Ret.) David Petraeus AO". Lowy Institute. September 2, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015. "Walk and Shoot Training" File:Petraeus Brennan Walk and Shoot.pdf "Microsoft Word – FM 3-24 Final Electronic File.doc" (PDF). Retrieved July 4, 2010. David H. Petraeus. "Beyond the Cloister – David H. Petraeus". The American Interest Magazine. Archived from the original on February 14, 2008. Retrieved July 4, 2010. "Hardcover Nonfiction Best Sellers November 5, 2023". The New York Times. "USA TODAY's Best-selling Booklist". USA Today. "Aspects of History Book of the Year: Conflict". Aspects of History. November 26, 2023. "Publishers Weekly Best Seller List". Archived from the original on November 28, 2023. "My year in books – a 2023 review". The National Business Review. December 24, 2023. "The Best Reads of 2023: A Holiday Gift Guide". The Cipher Brief. December 17, 2023. "2023 Holiday Book Recommendations". Foreign Policy Research Institute. December 26, 2023. "WAR BOOKS: THE BEST BOOKS WE READ IN 2023". Modern War Institute. December 29, 2023. "Conflict: The Evolution of Warfare from 1945 to Ukraine - General David H. Petraeus". YouTube. NOLA. Goldman, Adam (January 25, 2016). "How David Petraeus avoided felony charges and possible prison time". The Washington Post. Deresiewicz, William (March 1, 2010). "Solitude and Leadership: If you want others to follow, learn to be alone with your thoughts". Phi Beta Kappa, The American Scholar. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Cloud, David; Greg Jaffe (2009). The Fourth Star: Four Generals and the Epic Struggle for the Future of the United States Army. Random House. ISBN 978-0307409065. Robinson, Linda (2008). Tell Me How This Ends: General David Petraeus and the Search for a Way Out of Iraq. PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1586487669. plus Book Lecture at the Pritzker Military Library on November 22, 2008 David Petraeus at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Appearances on C-SPAN David Petraeus at IMDb David Petraeus collected news and commentary at The Guardian FBI file on David Petraeus at the Internet Archive