Year 929 (CMXXIX) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. January 16 – Emir Abd al-Rahman III of Córdoba, Spain, proclaims himself caliph and creates the Caliphate of Córdoba. He breaks his allegiance to, and ties with, the Fatimid and Abbasid caliphs. February 3 – Guy, Margrave of Tuscany, second husband (third lover) of the Roman noblewoman Marozia, dies. He is succeeded by his brother Lambert as margrave of Tuscany. Early 929 – Siege of Gana: German king Henry the Fowler besieges Gana with an East Frankish army and conquers the stronghold. He establishes the fort of Meissen nearby. Early 929 – Henry the Fowler invades Bohemia from the north and marches on Prague. Duke Arnulf I of Bavaria invades Bohemia from the south. The Bohemians capitulate. Summer – The Slavic-Arab leader Sabir defeats a small Byzantine fleet and seizes Termoli (in Molise, on the Adriatic coast). He returns to Africa laden with booty and slaves. September 4 – Battle of Lenzen: Slavic forces (the Redarii and the Obotrites) are defeated by a Saxon army near the fortified stronghold of Lenzen (modern Germany). October 7 – Charles the Simple, former king of West Francia, dies in prison at Péronne, leaving Rudolph with no opposition except that of Herbert II, Count of Vermandois. Mpu Sindok, ruler of the Mataram Kingdom, moves his court from Central to East Java (modern Indonesia), probably after the eruption of Mount Merapi and/or invasion from Srivijaya. Pope Leo VI dies at Rome after a 7-month reign. He is succeeded (probably handpicked–by Marozia from the Tusculani family) by Stephen VII as the 124th pope of the Catholic Church. September 29 – Qian Chu, king of Wuyue (d. 988) al-Ta'i', Abbasid caliph of Baghdad (d. 1003) Fujiwara no Kaneie, Japanese statesman (d. 990) Guo Zhongshu, Chinese painter (approximate date) Saigū no Nyōgo (Princess Kishi), Japanese waka poet (d. 985) William, archbishop of Mainz (d. 968) January 28 – Gao Jixing, founder of Chinese Jingnan (b. 858) February 3 – Guy ("the Philosopher"), margrave of Tuscany (Italy) February 12 – Leo VI, pope of the Catholic Church March 26 – Wang Du, Chinese warlord and governor (jiedushi) April 9 – Cui Xie, Chinese official and chancellor June 7 – Ælthryth, English princess and countess of Flanders (b. 877) Before August 16 – Sancho Ordóñez, king of Galicia (Spain) October 7 – Charles the Simple, Frankish king (b. 879) Abu Ali al-Husayn ibn Ahmad al-Madhara'i, Abbasid fiscal director Abu'l-Musafir al-Fath, Sajid emir of Azerbaijan (Iran) Al-Batani, Muslim astronomer and mathematician Ashot II, king of Armenia (approximate date) Gao Yu, Chinese chief strategist Indra III, ruler of Rashtrakuta (India) Lothar I, Frankish nobleman (b. 902) Lothar II, Frankish nobleman (b. 874) Padla II, prince of Kakheti (Georgia) Thumal the Qahraman, Abbasid female judge Zhao Jingyi, Chinese general and governor Abd-ar-Rahman III[dead link] Spuler, Bertold; F.R.C. Bagley (December 31, 1981). The Muslim world: a historical survey, Part 4. Brill Archive. p. 252. ISBN 9789004061965.