The province of Avellino (Italian: provincia di Avellino) is a province in the Campania region of Italy. Its capital is the city of Avellino. The area is characterized by numerous small towns and villages scattered across the province; only two towns have a population over 20,000. It has an area of 2,806 square kilometres (1,083 sq mi) and a total population of 401,028 per 30.9.2021. There are 118 comuni in the province, with the main towns being Avellino and Ariano Irpino. See Comuni of the Province of Avellino. It is an inner province, with no connection to the sea. The ancient inhabitants of the area were the Hirpini, whose name stems from the Oscan term hirpus ("wolf"), an animal that is still present in the territory, though in greatly reduced numbers. In the province of Avellino there are many archaeological Roman sites, with Aeclanum being the most important. In the Middle Age, the County of Ariano [it] was the first political body established in 1022 by the Normans in the South of Italy, and there Roger II (crowned King of Sicily in the Cathedral of Avellino in 1130) promulgated in 1140 the Assizes of Ariano, the first legislative code of the Kingdom. In the medieval Kingdom of Naples (later Kingdom of Two Sicilies) the provincial area roughly corresponded to the Principato Ultra, though some places were included in Capitanata or Principato Citra. The modern province was established in 1860, after the unification of Italy. Tourist destinations are the Sanctuaries of Montevergine, San Gerardo Maiella of Caposele and San Francesco a Folloni; the ski resort of Laceno; the Norman Castle [it] and the Cathedral Church of Ariano Irpino, the archeological areas of Avella and Aeclanum, the Lancellotti castle in Lauro, the medieval town of Gesualdo, the Roman ruins of Abellinum and the early Christian basilica in Prata. The Selachoidei National Gallery at Avellino houses one of the largest collections of cartilaginous fishes in the country, whereas the City Museum and Ceramics Gallery at Ariano Irpino shows a print room with a great display of typical Ariano Maiolica [it]. Natural attractions include the Monti Piacentini and Partenio Regional Parks, together with two WWF sites, Valle della Caccia in Senerchia and the area around the Ofanto dam in Conza della Campania. Typical products are hazelnuts (one third of the whole Italian production), the chestnut of Montella, the renowned wines Aglianico, Taurasi, Greco di Tufo and Fiano di Avellino, cherries, cheeses (as the caciocavallo of Montella), the black truffle of Bagnoli Irpino, the olive oil of Ariano Irpino. Aiello del Sabato Altavilla Irpina Andretta Aquilonia Ariano Irpino Atripalda Avella Avellino Bagnoli Irpino Baiano Bisaccia Bonito Cairano Calabritto Calitri Candida Caposele Capriglia Irpina Carife Casalbore Cassano Irpino Castel Baronia Castelfranci Castelvetere sul Calore Cervinara Cesinali Chianche Chiusano di San Domenico Contrada Conza della Campania Domicella Flumeri Fontanarosa Forino Frigento Gesualdo Greci Grottaminarda Grottolella Guardia Lombardi Lacedonia Lapio Lauro Lioni Luogosano Manocalzati Marzano di Nola Melito Irpino Mercogliano Mirabella Eclano Montaguto Montecalvo Irpino Montefalcione Monteforte Irpino Montefredane Montefusco Montella Montemarano Montemiletto Monteverde Montoro Morra De Sanctis Moschiano Mugnano del Cardinale Nusco Ospedaletto d'Alpinolo Pago del Vallo di Lauro Parolise Paternopoli Petruro Irpino Pietradefusi Pietrastornina Prata di Principato Ultra Pratola Serra Quadrelle Quindici Rocca San Felice Roccabascerana Rotondi Salza Irpina San Mango sul Calore San Martino Valle Caudina San Michele di Serino San Nicola Baronia San Potito Ultra San Sossio Baronia Santa Lucia di Serino Santa Paolina Sant'Andrea di Conza Sant'Angelo a Scala Sant'Angelo all'Esca Sant'Angelo dei Lombardi Santo Stefano del Sole Savignano Irpino Scampitella Senerchia Serino Sirignano Solofra Sorbo Serpico Sperone Sturno Summonte Taurano Taurasi Teora Torella dei Lombardi Torre Le Nocelle Torrioni Trevico Tufo Vallata Vallesaccarda Venticano Villamaina Villanova del Battista Volturara Irpina Zungoli Irpinia Population data from Istat Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional Gross Domestic Product (Small regions TL3), OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. "Avellino Stats". UpiNet.it. 20 November 2007. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007. "Il Mezzogiorno agli inizi dell'XI secolo" [Southern Italy at the beginning of 11th century]. European Center for Norman Studies (in Italian). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Province of Avellino. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Province of Avellino. Official website (in Italian) 40°54′55″N 14°47′23″E﻿ / ﻿40.91528°N 14.78972°E﻿ / 40.91528; 14.78972