The United States Coast Guard (USCG) is the maritime security, search and rescue, and law enforcement service branch of the United States Armed Forces and one of the country's eight uniformed services. The service is a maritime, military, multi-mission service unique among the United States military branches for having a maritime law enforcement mission with jurisdiction in both domestic and international waters and a federal regulatory agency mission as part of its duties. It is the largest coast guard in the world, rivaling the capabilities and size of most navies. The U.S. Coast Guard is a humanitarian and security service. It protects the United States' borders and economic and security interests abroad; and defends its sovereignty by safeguarding sea lines of communication and commerce across U.S. territorial waters and its Exclusive Economic Zone. Due to ever-expanding risk imposed by transnational threats through the maritime and cyber domains, the U.S. Coast Guard is at any given time deployed to and operating on all seven continents and in cyberspace to enforce its mission. Like its United States Navy sibling, the U.S. Coast Guard maintains a global presence with permanently-assigned personnel throughout the world and forces routinely deploying to both littoral and blue-water regions. The U.S. Coast Guard's adaptive, multi-mission "white hull" fleet is leveraged as a force of both diplomatic soft power and humanitarian and security assistance over the more overtly confrontational nature of "gray hulled" warships. As a humanitarian service, it saves tens of thousands of lives a year at sea and in U.S. waters, and provides emergency response and disaster management for a wide range of human-made and natural catastrophic incidents in the U.S. and throughout the world. The U.S. Coast Guard operates under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security during peacetime. During times of war, it can be transferred in whole or in part to the U.S. Department of the Navy under the Department of Defense by order of the U.S. President or by act of Congress. Prior to its transfer to Homeland Security, it operated under the Department of Transportation from 1967 to 2003 and the Department of the Treasury from its inception until 1967. A congressional authority transfer to the Navy has only happened once: in 1917, during World War I. By the time the U.S. entered World War II in December 1941, the U.S. Coast Guard had already been transferred to the Navy by President Franklin Roosevelt. Created by Congress as the Revenue-Marine on 4 August 1790 at the request of Alexander Hamilton, it is the oldest continuously operating naval service of the United States. As Secretary of the Treasury, Hamilton headed the Revenue-Marine, whose original purpose was collecting customs duties at U.S. seaports. By the 1860s, the service was known as the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the term Revenue-Marine gradually fell into disuse. The modern U.S. Coast Guard was formed by a merger of the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service and the U.S. Life-Saving Service on 28 January 1915, under the Department of the Treasury. In 1939, the U.S. Lighthouse Service was also merged into the U.S. Coast Guard. As one of the country's six armed services, the U.S. Coast Guard has deployed to support and fight every major U.S. war since 1790, from the Quasi-War with France to the Global War on Terrorism. As of December 2021, the U.S. Coast Guard's authorized force strength is 44,500 active duty personnel and 7,000 reservists. The service's force strength also includes 8,577 full-time civilian federal employees and 31,000 uniformed volunteers of the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. The service maintains an extensive fleet of roughly 250 coastal and ocean-going cutters, patrol ships, buoy tenders, tugs, and icebreakers; as well as nearly 2,000 small boats and specialized craft. It also maintains an aviation division consisting of more than 200 helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft. While the U.S. Coast Guard is the second smallest of the U.S. military service branches in terms of membership, the service by itself is the world's 12th largest naval force. The Coast Guard carries out three basic roles, which are further subdivided into eleven statutory missions. The three roles are: Maritime safety Maritime security Maritime stewardship With a decentralized organization and much responsibility placed on even the most junior personnel, the Coast Guard is frequently lauded for its quick responsiveness and adaptability in a broad range of emergencies. In a 2005 article in Time magazine following Hurricane Katrina, the author wrote, "the Coast Guard's most valuable contribution to [a military effort when catastrophe hits] may be as a model of flexibility, and most of all, spirit." Wil Milam, a rescue swimmer from Alaska told the magazine, "In the Navy, it was all about the mission. Practicing for war, training for war. In the Coast Guard, it was, take care of our people and the mission will take care of itself." The eleven statutory missions as defined by law are divided into homeland security missions and non-homeland security missions: Ice operations, including the International Ice Patrol Living marine resources (fisheries law enforcement) Marine environmental protection Marine safety Aids to navigation Search and rescue Defense readiness Maritime law enforcement Migrant interdiction Ports, waterways and coastal security (PWCS) Drug interdiction The U.S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue (CG-SAR) is one of the Coast Guard's best-known operations. The National Search and Rescue Plan designates the Coast Guard as the federal agency responsible for maritime SAR operations, and the United States Air Force as the federal agency responsible for inland SAR. Both agencies maintain rescue coordination centers to coordinate this effort, and have responsibility for both military and civilian search and rescue. The two services jointly provide instructor staff for the National Search and Rescue School that trains SAR mission planners and coordinators. Previously located on Governors Island, New York, the school is now located at Coast Guard Training Center Yorktown at Yorktown, Virginia. Operated by the Coast Guard, the National Response Center (NRC) is the sole U.S. Government point of contact for reporting all oil, chemical, radiological, biological, and etiological spills and discharges into the environment, anywhere in the United States and its territories. In addition to gathering and distributing spill/incident information for Federal On Scene Coordinators and serving as the communications and operations center for the National Response Team, the NRC maintains agreements with a variety of federal entities to make additional notifications regarding incidents meeting established trigger criteria. The NRC also takes Maritime Suspicious Activity and Security Breach Reports. Details on the NRC organization and specific responsibilities can be found in the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. The Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) database system is managed and used by the Coast Guard for tracking pollution and safety incidents in the nation's ports. The National Maritime Center (NMC) is the merchant mariner credentialing authority for the USCG under the auspices of the Department of Homeland Security. To ensure a safe, secure, and environmentally sound marine transportation system, the mission of the NMC is to issue credentials to fully qualified mariners in the United States maritime jurisdiction. The six uniformed services that make up the U.S. Armed Forces are defined in Title 10 of the U.S. Code: "The term "armed forces" means the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, Air Force, Space Force, and Coast Guard." The Coast Guard is further defined by Title 14 of the United States Code: "The Coast Guard as established January 28, 1915, shall be a military service and a branch of the armed forces of the United States at all times. The Coast Guard shall be a service in the Department of Homeland Security, except when operating as a service in the Navy." Coast Guard organization and operation is as set forth in Title 33 of the Code of Federal Regulations. On 25 November 2002, the Homeland Security Act was signed into law by U.S. President George W. Bush, designating the Coast Guard to be placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The transfer of administrative control from the U.S. Department of Transportation to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security was completed the following year, on 1 March 2003. The U.S. Coast Guard reports directly to the civilian Secretary of Homeland Security. However, under 14 U.S.C. § 3 as amended by section 211 of the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006, upon the declaration of war and when Congress so directs in the declaration, or when the President directs, the Coast Guard operates under the Department of Defense as a service in the Department of the Navy. As members of the military, Coast Guardsmen on active and reserve service are subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and receive the same pay and allowances as members of the same pay grades in the other uniformed services. The service has participated in every major U.S. conflict from 1790 through today, including landing troops on D-Day and on the Pacific Islands in World War II, in extensive patrols and shore bombardment during the Vietnam War, and multiple roles in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Maritime interception operations, coastal security, transportation security, and law enforcement detachments have been its major roles in recent conflicts in Iraq. On 17 October 2007, the Coast Guard joined with the U.S. Navy and U.S. Marine Corps to adopt a new maritime strategy called A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower that raised the notion of prevention of war to the same philosophical level as the conduct of war. This new strategy charted a course for the Navy, Coast Guard and Marine Corps to work collectively with each other and international partners to prevent regional crises, man-made or natural, from occurring, or reacting quickly should one occur to avoid negative impacts to the United States. During the launch of the new U.S. maritime strategy at the International Seapower Symposium at the U.S. Naval War College in 2007, Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Thad Allen said the new maritime strategy reinforced the time-honored missions the service has carried out in the United States since 1790. "It reinforces the Coast Guard maritime strategy of safety, security and stewardship, and it reflects not only the global reach of our maritime services but the need to integrate and synchronize and act with our coalition and international partners to not only win wars ... but to prevent wars," Allen said. Title 14 USC, section 2 authorizes the Coast Guard to enforce U.S. federal laws. This authority is further defined in 14 U.S.C. § 522, which gives law enforcement powers to all Coast Guard commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers. Unlike the other branches of the United States Armed Forces, which are prevented from acting in a law enforcement capacity by 18 U.S.C. § 1385, the Posse Comitatus Act, and Department of Defense policy, the Coast Guard is exempt from and not subject to the restrictions of the Posse Comitatus Act. Further law enforcement authority is given by 14 U.S.C. § 703 and 19 U.S.C. § 1401, which empower U.S. Coast Guard active and reserve commissioned officers, warrant officers, and petty officers as federal customs officers. This places them under 19 U.S.C. § 1589a, which grants customs officers general federal law enforcement authority, including the authority to: (1) carry a firearm; (2) execute and serve any order, warrant, subpoena, summons, or other process issued under the authority of the United States; (3) make an arrest without a warrant for any offense against the United States committed in the officer's presence or for a felony, cognizable under the laws of the United States committed outside the officer's presence if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing a felony; and (4) perform any other law enforcement duty that the Secretary of Homeland Security may designate. — 19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers The U.S. Government Accountability Office Report to the House of Representatives, Committee on the Judiciary on its 2006 Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities, identified the Coast Guard as one of 104 federal components that employed law enforcement officers. The report also included a summary table of the authorities of the Coast Guard's 192 special agents and 3,780 maritime law enforcement boarding officers. Coast Guardsmen have the legal authority to carry their service-issued firearms on and off base. This is rarely done in practice, however; at many Coast Guard stations, commanders prefer to have all service-issued weapons in armories when not in use. Still, one court has held in the case of People v. Booth that Coast Guard boarding officers are qualified law enforcement officers authorized to carry personal firearms off-duty for self-defense. The Coast Guard traced its roots to the small fleet of vessels maintained by the United States Department of the Treasury beginning in the 1790s to enforce tariffs (an important source of revenue for the new nation). Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton lobbied Congress to fund the construction of ten cutters, which it did on 4 August 1790 (now celebrated as the Coast Guard's official birthday). Until the re-establishment of the Navy in 1798, these "revenue cutters" were the only naval force of the early United States. As such, the cutters and their crews frequently took on additional duties, including combating piracy, rescuing mariners in distress, ferrying government officials, and even carrying mail. Initially not an organized federal agency at all, merely a "system of cutters," each ship operated under the direction of the customs officials in the port to which it was assigned. Several names, including "Revenue-Marine," were used as the service gradually becoming more organized. Eventually it was officially organized as the United States Revenue Cutter Service. In addition to its regular law enforcement and customs duties, revenue cutters and their crews were used to support and supplement the Navy in various armed conflicts including the American Civil War. A separate federal agency, the U.S. Life-Saving Service, developed alongside the Revenue-Marine. Prior to 1848, there were various charitable efforts at creating systems to provide assistance to shipwrecked mariners from shore-based stations, notably by the Massachusetts Humane Society. The federal government began funding lifesaving stations in 1848 but funding was inconsistent and the system still relied on all-volunteer crews. In 1871, Sumner Increase Kimball was appointed chief of the Treasury Department's newly-created Revenue Marine Division, and began the process of organizing the Revenue-Marine cutters into a centralized agency. Kimball also pushed for more funding lifesaving stations and eventually secured approval to create the Lifesaving Service as a separate federal agency, also within the Treasury Department, with fulltime paid crews. In 1915 these two agencies, the Revenue Cutter Service and the Lifesaving Service, were merged to create the modern United States Coast Guard. The Lighthouse Service and the Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation were absorbed by the Coast Guard 1939 and 1942 respectively. In 1967, the Coast Guard moved from the U.S. Department of the Treasury to the newly formed U.S. Department of Transportation, an arrangement that lasted until it was placed under the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2003 as part of legislation designed to more efficiently protect American interests following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. In times of war, the Coast Guard or individual components of it can operate as a service of the Department of the Navy. This arrangement has a broad historical basis, as the Coast Guard has been involved in wars as diverse as the War of 1812, the Mexican–American War, and the American Civil War, in which the cutter Harriet Lane fired the first naval shots attempting to relieve besieged Fort Sumter. The last time the Coast Guard operated as a whole within the Navy was in World War II, in all some 250,000 served in the Coast Guard during World War II. Coast Guard Squadron One, was a combat unit formed by the United States Coast Guard in 1965 for service during the Vietnam War. Placed under the operational control of the United States Navy, it was assigned duties in Operation Market Time. Its formation marked the first time since World War II that Coast Guard personnel were used extensively in a combat environment. The squadron operated divisions in three separate areas during the period of 1965 to 1970. Twenty-six Point-class cutters with their crews and a squadron support staff were assigned to the U.S. Navy with the mission of interdicting the movement of arms and supplies from the South China Sea into South Vietnam by Viet Cong and North Vietnam junk and trawler operators. The squadron also provided 81mm mortar naval gunfire support to nearby friendly units operating along the South Vietnamese coastline and assisted the U.S. Navy during Operation Sealords. Coast Guard Squadron Three, was a combat unit formed by the United States Coast Guard in 1967 for service during the Vietnam War. Placed under the operational control of the United States Navy and based in Pearl Harbor. It consisted of five USCG High Endurance Cutters operating on revolving six-month deployments. A total of 35 High Endurance Cutters took part in operations from May 1967 to December 1971, most notably using their 5-inch guns to provide naval gunfire support missions. Often units within the Coast Guard operate under Department of the Navy operational control while other Coast Guard units remain under the Department of Homeland Security. The Deployable Operations Group (DOG) was a Coast Guard command established in July 2007. The DOG established a single command authority to rapidly provide the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security, Department of Defense, Department of Justice and other interagency operational commanders adaptive force packages drawn from the Coast Guard's deployable specialized force units. The DOG was disestablished on 22 April 2013 and its deployable specialized forces (DSF) units were placed under the control of the Atlantic and Pacific Area Commanders. The planning for the unit began after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, and culminated with its formation on 20 July 2007. Its missions included maritime law enforcement, anti-terrorism, port security, pollution response, and diving operations.[citation needed] There were over 25 specialized units within the Deployable Operations Group including the Maritime Security Response Team, Maritime Safety and Security Teams, Law Enforcement Detachments, Port Security Units, the National Strike Force, and Regional Dive Lockers. The DOG also managed Coast Guard personnel assigned to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command and was involved in the selection of Coast Guard candidates to attend Navy BUD/S and serve with Navy SEAL Teams. Marine Corps Privates First Class William A. McCoy and Ralph L. Plunkett holding a sign thanking the Coast Guard after the Battle of Guam in 1944 A gun crew on board USCGC Point Comfort (WPB-82317) firing an 81mm mortar during the bombardment of a suspected Viet Cong staging area one mile behind An Thoi in August 1965 USCGC Duane (WPG-33) shelling targets in Vietnam in 1967, where the Coast Guard was a part of Operation Market Time United States Coast Guard Squadron One unit patch during the Vietnam War Seal of the United States Coast Guard Deployable Operations Group USS Vandegrift (FFG 48) and USCGC Mellon (WHEC-717) cruising side by side in the Java Sea on May 28, 2010 A member of USCG Law Enforcement Detachment (LEDET) 106 performing a security sweep aboard a tanker ship in the North Persian Gulf in July 2007 A Coast Guardsman stands guard over more than 40,000 pounds of cocaine worth an estimated $500 million being offloaded from the Cutter Sherman, 23 April 2007. A boatswain's mate keeps watch on a small boat as it heads for the USCGC Chandeleur in 2008 A Coast Guard Aviation Survival Technician assisting with the rescue of a pregnant woman during Hurricane Katrina in 2005 The new Department of Homeland Security headquarters complex is on the grounds of the former St. Elizabeths Hospital in the Anacostia section of Southeast Washington, across the Anacostia River from former Coast Guard headquarters. The fiscal year 2016 budget request for the U.S. Coast Guard was $9.96 billion. The Coast Guard's current district organization is divided into 9 districts. Their designations, district office and area of responsibility are as follows: Shore establishment commands exist to support and facilitate the mission of the sea and air assets and Coastal Defense. U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters is located in Southeast Washington, D.C. Examples of other shore establishment types are Coast Guard Sectors (which may include Coast Guard Bases), Surface Forces Logistics Center (SFLC), Coast Guard Stations, Coast Guard Air Stations, and the United States Coast Guard Yard. Training centers are included in the shore establishment commands. The military college for the USCG is called the United States Coast Guard Academy which trains both new officers through a four year program and enlisted personnel joining the ranks of officers through a 17 week program called Officer Candidate School (OCS). Abbreviated TRACEN, the other Training Centers include Training Center Cape May for enlisted bootcamp, Training Center Petaluma and Training Center Yorktown for enlisted "A" schools and "C" schools, and Coast Guard Aviation Technical Training Center and Coast Guard Aviation Training Center Mobile for aviation enlisted "A" school, "C" schools, and pilot officer training. The Coast Guard has a total workforce of 87,569. The formal name for a uniformed member of the Coast Guard is "Coast Guardsman", irrespective of gender. "Coastie" is an informal term commonly used to refer to current or former Coast Guard personnel. In 2008, the term "Guardian" was introduced as an alternative but was later dropped. Admiral Robert J. Papp Jr. stated that it was his belief that no Commandant had the authority to change what members of the Coast Guard are called as the term Coast Guardsman is found in Title 14 USC which established the Coast Guard in 1915. "Team Coast Guard" refers to the four components of the Coast Guard as a whole: Regular, Reserve, Auxiliary, and Coast Guard civilian employees.[citation needed] Commissioned officers in the Coast Guard hold pay grades ranging from O-1 to O-10 and have the same rank structure as the Navy. Officers holding the rank of ensign (O-1) through lieutenant commander (O-4) are considered junior officers, commanders (O-5) and captains (O-6) are considered senior officers, and rear admirals (O-7) through admirals (O-10) are considered flag officers. The Commandant of the Coast Guard and the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard are the only members of the Coast Guard authorized to hold the rank of admiral. The Coast Guard does not have medical officers or chaplains of its own. Instead, chaplains from the U.S. Navy, as well as officers from the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps are assigned to the Coast Guard to perform chaplain-related functions and medical-related functions, respectively. These officers wear Coast Guard uniforms but replace the Coast Guard insignia with that of their own service. The Navy and Coast Guard share identical officer rank insignia except that Coast Guard officers wear a gold Coast Guard Shield in lieu of a line star or staff corps officer insignia. Highly qualified enlisted personnel in pay grades E-6 through E-9 with a minimum of eight years' experience can compete each year for appointment as warrant officers (WO). Successful candidates are chosen by a board and then commissioned as chief warrant officer two (CWO2) in one of twenty-one specialties. Over time, chief warrant officers may be promoted to chief warrant officer three (CWO3) and chief warrant officer four (CWO4). The ranks of warrant officer (WO1) and chief warrant officer five (CWO5) are not currently used in the Coast Guard. Chief warrant officers may also compete for the Chief Warrant Officer to Lieutenant Program. If selected, the warrant officer will be promoted to lieutenant (O-3E). The "E" designates over four years' active duty service as a warrant officer or enlisted member and entitles the member to a higher rate of pay than other lieutenants.[citation needed] Enlisted members of the Coast Guard have pay grades from E-1 to E-9 and also follow the same rank structure as the Navy. Enlisted members in pay grades of E-4 and higher are considered petty officers and follow career development paths very similar to those of Navy petty officers. Petty officers in pay grade E-7 and higher are chief petty officers and must attend the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officer Academy, or an equivalent Department of Defense school, in order to be advanced to pay grade E-8. The basic themes of the school are: Professionalism Leadership Communications Systems thinking and lifelong learning Enlisted rank insignia is also nearly identical to Navy enlisted insignia. The Coast Guard shield replacing the petty officer's eagle on collar and cap devices for petty officers or enlisted rating insignia for seamen qualified as a "designated striker". Group Rate marks (stripes) for junior enlisted members (E-3 and below) also follow Navy convention with white for seaman, red for fireman, and green for airman. In a departure from the Navy conventions, all petty officers E-6 and below wear red chevrons and all chief petty officers wear gold.[citation needed] The U.S. Coast Guard Academy is a four-year service academy located in New London, Connecticut. Approximately 200 cadets graduate each year, receiving a Bachelor of Science degree and a commission as an ensign in the Coast Guard. Graduates are obligated to serve a minimum of five years on active duty. Most graduates are assigned to duty aboard Coast Guard cutters immediately after graduation, either as Deck Watch Officers (DWOs) or as Engineer Officers in Training (EOITs). Smaller numbers are assigned directly to flight training at Naval Air Station Pensacola, Florida or to shore duty at Coast Guard Sector, District, or Area headquarters units.[citation needed] In addition to the Academy, prospective officers, who already hold a college degree, may enter the Coast Guard through Officer Candidate School (OCS), also located at the Coast Guard Academy. OCS is a 17-week course of instruction that prepares candidates to serve effectively as officers in the Coast Guard. In addition to indoctrinating students into a military lifestyle, OCS provides a wide range of highly technical information necessary to perform the duties of a Coast Guard officer. Graduates of OCS are usually commissioned as ensigns, but some with advanced graduate degrees may enter as lieutenants (junior grade) or lieutenants. Graduating OCS officers entering active duty are required to serve a minimum of three years, while graduating reserve officers are required to serve four years. Graduates may be assigned to a cutter, flight training, a staff job, or an operations ashore billet. OCS is the primary channel through which the Coast Guard enlisted grades ascend to the commissioned officer corps. Unlike the other military services, the Coast Guard does not have a Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) program. However, the Coast Guard does have the Select Reserve Direct Commission, an officer program for prospective candidates interested serving as a Coast Guard Reserve Officer. Lawyers, engineers, intelligence officers, military aviators holding commissions in other branches of the U.S. Armed Forces requesting interservice transfers to the Coast Guard, graduates of maritime academies, and certain other individuals may also receive an officer's commission in the Coast Guard through the Direct Commission Officer (DCO) program. Depending on the specific program and the background of the individual, the course is three, four or five weeks long. The first week of the five-week course is an indoctrination week. The DCO program is designed to commission officers with highly specialized professional training or certain kinds of previous military experience. Newly enlisted personnel are sent to eight weeks of recruit training at Coast Guard Training Center Cape May in Cape May, New Jersey. New recruits arrive at Sexton Hall and remain there for three days of initial processing which includes haircuts, vaccinations, uniform issue, and other necessary entrance procedures. During this initial processing period, the new recruits are led by temporary company commanders. These temporary company commanders are tasked with teaching the new recruits how to march and preparing them to enter into their designated company. The temporary company commanders typically do not enforce any physical activity such as push ups or crunches. When the initial processing is complete, the new seaman recruits are introduced to their permanent company commanders who will remain with them until the end of training. There is typically a designated lead company commander and two support company commanders. The balance of the eight-week boot camp is spent in learning teamwork and developing physical skills. An introduction of how the Coast Guard operates with special emphasis on the Coast Guard's core values is an important part of the training. The current nine Recruit Training Objectives are: Self-discipline Military skills Marksmanship Vocational skills and academics Military bearing Physical fitness and wellness Water survival and swim qualifications Esprit de corps Core values (Honor, Respect, and Devotion to Duty) Following graduation from recruit training, most members are sent to their first unit while they await orders to attend advanced training in Class "A" Schools. At "A" schools, Coast Guard enlisted personnel are trained in their chosen rating; rating is a Coast Guard and Navy term for enlisted skills synonymous with the Army's and Marine Corps' military occupation codes (MOS) and Air Force's Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC). Members who earned high ASVAB scores or who were otherwise guaranteed an "A" School of choice while enlisting may go directly to their "A" School upon graduation from Boot Camp. The Coast Guard employs over 8,577 civilians in over two hundred different job types including Coast Guard Investigative Service special agents, lawyers, engineers, technicians, administrative personnel, tradesmen, and federal firefighters. Civilian employees work at various levels in the Coast Guard to support its various missions. The Coast Guard operates 243 Cutters, defined as any vessel more than 65 feet (20 m) long, that has a permanently assigned crew and accommodations for the extended support of that crew. National Security Cutter (WMSL): Also known as the Legend-class, these are the Coast Guard's latest class of 418-foot (127 m) cutter. At 418 ft. these are the largest USCG military cutters in active service. One-for-one, Legend-class ships have replaced individually decommissioned 1960s Hamilton-class cutters, (also known as the High Endurance Cutter (WHEC)). A total of eleven were authorized and budgeted; as of 2021 eight are in service, and two are under construction. Medium Endurance Cutter (WMEC): These are mostly the 210-foot (64 m) Reliance-class, and the 270-foot (82 m) Famous-class cutters, although the 283-foot (86 m) Alex Haley also falls into this category. Primary missions are law enforcement, search and rescue, and military defense. Heritage-class cutters are expected to eventually replace the Reliance- and Famous-class cutters as they are completed. Polar-class icebreaker (WAGB): There are three WAGB's used for icebreaking and research though only two, the heavy 399-foot (122 m) Polar Star and the newer medium class 420-foot (130 m) Healy, are active. Polar Sea is located in Seattle, Washington but is not currently in active service. The icebreakers are being replaced with new heavy icebreakers under the Polar icebreaker program, the world's largest coast guard vessel due for delivery in 2025. USCGC Eagle: A 295-foot (90 m) sailing barque used as a training ship for Coast Guard Academy cadets and Coast Guard officer candidates. She was originally built in Germany as Horst Wessel, and was seized by the United States as a prize of war in 1945. USCGC Mackinaw: A 240-foot (73 m) heavy icebreaker built for operations on the Great Lakes. Seagoing Buoy Tender (WLB): These 225-foot (69 m) ships are used to maintain aids to navigation and also assist with law enforcement and search and rescue. Coastal Buoy Tender (WLM): The 175-foot (53 m) Keeper-class coastal buoy tenders are used to maintain coastal aids to navigation. Sentinel-class cutter (WPC): The 154-foot (47 m) Sentinel-class, also known by its program name, the "Fast Response Cutter"-class and is used for search and rescue work and law enforcement. Bay-class icebreaking tug (WTGB): 140-foot (43 m) icebreakers used primarily for domestic icebreaking missions. Other missions include search and rescue, law enforcement, and aids to navigation maintenance. Patrol Boats (WPB): There are two classes of WPBs currently in service; the 110-foot (34 m) Island-class patrol boats and the 87-foot (27 m) Marine Protector-class patrol boats Small Harbor Tug (WYTL): 65-foot (20 m) small icebreaking tugboats, used primary for ice clearing in domestic harbors in addition to limited search and rescue and law enforcement roles. The Coast Guard operates about 1,650 boats, defined as any vessel less than 65 feet (20 m) long, which generally operate near shore and on inland waterways. The Coast Guard boat fleet includes: Motor Lifeboat (MLB): The Coast Guard's 47-foot (14 m) primary heavy-weather boat used for search and rescue as well as law enforcement and homeland security. Response Boat – Medium (RB-M): A new multi-mission 45-foot (14 m) vessel intended to replace the 41-foot (12 m) utility boat. 170 planned Special Purpose Craft – Near Shore Lifeboat: Only 2 built. Shallow draft, 42-foot (13 m) lifeboat substituted for the 47-foot (14 m) Motor Life Boat, based at Chatham, Massachusetts Deployable Pursuit Boat (DPB): A 38-foot (12 m) launch capable of pursuing fast cocaine smuggling craft. Long Range Interceptor (LRI): A 36-foot (11 m) high-speed launch that can be launched from the stern ramps of the larger Deepwater cutters. Aids to Navigation Boats (TANB/BUSL/ATON/ANB): Various designs ranging from 26 to 55 feet (7.9 to 16.8 m) used to maintain aids to navigation. Special Purpose Craft – Law Enforcement (SPC-LE): Intended to operate in support of specialized law enforcement missions, utilizing three 300 horsepower (220 kW) Mercury Marine engines. The SPC-LE is 33 feet (10 m) long and capable of speeds in excess of 50 knots (93 km/h; 58 mph) and operations more than 30 miles (48 km) from shore. Response Boat – Small (RB-S): A 25-foot (7.6 m) high-speed boat, for a variety of missions, including search and rescue, port security and law enforcement duties. Transportable Port Security Boat (TPSB): A 25-foot (7.6 m) well-armed boat used by Port Security Units for force protection. SPC-SW Special Purpose Craft, Shallow-water: 24 feet (7.3 m)[clarification needed] Over-the-Horizon (OTH) boat: A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull inflatable boat used by medium and high endurance cutters and specialized units. Short Range Prosecutor (SRP): A 23-foot (7.0 m) rigid hull inflatable boat that can be launched from a stern launching ramp on the National Security Cutters. The Coast Guard operates approximately 201 fixed and rotary wing aircraft from 24 Coast Guard Air Stations throughout the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. Most of these air stations are tenant activities at civilian airports, several of which are former Air Force Bases and Naval Air Stations, although several are also independent military facilities. Coast Guard Air Stations are also located on active Naval Air Stations, Air National Guard bases, and Army Air Fields.[citation needed] Coast Guard aviators receive Primary (fixed-wing) and Advanced (fixed or rotary-wing) flight training with their Navy and Marine Corps counterparts at NAS Whiting Field, Florida, and NAS Corpus Christi, Texas, and are considered Naval Aviators. After receiving Naval Aviator Wings, Coast Guard pilots, with the exception of those slated to fly the HC-130, report to U.S. Coast Guard Aviation Training Center, Mobile, Alabama to receive 6–12 weeks of specialized training in the Coast Guard fleet aircraft they will operate. HC-130 pilots report to Little Rock AFB, Arkansas, for joint C-130 training under the auspices of the 314th Airlift Wing of the U.S. Air Force.[citation needed] Fixed-wing aircraft operate from Air Stations on long-duration missions. Helicopters operate from Air Stations and can deploy on a number of different cutters. Helicopters can rescue people or intercept vessels smuggling migrants or narcotics. Since the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001, the Coast Guard has developed a more prominent role in national security and now has armed helicopters operating in high-risk areas for the purpose of maritime law enforcement and anti-terrorism.[citation needed] The Coast Guard is now developing an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) program that will utilize the MQ-9 Reaper platform for homeland security and search/rescue operations. To support this endeavor, the Coast Guard has partnered with the Navy and U.S. Customs and Border Protection to study existing/emerging unmanned aerial system (UAS) capabilities within their respective organizations. As these systems mature, research and operational experience gleaned from this joint effort will enable the Coast Guard to develop its own cutter and land-based UAS capabilities. Most Coast Guard Cutters have one or more naval gun systems installed, including: The Oto Melara 76 mm, a radar-guided computer controlled gun system that is used on Medium Endurance Cutters. The 3-inch gun's high rate of fire and availability of specialized ammunition make it a multi-purpose gun capable of anti-shipping, anti-aircraft, ground support, and short-range anti-missile defense. The MK 110 57mm gun, a radar-guided computer controlled variant of the Bofors 57 mm gun. It is used on the Legend-class cutter, also known as the National Security Cutter (NSC). It is a multi-purpose gun capable of anti-shipping, anti-aircraft, and short-range anti-missile defense. The stealth mount has a reduced radar profile. Also, the gun has a small radar mounted on the gun barrel to measure muzzle velocity for fire control purposes and can change ammunition types instantly due to a dual-feed system. It can also be operated/fired manually using a joystick and video camera (mounted on gun). The Mk 38 Mod 0 weapons system consists of an M242 Bushmaster 25mm chain gun and the Mk 88 Mod 0 machine gun mount. A manned system, its gyro-stabilization compensates for the pitching deck. It provides ships with defensive and offensive gunfire capability for the engagement of a variety of surface targets. Designed primarily as a close-range defensive measure, it provides protection against patrol boats, floating mines, and various shore-based targets. The Mk 38 Mod 2 weapons system is a remotely operated Mk 38 with an electronic optical sight, laser range-finder, FLIR, a more reliable feeding system, all of which enhance the weapon systems capabilities and accuracy. The Phalanx CIWS (pronounced "sea-wiz") is a close-in weapon system for defense against aircraft and anti-ship missiles. it can also be used against a variety of surface targets. Consisting of a radar-guided 20 mm 6-barreled M61 Vulcan cannon mounted on a swiveling base, it is used on the Coast Guard's National Security Cutters. This system can operate autonomously against airborne threats or may be manually operated with the use of electronic optical sight, laser range-finder and FLIR systems against surface targets. The Sea PROTECTOR MK50 is a remotely controlled gyro-stabilized M2 .50 caliber heavy machine gun. The sight package includes a daylight video camera, a thermal camera and an eye-safe laser rangefinder operated by a joystick. It is also furnished with a fully integrated fire control system that provides ballistic correction. The Mk50s are used on only four Marine Protector-class Cutters, the USCGC Sea Fox (WPB-87374), USCGC Sea Devil (WPB-87368), USCGC Sea Dragon (WPB-87367) and USCGC Sea Dog (WPB-87373) The U.S. Coast Guard uses a wide variety of small arms and light weapons. Handguns, shotguns, and rifles are used to arm boat crew and boarding team members and machine guns are mounted aboard cutters, boats, and helicopters. Small arms and light weapons arms include: M9 9mm pistol SIG Sauer P229R DAK .40 S&W pistol Remington M870P 12 gauge shotgun M16A2 rifle M4 carbine Mk 18 carbine M14 Tactical rifle Mk 11 (KAC SR-25) Mk 11 Mod 2 precision rifle FN M240 machine gun M2 .50 caliber heavy machine gun Mk 19 40mm grenade launcher Barrett M107 .50-caliber rifle, used by marksmen from the Helicopter Interdiction Tactical Squadron and Law Enforcement Detachments to disable the engines on fleeing boats. The Coast Guard, like the other armed services of the United States, has a set of core values that serve as basic ethical guidelines for all Coast Guard active duty, reservists, auxiliarists, and civilians. The Coast Guard Core Values are: Honor: Integrity is our standard. We demonstrate uncompromising ethical conduct and moral behavior in all of our personal actions. We are loyal and accountable to the public trust. Respect: We value our diverse workforce. We treat each other with fairness, dignity, and compassion. We encourage individual opportunity and growth. We encourage creativity through empowerment. We work as a team. Devotion to Duty: We are professionals, military and civilian, who seek responsibility, accept accountability, and are committed to the successful achievement of our organizational goals. We exist to serve. We serve with pride. In 2008, the Coast Guard introduced the Guardian Ethos. As the Commandant, Admiral Allen noted in a message to all members of the Coast Guard: [The Ethos] "defines the essence of the Coast Guard," and is the "contract the Coast Guard and its members make with the nation and its citizens." In an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral Papp, directed that the language of Guardian Ethos be superseded by the Coast Guard Ethos in an effort to use terminology that would help with the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard. The term Coast Guardsman is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically. This changed the line in the Guardian Ethos "I am a Guardian." to become "I am a Coast Guardsman." The Ethos is: In Service to our Nation With Honor, Respect, and Devotion to Duty We protect We defend We save We are Semper Paratus We are the United States Coast Guard — The Coast Guard Ethos The "Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman" was written by Vice Admiral Harry G. Hamlet, who served as Commandant of the Coast Guard from 1932 to 1936. I am proud to be a United States Coast Guardsman. I revere that long line of expert seamen who by their devotion to duty and sacrifice of self have made it possible for me to be a member of a service honored and respected, in peace and in war, throughout the world. I never, by word or deed, will bring reproach upon the fair name of my service, nor permit others to do so unchallenged. I will cheerfully and willingly obey all lawful orders. I will always be on time to relieve, and shall endeavor to do more, rather than less, than my share. I will always be at my station, alert and attending to my duties. I shall, so far as I am able, bring to my seniors solutions, not problems. I shall live joyously, but always with due regard for the rights and privileges of others. I shall endeavor to be a model citizen in the community in which I live. I shall sell life dearly to an enemy of my country, but give it freely to rescue those in peril. With God's help, I shall endeavor to be one of His noblest Works... A UNITED STATES COAST GUARDSMAN. — Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman This unofficial motto of the Coast Guard dates to an 1899 United States Lifesaving Service regulation, which states in part: "In attempting a rescue, ... he will not desist from his efforts until by actual trial, the impossibility of effecting a rescue is demonstrated. The statement of the keeper that he did not try to use the boat because the sea or surf was too heavy will not be accepted, unless attempts to launch it were actually made and failed." The Coast Guard Ensign (flag) was first flown by the Revenue Cutter Service in 1799 to distinguish revenue cutters from merchant ships. A 1 August 1799 order issued by Secretary of the Treasury Oliver Wolcott Jr. specified that the Ensign would be "sixteen perpendicular stripes (for the number of states in the United States at the time), alternate red and white, the union of the ensign to be the arms of the United States in a dark blue on a white field." This ensign became familiar in American waters and served as the sign of authority for the Revenue Cutter Service until the early 20th century. The ensign was originally intended to be flown only on revenue cutters and boats connected with the Customs Service but over the years it was found flying atop custom houses as well, and the practice became a requirement in 1874. On 7 June 1910, President William Howard Taft issued an Executive Order adding an emblem to (or "defacing") the ensign flown by the Revenue cutters to distinguish it from what is now called the Customs Ensign flown from the custom houses. The emblem was changed to the official seal of the Coast Guard in 1927. The purpose of the ensign is to allow ship captains to easily recognize those vessels having legal authority to stop and board them. It is flown only as a symbol of law enforcement authority and is never carried as a parade standard. The Coast Guard Standard is used in parades and carries the battle honors of the Coast Guard. It was derived from the jack of the Coast Guard ensign which was flown by revenue cutters. The emblem is a blue eagle from the coat of arms of the United States on a white field. Above the eagle are the words "UNITED STATES COAST GUARD" below the eagle is the motto, "SEMPER PARATUS" and the inscription "1790." The Racing Stripe, officially known as the Service Mark, was designed in 1964 by the industrial design office of Raymond Loewy Associates to give the Coast Guard a distinctive, modern image. Loewy had designed the colors for the Air Force One fleet for Jackie Kennedy. President Kennedy was so impressed with his work, he suggested that the entire Federal Government needed his make-over and suggested that he start with the Coast Guard. The stripes are canted at a 64 degree angle, coincidentally the year the Racing Stripe was designed. The racing stripe is borne by Coast Guard cutters, aircraft, and many boats. First used and placed into official usage as of 6 April 1967, it consists of a narrow blue stripe, a narrow white stripe between, and a broad CG red bar with the Coast Guard shield centered. Red-hulled icebreaker cutters and most HH-65/MH-65 helicopters (i.e., those with a red fuselage) bear a narrow blue stripe, a narrow empty stripe the color of the fuselage (an implied red stripe), and broad white bar, with the Coast Guard shield centered. Conversely, black-hulled cutters (such as buoy tenders and inland construction tenders) use the standard racing stripe. Auxiliary vessels maintained by the Coast Guard also carry the Racing Stripe, but in inverted colors (i.e., broad blue stripe with narrow white and CG red stripes) and the Auxiliary shield. Similar racing stripe designs have been adopted for the use of other coast guards and maritime authorities and many other law enforcement and rescue agencies. For most of the Coast Guard's history its uniforms largely mirrored the style of U.S. Navy uniforms, distinguishable only by their insignia. In 1974, under the leadership of Admiral Chester R. Bender, the initial versions of the current Coast Guard Service Dress Blue and Tropical uniforms were introduced. This represented a major departure from many common conventions in naval and maritime uniforms. Notably, "Bender's Blues" were a common service dress uniform for all ranks, dispensing with the sailor suit and sailor cap formerly worn by enlisted members. Rank insignia remained consistent with the naval pattern and some distinctly-nautical items such as the pea coat, officer's sword, and dress white uniforms remained. Today, the Coast Guard's uniforms remain among the simplest of any branch of the armed forces, with fewer total uniforms and uniform variants than the other armed services. There are only three uniforms that typically serve as standard uniforms of the day—the Operational Dress Uniform, Tropical Blue, and Service Dress Blue (Bravo). The United States Coast Guard Reserve is the reserve military force of the Coast Guard. The Coast Guard Reserve was founded on 19 February 1941. The Coast Guard has 8700 reservists who normally drill two days a month and an additional 12 days of active duty each year, although many perform additional drill and active duty periods, to include those mobilized to extended active duty. Coast Guard reservists possess the same training and qualifications as their active duty counterparts, and as such, can be found augmenting active duty Coast Guard units every day.[citation needed] During the Vietnam War and shortly thereafter, the Coast Guard considered abandoning the reserve program, but the force was instead reoriented into force augmentation, where its principal focus was not just reserve operations, but to add to the readiness and mission execution of every-day active duty personnel. Since 11 September 2001, reservists have been activated and served on tours of active duty, to include deployments to the Persian Gulf and also as parts of Department of Defense combatant commands such as the U.S. Northern and Central Commands. Coast Guard Port Security Units are entirely staffed with reservists, except for five to seven active duty personnel. Additionally, most of the staffing the Coast Guard provides to the Navy Expeditionary Combat Command are reservists. The Reserve is managed by the Assistant Commandant for Reserve, Rear Admiral James M. Kelly, USCG. There have been women in the United States Coast Guard since 1918, and women continue to serve in it today. During World War I, in January 1918, Myrtle Hazard enlisted and became a radio operator and then an electrician. She was the only woman to serve during the war and she is the namesake of USCGC Myrtle Hazard . Twin sisters Genevieve and Lucille Baker were long considered to be the first women to serve in the Coast Guard in numerous news reports; however, while they tried to enlist, they were not accepted. The United States Coast Guard Auxiliary is the uniformed, non-military volunteer component of the United States Coast Guard, created on 23 June 1939 by an act of Congress. Although a civilian organization, it was originally named the "United States Coast Guard Reserve" and was later re-named the "United States Coast Guard Auxiliary" on 19 February 1941 when a military reserve force for the Coast Guard was created. As part of "Team Coast Guard" (the term used to collectively describe all active, reserve, auxiliary, and civilian employees), the Auxiliary carries out, or assists in, nearly all of the Coast Guard's noncombatant and non-law enforcement missions. Auxiliarists are subject to direction from the Commandant of the Coast Guard. As of 2022, there were approximately 26,000 members of the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. Coast Guard policy has assigned many of its duties related to recreational boating safety to the Auxiliary, including public boating safety education and outreach. This includes offering boating skills courses, liaising with marine-related businesses at the local level, and providing voluntary Vessel Safety Checks (formerly called Courtesy Examinations) to the public. Additionally, Auxiliarists use their own vessels, boats, and aircraft (once registered as Coast Guard facilities) to provide operational support to the Coast Guard by conducting safety patrols, assisting in search and rescue missions, inspecting aids to navigation, and performing other tasks on behalf of the Coast Guard.[citation needed] Prior to 1997, Auxiliarists were largely limited to activities supporting recreational boating safety. In 1997, however, new legislation authorized the Auxiliary to participate in any and all Coast Guard missions except direct military and direct law enforcement. Auxiliarists may directly augment active duty Coast Guard personnel in non-combat, non-law enforcement roles (e.g. radio communications watch stander, interpreter, cook, etc.) and may assist active duty personnel in inspecting commercial vessels and maintaining aids-to-navigation. Auxiliarists may support the law enforcement and homeland security missions of the Coast Guard but may not directly participate (make arrests, etc.), and Auxiliarists are not permitted to carry a weapon while serving in any Auxiliary capacity.[citation needed] One Coast Guardsman, Douglas Albert Munro, has earned the Medal of Honor, the highest military award of the United States. Fifty five Coast Guardsmen have earned the Navy Cross and numerous men and women have earned the Distinguished Flying Cross.[citation needed] The highest peacetime decoration awarded within the Coast Guard is the Homeland Security Distinguished Service Medal; prior to the transfer of the Coast Guard to the Department of Homeland Security, the highest peacetime decoration was the Department of Transportation Distinguished Service Medal. The highest unit award available is the Presidential Unit Citation. In wartime, members of the Coast Guard are eligible to receive the Navy version of the Medal of Honor. A Coast Guard Medal of Honor is authorized but has not yet been developed or issued. In May 2006, at the Change of Command ceremony when Admiral Thad Allen took over as Commandant, President George W. Bush awarded the entire Coast Guard, including the Coast Guard Auxiliary, the Coast Guard Presidential Unit Citation with hurricane device, for its efforts during and after Hurricane Katrina and Tropical Storm Rita. Numerous celebrities have served in the Coast Guard including tennis player Jack Kramer, golfer Arnold Palmer, All Star baseball player Sid Gordon, boxer Jack Dempsey; surfer and inventor Tom Blake; musicians Kai Winding, Rudy Vallee, Derroll Adams, and Tom Waits; actors Buddy Ebsen, Sid Caesar, Victor Mature, Richard Cromwell, Alan Hale Jr., William Hopper, Beau Bridges, Jeff Bridges, Cesar Romero; author Alex Haley; and Senator Claiborne Pell. Vice Admiral Thad Allen in 2005 was named Principal Federal Officer to oversee recovery efforts in the Gulf Region after Hurricane Katrina. After promotion to Admiral, on the eve of his retirement as Commandant, Allen again received national visibility after being named National Incident Commander overseeing the response efforts of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. Former Coast Guard officers have been appointed to numerous civilian government offices. After retiring as Commandant of the Coast Guard in 2002, Admiral James Loy went on to serve as United States Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security. After their respective Coast Guard careers, Carlton Skinner served as the first Civilian Governor of Guam; G. William Miller, 65th Secretary of the Treasury, and retired Vice Admiral Harvey E. Johnson Jr. served as Deputy Administrator and Chief Operating Officer of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) under President George W. Bush. Rear Admiral Stephen W. Rochon was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as the Director of the Executive Residence and White House Chief Usher, beginning service on 12 March 2007, and continued to serve in the same capacity under President Barack Obama. Two Coast Guard aviators, Commander Bruce E. Melnick and Captain Daniel C. Burbank, have served as NASA astronauts. Signalman First Class Douglas Albert Munro was awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously, and is the only Coast Guardsman to ever receive this honor. Those who have piloted or flown in Coast Guard aircraft under official flight orders may join the Coast Guard Aviation Association which was formerly known as the "Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl" ("Flying Since the World was Flat"). The Ancient Albatross Award is presented to the active duty USCG member who qualified as an aviator earlier than any other person who is still serving. Separate enlisted and officer awards are given. The Coast Guard CW Operators Association (CGCWOA) is a membership organization comprising primarily former members of the United States Coast Guard who held the enlisted rating of Radioman (RM) or Telecommunications Specialist (TC), and who employed International Morse Code (CW) in their routine communications duties on Coast Guard cutters and at shore stations. Members of this organization unite to assist members and dependents in need, assist with Coast Guard recruiting efforts, support the aims and goals of the Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Academy, keep informed on Coast Guard matters, and assemble for social amenities; and include Chief, Senior Chief, and Master Chief Petty Officers, active, reserve and retired. Membership is also open to all Chief Warrant Officers and Officers who have served as a Chief Petty Officer. Established in 1929, the Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association, United States Coast Guard (CWOA) represents Coast Guard warrant and chief warrant officers (active, reserve and retired) to the Congress, White House and the Department of Homeland Security. Additionally, the association communicates with the Coast Guard leadership on matters of concern to Coast Guard chief warrant officers. The U.S. Coast Guard maintains a Motion Picture and Television Office (MOPIC) in Hollywood, California, along with its sister services at the Department of Defense dedicated to enhancing public awareness and understanding of the Coast Guard, its people, and its missions through a cooperative effort with the entertainment industry. Fighting Coast Guard (1951), depicts Coast Guard trained to help win WWII. The Guardian (2006), depicts the Aviation Survival Technician (AST) program. Pain & Gain (2013), starring Dwayne Johnson and Mark Wahlberg, depicted the Coast Guard Deployable Specialized Forces in action. The Finest Hours (2016), A film portraying the rescue of the crew of SS Pendleton by coxswain Bernard C. Webber and the three other crewmen of Coast Guard Motor Lifeboat CG 36500. Deepwater Horizon (2016), depicts the events of 20 April 2010 when the mobile drilling platform Deepwater Horizon suffered a mass casualty explosion that resulted in the deaths of 11 crew members. The film also depicts the Coast Guard's coordination and response in the immediate aftermath of the explosion. The Coast Guard has been featured in several television series, including: Coast Guard Alaska: Search and Rescue, a series on The Weather Channel that features a Coast Guard search-and-rescue unit based in Kodiak, Alaska. Several series have spun off the original to focus on units based in Cape Disappointment and Florida. Oceans portal United States portal AMVER Badges of the United States Coast Guard Chaplain of the United States Coast Guard Coast Guard Day Coast Guard Intelligence Code of Federal Regulations, Title 33 Joint Maritime Training Center List of United States Coast Guard cutters List of United States Coast Guard stations Maritime Law Enforcement Academy Maritime Security Risk Analysis Model MARSEC National Data Buoy Center Naval militia North Pacific Coast Guard Agencies Forum Patrol Forces Southwest Asia SPARS United States Coast Guard Legal Division United States Coast Guard Police United States Coast Guard Research & Development Center U.S. National Ice Center List of United States federal law enforcement agencies National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office of Law Enforcement U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) United States Maritime Service United States Merchant Marine Although the U.S. Navy lists its founding as 1775 with the formation of the Continental Navy, the U.S. Navy was entirely disbanded in 1785. The modern U.S. Navy in its present form was founded in 1794. The number of uniformed personnel currently authorized by component. The number actually serving is usually less than the number authorized due to personnel turnover and recruitment efforts that have not filled all available vacancies. The term Coast Guardsman is the official term used by the U.S. Coast Guard to refer to a member regardless of the person's gender. In an ALCOAST message effective 1 December 2011 the Commandant, Admiral Papp, directed that the language of the Guardian Ethos be superseded by the Coast Guard Ethos in an effort to use terminology that would help with the identity of personnel serving in the Coast Guard. The term Coast Guardsman is the correct form of address used in Title 14 USC and is the form that has been used historically. Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard Reserve Force Command Master Chief Petty Officers for the Deputy Commandants Area Command Master Chief Petty Officers For example, the National Park Service operates various vessels with a green racing stripe, as seen at Channel Islands National Park#Vessels (image) or at Sleeping Bear Dunes (image). Other agencies include the Virginia Beach Police Department Marine Patrol, the China Coast Guard, the Turkish Coast Guard, Baltimore Police Marine Unit, and the US Park Police. "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions – When was the Coast Guard (and its forerunners) established and what is its organizational history?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 30 January 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2018. Fagan, Linda. "The Commandant of the United States Coast Guard – Auxiliary Policy Statement" (PDF). The Commandant of the United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 20 December 2022. "2020 Demographics: Profile of the Military Community" (PDF). Department of Defense. Retrieved 27 January 2023. William R. Benedetto (February 2006). Sailing Into the Abyss: A True Story of Extreme Heroism on the High Seas. Kensington Publishing Corporation. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-8065-2646-1. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 23 February 2015. Its sailors go by a handful of names including coasties, shallow-water sailors, hooligans, rum-runners, the Guard, and, now, the Home Security guys. "'Semper Paratus' (Always Ready)". Coast Guard History – FAQ's. U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "CHAPTER 2. UNITED STATES COAST GUARD EMBLEM" (PDF). United States Coast Guard. April 2011. p. 2. COMDTINST M5200.14A. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 February 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2018. 14 U.S.C. § 102 "U.S. Coast Guard Strategic Plan 2018-2022" (PDF). U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "2003 – Coast Guard Transferred to the Department of Homeland Security". cgaviationhistory.org. Coast Guard Aviation Association. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. "1967 – United States Coast Guard Transferred to the Department of Transportation". cgaviationhistory.org. Coast Guard Aviation Association. Retrieved 23 September 2020. United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 6 April 1917: With the declaration of war against Germany the Coast Guard was transferred by Executive Order to the control of the Navy Department. United States Coast Guard. "Timeline of Coast Guard Organizational History" (PDF). United States Department of Homeland Security. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 1 November 1941: President Roosevelt's Executive Order 8929 transferred the Coast Guard to Navy Department control. In compliance with Executive Order 9666, the Coast Guard returned to Treasury Department control. Johnson, Robert Irwin (1987). Guardians of the Sea, History of the United States Coast Guard, 1915 to the Present. Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-87021-720-3. Scheina, Robert (11 October 2012). "The U.S. Coast Guard at War". Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. LaRouche, Monique (2012). "The Coast Guard RAIDs Afghanistan". Reservist. LXI (1). U.S. Coast Guard: 18. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. "[USC02] 14 USC 4904: Authorized levels of military strength and training". uscode.house.gov. Retrieved 27 December 2021. "United States Coast Guard > Our Organization > Workforce". US Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Operational_Assets". US Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 16 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Happy 225th Birthday to the United States Coast Guard! « Coast Guard Auxiliary Live". live.cgaux.org. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "Coast Guard Organization and Administration, Chapter One". Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2013. The Coast Guard Gets It Right Archived 22 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Amanda Ripley. TIME. 23 October 2005. 6 U.S.C. § 468 "U.S. Coast Guard Office of Search and Rescue (CG-SAR)". dco.uscg.mil. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "National Search and Rescue Plan (USA) 2007" (PDF). Uscg.mil. 22 June 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 3 February 2013. "National Search And Rescue Committee". U.S. Coast Guard Office of Search and Rescue. U.S. Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 17 February 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Training Center Yorktown, VA". forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "National Response Center". USCG. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2015. "National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) Overview". US EPA. 4 June 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2014. "U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Management System (MSMS)" (PDF). RITA | Bureau of Transportation Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) System" (PDF). National Archives. "USCG Port State Information Exchange Default Page". cgmix.uscg.mil. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "USCG Merchant Mariner Credential (MMC) @ National Maritime Center (NMC)". Edumaritime.net. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2018. 10 U.S.C. § 101(a)(4) "Trump Signs Law Establishing U.S. Space Force". U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE. Retrieved 21 December 2019. "14 USC §1. Establishment of Coast Guard" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. United States Coast Guard. "Daily Chronology of Coast Guard History". United States Department of Homeland Security. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. 2003 - Administrative control of the Coast Guard transferred to the newly created Department of Homeland Security from the Department of Transportation, where it had served since 1 April 1967. "Homeland Security Act of 2002" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 25 November 2002. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Baldinelli, D.C. (9 December 2002). "The U.S. Coast Guard's Assignment to the Department of Homeland Security: Entering Uncharted Waters or Just a Course Correction?". United States Coast Guard. United States Department of Homeland Security. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. On November 25, 2002, President George Bush signed the Homeland Security Act, which called for the largest reorganization in the U.S. government since the formation of the Department of Defense. The reorganization plan will bring together twenty-two agencies or parts of agencies from other departments such as Justice, Commerce, Health and Human Services, etc., under the control of the Department of Homeland Security.... One of those agencies affected was the United States Coast Guard, which will be transferred from the Department of Transportation. "Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Act of 2006". Congress.gov. 12 July 2006. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "14 U.S.C. § 2 - U.S. Code Title 14. Coast Guard § 2". Findlaw. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Thiesen, William H. (26 July 2018). "The Long Blue Line: Coast Guard combat operations in Operation Iraqi Freedom". Coast Guard Compass. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Garamone, Jim (17 October 2007). "Sea Services Unveil New Maritime Strategy". Navy News Service. American Forces Press Service. NNS071017-13. Archived from the original on 5 March 2009. Retrieved 30 May 2008. "14 USC §2. Primary duties" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Previously 14 USC 89 - "14 USC §89. Law enforcement" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "18 USC §1385. Use of Army and Air Force as posse comitatus" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. Previously 14 USC 143 "14 USC §143. Treasury Department" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "19 USC §1401.(i) Officer of the customs; customs officer" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. "19 USC §1589a. Enforcement authority of customs officers" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. "Federal Law Enforcement Survey of Federal Civilian Law Enforcement Functions and Authorities" (PDF). Government Accounting Office. December 2006. GAO-07-121. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 22 April 2008. "Law Enforcement Survey Table". Government Accounting Office. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. "People v. Booth, ___ N.Y.S.2d ___, 2008 WL 2247068, 2008 N.Y. Slip. Op. 28206 (N.Y. Co.Ct. 2008)" (PDF). 24 May 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 23 June 2008. Ripley, Amanda (23 October 2005). "How the Coast Guard Gets it Right". Time. Archived from the original on 22 December 2007. Retrieved 11 February 2008. Thiesen, William H. (19 April 2018). "The Long Blue Line: Civil War operations of the Revenue Cutter Service". Coast Guard Compass. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Strobridge, Truman R. (17 November 2014). "Chronology of Aids to Navigation and the United States Lighthouse Service 1716-1939". U.S. Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 21 January 2015. "U.S. Steamboat Inspection Service & the History of Merchant Vessel Inspection". U.S. Coast Guard. 17 November 2014. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 21 January 2015. "Coast Guard joins Homeland Security Department". CNN. 26 February 2003. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "World War II". United States Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Vietnam". United States Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Toler, Vern (November 1996). "The Coast Guard in Vietnam". The Coast Guard Reservist. Jack's Joint. Archived from the original on 3 July 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2018. Larzelere, Alex (1997). The Coast Guard at War, Vietnam, 1965–1975. Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland. pp. 124–128. ISBN 978-1-55750-529-3. "Naval Operations Concept 2010" (PDF). fas.org. Retrieved 11 May 2021. "Deployable Operations Group disbanded". Navy Times. Retrieved 21 January 2015. Guard, U. S. Coast (28 June 2021). "Deployable Operations Group". Military.com. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Coast Guard Expects New Deployable Group Operating By Next Summer" (PDF). Senior Coast Guard Leadership. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 3 February 2013. Papp, Robert J. Jr. (27 September 2012). "The legacy of Signalman 1st Class Douglas Munro". Coast Guard Compass. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. Retrieved 9 October 2012. Cacas, Max (10 September 2009). "DHS marks new milestone with St. E's campus groundbreaking". WFED. Archived from the original on 21 June 2011. "FY 2016 DHS Budget in Brief" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 6 December 2016. "Surface Forces Logistics Center". Dcms.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "United States Coast Guard Academy". Uscga.edu. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Training Center Cape May, NJ". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Training Center Petaluma, CA". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Training Center Yorktown, VA". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Aviation Technical Training Center (ATTC) Elizabeth City, NC". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Aviation Training Center (ATC) Mobile, AL". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Leavitt, Michael P. "Coast Guardsman, Not Guardian" (PDF). Flotilla 23-1 Annapolis, MD. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 24 June 2011. Shipmates 17 - The Coast Guard Ethos "14 USC §41. Grades and ratings" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. "37 USC §201. Pay grades: assignment to; general rules" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2015, Section 201 "Required Uniforms". USCG Uniform Distribution Center. 23 May 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2009. Retrieved 16 November 2009. "U.S. Coast Guard: List of Ranks, Insignia, and Pay Range". Retrieved 13 November 2022. "OFFICER CANDIDATE SCHOOL (OCS)". Go Coast Guard. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Coast Guard ROTC Scholarships". Pocketsense.com. Retrieved 23 February 2022. "College Student Pre-Commissioning Initiative (Scholarship Program)". GoCoastGuard.com. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Direct Commission Officer Programs". United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 6 October 2023. "Direct Commission Programs | GoCoastGuard.com". www.gocoastguard.com. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Training Center Cape May" (PDF). United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "ASVAB score requirements changing for "A" schools". www.mycg.uscg.mil. Retrieved 8 August 2022.[permanent dead link] "USCG Civilian Careers". United States Coast Guard. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2010. "Civilian Careers (CG-121) | U.S. Coast Guard". www.dcms.uscg.mil. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "United States Coast Guard Regulations, Chapter 10 – Classification and Status of Coast Guard Vessels" (PDF). 1992. COMDINSTM 5000.3B. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. LaGrone, Sam (21 July 2022). "Eastern Shipbuilding Protests Coast Guard Offshore Patrol Cutter Award to Austal USA". news.usni.org. USNI News. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "420-foot Icebreaker (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "399-foot Polar Class Icebreakers (WAGB)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "Alaska Lt. Gov. calls for US icebreakers". Fairbanks Daily News-Miner. Associated Press. 30 November 2011. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. "Northrop Grumman to Supply Polar Ice Breaker Navigation Support for U.S. Coast Guard". 20 October 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 21 October 2013. "U.S. Coast Guard Barque Eagle (WIX-327)". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "USCGC Eagle". Lots of Honor. 2 June 2017. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "140-foot Icebreaking Tug (WTGB) - Bay Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 11 March 2010. "110-foot Patrol Boat (WPB) - Island Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "87-foot Coastal Patrol Boat (WPB) - Marine Protector Class". Aircraft, Boats, and Cutters: Cutters. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "Chatham Boats". Station Chatham. 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 February 2011. Retrieved 6 February 2011. "COAST GUARDSMAN PIONEERS UNMANNED AERIAL SURVEILLANCE". gocoastguard.com. 2021. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2023. "The Scramble Military Database USA-Coast Guard". scramble.nl. Retrieved 1 May 2019.[permanent dead link] "Crew-Served Weapon, MK-19, 40mm Machine Gun Course (MK-19)". Forcecom.uscg.mil. Archived from the original on 18 March 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "U.S. Coast Guard Core Values". U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary. U.S. Coast Guard. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "The Coast Guard and Homeland Security". United States Army Combined Arms Center. July 2010. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015. "Shipmates 17 - The Coast Guard Ethos" (txt). CGMS General Messages. 30 November 2011. ALCOAST 554/11. Archived from the original on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2011. "The Guardian Ethos", U.S. Coast Guard Posture Statement (PDF), United States Coast Guard, February 2008, p. 17, archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019, retrieved 11 March 2018 "Harry G. Hamlet 1932-1936". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26 January 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2009. Retrieved 8 November 2009. Hamlet, Harry G. (10 October 2012). "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - Creed of the United States Coast Guardsman". Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009. Retrieved 8 November 2009. "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - What is the origin of the saying "You have to go out, but you don't have to come back"?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "U.S. Coast Guard Flags". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 26 January 2012. Archived from the original on 20 June 2009. Retrieved 21 March 2009. "The Coast Guard Ensign". Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived from the original on 21 June 2009. Retrieved 15 July 2009. Saba, Anne (January 2000). "Tradition, Service, Honor: The Customs Ensign". U.S. Customs Today. Archived from the original on 23 October 2011. "U.S. Coast Guard Flags". 17 November 2014. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015. As it was intended in 1799, the ensign is displayed as a mark of authority for boardings, examinations and seizures of vessels for the purpose of enforcing the laws of the United States. The ensign is never carried as a parade or ceremony standard. "Trademarks and Emblems". U.S. Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Thiesen, William H. (Summer 2012). "The History of the 'Racing Stripe' Emblem and Brand" (PDF). Sea History (139). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 2 July 2013. "Coatings And Color Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives and Publications Division. 11 March 2005. COMDTINST M10360.3C. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2009. "Coast Guard History: Frequently Asked Questions - When did the Coast Guard adopt the "slash" for its cutters, boats, and aircraft?". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 14 February 2013. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2013. "U.S. Coast Guard Coatings and Color manual" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 16 July 1973. CG-263. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2013. "Uniform Regulations" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. 18 February 2009. COMDTINST M1020.6F. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2013. Uniform regulations, Comdtinst m1020.6k (PDF). U.S. Department of Homeland Security (Manual). Washington DC: United States Coast Guard. 7 July 2020. pp. 1–5. "14 USC PART II—Coast Guard Reserve and Auxiliary" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 9 August 2013. "Challenges at many levels: Holistic view of readiness allows Army to meet new demands". www.army.mil. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "Assessing the Health Readiness of Coast Guard Reservists: Results from Coast Guard Reserve Respondents to the HRBS". 2021. doi:10.7249/ig149.7. S2CID 241884762. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Rear Admiral James M. Kelly". United States Coast Guard. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Women in the military — international". CBC News. 30 May 2006. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 10 August 2015. "Women's History Chronology", Women & the U. S. Coast Guard, U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office "Women In Military Service For America Memorial". Womensmemorial.org. 27 July 1950. Archived from the original on 3 April 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013. "The Long Blue Line: Myrtle Hazard—first woman in the United States Coast Guard". United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 30 July 2023.[permanent dead link] Vojvodich, Donna (24 March 2023). "The Long Blue Line: The Baker Twins—Re-searching the first female Coasties - or were they?". United States Coast Guard. Retrieved 30 June 2023.[permanent dead link] "Title 14, United States Code, Section 821". United States Code. U.S. House of Representatives, Office of the Law Revision Counsel. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Papp, Robert J. Jr. "US Coast Guard Auxiliary Policy Statement" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 9 August 2013. "US Coast Guard Auxiliary | Homeland Security". www.dhs.gov. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "CG Auxiliary Vessel Examiner Manual" (PDF). CG-612 Directives and Publications Division. 20 August 1996. COMDTINST M16796.2E. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2013. "33 CFR § 5.31 Power and authority" (PDF). Government Printing Office. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 9 August 2013. "Auxiliary Manual" (PDF). "SM1c Douglas Albert Munro". Coast Guard Historian's Office. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2010. Retrieved 13 May 2010. Joshua Skovlund (1 September 2023). "The Presidential Unit Citation's history of heroism". Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Medal of Honor, Frequently Asked Questions". 5 June 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Coast Guard Presidential Unit Citation". Military Medals. Retrieved 16 July 2021. "Ancient Albatross Award". Ancient Order of the Pterodactyl. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. Chidlow, Nora L. "The Bird That Continues to Fly: A History of the Ancient Albatross Award" (PDF). Coast Guard Historian's Office. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 April 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2010. "Coast Guard CW Operators Association". Archived from the original on 3 July 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "U.S. Coast Guard Chief Petty Officers Association". Archived from the original on 3 August 2006. Retrieved 27 July 2006. "USCG Chief Warrant and Warrant Officers Association". Archived from the original on 13 March 2013. Retrieved 27 February 2013. USCG Department of Public Affairs. "U.S. Coast Guard Motion Picture & Television Office (CG-0922M)". Archived from the original on 13 March 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017. Commander Judd, Ralph, USCG (ret). "The Coast Guard In Film". USCG: Frequently Asked Questions. Archived from the original on 13 March 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Scott, A.O (29 September 2006). "Costner Is Back in the Water, and He's Stoically Swimming to Save Everybody". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Lodge, Bill (10 March 2015). "Casting call seeks real oil workers for 'Deepwater Horizon' movie starring Mark Wahlberg". The Advocate. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Johnson, Dave. "Deepwater Horizon the film – A review". Industrial Safety & Hygiene News. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Brooks, James (12 November 2011). "Kodiak Coast Guardsmen cheer their debut on national TV". Alaska Dispatch News. Archived from the original on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2017. "The Weather Channel Greenlights New Original Series "Coast Guard Florida,"". The Futon Critic. Retrieved 18 March 2015. Lagan, Christopher (6 February 2014). "Coast Guard Pacific Northwest will be focus of new Weather Channel series". Coast Guard All Hands. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2017. Dolbow, Jim (2017). The Coast Guardsman's Manual (11th ed.). Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, Maryland. ISBN 978-1682471890. Coast Guard: Observations on Progress Made and Challenges Faced in Developing and Implementing a Common Operational Picture: Testimony before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of Representatives Government Accountability Office Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Coast Guard. Official website About U.S. Coast Guard Coast Guard Magazine USCG Proceedings Magazine Coast Guard Directives and Publications Coast Guard Flags USCG Homeport Website Tilley, J. A. "A History of Women in the Coast Guard". U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Women & the U. S. Coast Guard "Women in the U. S. Coast Guard: Moments in History". U.S. Coast Guard Historian's Office. 4 December 2019. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Coast Guard in the Federal Register Reports on the Coast Guard, Department of Homeland Security Office of Inspector General A Cooperative Strategy for 21st Century Seapower [1] Archived 30 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Coast Guard Videos Military search and social network for current and former members of the Army, Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps, and Coast Guard U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary Website Coast Guard Channel Archived 2 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine Coast Guard News Congressional Research Service (CRS) Reports regarding the U.S. Coast Guard CRS Search Results Archived 5 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine Greg Trauthwein (17 March 2014). "USCG ... Past, Present & Future". Maritime Reporter and Marine News magazines online. Retrieved 26 February 2015. US Coast Guard Network Group on LinkedIn "America's Waterway Watch". U.S. Coast Guard Office of Port & Facility Compliance. 26 June 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2020. United States Coast Guard at the Wayback Machine (archived 29 January 1997)