The Antarctic Convergence or Antarctic Polar Front is a marine belt encircling Antarctica, varying in latitude seasonally, where cold, northward-flowing Antarctic waters meet the relatively warmer waters of the sub-Antarctic. Antarctic waters predominantly sink beneath the warmer subantarctic waters, while associated zones of mixing and upwelling create a zone very high in marine productivity, especially for Antarctic krill. This line, like the arctic tree line, is a natural boundary rather than an artificial one, such as the borders of nations and time zones. It not only separates two hydrological regions, but also separates areas of distinctive marine life and climates. The Arctic has no similar boundary because of the large bodies of land contiguous with the northern polar region. The Antarctic Convergence was first crossed by Anthony de la Roché in 1675, and described by Edmond Halley in 1700. The Antarctic Convergence is a zone approximately 32 to 48 km (20 to 30 mi) wide, varying in latitude seasonally and in different longitudes, extending across the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans between the 48th and 61st parallels of south latitude. Although the northern boundary varies, for the purposes of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 1980, it is defined as "50°S, 0°; 50°S, 30°E; 45°S, 30°E; 45°S, 80°E; 55°S, 80°E; 55°S, 150°E; 60°S, 150°E; 60°S, 50°W; 50°S, 50°W; 50°S, 0°." Although this zone is a mobile one, it usually does not stray more than half a degree of latitude from its mean position. The precise location at any given place and time is made evident by the sudden drop in seawater temperature from north to south of, on average, 2.8 °C (5.0 °F) from 5.6 °C (42.1 °F) to below 2 °C (36 °F). Amsterdam Island (France) Crozet Islands (France) Diego Ramírez Islands (Chile)  Falkland Islands (United Kingdom) Isla de los Estados (Argentina) Macquarie Island (Australia) NZ Subantarctic Islands (New Zealand) Antipodes Islands Auckland Islands Bounty Islands Campbell Islands Snares Islands Chatham Islands (New Zealand) Prince Edward Islands (South Africa) Saint Paul Island (France) / Tierra del Fuego (Argentina / Chile)  Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Gough Island  Bouvet Island (Norway)  Heard Island and McDonald Islands (Australia) Kerguelen Islands (France)  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands (United Kingdom) Balleny Islands (Antarctic Treaty System) Peter I Island (Antarctic Treaty System) Scott Island (Antarctic Treaty System) South Orkney Islands (Antarctic Treaty System) South Shetland Islands (Antarctic Treaty System) Geography portal Antarctic Antarctic Circle Antarctic Circumpolar Wave Polar front Southern Ocean R.K. Headland, The Island of South Georgia, Cambridge University Press, 1984.[ISBN missing][page needed] Alan Gurney, Below the Convergence: Voyages Toward Antarctica, 1699–1839, Penguin Books, New York, 1998.[ISBN missing][page needed] Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources 1980, Article 1(4).  This article incorporates public domain material from "Antarctic Convergence". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey. Map of Antarctic Convergence