Joaquin Rafael Phoenix (/hwɑːˈkiːn/; né Bottom; born October 28, 1974) is an American actor. Known for playing dark, unconventional and eccentric characters in films, in particular period dramas, he has received various accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, a Grammy Award, and two Golden Globe Awards. In 2020, The New York Times named him one of the greatest actors of the 21st century. Phoenix began his career by appearing in television series in the early 1980s with his brother River. His first major film roles were in SpaceCamp (1986) and Parenthood (1989). During this period, he was credited as Leaf Phoenix, a name he gave himself. He took back his birth name in the early 1990s and received critical acclaim for his supporting roles in the comedy-drama To Die For (1995) and the period film Quills (2000). Phoenix received further critical acclaim and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Commodus in the historical drama Gladiator (2000). He had success with the horror films Signs (2002) and The Village (2004), the historical drama Hotel Rwanda (2004), and won a Grammy Award, a Golden Globe Award, and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of musician Johnny Cash in the biopic Walk the Line (2005). Following a brief sabbatical, Phoenix starred in the psychological drama The Master (2012), winning the Volpi Cup for Best Actor and earning his third Academy Award nomination. He gained praise for his roles in the romantic drama Her (2013) and the crime satire Inherent Vice (2014), and won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor for the psychological thriller You Were Never Really Here (2017). For his performance as the titular character of Joker (2019), Phoenix won the Academy Award for Best Actor. He has since starred in the independent films C'mon C'mon (2021) and Beau Is Afraid (2023), and portrayed the title role in the historical drama Napoleon (2023). Phoenix is an animal rights activist. He has been vegan since the age of three and regularly supports charitable causes and has produced several documentaries on global meat consumption and its impact on the environment. He is in a relationship with actress Rooney Mara, with whom he has a son. Joaquin Rafael Bottom was born on October 28, 1974, at the Hospital Metropolitano San Francisco in the Río Piedras district of San Juan, Puerto Rico, to John Lee Bottom, the founder of a landscape gardening company, and Arlyn "Heart" Bottom (née Dunetz), who was an executive secretary at NBC and whose connection to an agent provided her children with acting work. He is the third of five children, following River (1970–1993) and Rain (born 1972), and preceding Liberty (born 1976) and Summer (born 1978), all of whom have been involved in acting. Phoenix also has a paternal half-sister, Jodean (born 1964). His father was a Catholic from Fontana, California, and was of English, German and French ancestry. His maternal grandfather, Meyer Dunetz, was Russian Jewish and his maternal grandmother, Margit Lefkowitz, was Hungarian Jewish; they were both Ashkenazi Jews who resided in New York City. Phoenix's parents met when his mother was hitchhiking in California, and they got married less than a year after meeting. Soon after the second child was born, they joined the religious cult called Children of God and started traveling throughout South America and Puerto Rico in the Caribbean as missionaries for the cult, where the next two children were born. They eventually grew disillusioned with Children of God and left in 1977, being opposed to the cult's increasingly distorted rules, particularly the practice of flirty fishing. The fifth child was born in Florida where the family settled for a while. It was also around this time they legally adopted the surname Phoenix, inspired by the mythical bird that rises from its own ashes, symbolizing a new beginning. When Phoenix was three, he and his older siblings witnessed fish being stunned as "they were throwing them against the side of the boat." This act made the whole family convert to a vegan lifestyle. He also began calling himself "Leaf", having been inspired by spending time outdoors raking leaves and desiring to have a nature-related name like his siblings. Leaf became the name he used before changing it back to his birth name Joaquin at the age of fifteen. In 1979, after Phoenix's father had to stop working because of an old spinal injury, the whole family moved to Los Angeles where the mother met a high-profile child agent named Iris Burton, who got the children into commercials and bit parts on TV. He made his acting debut alongside his brother in the television series Seven Brides for Seven Brothers in the 1982 episode "Christmas Song". He has said of his first time acting: Instantaneous joy. The most enjoyable thing. For some kids, it's the first time they crack a ball or score a goal. For me, it was this. I was eight years old, and I remember the first scene on the TV set so vividly. And I knew that I loved it – the physical sensation; how powerful it was. That's the feeling I've been chasing ever since. In 1984, Phoenix starred opposite his brother River in the ABC Afterschool Special entitled Backwards: The Riddle of Dyslexia, for which they shared a nomination for Best Young Actor in a Family Film Made for Television at the 6th Youth in Film Awards. He also made guest appearances in the Murder, She Wrote episode "We're Off to Kill the Wizard" and individual episodes of The Fall Guy and Hill Street Blues. A year later, Phoenix appeared in the television film Kids Don't Tell. To supplement their income, the kids sang their original songs like "Gonna Make It", written by River, and busked for money in matching yellow shirts and shorts. They also studied dance; Phoenix became an avid break dancer. Phoenix dropped out of high school when he was sent a dead frog in the mail to dissect for his biology studies, which prompted him to discontinue his studies. Dissatisfied with life in Los Angeles, the Phoenixes moved back to Florida, settling in Gainesville. Phoenix made his feature film debut in the adventure film SpaceCamp (1986) as a young boy who goes to Kennedy Space Center to learn about the NASA space program and undergoes amateur astronaut training. He guest starred in the anthology series Alfred Hitchcock Presents episode "A Very Happy Ending" in the same year, playing a child who blackmails a hitman into killing his father. Phoenix's first starring role was in the film Russkies (1987), about a group of friends who unknowingly befriend a Russian soldier during the Cold War. In 1989, Phoenix co-starred as Garry, the withdrawn teenage nephew of Steve Martin's character in Ron Howard's comedy-drama Parenthood. The film was a box office success, grossing $126 million worldwide against its $20 million budget. Critics praised the film, with IndieWire reviewers highlighting the film's cast and their performances for possessing "genuinely likable, and occasionally insightful, heart" calling Phoenix a "terrifically believable angsty adolescent", in a performance which garnered him a nomination for the Young Artist Award for Best Leading Young Actor in a Feature Film. The role of Garry was reprised in the series based on the film by Leonardo DiCaprio, who studied Phoenix's performance in order to get it right. After establishing himself as a child actor, Phoenix felt that he was not getting any appealing offers and decided to take a break from acting and traveled to Mexico with his father, learning Spanish. When he returned to the States, his brother River Phoenix suggested that Phoenix change his name back to Joaquin and encouraged him to start acting again. On October 31, 1993, River died of a drug overdose outside The Viper Room in West Hollywood. Phoenix, who had accompanied his brother and older sister Rain to the club, called 911 to seek help for his dying brother. After the death, the phone call was repeatedly broadcast on TV and radio shows. The family retreated to Costa Rica to escape the media glare as the event came to be depicted as a cautionary tale of young Hollywood surrounded by mythology and conspiracy. Phoenix returned to acting in Gus Van Sant's 1995 black comedy To Die For, based on the novel of the same name by Joyce Maynard, which in turn was inspired by the Pamela Smart murder case. Phoenix starred as Jimmy Emmett, a disturbed young man who is seduced by a woman (Nicole Kidman) to commit murder. The film premiered at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival and became a financial and critical success, with New York Times critic Janet Maslin praising Phoenix's performance, writing "So pity poor Jimmy. Rivetingly played by Mr Phoenix with a raw, anguished expressiveness that makes him an actor to watch for, Jimmy is both tempted and terrified by Suzanne's slick amorality. In that, he speaks for us all." In 1997, Phoenix played a small-town troublemaker in Oliver Stone's U Turn, and a poor man in love with a rich woman in Inventing the Abbotts. The films were received with mostly mixed and negative reviews, respectively, and neither performed well at the box office. The following year, Phoenix starred in Clay Pigeons as a young man in a small town who befriends a serial killer. The film was released to a dismal box office performance and was not well received by critics. In his next film, 8mm (1999), Phoenix co-starred as an adult video store employee who helps Tom Welles (Nicolas Cage) investigate the underworld of illegal pornography. The film turned out to be a box office success, grossing $96 million worldwide, but found few admirers among critics. In 2000, Phoenix co-starred in three films. In the first of these, he portrayed a fictionalized version of Roman Emperor Commodus in Ridley Scott's historical epic film Gladiator. The film received positive reviews and grossed $457 million worldwide, making it the second highest-grossing film of 2000. Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly called Phoenix's work "a more nuanced star-making performance" when comparing him to the lead Russell Crowe, writing "Phoenix turns what could have easily been a cartoonish villain into a richly layered study of pathology." Phoenix earned his first nominations for an Academy Award, a Golden Globe Award and a BAFTA Award in the Best Supporting Actor category. He and his late brother River became the first brothers to be nominated for acting Academy Awards. To this date, they are the only brothers to hold this distinction. His next film marked his first collaboration with director James Gray in The Yards. The crime film follows the corruption in the rail yards of Queens. Although failing to perform well at the box office, The Yards received positive reviews from critics with many considering Phoenix's performance as the villain a stand out. The third release of 2000 was Philip Kaufman's Quills, a satirical thriller inspired by the life and work of the Marquis de Sade. Phoenix portrayed the conflicted priest Abbé de Coulmier opposite Kate Winslet. The film premiered at the Telluride Film Festival and was a modest art house success grossing a total of $17 million at the box office. It was received with critical praise with Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praising Phoenix and his chemistry with Winslet, stating "Phoenix, on a roll this year with Gladiator and The Yards, excels at making the priest a seductive figure — a neat trick considering the real Abbe was a four-foot hunchback. Winslet and Phoenix generate real fire, notably when Abbe dreams of ravishing Madeleine on the altar." For his combined roles of that year, Phoenix was awarded the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor and the National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor. The following year, Phoenix starred in the satirical film Buffalo Soldiers as a U.S. Army soldier. The world premiere was held at the 2001 Toronto International Film Festival in early September. However, because the film was a satire of the US military, its wider theatrical run was delayed by approximately two years because of the September 11 attacks; it was finally released on July 25, 2003. BBC's Nev Pierce wrote that "Phoenix is excellent as a Gen X Sergeant Bilko, ensuring his cheerfully amoral character never loses heart - showcasing tenderness, love, grief and fear as his games get out of control" and Phoenix received a nomination for the British Independent Film Award for Best Actor. The science fiction thriller Signs (2002) marked Phoenix's first collaboration with director M. Night Shyamalan. In the film, he played Merrill Hess, a former Minor League baseball player who, along with his older brother Graham (Mel Gibson), discovers that Earth has been invaded by extraterrestrials. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but Phoenix's performance was praised, with critic Peter Travers writing that Phoenix "registers impressively, finding the humor and the pain in this lost boy [...] never making a false move as a helpless Merrill watches his rock of a brother crumble into a despairing crisis of faith." The film was a commercial success, grossing $408.2 million worldwide. In 2003, Phoenix played the irresolute husband of a superstar-skater (Claire Danes) in Thomas Vinterberg's romance-drama It's All About Love, and voiced Kenai in the Disney animated film Brother Bear. Phoenix expressed immense joy being cast as the lead voice role in a Disney animated feature, stating "The real pinnacle [in my career] is that I'm playing an animated character in a Disney film. Isn't that the greatest?" The film grossed $250.4 million worldwide, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. He was replaced by Patrick Dempsey in the sequel Brother Bear 2. Phoenix reunited with Shyamalan in the period thriller The Village (2004). The film is about a village whose population lives in fear of creatures inhabiting the woods beyond it, referred to as "Those We Don't Speak Of". He played farmer Lucius Hunt, a role which Christopher Orr of The Atlantic found "underdeveloped". Though initially receiving mixed reviews, the film attracted retrospective reviews years after its release. Several critics deemed it one of Shyamalan's best films, praising Phoenix's "terrific" performance. The film was a financial success, grossing $256.7 million worldwide on its $60 million budget. In his next film of the year, he starred opposite John Travolta in the drama film Ladder 49 as a Baltimore firefighter. In preparation for the role, Phoenix trained for two months with the Baltimore Fire Department, putting out actual fires. He admitted that he was afraid of heights before he started making this film, recalling "I got to the pole and I looked down and I couldn't do it. But you go through the training and it exposes your fears and helps you to overcome them. We ended up rappelling off a six-story tower and that really helped." The film earned $102.3 million at the box office despite receiving generally mixed reviews. Roger Ebert gave the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, praising the performances in the film. Phoenix's final film of 2004 was Terry George's Hotel Rwanda, playing cameraman Jack Daglish. Based on the Rwandan genocide, the film documents Paul Rusesabagina's (Don Cheadle) efforts to save the lives of his family and more than 1,000 other refugees by providing them with shelter in the besieged Hôtel des Mille Collines. The film was a moderate financial success but was a critical success, receiving almost exclusively positive reviews from critics. For his performance in the film, Phoenix was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award along with the cast. In 2005, Phoenix co-starred alongside Reese Witherspoon in the James Mangold directed film Walk the Line, a Johnny Cash biopic, after Cash himself approved of Phoenix. All of Cash's vocal tracks in the film and on the accompanying soundtrack are played and sung by Phoenix. The film premiered at the Telluride Film Festival, eventually grossing $186 million worldwide. Phoenix's performance received rave reviews from critics and it inspired film critic Roger Ebert to write, "Knowing Johnny Cash's albums more or less by heart, I closed my eyes to focus on the soundtrack and decided that, yes, that was the voice of Johnny Cash I was listening to. The closing credits make it clear it's Joaquin Phoenix doing the singing, and I was gob-smacked". For his portrayal of Johnny Cash, he won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media for the film's soundtrack. Phoenix also received a second Academy Award nomination, his first in the Best Actor category as well as a second BAFTA nomination. Earlier that year, he narrated Earthlings (2005), a documentary about the investigation of animal abuse in factory farms, and pet mills, and for scientific research. He was awarded the Humanitarian Award at the San Diego Film Festival in 2005, for his work and contribution to Earthlings. Animal rights philosopher Tom Regan remarked that "for those who watch Earthlings, the world will never be the same". Phoenix's first producing task was the action thriller We Own the Night (2007), in which he played nightclub manager Bobby Green/Grusinsky who tries to save his brother (Mark Wahlberg) and father (Robert Duvall) from Russian mafia hitmen. The James Gray-directed film premiered at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival to mixed reviews; Roger Ebert praised Gray's direction and the acting, but criticized its screenplay for lack of originality. David Edelstein of New York Magazine commended Phoenix for elevating the film's conflict, writing that it "might be heavy-handed without Phoenix's face—his irresolution somehow more powerful than other actors' resolve. There is no artifice. He's not an actor disappearing into a role but a man disappearing into himself[...]Phoenix homes in on the truth of this person. It's the paradox of the greatest acting". Later that year, he played a father obsessed with finding out who killed his son in a hit-and-run accident in his second feature with Terry George, the crime drama film Reservation Road. The film received mixed reviews from critics; Peter Travers praised Phoenix's acting stating "Even the best actors – and I'd rank Joaquin Phoenix and Mark Ruffalo among their generation's finest – can't save a movie that aims for tragedy but stalls at soap opera." Phoenix also executive produced the television show 4Real, a half-hour program which began airing in 2007. The series showcased celebrity guests on global adventures "in order to connect with young leaders who are creating social and economic change". In 2008, Phoenix starred as a suicidal bachelor torn between the family friend his parents wish he would marry and his beautiful but volatile new neighbor in Gray's Two Lovers. The romantic drama premiered at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival. Reviews for the film and Phoenix's performance were positive; New York Magazine's chief critic called it his best performance to date and Ray Bennett of The Hollywood Reporter felt that Phoenix led the film with "great intelligence and enormous charm, making his character's conflict utterly believable". During the promotion of Two Lovers, Phoenix had started to film his next performance for the mockumentary film I'm Still Here (2010), which the media felt overshadowed the former's theatrical release. I'm Still Here purports to follow the life of Phoenix, from the announcement of his retirement from acting, through his transition into a career as a hip hop artist managed by rap icon Sean "Diddy" Combs. Directed by Phoenix's then brother-in-law Casey Affleck and co-written by Affleck and Phoenix, the little-seen film premiered at the 67th Venice International Film Festival to mixed reviews; critics were divided on whether to interpret the film as documentary or performance art. After its release, Phoenix explained that the idea for the feature arose from his amazement that people believed reality television shows' claims of being unscripted. By claiming to retire from acting, he and Affleck planned to make a film that "explored celebrity, and explored the relationship between the media and the consumers and the celebrities themselves" through their film. In 2011, it was announced that Phoenix would star in Paul Thomas Anderson's drama film The Master, which traces the relationship between Freddie Quell (Phoenix), a World War II navy veteran struggling to adjust to a post-war society and Lancaster Dodd (Philip Seymour Hoffman), a leader of a religious movement known as "The Cause". To create the character, Phoenix lost a significant amount of weight and went to a dentist to help force his jaw shut on one side; a trait his own father had. The film premiered at the 2012 Venice Film Festival where he won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor. The art house film only grossed $28 million but was received with critical acclaim, with Phoenix's performance receiving high praise. Peter Travers called it the performance of his career writing "Acting doesn't get better or go deeper[...]Phoenix wears the role like a second skin. You can't take your eyes off him." His performance as Freddie was described as "career-defining" by Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter, who was impressed that Anderson and Phoenix collaboratively were able to build such complex work around such a derelict figure. Fellow actor Daniel Day-Lewis publicly lauded the "remarkable" Phoenix while accepting the Screen Actors Guild Award, apologizing for the fact that Phoenix hadn't been nominated for the same award. Despite this, Phoenix received his third Academy, Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations for his leading role. Phoenix and Gray's fourth collaboration came with The Immigrant (2013), a drama film in which he played the supporting role of a pimp who prostitutes Polish immigrant Ewa (Marion Cotillard) and ends up falling for her. The Immigrant and his performance premiered to highly positive reviews at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival. In his review, Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club thought the film featured one of his best performances and commended Phoenix's and Gray's developing work, writing of that "the two are so perfectly in sync, that it's hard to tell where Phoenix's performance ends and Gray's visual style[...]—begins", further lauding their development of Bruno into "a fully fledged tragic character, even though he is neither the protagonist of The Immigrant nor the main driving force behind its plot". His next feature film of that year was the Spike Jonze-directed romantic science-fiction drama Her. He played Theodore Twombly, a man who develops a relationship with Samantha (Scarlett Johansson), an intelligent computer operating system personified through a female voice. Released to critical acclaim, critic A.A. Dowd of The A.V. Club labeled Phoenix as "one of the most emotionally honest actors in Hollywood", impressed at how he effortlessly unleashes waves of vulnerability in the film's many tight, invasive close-up images, calling it a "tremendous performance, one that rescues this character—a mess of insecurities, regrets, and desires—from the walking pity party he could have been". Her earned more than double of its production budget, and Phoenix received his fourth nomination at the Golden Globes. Several journalists expressed disappointment over his failure to receive an Oscar nomination for it, with Peter Knegt of IndieWire naming it of one of ten worst Oscar acting snubs of the last decade in 2015. In 2014, Phoenix took on the role of Doc Sportello, a private investigator and hippie/dope head trying to help his ex-girlfriend solve a crime in the crime comedy-drama Inherent Vice, based on Thomas Pynchon's detective novel of the same name. Reviews toward the film were positive; critics praised Phoenix's performance and Paul Thomas Anderson's direction, while some were frustrated by its complicated plot. Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph termed Phoenix as Anderson's "perfect leading man" and his work as "the kind of quietly dazzling performance that rarely wins awards but will be adoringly dissected and quoted for decades". Phoenix earned his fifth Golden Globe nomination for the film. After narrating the sequel to Earthlings, the 2015 animal rights' documentary Unity, Phoenix teamed with director Woody Allen and Emma Stone in the crime mystery film Irrational Man. He played Abe Lucas, a philosophy professor experiencing an existential crisis. The film was released to mixed reviews at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival; The Hollywood Reporter felt that the film was too similar to Allen's previous films, but praised Phoenix's chemistry with Stone and Phoenix for playing the character "with a wonderful baggy, lived-in quality that makes us want to climb inside the character's whiskey-sozzled head". The thriller You Were Never Really Here, written and directed by Lynne Ramsay and based on the novella of the same name by Jonathan Ames, ranks among the most acclaimed films of Phoenix's career. The film is about Joe (played by Phoenix), a traumatized former FBI agent and Gulf War veteran who tracks down missing girls for a living. To prepare for the film, Phoenix was advised by a former bodyguard who goes on international missions to rescue children suffering sexual exploitation and abuse by human traffickers; he gained a significant amount of weight and muscle for the part. Phoenix was Ramsay's first and only choice to play the veteran, with Ramsay calling him "my soulmate in making movies". The film premiered at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, where it received universal acclaim and earned Phoenix the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor. Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times described Phoenix's performance as "the most rivetingly contained" work of his career and Dominick Suzanne-Mayer of Consequence noted that his evocative manners in the film, led to him giving career-high work and "the kind of haunting turn that only comes around a few times every decade or so". In 2018, Phoenix portrayed Jesus in the biblical drama Mary Magdalene, written by Helen Edmundson and directed by Garth Davis. The film, and his performance, received mixed reviews; a reviewer for Entertainment Weekly thought that Phoenix lacked the quiet compassion and grace that was required for the role, while Nick Allen of Roger Ebert's website described his performance as "a human being who is visibly tormented by the power and wisdom that works through him", deeming it one of the best portrayals of Jesus ever. His next two features—the biopic Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far on Foot and the crime drama The Sisters Brothers —were much better received. In the former, Phoenix reunited with his To Die For director Gus Van Sant to portray quadriplegic cartoonist John Callahan. Barry Hertz of The Globe and Mail wrote that there's no better leading actor producing better work than Phoenix, stating "The actor – never a simple chameleon, but someone who disappears into a role entirely with a frightening conviction – continues to display new and tremendous range here" and David Hughes of Empire thought that in a more conventional film, Phoenix would be the favorite to win an Academy Award. The third film of 2018 was The Sisters Brothers, Jacques Audiard's adaptation of the novel of the same name by Patrick deWitt. The film starred John C. Reilly and Phoenix as the notorious assassin brothers Eli and Charlie Sisters respectively and chronicles their chase after two men who have banded together to search for gold. Writing for Roger Ebert's website, Tomris Laffly commented on Phoenix's and Reilly's "tremendous chemistry" and Lindsey Behr of the Associated Press opined that the duo "excellently manage all the various tones in the film". Also in 2018, he collaborated with Rooney Mara and Sia to narrate Chris Delforce's documentary Dominion. Animal rights activists have called it one of the most powerful documentaries ever made. For his contribution to the documentary, Phoenix was granted the 2018 Award of Excellence for Narration by Hollywood International Independent Documentary Awards. In 2019, Phoenix starred as the DC Comics character Joker in Todd Phillips's psychological thriller Joker; an alternative origin story for the character. Set in 1981, the film follows Arthur Fleck, a failed clown and stand-up comedian whose descent into insanity and nihilism inspires a violent counter-cultural revolution against the wealthy in a decaying Gotham City. Phoenix lost 52 pounds (24 kg) in preparation, and based his laugh on "videos of people suffering from pathological laughter." Released to critical acclaim at the 76th Venice International Film Festival, the film experienced a polarized critical reception after its theatrical release. While Phoenix's performance received rave reviews, the dark tone, portrayal of mental illness, and handling of violence divided opinions and generated concerns of inspiring real-life violence; the movie theater where the 2012 Aurora, Colorado mass shooting occurred during a screening of The Dark Knight Rises refused to show it. Despite this, Joker became a box office success grossing over $1 billion (against its $55 million production budget), the first and only R-rated film to do so, becoming Phoenix's highest-grossing film. Pete Hammond of Deadline wrote of Phoenix's "extraordinary" performance, describing it as "dazzling risky and original" and The Hollywood Reporter's David Rooney called his performance the "must-see factor" of the film, writing "he inhabits [the character] with an insanity by turns pitiful and fearsome in an out-there performance that's no laughing matter[...]Phoenix is the prime force that makes Joker such a distinctively edgy entry in the Hollywood comics industrial complex." The film earned him numerous awards, including an Academy Award, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA, a SAG and a Critic's Choice Award for Best Actor. In 2020, Phoenix served as an executive producer on Gunda, directed by Viktor Kossakovsky. The acclaimed documentary follows the daily life of a pig, two cows, and a one-legged chicken. That same year, Phoenix was named on the list of the 25 Greatest Actors of the 21st Century by The New York Times. The list was compiled by famed critics Manohla Dargis and A.O. Scott and Phoenix's paragraph was written by his frequent collaborator, director James Gray. In 2021, he starred in Mike Mills' drama C'mon C'mon, as Johnny, a radio journalist who embarks on a cross-country trip with his young nephew. The A24 film premiered at the 48th Telluride Film Festival to universal acclaim and scored the best per-venue average for a limited release since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic upon its release. Angelica Jade Bastién of Vulture praised Phoenix, writing "a tremendous showing from Joaquin Phoenix, operating at a register he's rarely found before. It's a career best for him — lovely, empathetic, humane[...]He possesses a warmth that glows from beginning to end. As Johnny, Phoenix listens to people and the world around him with full-bodied curiosity. This is where the bravura lies in the performance: his ability to seemingly just be." Phoenix starred as Beau Wassermann, the title character in Ari Aster's surrealist black tragicomedy Beau Is Afraid (2023), which was released on April 14, 2023, before a wide release the following week. In it, he portrays a mild-mannered but paranoia-ridden man who embarks on a surreal odyssey to get home to his mother, confronting his greatest fears along the way. The film received generally favourable reviews, with critics crediting Aster's direction and Phoenix and his "sheer commitment" to the role, for giving the film its "undeniable power". Tomris Laffly of TheWrap called his performance as Beau "one of his best performances", praising his ability to act with "a startling level of vulnerability[...]both enigmatic and translucently bare". Phoenix received his seventh Golden Globe nomination for his performance in the film. Phoenix portrayed Napoleon Bonaparte in Napoleon, his second collaboration with director Ridley Scott, released on November 22, 2023.The film grossed over $200 million dollars and received mixed reviews (though mostly negative reviews in France), mostly criticized for its pacing and historical inaccuracies, but Phoenix's performance was met with praise. Writing in The Guardian, Peter Bradshaw, raved about the performance: "Phoenix is the key to it all: a performance as robust as the glass of burgundy he knocks back: preening, brooding, seething and triumphing." In 2024, Phoenix will reprise his role as Joker in Phillips' sequel Joker: Folie à Deux. He will also reunite with Lynne Ramsay in Polaris, co-starring Rooney Mara, and with Ari Aster in the contemporary Western film Eddington. "When I was 15 or 16 my brother River [Phoenix] came home from work and he had a VHS copy of a movie called Raging Bull and he sat me down and made me watch it. And the next day he woke me up, and he made me watch it again. And he said, "You're going to start acting again, this is what you're going to do." He didn't ask me, he just told me. And I am indebted to him for that because acting has given me such an incredible life". —Phoenix credits his brother River Phoenix for his acting career. At the beginning of his career, Phoenix was often referred to as "the second most famous Phoenix", his name associated most closely with the death of his brother River Phoenix. The media would often compare the two, with The New York Times describing Joaquin as "sweetly unsettling and endlessly vulnerable" compared to his brother's "pure all-American blond boyishness". After his brother died, Phoenix gained a reputation for his distrust of the media, with many speculating that it is derived from how River's death was covered by the press. He was often asked about the day River died, and still is to this date. Phoenix has described these interviews as "insincere" and has felt that they impeded on the mourning process. Caroline Frost of The Huffington Post has said that Phoenix is "engaging, engaged, mischievous, honest" in person and Anderson Cooper of 60 Minutes thought that he was "wry, shy and couldn't be any more friendlier" adding that Phoenix "just doesn't like to talk about himself". Although known for his intensity and darkness on-screen, director James Gray who worked with Phoenix in four feature films, says that Phoenix is very different off-screen saying "He's actually very tender and sweet and sensitive. It's almost as if he channels his intensity into the characters. Like the work is an outlet for his darker side." Phoenix has been described as one of the finest actors of his generation. As he achieved stardom after Gladiator (2000), he was conveniently ruled out of teen-idol roles because of his hard gaze and scarred lip. Justin Chang, analyzing his career in Los Angeles Times in 2020, remarked that filmmakers immediately seemed to recognize that Phoenix was more than a heartthrob, and that there was "something more tortured, more vulnerable and infinitely more interesting at play beneath the surface". He noted that through his work, Phoenix is challenging and redefining cinematic manhood and that this quality sets him apart from most of his contemporaries. Film critic and film historian Leonard Maltin has called Phoenix "a true chameleon", writing "[Phoenix] commands the screen and breaks your heart; he makes us feel it all vicariously." Phoenix is particularly known for his ability to heavily commit to each role he plays and his intense preparations, deeply immersing himself in the characters, often blurring the lines between fiction and reality. That immersion was particularly evident during the filming of the mockumentary I'm Still Here (2010), when Phoenix announced to the world that he was retiring from acting to become a rapper. Throughout the filming period, Phoenix remained in character for public appearances, giving many the impression that he was genuinely pursuing a new career. Media outlets worldwide believed that Phoenix was having a mental breakdown after his infamous appearance on The Late Show with David Letterman. Confusion from the media turned to concern as the seemingly drug-addled Phoenix continued his attempts to convince crowds he was serious about a rap career. Many worried his erratic behavior was a sign he was stuck in a downward spiral, and headed down the same self-destructive path that took the life of his older brother. Although widely suspected to be a mockumentary, the fact that the events of the film had been deliberately staged was not disclosed until after the film had been released. To this day, some people believe he went through a personal meltdown during the filming period. Phoenix has credited the making of I'm Still Here for allowing him to make bolder choices in acting. Phoenix contends there's no real methodology to the roles he chooses, but has said that he is drawn to complex characters. He speculates that his affinity for dark roles derives from something more ineffable, possibly prenatal saying that "I think there is a combination of nature and nurture[...]—and some of it is my upbringing." Even so, Phoenix remains reluctant to draw a line between his unusual childhood, his private tragedy and his talent for "inhabiting the morose, damaged, violent, and otherwise anxiety-riddled characters". James Gray has described Phoenix as "one of the most incorruptible people I've ever known, and the least superficial", and has spoken of his acting, saying that he admires Phoenix's "limitless ability to surprise you in the best ways and inspire you to move in a direction that you haven't thought of originally, better than what you have in mind". Garth Davis, who directed Phoenix in Mary Magdalene (2018), has remarked that he does not apply method acting, but said that working with Phoenix is like "working with this beautiful wild animal, where you have to give him the space to be free, so his performance can roam freely: raw, uncontrived and truly natural. If he smells the design of the scene, you lose his free spirit; if the script is weak, he will expose its flaws. He is fiercely intelligent and almost completely instinctual. And he has this immense sensitivity that can be both his curse and his gift, but for me, that is what it means to be human". In an interview with The Guardian in 2015, Phoenix said that he prefers independent film over major studio film, citing that "the quality of acting suffers". In 2019, Phoenix stated that in choosing films, he solely relies on the director, "I don't really care about genre or budget size, anything like that. It's just whether there is a filmmaker that has a unique vision, has a voice, and the ability to make the film." For Phoenix, a great performance is in the director's hands — it's ultimately the director's world he's entering. He maintains that the director creates the character's arc and that the best directors adjust to what is happening with the actor in the moment. Phoenix has cited Robert De Niro as one of his favorite actors and strongest acting influences. Phoenix recalled watching Raging Bull for the first time in an interview, "I think it just… awakened something in me. And I could suddenly see it through his eyes. There's a part in Raging Bull where De Niro meets a girl in between a chain-link fence. And he, you know, shakes her pinky and it's like this just beautiful little detail, it's this wonderful moment. And I think that in some ways is what I'm always looking for." Phoenix has directed music videos for Ringside, She Wants Revenge, People in Planes, Arckid, Albert Hammond Jr., and Silversun Pickups. He was said to have produced the opening track for Pusha T's My Name Is My Name album alongside Kanye West. The track is called "King Push". Phoenix then denied in a statement to XXL having produced the record, saying, "While it was widely reported that Pusha T used my beat and that I produced his song, I can't take any credit. A friend's son played me his music, and all I did was make an introduction to Kanye [West]'s camp." Phoenix is identified as one of the most active celebrities in the animal rights movement. A vegan since age three, he does not wear any clothes made out of animal skin; he requests that all of his leather costumes in films are made from synthetic materials. Phoenix has said that animal rights are one of the most important pillars in his life, and maintains that "climate change is imminent if we do not adopt a plant-based lifestyle". He has helped raise awareness of the correlation between animal rights, climate change and health issues. Phoenix has received praise and accolades from animal rights groups, with PETA naming him "Person of the Year" in 2019. PETA's president, Ingrid Newkirk said in a statement: "Joaquin Phoenix never misses an opportunity to turn the spotlight away from himself and onto animals' plight and to set a great example of walking the vegan walk". He has been an active supporter of numerous animal rights organizations, including PETA. "We go into the natural world, and we plunder it for its resources. We feel entitled to artificially inseminate a cow, and when she gives birth, we steal her baby, even though her cries of anguish are unmistakable. Then we take her milk that's intended for her calf, and we put it in our coffee and our cereal. And I think we fear the idea of personal change because we think that we have to sacrifice something, to give something up, but human beings, at our best, are so inventive and creative and ingenious. And I think that when we use love and compassion as our guiding principles, we can create, develop and implement systems of change that are beneficial to all sentient beings and to the environment." —Phoenix during his acceptance speech at the 2020 Academy Awards Throughout the years, Phoenix has headlined numerous campaigns for different organizations to help promote veganism and end animal slaughter. In 2019, Phoenix and his partner Rooney Mara led the National Animal Rights Day demonstration to help spread awareness for animal rights. On January 10, 2020, Phoenix was arrested with actress Jane Fonda at a climate change protest outside the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. At the protest, Phoenix spoke about the link between animal agriculture and climate change. During the 2019–20 awards season, amid protesting for animal rights, Phoenix had been driving a behind-the-scenes movement that transformed five events to meat-free menus, beginning with the Golden Globe Awards. He acknowledged the Hollywood Foreign Press Association during his acceptance speech, for its "very bold move making tonight plant-based. It really sends a powerful message." Soon after, Critics' Choice and SAG followed suit. Phoenix contacted the presidents of the award ceremonies, accompanied by signatures from the likes of fellow nominees Leonardo DiCaprio and Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Phoenix's pitch was that meat agriculture is a leading cause of climate change and that the televised spectacles should use their platforms to address pressing societal issues. The Academy Awards later announced that all food served at the Dolby Theatre before the Oscars was going to be vegan. Lisa Lange, Senior Vice President of Communications at PETA, spoke of Phoenix's power saying "He knows what can be done. He knows he's in a good position to push. He enlists friends. And it works. He can have influence in Hollywood and it influences the rest of the world." A day after winning the Academy Award for Best Actor, and subsequently delivering a headlining acceptance speech in which he spoke to the plight of mother cows and their babies used in animal agriculture, Phoenix helped to rescue a cow and her newborn calf from a Los Angeles slaughterhouse. They were taken to Farm Sanctuary, an animal sanctuary and advocacy organization, where they will live out the rest of their lives. The same month, he starred in Guardians of Life, the first of twelve short films by the environmental organization Mobilize Earth that highlighted the most pressing issues facing humanity and the natural world. Funds raised by the project went to Amazon Watch and Extinction Rebellion. Dávid Szőke and Sándor Kiss in Film International were highly critical of this move, arguing that "what is rather mind-boggling is that the discourse centers less on the issue of the calf and its mother or the exploitation of our natural world, and more on Phoenix in the leading role as the savior of our planet, raising questions about the narrative’s alignment with his environmental activism." Two animal species have been named after him. In 2011, a trilobite species was named Gladiatoria phoenix for his iconic role in the 2000 film Gladiator, and in 2020, a spider species endemic to Iran was named Loureedia phoenixi (also known as the Joker spider) due to its color pattern matching the DC Comics character Joker, for his role in the 2019 film Joker. In 2020, Phoenix collaborated with JusticeLA to create a public service announcement #SuingToSaveLives about the health of people in L.A. County jails amid the COVID-19 pandemic. In October 2023, Phoenix signed an open letter by artists to President Joe Biden calling for a ceasefire during the Israeli bombardment of Gaza. The letter reads: "We believe all life is sacred, no matter faith or ethnicity and we condemn the killing of Palestinian and Israeli civilians." After re-establishing himself as an actor in the mid-1990s, Phoenix moved back to Los Angeles. He is known for his disdain of celebrity culture, rarely granting interviews, and being reticent about discussing his private life. In 2018, he described himself as a secular Jew who does not affiliate with any organized religion; one of his "core values" is the idea of forgiveness. Phoenix has also claimed that his mother believed in Jesus, though his parents were not religious. While portraying Jesus for the 2018 movie Mary Magdalene, he expressed that the role changed his perspective on the nature of forgiveness. In early April 2005, Phoenix checked himself into rehab to be treated for alcoholism. Twelve years later, he revealed that he did not need an intervention: "I really just thought of myself as a hedonist. I was an actor in L.A. I wanted to have a good time. But I wasn't engaging with the world or myself in the way I wanted to". On January 26, 2006, while driving down a winding canyon road in Hollywood, Phoenix veered off the road and flipped his car. The crash was reportedly caused by brake failure. Shaken and confused, he heard someone tapping on his window and telling him to "just relax". Unable to see the man, Phoenix replied, "I'm fine. I am relaxed." The man replied, "No, you're not." The man then stopped Phoenix from lighting a cigarette while gasoline was leaking into the car cabin. Phoenix realized that the man was German filmmaker Werner Herzog. While Herzog helped Phoenix out of the wreckage by breaking the back window of the car, bystanders called an ambulance. Phoenix approached Herzog to express his gratitude. In 2012, Phoenix labeled the Academy Awards "bullshit". He later gave an interview apologizing for his comments, and acknowledged that the awards provide an important platform for many deserving filmmakers. He elaborated on the topic while on Jimmy Kimmel Live! in 2015, explaining that he is uncomfortable receiving accolades for his work in films when he considers the filmmaking process to be a collaborative one. A longtime vegan, Phoenix finds animal agriculture "absurd and barbaric". He explained his reasoning behind his veganism; "To me, it just seems obvious – I don't want to cause pain to another living empathetic creature. I don't want to take its babies away from it, I don't want to force it to be indoors and fattened up just to be slaughtered. Certainly, also, the effect that it has on our environment is devastating. So, for me, it's my life and has always been my life, and it's really one of the most important things to me." From 1995 to 1998, Phoenix dated his Inventing the Abbotts co-star Liv Tyler. The two remain close friends, with Tyler considering Phoenix and his sisters as her family. He was romantically involved with South African model Topaz Page-Green from 2001 to 2005. Phoenix is currently on the board of directors for The Lunchbox Fund, a non-profit organization which provides daily meals to students of township schools in Soweto, South Africa, founded by Page-Green. In 2012, Phoenix met Her co-star Rooney Mara. The two remained friends and began a romantic relationship four years later, during the making of Mary Magdalene. They were engaged to be married in July 2019, but the ceremony never took place. In August 2020, the couple had a son. In February 2024, it was reported that Mara and Phoenix are expecting their second child. They reside in the Hollywood Hills. Phoenix has described his family life as simple. He enjoys meditating, watching documentaries, reading scripts and taking karate classes. He has a black belt in karate. Phoenix has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances: 73rd Academy Awards (2001): Best Supporting Actor, nomination, as Commodus in Gladiator 78th Academy Awards (2006): Best Actor, nomination, as John R. "Johnny" Cash in Walk the Line 85th Academy Awards (2013): Best Actor, nomination, as Freddie Quell in The Master 92nd Academy Awards (2020): Best Actor, win, as Arthur Fleck / Joker in Joker Phoenix has won two Golden Globe Awards: Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for Walk the Line and Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for Joker, a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role for Joker. Phoenix was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media for the Walk The Line soundtrack. He has also won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for The Master and the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actor for You Were Never Really Here. Puerto Rico portal Film portal List of actors with Academy Award nominations List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories List of Jewish Academy Award winners and nominees List of Puerto Ricans List of animal rights advocates List of vegans In his childhood he went by "Leaf Rafael Phoenix". At age fifteen, he changed back to his given name "Joaquin Rafael Phoenix". "PREMIERE". Aleka.org. April 1988. Archived from the original on July 12, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2010. "Joaquin Phoenix". Hello!. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2017. Dargis, Manhola; Scott, A.O. (November 25, 2020). "The 25 Greatest Actors of the 21st Century (So Far)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved November 25, 2020. "Joaquin Phoenix". Contemporary Theatre, Film, and Television. Gale Research. 2002. p. 213. ISBN 978-1-4144-4513-7. Hagan, Joe (October 1, 2019). ""I Fucking Love My Life": Joaquin Phoenix on Joker, Why River Is His Rosebud, His Rooney Research, and His "Prenatal" Gift for Dark Characters". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Howden, Martin (January 10, 2011). He's Still Here: The Biography of Joaquin Phoenix. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-8435-8430-8. Archived from the original on January 24, 2020. Retrieved June 17, 2017. Sullivan, Ferenc (March 25, 2016). "Hungarian Roots: Joaquin Phoenix, Grammy And Golden Globe-Winning US Actor". Hungary Today. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far On Foot". AMC Theatres. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2018. ...his father, from California, is of mostly British Isles descent. Macintyre, James (February 27, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix on how playing 'heart-wrenching' Jesus in 'Mary Magdalene' inspires him to be 'more empathetic, considerate and forgiving'". Christian Today. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2018. Marrache, Yaakov (September 25, 2013). "Top 10 Hollywood: Jews you may not have guessed". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on February 17, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. Pfefferman, Naomi (April 11, 2002). "The Days of Summer". The Jewish Journal of Greater Los Angeles. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved April 29, 2018. Corner, Lena (July 9, 2011). "Rain Phoenix's unusual childhood". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved April 29, 2018. Friedman, Roger (October 24, 2005). "'Walk the Line' Star Won't Campaign for Oscar". Fox News. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. Corner, Lena (July 9, 2011). "Rain Phoenix's unusual childhood". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved April 29, 2018. "The book 'Last Night at the Viper Room' tells of River Phoenix's life before it was cut short at 22". New York Daily News. October 5, 2013. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Loria, Joe (April 23, 2018). "Here's What Inspired Joaquin Phoenix to Go Vegan 40 Years Ago". Mercy for Animals. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2021. "Iris Burton, 77; Hollywood agent represented child actors". Los Angeles Times. April 10, 2008. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017. Reynolds, Simon (January 28, 2015). "When he was Leaf: The early roles of Joaquin Phoenix". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved March 8, 2018. Brooks, Xan (March 8, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix:There was a period when I wanted out. I wanted my life back". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "6th Youth In Film Awards". YoungArtistAwards.org. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2011. Hirschberg, Lynn (September 18, 2005). "My Name Is Joaquin, and I Am an Actor". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018. "Joaquin Phoenix Biography". Biography. May 30, 2017. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018. Vernon, Polly (February 15, 2004). "Summer Phoenix: Coping with Hollywood". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2018. Summer Phoenix: "We had no money. All we had was each other. It's all you need." Hayes, Britt (January 28, 2013). "Way Back When: Oscar Nominee Joaquin Phoenix". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018. Lee Friday, Wednesday (July 9, 2016). "Where Are They Now? The Cast of Parenthood". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved March 8, 2018. "Parenthood (1989)". Box Office Mojo. March 5, 2007. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2010. "11th Annual Youth In Film Awards". YoungArtistAwards.org. Archived from the original on April 9, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2011. "The Assessment: Ron Howard's Directorial Career In 8 Movies". IndieWire. September 26, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Wight, Douglas (2012). Leonardo DiCaprio – The Biography. John Blake Publishing Ltd. p. 322. ISBN 978-1-78219-859-8. Morris, Mark (October 22, 2000). "River's younger brother". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017. Hagan, Joe (October 1, 2019). ""I Fucking Love My Life": Joaquin Phoenix on Joker, Why River Is His Rosebud, His Rooney Research, and His "Prenatal" Gift for Dark Characters". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Child, Ben (October 29, 2009). "Two-time Oscar nominee Joaquin Phoenix quits acting". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017. Hagan, Joe (October 1, 2019). ""I Fucking Love My Life": Joaquin Phoenix on Joker, Why River Is His Rosebud, His Rooney Research, and His "Prenatal" Gift for Dark Characters". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Maslin, Janet (September 27, 1995). "To Die For (1995) FILM REVIEW; She Trusts in TV's Redeeming Power". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2015. "Festival de Cannes: To Die For". Archived from the original on August 22, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2009. "To Die For(1995)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 1, 2015. Ebert, Roger (October 3, 1997). "U-Turn". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2010. Ebert, Roger (April 4, 1997). "Inventing The Abbotts". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on March 13, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Clay Pigeons (1998)". Rotten Tomatoes. September 15, 1998. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. "8MM". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. "Gladiator". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 7, 2009. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Nashawaty, Chris (December 22, 2000). "Joaquin Phoenix's role in Gladiator". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021. "The 73rd Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. March 25, 2001. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Winners & Nominees 2001". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Film in 2001". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "Oscar Firsts And Other Trivia" (PDF). Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 3, 2017. Retrieved May 10, 2015. "The Yards". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Thomas, William (November 10, 2000). "The Yards Review". Empire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2021. McCarthy, Todd (May 22, 2000). "The Yards". Variety. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Travers, Peter (October 20, 2000). "The Yards". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021. "Quills". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 9, 2007. Retrieved March 18, 2007. Travers, Peter (December 15, 2000). "Quills". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Goodridge, Mike (December 7, 2000). "Quills named best film by National Board of Review". Screen International. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2014. Armstrong, Mark (December 19, 2000). "Broadcast Critics Eat Crowe". E!. Archived from the original on May 6, 2020. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Scott, A.O. (July 25, 2003). "Buffalo Soldiers (2001) FILM REVIEW; A Portrait of the Army, but Few Heroes in Sight". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2017. Pierce, Nev (July 16, 2003). "Buffalo Soldiers (2003)". BBC. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Dams, Tim (September 23, 2003). "Dirty Pretty Things leads BIFA nominations". Screen International. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Travers, Peter (August 2, 2002). "Signs". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2015. "Signs". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 16, 2010. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Dargis, Manohla (October 29, 2004). "The Limits of Realism and of Absurdity". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Smith, Liz (March 13, 2001). "Isaak Surfing the Ironic / For Phoenix, life's a bear". Newsday. San Francisco Gate. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2015. "Brother Bear". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Oscars 2004:The winners". BBC News. March 1, 2004. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Voice of Kenai". Behind the Voice Actors. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2016. Orr, Christopher (January 11, 2005). "The Movie Review: 'The Village'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2021. "Village, The (2004) Movie Reviews". Rotten Tomatoes. July 30, 2004. Archived from the original on May 25, 2010. Retrieved May 5, 2010. VanDerWerff, Emily (January 23, 2019). "M. Night Shyamalan's The Village is an underrated masterpiece". Vox. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved September 2, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (July 30, 2019). "In Defense of M. Night Shyamalan's 'The Village'". Collider. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved September 2, 2019. Evangelista, Chris (August 1, 2017). "The Unpopular Opinion: 13 Years Later, 'The Village' Stands as One of M. Night Shyamalan's Best Movies". SlashFilm. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2019. "The Village". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Heroes and Stars of Ladder 49". Oprah.com. September 20, 2004. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Ladder 49". The Numbers. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved July 24, 2008. "Ladder 49(2004)". Metacritic. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Ebert, Roger (October 1, 2004). "Ladder 49". Chicago Sun Times. Archived from the original on March 10, 2013. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Hotel Rwanda". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Hotel Rwanda]". Metacritic. Retrieved February 20, 2024. "The 11th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Johnny Cash Was 'Thrilled' Joaquin Phoenix Would Play Him, 'Line' Director Says". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Finding the voice, spirit of Johnny Cash". CNN. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Walk the Line". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved January 27, 2009. Ebert, Roger (November 18, 2005). "Walk the Line". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on December 12, 2007. Retrieved January 27, 2009. "Joaquin Phoenix". Golden Globes. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Harris, Keith (February 4, 2015). "20 People You Won't Believe Have Grammys". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2021. "Oscars 2006 – Academy Award Winners, Nominees, Movies Released in 2005". Movies.about.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved April 14, 2012. "Film in 2006". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2015. "I Saw Earthlings.com Cast and Crew". Isawearthlings.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2018. Retrieved March 17, 2010. "EARTHLINGS is Single Informative Movie in Treatment and Protection of Animals". Earthlings.com. Archived from the original on August 18, 2010. "Festival de Cannes: We Own the Night". Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Ebert, Roger (October 11, 2007). "But we have to share custody". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Edelstein, David (October 5, 2007). "What's It All About, Anyway?". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Reservation Road". Rotten Tomatoes. October 19, 2007. Archived from the original on April 1, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Travers, Peter (October 18, 2007). "Reservation Road". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2015. "4 Real". Direct Current Media. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2007. Edelstein, David (February 8, 2009). "Debt Collection". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. Bennett, Ray (May 19, 2008). "Reviews: Two Lovers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2021. "A good movie that didn't get its proper due". The Observer. June 16, 2009. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Casey Affleck (September 2, 2010). "Casey Affleck Joaquins the Line With Phoenix Doc". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 2, 2011. Retrieved March 17, 2010. "I'm Still Here". Magnolia Pictures. Archived from the original on August 20, 2010. Retrieved August 27, 2010. "I'm Still Here Movie Reviews, Pictures". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 9, 2010. Retrieved September 17, 2010. Cieply, Michael (September 16, 2010). "Documentary? Better Call It Performance Art". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "Joaquin Phoenix Return visit on David Letterman show (sept 22 - 2010) HD 1080p". YouTube. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix: 'In real life, evil seduces'". The Guardian. London. January 22, 2015. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Phoenix To Self: 'Why Am I Talking About This? ... Joaquin, Shut Up'". NPR. January 21, 2014. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Waxman, Sharon (September 8, 2012). "'Pieta,' 'The Master' Win Top Venice Prizes – Jury Shifts Votes". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved September 9, 2012. "The Master". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "The Master". Rotten Tomatoes. September 14, 2012. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. McCarthy, Todd (September 1, 2012). "'The Master': Venice Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved September 20, 2012. Travers, Peter (September 10, 2012). "The Master". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 16, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2015. Zeitchik, Steven (January 28, 2013). "SAG Awards 2013: The big moments, from Fey quips to Lawrence rippage". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 22, 2015. Goodacre, Kate (January 28, 2013). "Daniel Day-Lewis credits DiCaprio, Neeson with 'Lincoln' encouragement". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Oscar 2013: The nominations revealed..." Entertainment Weekly. January 10, 2013. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2013. "Baftas 2013: full list of nominations". The Guardian. London. January 9, 2013. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "Golden Globes 2013: full list of nominations". The Guardian. London. December 13, 2012. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2015. "The Immigrant Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 16, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2014. Vishnevetsky, Ignatiy (May 15, 2014). "James Gray's The Immigrant is an American masterpiece". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Dowd, A.A. (December 18, 2013). "Joaquin Phoenix courts his computer in the beguiling Her". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Her (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Internet Movie Database. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2014. "Joaquin Phoenix Biography". The Golden Globes. Archived from the original on February 26, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2015. "Oscar Snubs We May Never Get Over". GQ. January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Oscar Snubs We May Never Get Over". GQ. January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix, 'Her'". The Hollywood Reporter. January 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Knegt, Peter (January 15, 2015). "The 10 Worst Oscar Acting Snubs of the Last 10 Years". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Inherent Vice (2015)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. January 9, 2015. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Inherent Vice Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. Collin, Robbie (February 19, 2015). "Inherent Vice: 'stupendous'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Winners & Nominees 2015". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved June 21, 2015. McNary, Dave (April 22, 2015). "Documentary 'Unity' Set for Aug. 12 Release with 100 Star Narrators". Variety. Archived from the original on September 1, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015. Rooney, David (May 15, 2015). "'Irrational Man': Cannes Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "You Were Never Really Here (2018)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. April 6, 2018. Archived from the original on May 23, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2019. Miller, Julie (May 25, 2017). "Here's How Much Joaquin Phoenix Trusted Lynne Ramsay". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Bhattacharya, Sanjiv (February 12, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix: A Man Apart". Esquire. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "You Were Never Really Here Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on August 18, 2018. Retrieved December 29, 2018. Debruge, Peter (May 28, 2017). "2017 Cannes Film Festival Award Winners Announced". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. "Cannes Film Festival: The Square wins Palme d'Or". BBC News. May 28, 2017. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Chang, Justin (April 5, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix descends into a hellish New York underworld in the haunting 'You Were Never Really Here'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. Suzanne-Mayer, Dominick (April 7, 2018). "Film Review: You Were Never Really Here is Brutal, Hypnotic, and Absolutely Must-See". Consequence. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Nashawaty, Chris (April 12, 2019). "Rooney Mara gives the gospels a feminist spin in Mary Magdalene: EW review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Allen, Nick (April 12, 2019). "Mary Magdalene". Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Hertz, Barry (July 18, 2018). "Review: Joaquin Phoenix rises from Gus Van Sant's ambivalence in Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far on Foot". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Hughes, David (October 22, 2018). "Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far On Foot Review". Empire. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Behr, Lindsey (September 26, 2018). "Review: Phoenix and Reilly excel as 'The Sisters Brothers'". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Laffly, Tomris (September 21, 2018). "The Sisters Brothers". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Court, Emily (March 22, 2018). "BREAKING: New Vegan Documentary 'Dominion' To Feature Joaquin Phoenix And Rooney Mara". Plant Based News. Archived from the original on March 31, 2018. Retrieved April 24, 2018. Maria, Chiorando (March 26, 2018). "Vegan Activist James Aspey Says 'Documentary Dominion Is One Of The Most Powerful Ever Created'". Plant Based News. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved February 12, 2020. "July 2018 Winners". Hollywood International Independent Documentary Awards. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020. Rottenberg, Josh (August 28, 2019). "In 'Joker' the stakes are life and death, and comic book movies may never be the same". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 28, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2019. Stone, Sam (September 1, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix Sheds Weight Ahead of Joker Movie Role". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Stone, Sam (August 14, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix Reveals the Dark, Real World Origin of His Joker's Laugh". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 14, 2019. Anderson, Ariston (September 7, 2019). "Venice: Todd Phillips' 'Joker' Wins Golden Lion, Roman Polanski Wins Silver Lion". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 7, 2019. Retrieved September 7, 2019. Cavna, Michael (October 3, 2019). "Why 'Joker' became one of the most divisive movies of the year". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2019. "Joker (2019)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. "Joker (2019)". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Archived from the original on November 9, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Hammond, Pete (August 31, 2019). "'Joker' Review: Joaquin Phoenix Kills It In Dark, Timely DC Origin Movie That Is No Laughing Matter – Venice Film Festival". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved September 7, 2019. Rooney, David (August 31, 2019). "'Joker': Film Review Venice 2019". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Golden Globes 2020: The Complete Nominations List". Variety. December 9, 2019. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019. Gonzalez, Sandra. "See the full list of Golden Globe winners". CNN. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved January 6, 2020. "'Joker' Leads BAFTA 2020 Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2020. "Oscar Nominations 2020: The Complete List". Variety. January 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Critics' Choice Awards: 'Once Upon a Time in Hollywood' Named Best Picture; Full Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. January 12, 2020. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Desta, Yohana (January 20, 2020). "SAG Awards 2020: Joaquin Phoenix Pays Joker Tribute to "My Favorite Actor, Heath Ledger"". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved January 20, 2020. Thompson, Anne (February 23, 2020). "How 'Gunda' Director Victor Kossakovsky Found Joaquin Phoenix – and the 'Meryl Streep' of Pigs". IndieWire. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 20, 2021). "'Ghostbusters: Afterlife' Calls Up $44M Opening Weekend – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2021. "C'mon C'mon". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved November 23, 2021. Bastién, Angelica Jade (November 24, 2021). "Joaquin Phoenix Gives a Career-Best Performance in C'mon C'mon". Vulture. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021. "Beau Is Afraid". www.bbfc.co.uk. Archived from the original on May 10, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. "Beau Is Afraid". Rotten Tomatoes. April 21, 2023. Archived from the original on April 21, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Laffly, Tomris (April 10, 2023). "'Beau Is Afraid' Review: Ari Aster's Stunning, Unknowable and Fearless Opus". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (December 11, 2023). "Golden Globe Nominations: 'Barbie', 'Oppenheimer' Top Movie List; 'Succession' Leads Way In TV". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (November 15, 2023). "Napoleon review – Joaquin Phoenix makes a magnificent emperor in thrilling biopic". theguardian.co.Uk. Archived from the original on November 15, 2023. Retrieved November 15, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (June 7, 2022). "'Joker' Sequel: Todd Phillips Reveals Working Title, Joaquin Phoenix Reading Script in New Pics". Variety. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Sharf, Zack (June 21, 2021). "Lynne Ramsay Sets Joaquin Phoenix Reunion with 'Polaris,' Also Starring Rooney Mara". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Booth, Ned (April 19, 2023). "'Eddington': Ari Aster May Start Shooting His "Western-Noir Dark Ensemble Comedy" With Joaquin Phoenix This Summer". The Playlist. Archived from the original on June 17, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Nickolai, Nate (September 9, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix Credits River Phoenix For Acting Career in Emotional Speech (Watch)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Ellis, Bret Easton (September 6, 2017). "The Weird Brilliance of Joaquin Phoenix". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 29, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Cooper, Anderson (September 13, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix: A three-decade career filled with dark, complicated characters". CBS News. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine: "EL UNO JOAQUIN PHOENIX 60 MINUTES". YouTube. January 14, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Frost, Caroline (November 2, 2014). "'Her' Star Joaquin Phoenix Interview: 'You Hit Your Forties, You Get Soft. I'm So Scared Of That'". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Lodge, Guy (July 11, 2018). "Is Joaquin Phoenix set to be the greatest actor of his generation?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Chang, Justin (February 9, 2020). "Yes, Joaquin Phoenix deserved his best actor Oscar— but not for 'Joker' alone". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Matlin, Leonard (July 12, 2018). "Don't Worry, He Won't Get Far on Foot". Leonard Maltin. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Pirrello, Phil (September 24, 2019). "The 11 Best Joaquin Phoenix Performances, Ranked". Collider. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Piccalo, Gina (August 22, 2010). "Joaquin Phoenix Great Practical Joke". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Fowler, Bella (September 8, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix's huge prank on the world". News.com.au. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Ali, Lorraine (August 6, 2015). "Actor Joaquin Phoenix drawn to complex characters". Duluth News Tribune. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Carroll, Rory (January 22, 2015). "Joaquin Phoenix: 'In real life, evil seduces'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2015. Itzkoff, Dave (September 10, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix,the Wild Card of 'Joker'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 12, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Croxton, Will (January 12, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix and family on River Phoenix's legacy and influence". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. "Tired of Feeling Sorry". Ringside. Archived from the original on September 28, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "Tear You Apart". She Wants Revenge. Archived from the original on October 2, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "If you Talk Too Much (My Head Will Explode)". People in Planes. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "I'll Stick Around". Arckid. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "In Transit". Albert Hammond Jr. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "Little Lovers so Polite". Silversun Pickups. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. "Joaquin Phoenix denies producing Pusha T's King Push". Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved May 1, 2015. Mitchell, Klaus (December 7, 2020). "EXCLUSIVE: PBN Interview With Vegan Oscar-Winner Joaquin Phoenix". Plant Based News. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix Brings Anti-Wool Message to Columbus". PETA. September 23, 2016. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "10 Times Joaquin Phoenix has been a fine ambassador for veganism". Female First. October 28, 2016. Archived from the original on July 18, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017. Baker, Emily (April 21, 2021). "Joaquin Phoenix Documentary Details Slaughterhouse Cow Rescue And Impact Of Animal Agriculture". Plant Based News. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Singer, Jasmin (October 15, 2020). "JOAQUIN PHOENIX ON VEGANISM, THE ENVIRONMENT, AND SOCIAL JUSTICE: A VEGNEWS EXCLUSIVE INTERVIEW". VegNews. Archived from the original on July 18, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Vlessing, Etan (December 2, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix Named PETA Person of the Year (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2019. "Joaquin Phoenix Brings Anti-Wool Message to Columbus". PETA. September 23, 2016. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Piña, Christy (February 9, 2020). "Oscars: Read Joaquin Phoenix's Best Actor Speech". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Bender, Kelli (August 24, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix Encourages Animal Lovers to 'Change the World From Your Kitchen' by Going Vegan". People. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix: Drowns". PETA. February 11, 2013. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix Shares Disturbing Video". PETA. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Flint, Hanna (June 4, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix and Rooney Mara carry dead animals in protest". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Johnson, Ted (January 10, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix, Martin Sheen Among Those Arrested As Jane Fonda Leads Final D.C. Climate Protest". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Baum, Gary (February 4, 2020). "How Joaquin Phoenix Vegan-ized Awards Season Behind the Scenes". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 22, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix Rescues Mother Cow and Newborn Calf Day after Academy Awards Win". Farm Sanctuary. February 21, 2020. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Green, Matthew (February 6, 2020). "'Joker' star Phoenix takes aim at climate apathy with film about dying Earth". Reuters. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2020. Szőke, Dávid; Kiss, Sándor (February 18, 2024). "Environmental Action in Opposite Directions: Extinction (2019) and Guardians of Life (2020)". Film International. Archived from the original on February 19, 2024. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Adrain, Jonathan M.; McAdams, Neo E.B.; Westrop, Stephen R. (2011). "Affinities of the Lower Ordovician (Tulean; lower Floian) trilobite Gladiatoria, with species from the Great Basin, western United States" (PDF). Memoirs of the Association of Australasian Palaeontologists. 42: 321–367. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Zamani, A.; Marusik, Y.M. (2020). "A new and easternmost species of Loureedia (Aranei: Eresidae) from Iran" (PDF). Arthropoda Selecta. 29 (2): 239–243. doi:10.15298/arthsel.29.2.09. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2021. Weisberger, Mindy (June 2020). "Scientists discover spider wearing 'Joker' makeup, name it after Joaquin Phoenix". livescience.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020. Moniuszko, Sara M. "Natalie Portman, Gabrielle Union and Joaquin Phoenix join all-star PSA for jail reform amid COVID-19". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Perez, Lexy (September 24, 2020). "Natalie Portman, Gabrielle Union, Joaquin Phoenix Lead #SuingToSaveLives PSA for COVID-19 Response Coalition (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. "Celebrities call for ceasefire, decry civilian deaths: Hollywood reacts to Israel-Hamas war". USA Today. October 16, 2023. "Hollywood stars urge Biden to push for ceasefire in Israel-Hamas war". Al Jazeera. October 21, 2023. Zaimov, Stoyan (March 19, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix Talks Faith, Forgiveness, 'Mary Magdalene' Portraying Women in 'Positive Way'". The Christian Post. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 22, 2021. Zaimov, Stoyan (March 19, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix Talks Faith, Forgiveness, 'Mary Magdalene' Portraying Women in 'Positive Way'". The Christian Post. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2021. "My parents believed in God. I'm Jewish, my mom's Jewish, but she believes in Jesus, she felt a connection to that ... But they were never religious. I don't remember going to church, maybe a couple of times." And getting to play Jesus changed his perspective on what forgiveness means. "Joaquin Phoenix Checks into Rehab". CBS News. April 13, 2005. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2009. Celebretainment, By (April 6, 2017). "Joaquin Phoenix saved from flames by Werner Herzog". Celebretainment. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Gheorghe, Adina (February 3, 2006). "Joaquin Phoenix Rescued from Car Crash by Director Werner Herzog". Softpedia. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved February 22, 2021. My Son My Son, What Have Ye Done – Werner Herzog (Video-recorded Interview). Millennium Entertainment. August 24, 2010. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved February 11, 2020. Mitchell, Elvis (October 10, 2012). "Joaquin Phoenix". Interview. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Husam Sam Asi (October 27, 2012). "Joaquin Phoenix: Actors don't deserve credit for their performance". UK Screen. Archived from the original on April 29, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2013. "Joaquin Phoenix on Awards". YouTube. January 9, 2015. Archived from the original on January 15, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Chiorando, Maria (October 4, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix Brands Animal Agriculture 'Absurd And Barbaric'". Plant Based News. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 22, 2021. KRENTCIL, FARAN (October 27, 2015). "Liv Tyler On How To Attend A Party Hosted By Your Ex". Elle. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021.</>"Liv Tyler Biography". People. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2015. Jones, Isabel (October 10, 2019). "Joaquin Phoenix and Liv Tyler Kept Their Relationship a Secret on the Set of Their 1997 Film". InStyle. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Cardoza, Riley (September 27, 2020). "Rooney Mara Gives Birth, Welcomes 1st Child With Fiance Joaquin Phoenix". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. "JOAQUIN PHOENIX". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Guglielmi, Jody (May 29, 2017). "Rooney Mara and Joaquin Phoenix Go Public as a Couple at Cannes Closing Ceremony". People. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2017. Silver, Jocelyn (July 22, 2019). "Rooney Mara and Joaquin Phoenix Are Engaged". W. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. Davis, Jessica (May 19, 2020). "Rooney Mara and Joaquin Phoenix reportedly expecting first child". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on May 30, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Pearce, Tilly (September 27, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix and Rooney Mara 'welcome a baby boy named River' after actor's late brother". Metro. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Rice, Nicholas (February 18, 2024). "Rooney Mara Is Pregnant, Expecting Baby No. 2 with Joaquin Phoenix". Retrieved February 18, 2024. "From The Joker to Karate Kid! Oscar winner Joaquin Phoenix adds karate back belt to his long list of awards". Coleman-Rayner. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Murphy, J.Kim; Vary, Adam B. (February 9, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix Thanks Oscar Crowd for 'Second Chance': 'I've Been Selfish, I've Been Cruel'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 26, 2021. Retrieved May 26, 2021. "Joaquin Phoenix". Golden Globes. Archived from the original on May 26, 2021. Retrieved May 26, 2021. "Baftas 2020: Sam Mendes film 1917 dominates awards". BBC News. February 2, 2020. Archived from the original on February 10, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2020. White, Abbey (January 19, 2020). "Joaquin Phoenix Dedicates SAG Award Win to Actor Nominees and Fellow Joker Actor Heath Ledger". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved May 26, 2021. Debruge, Peter (May 28, 2017). "2017 Cannes Film Festival Award Winners Announced". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Waxman, Sharon (September 8, 2012). "'Pieta,' 'The Master' Win Top Venice Prizes – Jury Shifts Votes". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved September 9, 2012. Joaquin Phoenix at IMDb Joaquin Phoenix at the TCM Movie Database Joaquin Phoenix at Rotten Tomatoes Joaquin Phoenix at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata