Sambir Raion (Ukrainian: Самбірський район) is a raion (district) in Lviv Oblast in western Ukraine. Its administrative center is Sambir. Population: 221,896 (2022 estimate). It was established in 1965. On 18 July 2020, as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, the number of raions of Lviv Oblast was reduced to seven, and the area of Sambir Raion was significantly expanded. Two abolished raions, Staryi Sambir and Turka Raions, as well as the city of Sambir, which was previously incorporated as a city of oblast significance and did not belong to the raion, were merged into Sambir Raion. The January 2020 estimate of the raion population was 67,063 (2020 est.). After the reform in July 2020, the raion consisted of 11 hromadas: Biskovychi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Biskovychi, retained from Sambir Raion; Borynia settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Borynia, transferred from Turka Raion; Dobromyl urban hromada with the administration in the city of Dobromyl, transferred from Staryi Sambir Raion; Khyriv urban hromada with the administration in the city of Khyriv, transferred from Staryi Sambir Raion; Novyi Kalyniv urban hromada with the administration in the city of Novyi Kalyniv, retained from Sambir Raion; Ralivka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Ralivka, retained from Sambir Raion; Rudky urban hromada with the administration in the city of Rudky, retained from Sambir Raion. Sambir urban hromada, transferred from the city of oblast significance of Sambir; Staryi Sambir urban hromada with the administration in the city of Staryi Sambir, transferred from Staryi Sambir Raion; Strilky rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Strilky, transferred from Staryi Sambir Raion; Turka urban hromada with the administration in the city of Turka, transferred from Turka Raion. Before the 2020 reform, the raion consisted of four hromadas, Biskovychi rural hromada with the administration in Biskovychi; Novyi Kalyniv urban hromada with the administration in Novyi Kalyniv; Ralivka rural hromada with the administration in Ralivka; Rudky urban hromada with the administration in Rudky. Sambir Raion consists of 2 city communities, 1 settlement community, 7 rural communities and 9 village councils, which unite 110 settlements and are subordinate to the Sambir district council. The administrative center is the city of Sambir, which is a city of regional importance and is not part of the district. United territorial communities of Sambir district: Babynska village community Biskovytska rural community Vilshanytska village community Vole-Baranetska rural community Voiutytska village community Dublianska settlement community Lukivska village community Novokalynivska city community Rudkivska city community Chukvianska rural community Villages: Berestiany Biskovychi Chukva Hordynia Kalyniv Kornalovychi Kulchytsi Lanovychi Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny (1570-1622) — a Ukrainian political and civic leader, Hetman of Ukrainian Zaporozhian Cossacks Marko Zhmaylo-Kulchytskyy — Registered Cossacks Hetman (1625), leader of the peasant-Cossack Zhmaylo Uprising in 1625. Yuriy Frants Kulchytsky (1640-1694) — Ukrainian political and civic leader. Omeljan Pritsak (1919-2006) — Ukrainian-American historian, first Mykhailo Hrushevsky Professor of Ukrainian History at Harvard University and the founder and first director (1973–1989) of the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute. Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny Yuriy Frants Kulchytsky Administrative divisions of Lviv Oblast Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Турківська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Старосамбірська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Самбірська територіальна громада" (in Ukrainian). decentralization.gov.ua. "Самбірська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Адміністративно-територіальний устрій Самбірського району на сайті Верховної Ради України Woloschuk, Peter T. (11 June 2006). "Omeljan Pritsak, scholar of Ukrainian, Turkic studies, 87". Obituary. The Ukrainian Weekly. Retrieved 14 October 2017.