The Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting was a mass shooting that occurred on December 14, 2012, in Newtown, Connecticut, United States, when 20-year-old Adam Lanza shot and killed 26 people. Twenty of the victims were children between six and seven years old, and the other six were adult staff members. Earlier that day, before driving to the school, Lanza fatally shot his mother at their Newtown home. As first responders arrived at the school, Lanza killed himself, shooting himself in the head. The incident is the deadliest mass shooting in Connecticut history and the deadliest at an elementary school in U.S. history. The shooting prompted renewed debate about gun control in the United States, including proposals to make the background-check system universal, and for new federal and state gun legislation banning the sale and manufacture of certain types of semi-automatic firearms and magazines which can hold more than ten rounds of ammunition. A November 2013 report issued by the Connecticut State Attorney's office concluded that Lanza acted alone and planned his actions, but provided no indication why he did so, or why he targeted the school. A report issued by the Office of the Child Advocate in November 2014 said that Lanza had Asperger's syndrome and, as a teenager, depression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, but concluded that they had "neither caused nor led to his murderous acts". The report went on to say, "his severe and deteriorating internalized mental health problems [...] combined with an atypical preoccupation with violence [...] (and) access to deadly weapons [...] proved a recipe for mass murder." As of November 30, 2012, 456 children were enrolled in kindergarten through fourth grade at Sandy Hook Elementary School. The school's security protocols had recently been upgraded, requiring visitors to be individually admitted after visual and identification review by video monitor. Doors to the school were locked at 9:30 a.m. each day, after morning arrivals. Newtown is in Fairfield County, Connecticut, about 17 miles (30 km) from New Haven, 30 miles (50 km) from Hartford, and 60 miles (100 km) from New York City. Violent crime had been rare in the town of 28,000 residents; there was only one homicide in the town in the ten years before the school shooting. Under the Connecticut gun laws at the time, the 20-year-old Lanza was old enough to carry a long gun, such as a rifle or shotgun, but too young to own or carry handguns. The guns he used had been purchased legally by his mother. List of deaths Killed: Perpetrator's mother: Nancy Lanza, 52 (shot at home) School personnel: Rachel D'Avino, 29, behavior therapist Dawn Hochsprung, 47, principal Anne Marie Murphy, 52, special education teacher Lauren Rousseau, 30, teacher Mary Sherlach, 56, school psychologist Victoria Leigh Soto, 27, teacher Students: Charlotte Bacon, 6 Daniel Barden, 7 Olivia Engel, 6 Josephine Gay, 7 Dylan Hockley, 6 Madeleine Hsu, 6 Catherine Hubbard, 6 Chase Kowalski, 7 Jesse Lewis, 6 Ana Márquez-Greene, 6 James Mattioli, 6 Grace McDonnell, 7 Emilie Parker, 6 Jack Pinto, 6 Noah Pozner, 6 Caroline Previdi, 6 Jessica Rekos, 6 Avielle Richman, 6 Benjamin Wheeler, 6 Allison Wyatt, 6 Perpetrator: Adam Lanza, 20 (suicide) Wounded: Natalie Hammond, 40, lead teacher Deborah Pisani Sources: Sometime before 9:30 a.m. EST on December 14, 2012, Lanza shot and killed his mother Nancy Lanza, aged 52, with a .22-caliber Savage Mark II rifle at their Newtown home. Investigators later found her body clad in pajamas, in her bed, with four gunshot wounds to her head. Lanza then drove to Sandy Hook Elementary School in his mother's car. Shortly after 9:35 a.m., armed with his mother's Bushmaster XM15-E2S rifle and ten magazines with 30 rounds each, Lanza shot his way through a glass panel next to the locked front entrance doors of the school. He was wearing black clothing, yellow earplugs, sunglasses, a black hat, and an olive green utility vest. Initial reports that he was wearing body armor were incorrect. Some of those present heard the initial shots on the school intercom system, which was being used for morning announcements. Principal Dawn Hochsprung and school psychologist Mary Sherlach were meeting with other faculty members when they heard, but did not recognize, gunshots. Hochsprung, Sherlach, and lead teacher Natalie Hammond went into the hall to determine the source of the sounds and encountered Lanza. A faculty member who was at the meeting said that the three women called out "Shooter! Stay put!" which alerted their colleagues to the danger and saved their lives. An aide heard gunshots. A teacher hiding in the math lab heard school janitor Rick Thorne yell, "Put the gun down!" Lanza killed both Hochsprung and Sherlach. Hammond was hit first in the leg, and then sustained another gunshot wound. She laid still in the hallway and then, not hearing any more noise, crawled back to the conference room and pressed her body against the door to keep it closed. She was later treated at Danbury Hospital. A nine-year-old boy said he heard the shooter say "Put your hands up!" and someone else say "Don't shoot!" He also heard many people yelling and many gunshots over the intercom while he, his classmates, and his teacher took refuge in a closet in the gymnasium. Diane Day, a school therapist who had been at the faculty meeting with Hochsprung, heard screaming followed by more gunshots. A second teacher, who was a substitute kindergarten teacher, was wounded in the attack. While she was closing a door further down the hallway, she was hit in the foot with a bullet that ricocheted. Lanza never entered her classroom. After killing Hochsprung and Sherlach, Lanza entered the main office but apparently did not see the people hiding there, and returned to the hallway. School nurse Sarah (Sally) Cox, 60, hid under a desk in her office. She later described seeing the door opening and Lanza's boots and legs facing her desk from approximately twenty feet (six meters) away. He remained standing for a few seconds before turning around and leaving. She and the school secretary Barbara Halstead called 9-1-1 and hid in a first-aid supply closet for as long as four hours. Janitor Rick Thorne ran through hallways, alerting classrooms. Lanza entered Room 8, a first-grade classroom where Lauren Rousseau, a substitute teacher, had herded her first-grade students to the back of the room, and was trying to hide them in a bathroom, when Lanza forced his way into the classroom. Rousseau, Rachel D'Avino (a behavioral therapist who had been employed for a week at the school to work with a special needs student), and fifteen students in Rousseau's class were killed. Fourteen of the children were dead at the scene; one injured child was taken to a hospital for treatment, but was later declared dead. Most of the teachers and students were found crowded together in the bathroom. A six-year-old girl, the sole survivor, was found by police in the classroom following the shooting. She hid in a corner of the classroom's bathroom during the shooting. Her family's pastor said she survived by playing dead. When she reached her mother, she said, "Mommy, I'm okay, but all my friends are dead." The child described the shooter as "a very angry man". A girl hiding in a bathroom with two teachers told police that she heard a boy in the classroom screaming, "Help me! I don't want to be here!" to which Lanza responded, "Well, you're here," followed by "hammering" sounds. Lanza also went to Room 10, another first-grade classroom nearby; at this point, there are conflicting reports about the order of events. According to some reports, the classroom's teacher, Victoria Leigh Soto, had concealed some of the students in a closet or bathroom, and some of the other students were hiding under desks. Soto was walking back to the classroom door to lock it when Lanza entered the classroom. Lanza walked to the back of the classroom, saw the children under the desks, and shot them. First-grader Jesse Lewis shouted at his classmates to run for safety, and several of them did. Lewis was looking at Lanza when Lanza fatally shot him. Another account, given by a surviving child's father, said that Soto had moved the children to the back of the classroom, and that they were seated on the floor when Lanza entered. According to this account, neither Lanza nor any of the occupants of the classroom spoke. Lanza stared at the people on the floor, pointed the gun at a boy seated there, but did not fire. The boy ran out of the classroom. The final report into the shooting concluded that the sequence of events in Rooms 8 and 10 was "indeterminate". A Hartford Courant report said that six of the children who escaped did so when Lanza stopped shooting, either because his weapon jammed or he erred in reloading it. Earlier reports said that, as Lanza entered her classroom, Soto told him that the children were in the auditorium. When several of the children came out of their hiding places and tried to run for safety, Lanza fatally shot them. Soto put herself between her students and the shooter, who then fatally shot her. Anne Marie Murphy, the special education teacher who worked with special-needs students in Soto's classroom, was found covering six-year-old Dylan Hockley, who also died. Soto and four children were found dead in the classroom. Soto was near the north wall of the room with a set of keys nearby.: 14  One child was taken to the hospital, but was pronounced dead.: 14  Six surviving children from the class and a school bus driver took refuge at a nearby home. According to the official report released by the state's attorney, nine children ran from Soto's classroom, and police found two hiding in a class bathroom.: 14  Five of Soto's students were killed. First-grade teacher Kaitlin Roig, 29 years old, hid fifteen students in a bathroom and barricaded the door, telling them to be completely quiet to remain safe. It is believed that Lanza bypassed her classroom, which was the first classroom on the left side of the hallway. Following a lockdown drill weeks earlier, Roig had failed to remove a piece of black construction paper covering the small window in her classroom door. Lanza may have assumed that Roig's classroom was empty because the door was closed and the window covered. School library staff Yvonne Cech and Maryann Jacob tried to hide eighteen children in a part of the library the school used for lockdown in practice drills. When they discovered that one door would not lock, they had the children crawl into a storage room, where Cech barricaded the door with a filing cabinet. Music teacher Maryrose Kristopik, 50, barricaded her fourth graders in a tiny supply closet during the rampage. One of Kristopik's students later said that Lanza arrived moments later, pounding on the door and yelling, "Let me in," while the students in Kristopik's class quietly hid inside. Two third-grade students, chosen as classroom helpers, were walking down the hallway to the office to deliver the morning attendance sheet as the shooting began. Teacher Abbey Clements pulled both children into her classroom, where they hid. Laura Feinstein, a reading specialist at the school, gathered two students from outside her classroom and hid with them under desks after they heard gunshots. Feinstein called the school office and tried to call 911, but could not connect due to lack of reception on her cell phone. She hid with the children for approximately 40 minutes, at which point law enforcement came to lead them out of the room. The police heard the final shot at 9:40:03 a.m. They believed that it was Lanza shooting himself in the lower rear portion of his head with the Glock 20SF in classroom 10. Lanza's body was found wearing a pale green pocket vest over a black polo shirt, over a black T-shirt, black sneakers, black fingerless gloves, black socks, and a black canvas belt. Other objects found in the vicinity of Lanza included a black Boonie hat and thin frame sunglasses. The Glock was found, apparently jammed, near Lanza, and the rifle was found several feet away from him. A 9mm SIG Sauer P226, which had not been fired during the incident, was found on Lanza. Authorities determined that Lanza reloaded frequently during the shootings, sometimes firing only 15 rounds from a 30-round magazine. He shot all but two of his victims multiple times. Most of the shooting took place in two first-grade classrooms near the entrance of the school. The students among the victims totaled eight boys and twelve girls, all either six or seven years old, and the six adults were all women who worked at the school. Bullets were also found in at least three cars parked outside the school, leading police to believe that he fired at a teacher who was standing near a window. When police interviewed survivors, a teacher recalled hearing Lanza curse several times, as well as telling them to, "Look at me!", "Come over here!", and "Look at them!" The first call to 911 was around 9:35 a.m. Newtown 911 police dispatch first broadcast that there was a shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School (SHES) at 9:36 a.m., about 30 seconds after they received the first call. Connecticut State Police (CSP) were dispatched at 9:37 a.m. Newtown police arrived at the school street at 9:39 a.m., approximately three-and-a-half minutes after the 911 call, and Connecticut State Police arrived at the school street at 9:46 a.m. Newtown police first entered the school at 9:45 a.m., approximately nine minutes after the first 911 call and approximately ten minutes after the shooting started. This was approximately five minutes after the last shot was heard. No shots were fired by the police. The Newtown police and Connecticut State Police mobilized local police dog and police tactical units, a bomb squad, and a state police helicopter. Police locked down the school and began evacuating the survivors room by room, escorting groups of students and adults away from the school. They swept the school for other shooters at least four times. At approximately 10:00 a.m., Danbury Hospital sent extra medical personnel in expectation of having to treat numerous victims. Three wounded patients were evacuated to the hospital, where two children were later declared dead. The other was an unidentified adult. The New York City medical examiner dispatched a portable morgue to assist the authorities. The victims' bodies were removed from the school and formally identified during the night after the shooting. A state trooper was assigned to each victim's family to protect their privacy and provide them with information. On December 4, 2013, seven 911 calls relating to the shooting were made public. Investigators did not find a suicide note or any messages referring to the planning of the attack. Janet Robinson, superintendent of Newtown schools, said she had not found any connection between Lanza's mother and the school, in contrast to initial media reports that said Lanza's mother had worked there. Police also investigated whether Lanza was the person who had been in an altercation with four staff members at Sandy Hook School the day before the massacre. It was presumed that he killed two of the four staff members involved in the altercation (the principal and the psychologist) and wounded the third (the lead teacher) in the attack; the fourth staff member was not at the school that day. The state police said they did not know of any reports about any altercations at the school. Police sources initially reported that Lanza's brother Ryan Lanza, then aged 24, was the perpetrator. This was probably because Adam was carrying Ryan's identification, Ryan told The Jersey Journal. Ryan, who lived in Hoboken, New Jersey, and was at his job in New York City at the time of the shooting, voluntarily submitted to questioning by New Jersey State Police, Connecticut State Police, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Police said he was not considered a suspect, and he was not taken into custody. Ryan said he had not been in touch with Adam since 2010; when asked why, Ryan said his brother was "sick", "[doesn't] talk to anyone", and that Ryan "didn't know him anymore". Connecticut State Police indicated their concern about misinformation being posted on social media sites and threatened prosecution of anyone involved with such activities. Ryan was also mistakenly reported to have mourned his mother and brother on social media and to have been interviewed by the New York Post. A spokesperson for the Lanza family later said an impostor gave the interview. A large quantity of unused ammunition was recovered inside the school along with three semi-automatic firearms found with Lanza: a .223-caliber Bushmaster XM15-E2S rifle, a 10mm Glock 20SF handgun, and a 9mm SIG Sauer P226 handgun. Outside the school, an Izhmash Saiga-12 shotgun was found in the trunk of the car Lanza had driven to the school, a black 2010 Honda Civic. On March 28, 2013, court documents released from the investigation showed that the shooting had occurred in the space of fewer than five minutes with 156 shots fired. This comprised 154 shots from the rifle and two shots from the 10mm pistol. Lanza fired one shot from the Glock in the hallway and killed himself with another shot from the pistol to the head. Shortly after the shooting, police announced that Lanza used the rifle to kill the victims at the school. At a press conference on December 15, Dr. H. Wayne Carver II, the Chief Medical Examiner of Connecticut, was asked about the wounds, and replied "All the ones that I know of at this point were caused by the long weapon." When asked if the children suffered before dying, Carver replied by stating that "If so, not for very long". Carver, whose office autopsied the victims and who personally performed seven, said the injuries were "devastating" and that parents identified their children from photographs to spare them the sight. All the child victims were first-graders, and all were killed with the Bushmaster XM15. Carver said the bullets used were "designed in such a fashion the energy is deposited in the tissue so the bullet stays in." Investigators evaluated Lanza's body, looking for evidence of drugs or medication through toxicology tests. Unusually for an investigation of this type, DNA testing of Lanza was utilized. The results of the toxicology report were published in October 2013, and stated that no alcohol or drugs were found in his system. Lanza's autopsy showed no tumors or gross deformities in his brain. Lanza removed the hard drive from his computer and intentionally damaged it before the shooting, creating a challenge for investigators to recover data. As of the final report's publication, recovering data from the damaged drive had proven unsuccessful. Police believe that Lanza extensively researched earlier mass shootings, as they had found that Lanza had downloaded videos relating to the Columbine High School massacre, other shootings and two videos of suicide by gunshot. Details of the investigation were reported by law enforcement officials at a meeting of the International Association of Police Chiefs and Colonels held during the week of March 11, 2013. An article published in the New York Daily News on March 17, 2013, provided purported details of this report by an anonymous law enforcement veteran who had attended the meeting. The source stated that the investigation had found that Lanza had created a 7-by-4-foot sized spreadsheet listing around 500 mass murderers and the weapons they used, which was considered to have taken years of work and to have been used by Lanza as a "score sheet". On March 18, 2013, Lt. Paul Vance of the Connecticut State Police responded that the information from this meeting was "law enforcement sensitive information" and considered the release to be a leak. The March 28 documents also provided details on items found at Lanza's home, including three samurai swords, a newspaper article about the Northern Illinois University shooting, and a National Rifle Association certificate. The NRA denied that Adam Lanza or Nancy Lanza were members and reporters noted that the NRA site provides training certificate completion templates for courses offered by NRA Certified Instructors. A gun safe was found in a bedroom and investigators found more than 1,400 rounds of ammunition and other firearms. At home, Lanza had access to three more firearms: a .45 Henry rifle, a .30 Enfield rifle, and a .22 Marlin rifle. These were legally owned by Lanza's mother, who was described as a gun enthusiast. According to Time, authorities also found a photograph of Lanza holding a gun to his head at his home following his death. According to The New York Times, law enforcement officials commented that Lanza would spend most of his time in his basement doing solitary activities. According to the same officials, it also appeared that Lanza "may have taken target practice in the basement". The Hartford Courant reported that Lanza had edited Wikipedia articles related to mass shootings with the username Kaynbred. The final report of the State Attorney summarizing the investigation into the shooting was published on November 25, 2013. It concluded that Adam Lanza had acted alone, and that the case was closed. The report noted that "[Lanza] had a familiarity with and access to firearms and ammunition and an obsession with mass murders, in particular the April 1999 shootings at Columbine High School in Colorado." The report did not identify a specific motive for the shooting, stating, "The evidence clearly shows that the shooter planned his actions, including the taking of his own life, but there is no clear indication why he did so, or why he targeted Sandy Hook elementary school." On the question of Lanza's state of mind, the report noted "significant mental health issues that affected his ability to live a normal life and to interact with others, even those to whom he should have been close ... What contribution this made to the shootings, if any, is unknown as those mental health professionals who saw him did not see anything that would have predicted his future behavior." The report found no evidence that Lanza had taken drugs or medication that would have affected his behavior, and observed, "'Why did the shooter murder twenty-seven people, including twenty children?' Unfortunately, that question may never be answered conclusively, despite the collection of extensive background information on the shooter through a multitude of interviews and other sources." On December 27, 2013, police released thousands of pages of documents pertaining to the investigation. In accordance with law, the names of victims and witnesses were redacted or withheld. The summary report included information about items found on Lanza's computer equipment, including writings and material about previous mass shootings. A former teacher of Lanza's noted that he exhibited antisocial behavior, rarely interacted with other students, and was obsessed with writing "about battles, destruction and war." The Report of the Office of the Child Advocate concluded: "There was not one thing that was necessarily the tipping point driving Lanza to commit the Sandy Hook shooting. Rather there was a cascade of events, many self-imposed, that included: loss of school; absence of work; disruption of the relationship with his one friend; virtually no personal contact with family; virtually total and increasing isolation; fear of losing his home and of a change in his relationship with Mrs. Lanza, his only caretaker and connection; worsening OCD; depression and anxiety; profound and possibly worsening anorexia; and an increasing obsession with mass murder occurring in the total absence of any engagement with the outside world. Adam increasingly lived in an alternate universe in which ruminations about mass shootings were his central preoccupation". The authors also noted that despite multiple developmental and mental health problems, Lanza had not received adequate mental health treatment. They wrote: "It is fair to surmise that, had Lanza's mental illness been adequately treated in the last years of his life, one predisposing factor to the tragedy of Sandy Hook might have been mitigated". The report also tentatively disagreed with the conclusions of the State Attorney about why Lanza targeted Sandy Hook. They noted that "According to the FBI, shooters are likely to target places or people that are familiar to them ... The elementary school may have been targeted because he could overpower people, a dynamic that is very important for mass shooters as they do not want to be thwarted". Adam Peter Lanza (April 22, 1992 – December 14, 2012) lived with his mother, Nancy Lanza, in Newtown, 5 miles (8 km) from the elementary school. He did not have a criminal record. He had access to guns through his mother, who was described as a "gun enthusiast who owned at least a dozen firearms". She often took her two sons to a local shooting range, where they learned to shoot. Lanza's father has said that he does not believe Nancy feared Lanza. She did not confide any fear of Lanza to her sister or to her best friend, slept with her bedroom door unlocked, and kept guns in the house. Lanza attended Sandy Hook Elementary School for four and a half years. He began at Newtown Middle School in 2004, but according to his mother was "wracked by anxiety". She told friends that her son started getting upset in middle school because of frequent classroom changes during the day. The movement and noise were too stimulating and made him anxious. At one point, his anxiety was so intense that she took him to the emergency room at Danbury Hospital. Because of the smaller class sizes, his mother moved him to a parochial school, St. Rose of Lima. According to a classmate at St. Rose of Lima, he entered "late in the school year", and he left in June 2005. At age 14, he went to Newtown High School, where he was named to the honor roll in 2007. Students and teachers who knew him in high school described Lanza as "intelligent but nervous and fidgety". He avoided attracting attention and was uncomfortable socializing. He is not known to have had any close friends in school. Schoolwork often triggered his underlying sense of hopelessness and by 2008, when he turned 16, he was only going to school occasionally. The intense anxiety Lanza experienced at the time suggests his autism might have been exacerbated by the hormonal shifts of adolescence. He was taken out of high school and home-schooled by his mother and father. He earned a GED. In 2008 and 2009, he also attended some classes at Western Connecticut State University. Lanza was born and partially raised in Kingston, New Hampshire, about 7 miles (10 km) southwest of Exeter, 30 miles (50 km) east of Manchester, and 50 miles (80 km) north of Boston. While living in New Hampshire at the time, Lanza exhibited developmental challenges before the age of three. These included communication and sensory difficulties, socialization delays, and repetitive behaviors. He was seen by the New Hampshire Birth to Three intervention program and referred to special education preschool services. Once at elementary school, he was diagnosed with a sensory-integration disorder. The sensory-processing disorder does not have official status by the medical community as a formal diagnosis but is a common characteristic of autism. His anxiety affected his ability to attend school and in 8th grade he was placed on "homebound" status, which is reserved for children who are too disabled, even with supports and accommodations, to attend school. When he was 13, Lanza was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome by a psychiatrist, Paul Fox. When he was 14, his parents took him to Yale University's Child Study Center, where he was also diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). He frequently washed his hands and changed his socks 20 times a day, to the point where his mother did three loads of laundry a day. He also sometimes went through a box of tissues in a day because he could not touch a doorknob with his bare hand. Lanza was treated by Robert King, who recommended extensive support be put in place, and King's colleague Kathleen Koenig at the Yale Child Study Center prescribed the antidepressant Celexa. Lanza took the medication for three days. His mother Nancy reported: "On the third morning he complained of dizziness. By that afternoon he was disoriented, his speech was disjointed, he couldn't even figure out how to open his cereal box. He was sweating profusely ... it was actually dripping off his hands. He said he couldn't think ... He was practically vegetative." He never took the medication again. A report from the Office of the Child Advocate found that "Yale's recommendations for extensive special education supports, ongoing expert consultation, and rigorous therapeutic supports embedded into (Lanza's) daily life went largely unheeded." In a 2013 interview, Peter Lanza (Adam's father) said he suspected his son might have also had undiagnosed schizophrenia in addition to his other conditions. Lanza said that family members might have missed signs of the onset of schizophrenia and psychotic behavior during his son's adolescence because they mistakenly attributed his odd behavior and increasing isolation to Asperger syndrome. Because of concerns that published accounts of Lanza's autism could result in a backlash against others with the condition, autism advocates campaigned to clarify that autism is a brain-related developmental disorder rather than a mental illness. The violence Lanza demonstrated in the shooting is generally not seen in the autistic population and none of the psychiatrists he saw detected troubling signs of violence in his disposition. Lanza appears to have had no contact with mental health providers after 2006. The report from the Office of the Child Advocate stated: "In the course of Lanza's entire life, minimal mental health evaluation and treatment (in relation to his apparent need) was obtained. Of the couple of providers that saw him, only one—the Yale Child Study Center—seemed to appreciate the gravity of (his) presentation, his need for extensive mental health and special education supports, and the critical need for medication to ease his obsessive-compulsive symptoms." Investigators found Lanza was fascinated with mass shootings, such as the Columbine High School massacre. Among the clippings found in his room, there was a story from The New York Times about a man who shot at schoolchildren in 1891. His computer contained two videos of gunshot suicides, movies that showed school shootings, and two pictures of Lanza pointing guns at his own head. This only came to light after Lanza died, because he never permitted others to access his bedroom, including his mother. Lanza had also taped black plastic garbage bags over the windows in his bedroom to block out sunlight. He had cut off contact with both his father and brother in the two years before the shooting and at one point communicated with his mother, who lived in the same house, only by email. A document titled "Selfish", describing Lanza's belief in the inherent selfishness of women, was found on his computer after his death. According to a report by the Office of the Child Advocate in Connecticut in November 2014, Lanza may have had anorexia nervosa. The authors wrote that "Anorexia can produce cognitive impairment and it is likely that anorexia combined with an autism spectrum disorder and OCD compounded Lanza's risk for suicide". They also noted that at the time of his death, Lanza "was anorexic (he was six feet tall (183 cm) and weighed 112 pounds (51 kg)), to the point of malnutrition and resultant brain damage." He was also living in almost total isolation in his room, spending most of his time on the internet playing World of Warcraft and other video games. The report stated that he "descended" into a world where his only communication with the outside world was with members of a cyber-community, "a small community of individuals that shared his dark and obsessive interest in mass murder". In the weeks before the killings, Lanza's mother was considering moving him to another town. She planned to purchase a recreational vehicle for him to stay in so that potential purchasers could see the house without disturbing him. The Report of the Child Advocate stated that: In the wake of Mrs Lanza's stated plan to move out of Newtown in 2012, and perhaps stimulated by fears of leaving the "comfort zone" of his home, Adam planned and executed the massacre at Sandy Hook Elementary School on December 14, 2012. His severe and deteriorating internalized mental health problems were combined with an atypical preoccupation with violence. Combined with access to deadly weapons, this proved a recipe for mass murder". James Knoll, a forensic psychiatrist at SUNY Upstate Medical University, was consulted about what motivated Lanza to kill. Knoll states that Lanza's final act conveyed a distinct message: "I carry profound hurt—I'll go ballistic and transfer it onto you." In January 2015, the families of two of the first-graders who died in the shooting filed a lawsuit against the city of Newtown and the Newtown Board of Education alleging inadequate security at the school. In March, it was announced that parents of children and teachers killed in the shooting had filed lawsuits against the estate of Nancy Lanza. The suits are based on a claim that she did not properly secure her firearms, which allowed her son, a person with mental health issues, to gain access to them. The attorneys representing the families said Lanza was believed to have had homeowner's insurance on her home worth more than $1 million and they were seeking compensation based on that. On October 16, 2019, a jury awarded Leonard Pozner $450,000 for defamation by James Fetzer, who had co-written the book Nobody Died at Sandy Hook. The book claimed that Pozner had fabricated the death certificate of his son Noah, a six-year-old victim of the shooting. Fetzer said he would appeal the decision. Fetzer petitioned for an appeal, which was denied, to which he petitioned for a rehearing, which was also denied. On December 15, 2014, nine families of the 26 victims of the shooting filed a class-action lawsuit in Connecticut against Bushmaster, Remington Arms, Camfour, a distributor of firearms, and the now-closed East Windsor store, Riverview Sales, where the gunman's rifle was purchased, seeking "unspecified" damages, claiming an exemption from the 2005 Federal Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (PLCAA) that would normally disallow such a suit as lacking standing. The plaintiffs allege that the XM15-E2S is suitable only for military and policing applications and that Bushmaster inappropriately marketed it to civilians. In January 2015, Bushmaster's attorneys petitioned to have the suit moved to federal court because, although the shooting took place in Connecticut, it is located in North Carolina. In February 2015, the victims' families' attorneys made a motion to move the suit back to state court. On April 14, 2016, a Connecticut court denied the defendants' motion to summarily dismiss the case. Lawyers for the defense filed a second motion for dismissal a month later. On October 14, 2016, the defendants' motion to dismiss the lawsuit was granted. The judge ruled the complaint was not valid per federal and Connecticut laws. The families appealed to the Connecticut Supreme Court. In March 2019, the court decided in a 4–3 vote to reverse parts of the trial court's rulings and remand the case back to Bridgeport Superior Court for additional hearings. It ruled that the families' appeal to the Connecticut Unfair Trade Practices Act, demonstrating that the gun manufacturers had used advertising that presented the weapons in an "unfair, unethical, or dangerous manner", with Remington seeking to "expand the market for [its] assault weapons through advertising campaigns that encouraged consumers ... to launch offensive assaults against their perceived enemies", was not prohibited by PLCAA, and thus that the plaintiffs had sufficient standing to argue their case at trial court. It also ruled that the plaintiffs can subpoena internal documents on how gun companies have marketed the AR-15. Remington asked the Supreme Court of the United States to review the state court ruling, but in November 2019 the Supreme Court declined to hear the appeal, allowing the families' suit to proceed. On July 26, 2021, a judge refused to dismiss the lawsuit. In court documents the next day, Remington offered $33 million to be shared by the nine families. On February 15, 2022, Remington agreed to settle for $73 million, according to the families' attorney, Josh Koskoff. On April 17, 2018, radio host and conspiracy theorist Alex Jones was sued for defamation by three parents whose children were killed in the shooting. Prior to this, Jones said that the Sandy Hook shooting was "completely fake" and a "giant hoax" perpetrated by opponents of the Second Amendment. Jones claims he later believed the shooting was real. On May 23, 2018, six more families sued Jones for his claims. Jones was found to be in contempt of court by a Texas judge even before the trial started, failing to produce witnesses and materials relevant to the procedures. Consequently, Jones and InfoWars were fined a total of $126,000 in October and December 2019. In October 2021, Jones was ordered to pay damages and was criticized by a judge for failing to hand over documents requested by the courts. Jones declared bankruptcy in April 2022 as a result of the defamation lawsuits caused by his claims that the shooting was a hoax. On August 4, 2022, Jones was ordered to pay $4.1M compensatory damages to Sandy Hook parents and, on August 5, 2022, he was ordered to pay a further $45.2M in punitive damages. On October 12, 2022, Jones was ordered to pay $965 million in damages to the families of Sandy Hook victims. The school was closed indefinitely following the shooting, partially because it remained a crime scene. Sandy Hook students returned to classes on January 3, 2013, at Chalk Hill Middle School in nearby Monroe at the town's invitation. Chalk Hill at the time was an unused facility, refurbished after the shooting, with desks and equipment brought in from Sandy Hook Elementary. The Chalk Hill school was temporarily renamed "Sandy Hook". The University of Connecticut created a scholarship for the surviving children of the shootings. On January 31, the Newtown school board voted unanimously to ask for police officer presence in all of its elementary schools; previously other schools in the district had such protection, but Sandy Hook had not been one of those. On May 10, a task force of 28 appointed members voted to demolish the existing Sandy Hook Elementary school and have a new school built in its place. The $57 million proposed project was sent to the Newtown Board of Education for approval, to be followed by a public ballot. In October 2013, Newtown residents voted 4,504–558 in favor of the proposed demolition and reconstruction, to be funded by $50 million in state money. Demolition began on October 25 and was completed in December 2013 at a cost of nearly US$1.4 million. After the town clerk's office was inundated with requests from the media, Connecticut House of Representatives Republican Dan Carter introduced legislation that would restrict access to public information available under the Freedom of Information Act. On June 5, both houses (Senate and House of Representatives) of the Connecticut state legislature passed a bill modifying the state's Freedom of Information Act in order to "prevent the release of crime-scene photos and video evidence from the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre and other Connecticut homicides, concerned such records would be spread on the Internet." The bill then went on to Gov. Dannel P. Malloy's desk for his signature. The bill creates a new exemption to the state's Freedom of Information Act. The release of photographs, film, video, digital or other visual images depicting a homicide victim is prevented if such records "could reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of the personal privacy of the victim or the victim's surviving family members." The Sandy Hook Promise Foundation, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, was formed to help survivors and families of the victims while also continuing the service of assisting others impacted by other shootings across the United States. President Barack Obama gave a televised address on the day of the shootings: "We're going to have to come together and take meaningful action to prevent more tragedies like this, regardless of the politics." Obama expressed "enormous sympathy for families that are affected". He also ordered flags to be flown at half-staff at the White House and other U.S. federal government facilities worldwide in respect of the victims. On December 16, Obama traveled to Newtown where he met with victims' families and spoke at an interfaith vigil. Dannel Malloy, the Governor of Connecticut, addressed the media the evening of the shootings near a local church holding a vigil for the victims, urging the people of Connecticut to come together and help each other. Malloy said, "Evil visited this community today, and it is too early to speak of recovery, but each parent, each sibling, each member of the family has to understand that Connecticut, we are all in this together, we will do whatever we can to overcome this event, we will get through it." Hundreds of mourners, including Malloy, attended vigils in various churches in Newtown. On December 17, Malloy called for a statewide moment of silence and church bells to be tolled 26 times at 9:30 a.m. on December 21, exactly one week after the school shooting. U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan said: "our thanks go out to every teacher, staff member, and first responder who cared for, comforted, and protected children from harm, often at risk to themselves. We will do everything in our power to assist and support the healing and recovery of Newtown." The day after the shootings, Lanza's father released a statement: Our hearts go out to the families and friends who lost loved ones and to all those who were injured. Our family is grieving along with all those who have been affected by this enormous tragedy. No words can truly express how heartbroken we are. We are in a state of disbelief and trying to find whatever answers we can. We too are asking why. We have cooperated fully with law enforcement and will continue to do so. Like so many of you, we are saddened, but struggling to make sense of what has transpired. Leaders from other countries and organizations throughout the world also offered their condolences through the weekend after the shooting. President Obama posthumously honored the six adults with the 2012 Presidential Citizens Medal on February 15, 2013. President Obama said "And then when Dawn Hochsprung, and Mary Sherlach, Vicki Soto, Lauren Rousseau, Rachel D'Avino, Anne Marie Murphy—when they showed up for work at Sandy Hook Elementary on December 14th of last year, they expected a day like any other—doing what was right for their kids; spent a chilly morning readying classrooms and welcoming young students—they had no idea that evil was about to strike. And when it did, they could have taken shelter by themselves. They could have focused on their own safety, on their own wellbeing. But they didn't. They gave their lives to protect the precious children in their care. They gave all they had for the most innocent and helpless among us. And that's what we honor today—the courageous heart, the selfless spirit, the inspiring actions of extraordinary Americans, extraordinary citizens." Sandy Hook conspiracy theories have become social phenomena, despite overwhelming contemporary coverage of the incident. The shooting prompted renewed debate about gun control in the United States, including proposals for making the background-check system universal, and for new federal and state legislation banning the sale and manufacture of certain types of semi-automatic firearms and magazines with more than ten rounds of ammunition. Within hours of the shooting, a We the People petition was started asking the White House to "immediately address the issue of gun control through the introduction of legislation in Congress", and the gun control advocacy group the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence reported that an avalanche of donations in the hours after the shooting caused its website to crash. Five days later, President Obama announced that he would make gun control a "central issue" of his second term, and he created a gun violence task force, to be headed by Vice President Joe Biden. On January 16, 2013, Obama signed 23 executive orders and proposed 12 congressional actions regarding gun control. His proposals included universal background checks on firearms purchases, an assault weapons ban, and a high-capacity magazine ban limiting capacity to 10 cartridges. On December 21, 2012, the National Rifle Association's Wayne LaPierre said gun-free school zones attract killers and that another gun ban would not protect Americans. He called on Congress to appropriate funds to hire armed police officers for every American school and announced that the NRA would create the National School Shield Emergency Response Program to help. After LaPierre's press conference, the Brady Campaign asked for donations to support its gun control advocacy and asked NRA members "who believe like we do, that we are better than this" to join its campaign. On January 8, 2013, former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords, who was shot and injured in a 2011 shooting in Tucson, launched the gun control group Americans for Responsible Solutions, with a specific aim of matching or exceeding the fundraising capabilities of the NRA and similar groups. On January 16, 2013, New York became the first U.S. state to act after the shooting when it enacted the Secure Ammunition and Firearms Enforcement (SAFE) Act. On April 3, 2013, the Connecticut General Assembly passed a 139-page major gun-control bill with broad bipartisan support. Governor Malloy signed the bill on the same day. The bill requires universal background checks (background checks for all firearm purchases) and a high-capacity magazine ban banning the sale or purchase of ammunition magazines capable of holding more than ten rounds of ammunition like those used in the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. It also created the first registry in the United States for dangerous-weapon offenders, and added over 100 types of guns to the state's assault weapons ban. Pro-gun groups had rallied outside the Capitol to protest prior to the signing and challenged it in court. Federal judge Alfred Covello ruled to uphold the law in January 2014. On April 4, 2013, Maryland also enacted new restrictions to their existing gun laws. However, ten other states passed laws that relaxed gun restrictions. Legislation introduced in the first session of 113th Congress included the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 and the Manchin-Toomey Amendment to expand background checks on gun purchases. Both were defeated in the Senate on April 17, 2013. A renewed debate about the effects of violent video games on young people began soon after the shooting due to news reports suggesting Lanza frequently played violent video games. Wayne LaPierre publicly blamed video games for the shooting, specifically targeting the free online game Kindergarten Killers created by Gary Short. Police found numerous video games in the basement of Adam Lanza's home, which was used as a gaming area. The final report into the shooting by the State Attorney, published in November 2013, noted that "[Lanza] played video games often, both solo at home and online. They could be described as both violent and non-violent. One person described the shooter as spending the majority of his time playing non-violent video games all day, with his favorite at one point being Super Mario Bros." The report described his liking for Dance Dance Revolution, which he played frequently for hours with an acquaintance at a movie theater in Danbury which had a commercial version of the game, and also played the game at home. Dance Dance Revolution is a non-violent exercising game where "the user is required to move their feet rhythmically in response to video cues". According to the Report by the Office of the Child Advocate, Lanza would play the game for hours on end using it as a distraction from his inner turmoil. The report said "he would whip himself into a frenzy, a behavior consistent, possibly, with a need to contain anxiety-producing impulses and thoughts. There were days when he would not do anything else but Dance Dance Revolution. The final report by the State Attorney did not make a link between video games and the motive for the shooting. However, the Report of the Child Advocate said "video game and internet addiction appear to be 'highly comorbid with several other psychiatric disorders' including anxiety, depression, and obsessive compulsive challenges". Many organizations were created due to the massacre that work to promote an end to school shootings, with some, such as Jesse Lewis Choose Love Movement, Sandy Hook Promise, and Safe and Sound Schools organized and led by parents of victims, while others, such as Moms Demand Action, were created by outsiders outraged by the shooting. In March 2014, the Newtown city officials announced the design for the new Sandy Hook Elementary School. The only remnant of the original school would be its flagpole. A few days later, the Newtown-Sandy Hook Community Foundation released results of a survey with over 1,600 respondents. Among other inquiries, the survey asked residents what should be done with the balance of the $11 million in donations that had been received since the incident in 2012. The majority of responses said that money for mental health counseling and other family expenses should be the top priorities. A few responses suggested that some of the money should be used to purchase and tear down the shooter's family home in order to replace it with a park or wildlife sanctuary. Jennifer Barahona, the foundation's executive director, was quoted as saying, "That's not something we're considering at this time. It's really outside of our scope." On October 21, building site preparation work began on the new Sandy Hook Elementary School; project updates and progress were posted on a dedicated website. Citing security and privacy reasons and out of respect for the families of victims, no ground breaking ceremony was held. Construction was scheduled to begin in March 2015 with the school expected to open by December 2016. In December, it was announced that the town of Newtown will acquire the property and home of Nancy Lanza at no cost. The property at 36 Yogananda St. was part of the Lanza estate, to which surviving son Ryan Lanza is the sole heir. Lanza's attorney, Kenneth Gruder, arranged for the transfer through a series of transactions so that probate records would not show the city acquiring the property from the Lanza family. Gruder said the notoriety of the home had made it essentially unsalable. The home was demolished in March 2015. On January 21, 2015, Newtown Legislative Council voted unanimously to demolish the house where Nancy and Adam Lanza lived, and to keep the land as open space. The demolition was completed on March 24, 2015. In February 2015, the family of one of the victims, Victoria Soto, applied for trademark protection for her name. The reason for this was to help prevent others from misusing Soto's name on social media and for the benefit of the memorial fund set up in her name. The victim's sister, Jillian, said fake social media accounts existed using her sister's name to promote conspiracy theories about the shooting. In July 2016, the new Sandy Hook Elementary School was unveiled and parents were shown around the building. The design of the new school incorporates numerous security features, including bulletproof glass exteriors, fencing around the perimeter of the building, and fortified safe rooms. The new school is on the site of the building where the shooting took place, which was demolished and rebuilt with a state grant of around $50 million. In 2013, the Newtown board of selectmen appointed the Sandy Hook Permanent Memorial Commission. Out of 189 design submissions, the commission chose a design created by Dan Affleck and Ben Waldo of SWA Group. $3.7 million to construct the memorial was narrowly approved by Newtown voters in April 2021, and site work began in August 2021. Construction was completed in August 2022. The memorial opened to the public on November 13, 2022, after a private ceremony with the victims' families. It features a stone basin engraved with the names of the victims, with a young sycamore tree at its center. A memorial mass is held every year at St. Rose of Lima Church. List of attacks related to primary schools List of school-related attacks List of school shootings in the United States (2000–present) List of school massacres by death toll § Rampage killers Chenpeng Village Primary School stabbing, a school stabbing on the same day which drew comparisons between the two attacks Uvalde school shooting, another elementary school shooting in Uvalde, Texas Portals:  Connecticut  Schools  United States Scinto, Rich (December 15, 2012). "Sandy Hook Elementary: Newtown, Connecticut shooting timeline". The Oakland Press. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Connor, Tracy (December 19, 2012). "'Call for everything': Police scanner recording reveals early moments of Newtown tragedy". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Access to weapons made tragedy possible". Connecticut Post. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on June 24, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2013. "Conn. school shooter had 4 weapons". CBS News. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Barron, James (December 15, 2012). "Children Were All Shot Multiple Times With a Semiautomatic, Officials Say". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "20 children among dead at school shooting in Connecticut". CBC News. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Police: Second person injured in Connecticut school shooting survived". NBC News. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Llanos, Miguel (December 14, 2012). "Authorities ID gunman who killed 27 in elementary school massacre". NBC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Jennings, Natalie (December 14, 2012). "Mark Kelly: Action on guns 'can no longer wait'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Winter, Tom; Riordan Seville, Lisa (November 25, 2013). "Newtown report: Shooter Adam Lanza had no clear motive, was obsessed with Columbine". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Richinick, Michele (November 25, 2013). "'No conclusive motive' in Newtown shootings, report says". MSNBC. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Fernando, Christine (February 15, 2022). "Sandy Hook families agree to $73 million settlement with gunmaker Remington". USA Today. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Report of the Office of the Child Advocate, p.9, section 36 "Enrollment Report as of November 30, 2012". Newtown Public School District. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on June 4, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Barron, James (December 14, 2012). "Nation Reels After Gunman Massacres 20 Children at School in Connecticut". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Welcome to the Town of Newtown". Town of Newtown. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2013. Candiotti, Susan; Aarthun, Sarah (December 15, 2012). "'Why? Why?': 26 dead in elementary school massacre". CNN. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Conn. Gen. Stat. § 53a-3(18) (2011) Archived July 31, 2012, at the Wayback Machine (defining "'pistol' or 'revolver'" as "any firearm having a barrel less than twelve inches"); Conn. Gen. Stat. § 29–34(b) Archived September 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine (banning any transfer of a pistol or revolver to a person under 21, except for temporary and supervised use at a target range) Fessenden, Ford; Parlapiano, Alicia; McClean, Alan (December 17, 2012). "Connecticut's Rules for Purchasing This Gun". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Williams, Pete; Huus, Kari (December 14, 2012). "Gunman's mother owned weapons used in Connecticut school massacre". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Flegenheimer, Matt; Somaiya, Ravi (December 15, 2012). "A Mother, a Gun Enthusiast and the First Victim". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Hermann, Peter; Rosenwald, Michael S. (December 15, 2012). "Newtown school shooter's mother collected guns, was loath to let people inside home". Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Ryser, Rob (December 10, 2017). "Sandy Hook victims' families struggle with feelings about Nancy Lanza". The News-Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Poulisse, Adam (December 19, 2012). "Victim Rachel D'Avino, killed days before marriage proposal, had ties to UHart and USJ". Berkshire Eagle. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2012. "Connecticut shooting: Services for Katonah native Anne Marie Murphy set". Newsday. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Bacon, JoAnn (January 12, 2016). "Sandy Hook Parents: How We Honor Our Daughter's Memory". Time Magazine. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved August 30, 2017. "Caroline Previdi Foundation". Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Altimari, Dave (March 14, 2015). "Families Of Sandy Hook Victims Sue Nancy Lanza Estate". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved June 30, 2016. "Connecticut Elementary School Shooting Victims: 'Hero' Teacher, Principal, 20 Kids". ABC News. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Factbox: Identities of Connecticut shooting victims". Reuters. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "CT State Police Release Names Of Victims In School Shooting Massacre". CBS News. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Esposito, Richard; Smith, Candice; Ng, Christina (December 14, 2012). "20 Children Died in Newtown, Conn., School Massacre". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Sandy Hook School Shootings Fast Facts". CNN. June 7, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Christofferson, John; Apuzzo, Matt; Fitzgerald, Jim; Murphy, Bridget; Eaton-Robb, Pat (December 16, 2012). "Evidence hints at deadlier plan in Conn. massacre". The Washington Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 28, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2012. "Gunman dead after killing 20 children, 6 adults at Connecticut elementary school". Fox News. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Vance, J. Paul. "Update: State Police Identify Weapons Used in Sandy Hook Investigation". State of Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved December 15, 2016. Seized inside the school: #1. Bushmaster .223 caliber model XM15-E2S rifle with high capacity 30 round magazine #2. Glock 10 mm handgun #3. Sig-Sauer P226 9mm handgun [...] The shooter used the Bushmaster .223 to murder 20 children and six adults inside the school; he used a handgun to take his own life inside the school. No other weapons were used in this crime. Almasy, Steve (December 19, 2012). "Newtown shooter's guns: What we know". CNN. Archived from the original on December 29, 2012. Retrieved December 30, 2012. The primary weapon used in the attack was a "Bushmaster AR-15 assault-type weapon," said Connecticut State Police Lt. Paul Vance. The rifle is a Bushmaster version of a widely made AR-15, the civilian version of the M-16 rifle used by the U.S. military. The original M-16 patent ran out years ago, and now the AR-15 is manufactured by several gunmakers. Unlike the military version, the AR-15 is a semiautomatic, firing one bullet per squeeze of the trigger. But like the M-16, ammunition is loaded through a magazine. In the school shooting, police say Lanza's rifle used numerous 30-round magazines. Altimari, Dave; Lender, Jon. "Newtown shootings: Sandy Hook Elementary School Shooter Adam Lanza Wore Earplugs". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2014. Besides the earplugs, he was wearing all black clothes under a drab olive green utility vest with pockets filled with 30-round magazines for the Bushmaster. Candiotti, Susan; Botelho, Greg; Watkins, Tom (March 29, 2013). "Newtown shooting details revealed in newly released documents". CNN. Archived from the original on July 29, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. But on December 14, 2012, he went out -- armed with 10 30-round magazines for his semiautomatic Bushmaster .223 caliber model XM15 rifle and bullets for his two handguns and a shotgun. Dorn, Chris; Dorn, Michael; Steve, Satterly; Shepherd, Sonayia; Nguyen, Phuong. "7 Lessons Learned from Sandy Hook". Campus Safety. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Bryan, Alix (December 16, 2012). "TIMELINE: Connecticut elementary school shooting updates". WTVR. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Gray, Sadie (December 16, 2012). "Sandy Hook gunman Adam Lanza shot his way through school door". The Times. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Gorosko, Andrew (November 26, 2013). "Long-Awaited 12/14 Report Offers Details, But No Motive". The Newtown Bee. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 22, 2013. "Newtown report reveals details, but no motive". Yale Daily News. December 3, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2014. Hayes, Mike (December 27, 2013). "Police Release Final Report On Sandy Hook School Shooting". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "Newtown shooter Adam Lanza was not wearing body armor during massacre". New Haven Register. New Haven, Connecticut. December 27, 2012. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Hudson, Hayley (December 24, 2012). "Becky Virgalla, Newtown Shooting Survivor, Says Principal, Others Saved Her in Sandy Hook Rampage". Huffington Post. Reuters. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. Christoffersen, John. "Conn. files: Gunman's mother loving but bewildered". Philadelphia Daily News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. Levitz, Jennifer (December 16, 2012). "Sandy Hook Locals Face New Reality". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "State's Attorney's Report on Sandy Hook Elementary School Shootings". The New York Times. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013. "Conn. school shooting: What we know". CBS News. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Applebome, Peter; Wilson, Michael (December 14, 2012). "Who Would Do This to Our Poor Little Babies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2017. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Altimari, Dave; Mahony, Edmund H.; Lender, Jon (March 13, 2013). "Newtown shootings: Adam Lanza Researched Mass Murderers, Sources Say". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on April 10, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Stoller, Gary (December 19, 2012). "School shooting survivor tells her story". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2013. "Sandy Hook Exposed?". snopes.com. December 15, 2012. Retrieved March 26, 2015. "Staff Directory". Sandy Hook Elementary School. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2013. Klein, Melissa (December 14, 2012). "Sandy Hook Elementary School nurse Sarah Cox relives terror of Newtown, Connecticut shooting". New York Post. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Christoffersen, John (December 14, 2012). "20 children, 6 adults killed at Connecticut school". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Connecticut State Police Sandy Hook Elementary School Shooting Report". State of Connecticut. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. "Details emerge on Sandy Hook shooting, Lanza's belongings". MSN. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. Sanchez, Raf (December 17, 2012). "Connecticut school shooting: six-year-old stayed alive by playing dead". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Oritz, Erik (December 17, 2012). "Newtown school shooting snuffs out promising lives of teachers, students". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Mayko, Michael P.; Pirro, John (December 31, 2013). "The voices of children who saw evil". The News-Times. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014. Retrieved January 3, 2014. "Face the Nation transcripts April 21, 2013: Boston bombings". Face the Nation. April 21, 2013. CBS. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. "Face the Nation transcripts April 21, 2013: Boston bombings". Face the Nation. April 21, 2013. CBS. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. Christoffersen, John (September 29, 2013). "Fear permeates young lives of Newtown witnesses". San Jose Mercury News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2013. "Sandy Hook Final Report. Office of the State's Attorney, Judicial District of Danbury. Stephen J. Sedensky III, State's Attorney" (PDF). ct.gov. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. Rayment, Sean (December 15, 2012). "Teachers sacrificed themselves to save their pupils". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Ramos, Victor Manuel (December 15, 2012). "Sandy Hook educators died trying to save the children". Newsday. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. Cleary, Tom (December 17, 2012). "Dylan Hockley died in Anne Marie Murphy's arms". Connecticut Post. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Newtown Resident Gene Rosen Speaks About Sheltering Six Students Who Escaped the Shooting". Fox News. December 18, 2012. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Stelzer, Brigitte (December 23, 2012). "Newtown massacre victims (and survivors) pictured in Victoria Soto's class photo". New York Post. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2013. Cleary, Tom (December 14, 2012). "'Hero teacher' rushed students to bathroom to keep students safe". Connecticut News. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Roig-Debellis, Kaitlin; Fisher, Robin Gaby (2016). Choosing Hope: How I Moved Forward from Life's Darkest Hour. G. P. Putnam's Sons/Penguin Random House. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-425-28231-1. Where can we hide? There's only one place. The bathroom ... How in God's name will I get all sixteen of us in there? "Newtown school massacre victims identified". BBC News. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Roberts, Christine (December 18, 2012). "Teacher's words of comfort to class during Newtown rampage: 'I love you all very much ... it's going to be OK'". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. McLaughlin, Michael (December 18, 2012). "Nicholas Sabillon, Sandy Hook Student, Recalls Killer Pounding on His Classroom Door". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Nikitchyuk, Andre (December 17, 2012). "BREAKING THE SILENCE! Father of surviving Sandy Hook student admits turning a blind eye to gun violence can no longer be an option". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Winter, Michael (December 14, 2012). "Tales of Sandy Hook heroism, young and old". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 24, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2012. "'Absolutely heartbreaking': Sandy Hook teacher's terrifying experience". WTOP. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "Sandy Hook Shooting, detailed report. Contains documents and further evidence from the case" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 25, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2013. "What would have prevented Lanza from mass murder at Sandy Hook?". The Washington Times. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2013. Altimari, Dave; Lender, Jon (January 6, 2013). "Sandy Hook Shooter Adam Lanza Wore Earplugs". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. "Connecticut State Police Sandy Hook Elementary School Shooting Report". State of Connecticut. 2013. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Zeveloff, Naomi (December 5, 2013). "A Newtown Clarification". The Jewish Daily Forward. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "Sandy Hook shooting: What happened?". CNN. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 8, 2013. "Children in Connecticut rampage were six, seven; shot multiple times". Reuters. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Newtown school shooting: Transcript of police, fire radio dispatch". New Haven Register. New Haven, Connecticut. December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Emmert, Don. "Conn. Elementary School Shooting: 20 Children, Seven Adults Killed". Mason County Daily News. Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Twenty children dead in mass shooting at Connecticut elementary school". Maclean's. December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2012. "28 Dead, Including 20 Children, After Sandy Hook School Shooting in Newtown". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Van Brussel, Joe; Sledge, Matt (December 14, 2012). "Danbury Hospital Prepared For School Shooting Massive Casualties, Got Few". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Quillen, Matt (December 15, 2012). "20 children, suspect's mother dead in CT elementary school shooting". NBC12. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013. Retrieved December 22, 2012. "Sandy Hook victims identified, bodies removed from school overnight". CBS News. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Altimari, Dave; Wilson, Jenny (December 4, 2013). "On The Six Newtown 911 Calls, Terror And Pleas For Help". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved January 4, 2014. Sherwell, Philip (December 16, 2012). "Connecticut school shooting: Adam Lanza rigged rifle for maximum damage". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Farhi, Paul (December 19, 2012). "Media too quick to fill in the gaps in story of school shooting in Newtown, Conn". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. "Newtown gunman had 'altercation' with school staff day before massacre". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Live blog: Kids slain at Connecticut school were 6, 7". CNN. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on February 18, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2018. Ross, Brian; Cuomo, Chris; Esposito, Richard (December 14, 2012). "Connecticut Shooter Adam Lanza: 'Obviously Not Well'". ABC News. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved September 28, 2020. Shontell, Alyson (December 17, 2012). "What It Was Like Being Ryan Lanza's Facebook Friend When The World Thought He Was A Killer". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Grant, Jason; Frassinelli, Mike (December 15, 2012). "Rumors fly in Hoboken about brother of suspected Connecticut school shooter". The Star Ledger. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved December 22, 2012. Boburg, Shawn; Ensslin, John; Cowen, Richard (December 15, 2012). "Sandy Hook shooter's brother questioned in Hoboken after shootings". North Jersey. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved September 28, 2020. From the Associated Press (December 15, 2012). "Police make contact with Lanza's 'missing' girlfriend and friend; Mother found dead in home". KNKX. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2020. Yost, Pete (December 14, 2012). "Conn. school shooting: Adam Lanza ID's as shooter". KSDK. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Yost, Pete; Keyser, Jason (December 15, 2012). "Correction: Conn school shooting-suspect story". NPR. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. "Brother of Conn. gunman wrongly cited as shooter". The Wall Street Journal. Associated Press. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Shapiro, Rebecca (December 14, 2012). "Media Initially Identify Adam Lanza, Newtown Shooting Suspect, As Ryan Lanza, His Brother". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Engel, Pamela (December 7, 2015). "New Details Revealed About Ryan Lanza's Interrogation After The Sandy Hook Massacre". Business Insider. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. "Lt. Paul Vance: Misinformation Is Being Posted on Social Media Sites". Fox News Insider. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Finn, Peter (December 23, 2012). "Lanza's brother denies giving Facebook interview to New York Post". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved September 25, 2020. "Ryan Lanza mourns the loss of his mother, Nancy, and brother, Adam Lanza". News.com.au. December 24, 2012. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. Stableford, Dylan (December 23, 2012). "Someone pretending to be Ryan Lanza gives Facebook interview to the New York Post". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. "Inside Newtown shooter Adam Lanza's home". MSNBC. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on April 1, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Details Emerge On Sandy Hook Shooting". Hartford Courant. October 19, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2013. Goode, Erica (December 16, 2012). "Newtown Shooter Used a Rifle Popular Among Gunowners". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Willingham, A.J. (December 15, 2012). "All wounds caused by 'long weapon'". HLN. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved February 1, 2013. "Medical Examiner: Newtown Shooting Victims Suffered 'Devastating Set of Injuries'". Newtown.patch.com. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on March 24, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2013. Candiotti, Susan; Ford, Dana (December 18, 2012). "Families hold funerals as school resumes for some Newtown students". CNN. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. Lauerman, John (December 20, 2012). "DNA of Newtown Gunman Unlikely to Yield Clues of Violence". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2012. Eveleth, Rose (December 31, 2012). "Adam Lanza's DNA Will Tell Us Nothing". Smithsonian.com. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved April 19, 2015. Altimari, Dave (October 29, 2013). "Full Report Confirms No Drugs, Alcohol In Lanza's System". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on July 9, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2014. "Adam Lanza, shooter in Sandy Hook Elementary massacre, found to have no brain deformities: medical examiner". Daily News. New York. Associated Press. January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2013. "Reports: Lanza smashed computer hard drive". USA Today. December 17, 2012. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2012. "Police release full Newtown massacre report, with photos and video – Investigations". NBC News. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Lupica, Mike (March 17, 2013). "Lupica: Morbid find suggests murder-obsessed gunman Adam Lanza plotted Newtown, Conn.'s Sandy Hook massacre for years". Daily News. Archived from the original on March 21, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2013. Gendreau, LeAnne (March 18, 2013). "Sandy Hook Shooter Kept Spreadsheet on Mass Killings: Report". WVIT. Archived from the original on April 23, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2013. "Adam Lanza, mom had NRA Certificates". Huffington Post. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on March 31, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Documents: New details on Newtown school massacre". CNN. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Connecticut school victims were shot multiple times". CNN. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Candiotti, Susan; Yan, Holly (December 16, 2012). "Connecticut school shooting: Latest developments". CNN. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Carver, who performed autopsies on seven of the victims, said the wounds he knew about were caused by a "long weapon" and that the rifle was the primary weapon used. Altimari, Dave; Mahony, Edmund; Lender, Jon (December 19, 2012). "Sandy Hook Shooter Lanza Left Little For Investigators To Trace". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2013. Williams, Pete; Llanos, Miguel; Connor, Tracy (December 14, 2012). "Elementary school massacre: 27 dead, including 20 kids, in Connecticut". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Lysiak, Matthew; Slattery, Denis; Schapiro, Rich (December 14, 2012). "Sandy Hook mass murderer Adam Lanza, 20, 'deeply disturbed kid'". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Park, Alice (March 11, 2014). "Don't Blame Adam Lanza's Violence on Asperger's". Time. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved March 12, 2014. Kleinfield, N. R.; Rivera, Ray; Kovaleski, Serge F. (March 28, 2013). "Newtown Killer's Obsessions, in Chilling Detail". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013. Altimari, Dave (December 9, 2018). "Sandy Hook shooter Adam Lanza's spreadsheet detailing centuries of mass violence served as a road map to murder". The Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on August 31, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "Sandy Hook report – shooter Adam Lanza was obsessed with mass murder". The Guardian. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013. "Newtown gunman Adam Lanza had 'obsession' with Columbine". BBC News. November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "Sandy Hook massacre: Adam Lanza acted alone and had an obsession with mass killings". The Independent. London. November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "Police Release Documents On Newtown Massacre". Hartford Courant. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Chappell, Bill (November 25, 2013). "No Motive In Newtown Report, But Many Details About Lanza". NPR. Archived from the original on February 15, 2015. Retrieved January 29, 2015. "Police file on Newtown yields chilling portrait". The Washington Post. Associated Press. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. Retrieved December 28, 2013. Report of the Office of the Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.104 Report of the Office of the Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.107 Halbfinger, David M (December 14, 2012). "A Gunman, Recalled as Intelligent and Shy, Who Left Few Footprints in Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 27, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Misur, Susan; Carter, Angi; Smith, Jenn (December 14, 2012). "Adam Lanza's family seemed like normal family, neighbors say". The Evening Sun. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Yost, Pete; Keyser, Jason (December 14, 2012). "Connecticut shooting suspect was honors student". Boston Globe. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 19, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Friends: Newtown gunman's mother home-schooled son, kept arsenal of guns". CBS News. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Bankoff, Caroline (December 2012). "Newtown Shooter Adam Lanza's Mother Was an Avid Gun Collector". New York. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "Investigators look for insight into Newtown gunman's mind". CBS News. Associated Press. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Goodwin, Liz (December 19, 2012). "Survivalists worry 'preppers' will be scapegoated for Newtown shooting". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Alexander, Harriet; Barrett, David; Donnelly, Laura; Swaine, Jon (December 15, 2012). "Connecticut school shooting: Troubled life of Adam Lanza, a fiercely intelligent killer". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2018. Lysiak, Matthew; Slattery, Dennis; Siemaszko, Corky (December 15, 2012). "Newtown, Conn. shooting: Sandy Hook elementary school gunman Adam Lanza learned to shoot from his gun-collecting mom". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. Solomon, Andrew (March 17, 2014). "The Reckoning". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Stoller, Gary; Dorell, Oren (December 19, 2012). "Classmate says Adam Lanza attended Sandy Hook school". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Griffin, Alaine; Kovner, Josh (June 30, 2013). "Adam Lanza's Medical Records Reveal Growing Anxiety". The Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on March 2, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Griffin, Alaine; Kovner, Josh (June 29, 2013). "Adam Lanza's Pediatric Records Reveal Growing Anxiety". PBS. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Fisher, Marc; O'Harrow, Robert; Finn, Peter (December 22, 2012). "A frustrating search for motive in Newtown shootings". Washington Post. Retrieved August 12, 2022. "Newtown High School honor roll". The News-Times. May 5, 2007. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2017. "Adam Lanza Took Western Connecticut State University Courses When He Was 16". Huffington Post. December 17, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Raising Adam Lanza". Frontline. PBS. February 19, 2013. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013. Shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Office of the Child Advocate, 2014, p.7. "Newtown Shooter Lanza Had Sensory Processing Disorder". ABC News. Retrieved February 20, 2013. Shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Office of the Child Advocate, 2014, p.8. "Police release documents on Newtown massacre". Politico. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved January 14, 2014. "Adam Lanza, Newtown school shooter, remains enigma despite files". Newsday. Archived from the original on December 29, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. "Sandy Hook shooter treated at Yale". Yale Daily News. January 22, 2014. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2014. Falco, Miriam (December 17, 2012). "Groups: Autism not to blame for violence". CNN. Archived from the original on February 5, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Goodwin, Liz (February 19, 2013). "New photos, details emerge of Newtown mass shooter Adam Lanza | The Lookout". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on February 19, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2013. "Adam Lanza Diagnosed With Sensory Integration Disorder | Video". ABC News. February 18, 2013. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2013. Rochman, Bonnie (December 19, 2012). "Troubling legacy of Sandy Hook may be backlash against kids with autism". Time. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2012. Lutz, Amy S.F. (December 17, 2012). "Don't Be Afraid of People With Autism: They are not cold-blooded killers". Slate. Archived from the original on December 21, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2012. "Sandy Hook killer Adam Lanza took motive to his grave - CNN.com". CNN. December 18, 2013. Archived from the original on December 18, 2013. Perrefort, Dirk (January 19, 2014). "Computer evidence shows Lanza's interest in pedophilia". Connecticut Post. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved November 19, 2017. "Sandy Hook killer Adam Lanza took motive to his grave". CNN. November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. "Sandy Hook Report: Inside Gunman Adam Lanza's Bedroom". ABC News. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2013. Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.102. Shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School (PDF) (Report). November 21, 2014. p. 102. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 26, 2014. Retrieved November 28, 2014. Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.100. "Nancy Lanza had considered moving with her son to Washington state". The Seattle Times. November 18, 2012. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.103 Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.8 Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.9. Richinick, Michele (January 22, 2015). "Gun manufacturer moves Sandy Hook lawsuit to federal court". MSNBC. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 11, 2015. Polansky, Rob (March 13, 2015). "Nine Sandy Hook families sue Lanza estate". Eyewitness News 3. WFSB. Archived from the original on March 14, 2015. Retrieved March 15, 2015. "Sandy Hook shooting: Parent awarded $450,000 for defamation". BBC News. October 16, 2019. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. "James Fetzer, Petitioner v. Leonard Pozner". Supreme Court of the United States. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Sandy Hook victims' families file lawsuit against gun maker". BBC News. December 15, 2014. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Terrill, Daniel. "Remington tries for dismissal in Sandy Hook, Bushmaster case". Guns.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2016. Obbie, Mark (February 17, 2016). "Will a Gun Manufacturer Be Held Liable for Sandy Hook?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved February 23, 2016. Stewart, Doug (February 17, 2015). "Sandy Hook families push to move Bushmaster lawsuit back to state court". FOX CT. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 11, 2015. Gorman, Michele (April 14, 2016). "Sandy Hook Lawsuit: Judge Rules Against Gun Companies". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2016. Fantz, Ashley (June 20, 2016). "Gun makers urge judge to toss Sandy Hook lawsuit". CNN. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Brennan, Christopher (October 14, 2016). "Conn. judge dismisses Sandy Hook families' lawsuit against gunmaker". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. Mason, Melvin (October 14, 2016). "Sandy Hook families' lawsuit thrown out". Stratford Star. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2016. In her 54-page ruling, Bellis said the allegations "do not fit within the common-law tort of negligence entrustment under well established Connecticut law, nor do they come within the PLCAA [Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act]'s definition of negligent entrustment." "Memorandum of Decision". October 14, 2016. Archived from the original on December 30, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2016. "Connecticut Judge Dismisses Sandy Hook Families' Suit Against Gunmaker". The New York Times. Reuters. October 14, 2016. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 15, 2016. Altimari, Dave (March 17, 2019). "Supreme Court ruling in Sandy Hook case could reveal gun manufacturer's confidential marketing strategy for semiautomaic firearms". The Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved March 18, 2019. Stern, Mark Joseph (March 14, 2019). "Connecticut Supreme Court Issues Stunning Decision Allowing Sandy Hook Families to Sue Gun Manufacturer". Slate. Archived from the original on March 15, 2019. Retrieved March 14, 2019. de Vogue, Ariane (November 12, 2019). "Supreme Court allows Sandy Hook families to sue Remington". CNN. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2019. Romo, Vanessa (July 28, 2021). "Gun-Maker Offers Sandy Hook Families $33 Million. Here's What They May Be Considering". NPR. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Murdock, Sebastian (February 15, 2022). "Sandy Hook Families Win $73 Million In Lawsuit Against Remington Arms". HuffPost. Retrieved February 15, 2022. "Families of Sandy Hook victims settle with Remington". BBC News. February 16, 2022. p. 1. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Haag, Matthew (April 17, 2018). "Sandy Hook Parents Sue Alex Jones for Defamation". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 17, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. "The Latest: Host Alex Jones responds to Sandy Hook lawsuits". NY Daily News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Zadrozny, Brandy. "Six more families sue Alex Jones over Sandy Hook conspiracy claims". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 22, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018. "Alex Jones ordered to pay $100,000 in Sandy Hook defamation case". BBC News. December 31, 2019. Archived from the original on December 31, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2019. Timothy Bella (October 1, 2021). "Alex Jones must pay damages to Sandy Hook families after calling shooting a 'giant hoax,' judge rules". The Washington Post. Calfas, Jennifer (October 1, 2021). "Alex Jones Held Liable in Sandy Hook Defamation Cases". WSJ – via www.wsj.com. "Alex Jones' Infowars files for bankruptcy in wake of defamation suits over his assertions that the Sandy Hook massacre was a hoax". www.cbsnews.com. April 18, 2022. Taylor, Derrick Bryson (April 18, 2022). "Alex Jones's Infowars Files for Bankruptcy". The New York Times – via NYTimes.com. Dylan Stableford (August 4, 2022). "Alex Jones must pay $4.1 million to Sandy Hook parents, jury finds". Yahoo! News. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Samee, Safia. "Alex Jones must pay at least $4.1 million to parents of a Sandy Hook school massacre victim in defamation case, jury rules". NBC News. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Massie, Graeme (August 5, 2022). "Alex Jones ordered to pay additional $45.2m in punitive damages by Texas jury". The Independent. Queen, Jack (October 12, 2022). "Alex Jones must pay Sandy Hook families nearly $1 billion for hoax claims, jury says". Reuters. Retrieved October 12, 2022. James, Will (December 17, 2012). "Sandy Hook Elementary School Closed Indefinitely". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 10, 2015. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "Connecticut survivors to attend school in neighboring town". Reuters. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "Sandy Hook students to move to Monroe school". The News-Times. December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "Newtown shooting: Sandy Hook students back to school". BBC News. January 3, 2013. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved January 3, 2013. DeSantis, Nick (December 18, 2012). "UConn Creates a Scholarship in Honor of School-Shooting Victims". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Zaretsky, Mark (January 31, 2013). "Newtown board wants more cops in schools". New Haven Register. New Haven, Connecticut. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2013. Kelly, Devin (May 11, 2013). "Task force: Sandy Hook Elementary should be torn down, rebuilt". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved May 11, 2013. Brumfield, Ben (May 11, 2013). "Sandy Hook task force recommends demolition and rebuilding". CNN. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2013. Chappell, Bill (October 6, 2013). "The Votes Are In: Sandy Hook Elementary Will Be Torn Down". WBUR. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2013. Ford, Bev; Siemaszko, Corky (October 25, 2013). "Sandy Hook Elementary School razing begins in Newtown, Conn". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Richinick, Michele (January 2, 2014). "Construction crews completely demolish former Sandy Hook Elementary School". MSNBC. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Connecticut mulls death certificate limits after Newtown massacre". Fox News. Associated Press. February 24, 2013. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Haigh, Susan. "Conn. lawmakers OK compromise Newtown privacy bill". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Hockley, Nicole. "My son never came home from Sandy Hook. My heart bleeds for Texas as I relive Dylan's murder". USA TODAY. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Statement by the President on the School Shooting in Newtown, CT". White House Press Office (Press release). December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. "Official with knowledge of Conn. school shooting: 27 dead, including 18 children". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Siddiqui, Sabrina; Foley, Elise (December 14, 2012). "Obama on Connecticut Shooting: We Need 'Meaningful Action'". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. O'Brien, Michael (December 14, 2012). "An emotional Obama: 'They had their entire lives ahead of them'". NBC News. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Presidential Proclamation – Honoring the Victims of the Shooting in Newtown, Connecticut". White House Press Office (Press release). December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on January 21, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "President Obama To Visit Newtown Sunday". Hartford Courant. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "Conn. Governor: 'evil visited this community'". AOL. Associated Press. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Hundreds pack Conn. church for vigil after rampage". CBS News. Associated Press. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. Moore, Martha (December 14, 2012). "Hundreds pack Conn. churches after rampage". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2012. McCarthy, Tom (December 17, 2012). "Newtown shooting: funerals to be held for victims". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 4, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "Children and adults gunned down in Connecticut school massacre". CNN. December 14, 2012. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2012. "Peter Lanza Statement: Father Of Adam Lanza Says, 'We Too Are Asking Why'". Huffington Post. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2012. "World leaders express shock over Connecticut shooting". Agence France-Presse. December 15, 2012. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2012. "Obama to honor 6 dead Sandy Hook teachers, administrators with Presidential Citizens Medal". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "Remarks by the President at Presentation of 2012 Presidential Citizens Medals". whitehouse.gov. February 15, 2013. Archived from the original on January 27, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2016 – via National Archives. Bennett, Dashiell (December 18, 2012). "Newtown Conspiracy Theories, Debunked". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014. * Steinhauer, Jennifer (January 24, 2013). "Senator Unveils Bill to Limit Semiautomatic Arms". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 28, 2013. Retrieved January 28, 2013. * Vigdor, Neil (January 24, 2013). "State Police: All 26 Newtown victims shot with assault rifle". Connecticut Post. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Bruce, Mary (December 14, 2012). "Petition Calls on White House to Address Gun Control". ABC News (blog). Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved June 28, 2020. Wing, Nick (December 17, 2012). "White House Gun Control Petition Becomes Site's Most Popular Ever". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2014. New, Catherine (December 14, 2012). "Anti-Gun Donations Surge After Connecticut Shooting". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Shear, Michael D. (December 20, 2012). "Obama Vows Fast Action in New Push for Gun Control". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Caldwell, Leigh Ann (December 19, 2012). "Obama sets up gun violence task force". CBS News. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2014. "Obama announces 23 executive actions, asks Congress to pass gun laws". CNN. January 16, 2013. Archived from the original on July 19, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014. "President Obama's remarks on new gun control actions, Jan. 16, 2013 (Transcript)". The Washington Post (transcript). January 16, 2013. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved January 18, 2013. Knox, Olivier (January 16, 2013). "Obama unveils sweeping plan to battle gun violence". Yahoo News (blog). Archived from the original on March 21, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017. Sullivan, Sean (December 21, 2012). "Put armed guards in every school, NRA leader Wayne LaPierre says". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 22, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Connor, Tracy; Isikoff, Michael (December 21, 2012). "Disbelief in some quarters after NRA calls for armed guards at every school, blames movies". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2014. "Gabrielle Giffords launches gun control campaign". BBC. January 8, 2013. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Seiler, Casey (January 16, 2013). "New gun law offers reply to mass killings: State becomes the first in the nation to act after horror of Newtown, Conn". Times Union. Albany, New York. Archived from the original on April 17, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2014. "Connecticut Governor Dannel Malloy signs bill with gun-control laws among the toughest in nation". Daily News. April 4, 2013. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved October 27, 2013. Lender, Jon; Altimari, Daniela; Wilson, Jenny (April 4, 2013). "Governor Signs Historic Gun Bill". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Mungin, Lateef; Brady, Brittany (April 4, 2013). "Connecticut governor signs sweeping gun measure". CNN. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. "Connecticut Governor Signs Gun Measures". New York Times. Associated Press. April 4, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Pazniokas, Mark (January 30, 2014). "Federal judge upholds Sandy Hook gun law". Connecticut Mirror. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. "Connecticut Governor Signs Gun Measures". The New York Times. Associated Press. April 4, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Jackson, Alex (April 5, 2013). "Maryland lawmakers send landmark gun control bill to O'Malley's desk". Capital Gazette. Annapolis, Maryland. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved April 16, 2014. Hartmann, Margaret (April 4, 2013). "Post-Newtown, States Passed More Gun-Rights Laws, Not Restrictions". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014. Sen. Dianne Feinstein, Rev. Gary Hall, Rep. Carolyn McCarthy et al. (January 24, 2013). Assault Weapons Ban Bill (video). Washington, D.C.: National Cable Satellite Corporation. Retrieved April 13, 2014. Freedman, Dan (January 24, 2013). "Feinstein offers new assault weapons ban". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 1, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2014. O'Keefe, Ed; Hamburger, Tom (April 10, 2013). "Key senators reach deal on background checks for gun buyers". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Peterson, Kristina (April 10, 2013). "Senate in Deal on Gun Checks". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Weisman, Jonathan (April 17, 2013). "Senate Blocks Drive for Gun Control". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Ferguson, Christopher J. (February 20, 2013). "Video games didn't cause Newtown rampage". CNN. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. Lohr, David (December 17, 2012). "Sandy Hook Blame Game: Eeny, Meeny, Miny, Moe". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on December 5, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. Ferguson, Christopher J. (December 20, 2012). "Sandy Hook Shooting: Video Games Blamed, Again". Time. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. Beekman, Daniel (December 21, 2012). "NRA blames video games like 'Kindergarten Killer' for Sandy Hook slaughter". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. The November 2013 final report names the following twelve video games as being part of Lanza's larger overall collection: Left 4 Dead, Metal Gear Solid, Dead Rising, Half Life, Battlefield, Call of Duty, Grand Theft Auto, Shin Megami Tensei, Dynasty Warriors, Vice City, Team Fortress, and Doom. Report of the Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p 98 "Adam Lanza's motive a mystery in Sandy Hook killings". CNN. November 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. Report of the Office of Child Advocate Archived November 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, p.101. Bonner, Jeanne (December 14, 2021). "26 playgrounds honor the students and the teachers killed at Sandy Hook". CNN. Retrieved December 28, 2021. Nicks, Denver. "Sandy Hook Heals With New School Design After Shooting". Time. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Collins, Dave. "Newtown residents want gunman's house torn down". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. "Site Work Begins For Construction Of New Sandy Hook School". CBS New York. October 22, 2014. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "The New Sandy Hook School". Svigals + Partners. Archived from the original on November 1, 2017. Retrieved November 15, 2018. "Demolition Of Old Sandy Hook Elementary Will Be Kept Private Contractors Ordered To Sign Confidentiality Agreements During Process". CBS New York. Associated Press. October 15, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014. Altimari, Dave (December 4, 2014). "Newtown Acquires Lanza House". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved December 20, 2014. Katersky, Aaron (March 24, 2015). "School Shooter Adam Lanza's Newtown House Is Demolished". ABC News. ABC News. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Bever, Lindsey (January 22, 2015). "Newtown votes to raze home of mass murderer Adam Lanza". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2015. Katersky, Aaron (March 24, 2015). "School Shooter Adam Lanza's Newtown House is Demolished". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2015. "Sandy Hook victim Victoria Soto to have name trademarked to prevent abuse". The Guardian. Associated Press. February 11, 2015. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015. "The new Sandy Hook school offers lesson on safety - The Boston Globe". BostonGlobe.com. Furfaro, Hannah (July 29, 2016). "For Sandy Hook, a New Start". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016. Taylor, Jim. "Construction To Begin At Sandy Hook Permanent Memorial August 23". www.newtownbee.com. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "The sound of children playing told Newtown officials they had found a Sandy Hook memorial site". Connecticut Public. November 17, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. Layne, Nathan (December 15, 2022). "'We choose love': Ten years after Sandy Hook shooting, town reflects on loss". Reuters. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. Quotations related to Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting at Wikiquote Sandy Hook Elementary School Official website (Archive) Final Report 28 Dead, Including 20 Children, After Shooting Rampage At Sandy Hook School In Newtown (via Wayback Machine)