The Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) is an American media franchise and shared universe centered on a series of superhero films produced by Marvel Studios. The films are based on characters that appear in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. The franchise also includes television series, short films, digital series, and literature. The shared universe, much like the original Marvel Universe in comic books, was established by crossing over common plot elements, settings, cast, and characters. Marvel Studios releases its films in groups called "Phases", with the first three phases collectively known as "The Infinity Saga" and the following three phases as "The Multiverse Saga". The first MCU film, Iron Man (2008), began Phase One, which culminated in the 2012 crossover film The Avengers. Phase Two began with Iron Man 3 (2013) and concluded with Ant-Man (2015). Phase Three began with Captain America: Civil War (2016) and concluded with Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019). Phase Four began with Black Widow (2021) and concluded with Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (2022). Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania (2023) began Phase Five, which will end with Thunderbolts (2025), and Phase Six will begin with The Fantastic Four (2025). Phase Six and "The Multiverse Saga" will conclude with Avengers 5 (2026) and Avengers: Secret Wars (2027). Marvel Television expanded the universe to network television with Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on ABC in 2013 before further expanding to streaming television on Netflix and Hulu and to cable television on Freeform. They also produced the digital series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot. Marvel Studios began producing their own television series for streaming on Disney+, starting with WandaVision in 2021 as the beginning of Phase Four. They also expanded to television specials in Phase Four, known as Marvel Studios Special Presentations, the first of which was Werewolf by Night (2022). The MCU also includes tie-in comics published by Marvel Comics, a series of direct-to-video short films called Marvel One-Shots, and viral marketing campaigns for the films featuring the faux news programs WHIH Newsfront and The Daily Bugle. The franchise has been commercially successful, becoming one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time, and generally received positive reviews. It has inspired other film and television studios to attempt similar shared universes and has also inspired several themed attractions, an art exhibit, television specials, literary material, multiple tie-in video games, and commercials. "It's never been done before and that's kind of the spirit everybody's taking it in. The other filmmakers aren't used to getting actors from other movies that other filmmakers have cast, certain plot lines that are connected or certain locations that are connected, but I think ... everyone was on board for it and thinks that it's fun. Primarily because we've always remained consistent saying that the movie that we are making comes first. All of the connective tissue, all of that stuff is fun and is going to be very important if you want it to be. If the fans want to look further and find connections, then they're there. There are a few big ones obviously, that hopefully the mainstream audience will [be] able to follow as well. But ... the reason that all the filmmakers are on board is that their movies need to stand on their own. They need to have a fresh vision, a unique tone, and the fact that they can interconnect if you want to follow those breadcrumbs is a bonus." —Kevin Feige, President of Production for Marvel Studios, on constructing a shared film universe. By 2005, Marvel Entertainment had begun planning to produce its own films independently and distribute them through Paramount Pictures. Previously, Marvel had co-produced several superhero films with Columbia Pictures, New Line Cinema and others, including a seven-year development deal with 20th Century Fox. Marvel made relatively little profit from its licensing deals with other studios and wanted to get more money out of its films while maintaining artistic control of the projects and distribution. Avi Arad, head of Marvel's film division, was pleased with Sam Raimi's Spider-Man films at Sony Pictures, but was less pleased with others. As a result, Arad decided to form Marvel Studios, Hollywood's first major independent film studio since DreamWorks Pictures. Kevin Feige, Arad's second-in-command, realized that unlike Spider-Man, Blade, and the X-Men, whose film rights were licensed to Sony, New Line Cinema, and Fox, respectively, Marvel still owned the rights to the core members of the Avengers. Feige, a self-described "fanboy", envisioned creating a shared universe, just as creators Stan Lee and Jack Kirby had done with their comic books in the early 1960s. To raise capital, the studio secured funding from a seven-year, $525 million revolving credit facility with Merrill Lynch. Marvel's plan was to release individual films for their main characters and then merge them in a crossover film. Arad doubted the strategy, but insisted that it was his reputation that helped secure the initial financing. He resigned the following year. In 2007, at 33 years old, Feige was named studio chief. To preserve its artistic integrity, Marvel Studios formed a creative committee of six people familiar with its comic book lore: Feige, Marvel Studios co-president Louis D'Esposito, Marvel Comics' president of publishing Dan Buckley, Marvel's chief creative officer Joe Quesada, writer Brian Michael Bendis, and Marvel Entertainment president Alan Fine, who oversaw the committee. Feige initially referred to the shared narrative continuity of these films as the "Marvel Cinema Universe", but later used the term "Marvel Cinematic Universe". Since the franchise expanded to other media, this phrase has been used by some to refer to the feature films only. In October 2014, Marvel Studios held a press event to announce the titles of their Phase Three films. By September 2015, after Marvel Studios was integrated into Walt Disney Studios with Feige reporting to Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan F. Horn instead of Marvel Entertainment CEO Isaac Perlmutter, the studios' creative committee had "nominal" input on the films moving forward, though they continued to consult on Marvel Television productions, which remained under Perlmutter's control. All key film decisions going forward were to be made by Feige, D'Esposito and Victoria Alonso. Feige mentioned that Avengers: Endgame (2019) would provide "a definitive end" to the films and storylines preceding it, with the franchise having "two distinct periods. Everything before [Endgame] and everything after". He later said Phase Three would conclude "The Infinity Saga". By November 2017, Disney was looking to develop a new Marvel television series for their streaming service Disney+. In July 2018, Feige noted discussions had begun with Disney regarding any potential involvement Marvel Studios could have with the streaming service, since Feige felt the service was "an important thing for the company". In September 2018, it was reported that Marvel Studios was developing several limited series centered on "second-tier" characters from the MCU films who had not and were unlikely to star in their own films. Each series was expected to be six to eight episodes, and would be produced by Marvel Studios rather than Marvel Television, with Feige taking a "hands-on role" in each series' development. Feige noted the series being developed for the streaming service would "tell stories... that we wouldn't be able to tell in a theatrical experience – a longer-form narrative". He also added that being asked by Disney to create these series "energized everyone creatively" within Marvel Studios, since they "could play in a new medium and throw the rules out the window in terms of structure and format". Television specials from the studio are marketed as "Marvel Studios Special Presentations". The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special (2022), a Special Presentation, was the first piece of content Marvel Studios planned to create for Disney+. In July 2019, Feige announced the Phase Four slate at San Diego Comic-Con, consisting of films and, for the first time, television event series on Disney+. The Phase Four slate includes What If...?, the first animated series from Marvel Studios, and by July 2021 the studio was creating an "animation branch and mini studio", known as Marvel Studios Animation, to focus on more animated content beyond What If...?. Alonso confirmed that Marvel Studios had around 31 projects in various stages of development by September 2021. In April 2022, Feige said he and Marvel Studios were on a creative retreat to plan and discuss the MCU films for the following 10 years. That July, Feige announced some of the films and series for Phase Five and Phase Six at San Diego Comic-Con, revealing that the second three Phases were collectively known as "The Multiverse Saga". Feige explained that Marvel Studios realized during development on Phase Four that it would be different from the first three phases, with more projects over a shorter period of time. This also came after the "creative experience" of ending Phase Three and "The Infinity Saga" with Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame. Therefore, instead of "culminat[ing] every 10 months in an Avengers movie" they decided to leave that culmination until the end of "The Multiverse Saga", with the second three phases all building to Avengers: The Kang Dynasty (2026) and Avengers: Secret Wars (2027). Marvel Studios was excited to explore Kang the Conqueror as an overarching villain of the Multiverse Saga after Thanos in the Infinity Saga, because Kang was a uniquely different villain in part because he has multiple variants. Additionally, the studio was not initially planning to have the next saga revolve around Kang, but decided to after seeing actor Jonathan Majors' performance in the first season of Loki (2021) and the dailies while filming Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania (2023). However, Majors was fired by Disney and Marvel Studios in December 2023 after he was found guilty amidst his legal issues, with Marvel also beginning referring to The Kang Dynasty internally as Avengers 5 by then. In March 2023, Alonso was fired from her role at Marvel Studios by a group including Disney Entertainment co-chairman Alan Bergman and Disney's human resources and legal departments for serving as a producer on the Amazon Studios film Argentina, 1985 (2022); this was a breach of a 2018 agreement between Alonso and Disney which stated employees would not work for a competing studio. Alonso reportedly did not seek permission to work on the film, and was asked by Disney to stop working on the film, as well as not to promote or publicize it, with the situation "deemed serious enough" that Disney requested a new agreement be signed. Despite this, Alonso continued to promote the film following its September 2022 premiere, and was consistently reminded of her agreement and breach of contract, ultimately leading to her firing. Alonso's lawyers refuted this claim, stating Disney was aware of, and agreed to, Alonso's work on Argentina, 1985, and that she was instead "silenced[... and] was terminated when she refused to do something she believed was reprehensible"; this incident was reported to be a disagreement with a Disney executive over the censoring of gay pride elements in Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania in order to release the film in Kuwait and comply with its restrictive anti-LGBTQ laws. A Disney spokesperson reiterated the notion that she was fired due to "an indisputable breach of contract and a direct violation of company policy" among other "key factors". Disney and Alonso reached a multi-million dollar compensation settlement in April. In July 2023, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated the company would be reducing the spending and creation of Marvel content, admitting that Marvel Studios' expansion into Disney+ series and more films had "diluted focus and attention" after a number of underachieving films at the box office. In December 2017, the Walt Disney Company agreed to acquire assets from 21st Century Fox, including 20th Century Fox. The transaction officially closed on March 19, 2019. The acquisition saw the return of the film rights of Deadpool, the X-Men characters, and the Fantastic Four characters to Marvel Studios, which would "create richer, more complex worlds of inter-related characters and stories". Some of the first elements previously controlled by 20th Century Fox to be integrated into the MCU were the organization S.W.O.R.D. in the Disney+ series WandaVision and the fictional country Madripoor in the series The Falcon and the Winter Soldier. Additionally, Patrick Stewart appeared as Earth-838 Professor Charles Xavier in Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022), portraying a different version of the character that he previously played in 20th Century Fox's X-Men film series, while Kamala Khan was revealed to have a genetic mutation in Ms. Marvel, with star Iman Vellani confirming she was the first mutant in the MCU. Namor is also revealed to be a mutant in Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (2022) as he is in the comics. In June 2010, Marvel Television was launched with Jeph Loeb as head. By July 2012, Marvel Television had entered into discussions with ABC to create a show set in the MCU; the network ultimately created the series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., Agent Carter, and Inhumans, which was a co-production with IMAX Corporation. In November 2013, Disney was set to provide Netflix with the live-action series Daredevil, Jessica Jones, Luke Cage, and Iron Fist, leading up to the miniseries The Defenders. In April 2016, Netflix ordered The Punisher, a spin-off of Daredevil. By February 2019, Netflix had canceled all of its Marvel series. In April 2016, the Disney-owned cable network Freeform announced Cloak & Dagger. In May 2017, Marvel announced that Runaways had received a series order from Hulu. In May 2019, Marvel announced that Helstrom had been greenlit for Hulu. In October 2019, further corporate restructuring saw Feige named Chief Creative Officer of Marvel Entertainment, with Marvel Television becoming part of Marvel Studios and executives of Marvel Television reporting to Feige. In December 2019, Marvel Television was folded into Marvel Studios, with Marvel Studios taking over production of the current series at the time; no further series from Marvel Television were being considered for development. In January 2021, Feige said "never say never" to potentially reviving the Netflix series, but noted Marvel Studios was focused on their new Disney+ series announced at that time. In May 2022, it was revealed that Marvel Studios was developing a new Daredevil series for Disney+, which was announced in July as Daredevil: Born Again. In 2008, the first tie-in comic was released. Quesada noted the comics would be set within the continuity of the films, but were not intended to be direct adaptions. Rather, they would explore "something that happened off screen" or flesh out something briefly mentioned. Feige was involved with the creation of the comics, with the film's screenwriters sometimes as well. Marvel Comics worked with Brad Winderbaum, Jeremy Latcham, and Will Corona Pilgrim at Marvel Studios to decide which concepts should be carried over from the Marvel Comics Universe to the Marvel Cinematic Universe, what to show in the tie-in comics, and what to leave for the films. Marvel has clarified which of the tie-in comics are considered canonical MCU stories, with the rest merely inspired by the MCU, "where we get to show off all the characters from the film in costume and in comic form". In August 2011, Marvel announced a series of direct-to-video short films called Marvel One-Shots, the name derived from the label used by Marvel Comics for their one-shot comics. Co-producer Brad Winderbaum called the short films "a fun way to experiment with new characters and ideas" and to expand the MCU. Each short film is designed to be a self-contained story that provides more backstory for characters or events introduced in the films. In March 2015, Marvel's Vice President of Animation Development and Production, Cort Lane, stated that animated tie-ins to the MCU were "in the works". That July, Marvel Studios partnered with Google to produce the faux news program WHIH Newsfront with Christine Everhart, a series of in-universe YouTube videos serving as the center of a viral marketing campaign to promote the films and universe. In December 2016, a six-part web series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot, was revealed, which debuted on ABC.com on December 13, 2016. It follows Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez on a secret mission, shortly before the start of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s fourth season, with Natalia Cordova-Buckley reprising her role. In September 2019, Sony created a real version of the fictional The Daily Bugle website as part of a viral marketing campaign to promote the home media release of Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019). Inspired by real-world "conspiracy-pushing" websites such as that of Alex Jones, the website features J. K. Simmons reprising his role as J. Jonah Jameson in a video where he speaks out against Spider-Man before asking viewers to "like and subscribe". In December 2020, Marvel Studios announced I Am Groot, a series of photorealistic animated shorts starring Baby Groot for Disney+. Marvel Studios often puts together a "lookbook" of influences from the comics and art by Marvel's visual development department, to create a visual template for a project. These are put together at company retreats, which the studio holds every "18 months or so" to plan out and develop the phases of the MCU. These lookbooks are not always shown to directors, though, with Marvel sometimes preferring to let the director offer their own ideas first. When choosing a director for a project, Marvel Studios looks for filmmakers to hire who are able to guide a film, with some of their choices considered "out-of-left-field", given a director's previous work. Feige remarked, "You don't have to have directed a big, giant visual-effects movie to do a big, giant visual-effects movie for us. You just have to have done something singularly sort of awesome." The studio ensures directors are open to the idea of the shared universe and are willing to include connective material, such as Kenneth Branagh and Joe Johnston needing to include Avengers set-up scenes in Thor and Captain America: The First Avenger, respectively. Marvel Studios usually has a big idea they would like to explore or build to in a project, such as Hydra infiltrating S.H.I.E.L.D. in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, with it up to the filmmakers to interpret and "improv a little bit" to get there. After these ideas have been developed, the creative team then begins to explore ideas happening in other future projects to see how to make any larger universe connections. There was large amount of collaboration between the Russo brothers and writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely with the other Phase Three directors and writers to make sure "everything line[d] up right" for the MCU's "culmination" in Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame. Marvel Studios also began contracting their actors for multiple films, including signing actor Samuel L. Jackson to a then "unprecedented" nine-movie contract. Feige said the studio has all actors sign contracts for multiple films, with the norm being for three or more, and the nine or twelve film deals "more rare". The actors' contracts also feature clauses that allows Marvel to use up to three minutes of an actor's performance from one film in another, which Marvel describes as "bridging material". By the start of Phase Four, Marvel Studios was no longer contracting actors for a large number of projects, with deal lengths varying for each actor and project. Feige said the studio was looking for actors who were excited to join the franchise and appear in multiple projects without being locked into contractual obligations. He also noted that they were starting to include theme park attractions in actors' deals. In August 2012, Marvel signed Joss Whedon to an exclusive contract through June 2015 for film and television. With the deal, Whedon would "contribute creatively" on Phase Two of the MCU and develop the first television series set in the universe. In April 2017, James Gunn revealed he would be working with Marvel "to help design where [the Guardians of the Galaxy characters'] stories go, and make sure the future of the Marvel Cosmic Universe is as special and authentic and magical as what we have created so far". In November 2022, Gunn became co-head of DC Studios, signing a deal for four years and to work exclusively on DC projects. By December 2020, because of the impact COVID-19 had on theaters and film studios shifting away from theatrical releases, Marvel Studios began exploring updated contracts for actors, writers, directors, and producers to receive adjusted compensation in the event a film had to debut on Disney+ instead of in theaters. TheWrap reported it was believed the new contracts would only apply to films about to enter production, and was unclear if any adjustments would be made to contracts for films already completed but not yet released. For Marvel Television, Loeb explained that they saw themselves as producers providing support to the showrunner: "we're involved in every aspect of the production—whether it's being in the writers' room, editing on set, casting—every step of the production goes through the Marvel team to tell the best story that we can." He added that the studio is able to work on so many series across different networks and platforms because all they needed was one person from the studio working on each series to help "guide the process". Actors appearing in Marvel Television series, such as Charlie Cox (Matt Murdock / Daredevil in Daredevil) and Adrianne Palicki (Bobbi Morse / Mockingbird in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.), were contractually obliged to appear in a Marvel film if asked. When developing the crossover miniseries The Defenders, showrunner Marco Ramirez consulted with the creators of all the individual Marvel Netflix series, having them read each of the scripts for The Defenders and provide insight into individual characters' worlds. In December 2021, Feige confirmed that Cox would reprise the role of Daredevil in Marvel Studios MCU productions, with Cox first reprising the role in the film Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021). Additionally, D'Onofrio first reprises his role as Kingpin in the Disney+ series Hawkeye (2021). Marvel Studios releases its films in groups called "Phases". The first three phases are collectively known as "The Infinity Saga". Phase One consists of Iron Man (2008), The Incredible Hulk (2008), Iron Man 2 (2010), Thor (2011), and Captain America: The First Avenger (2011), and concludes with the crossover film The Avengers (2012). Phase Two comprises Iron Man 3 (2013), Thor: The Dark World (2013), Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014), Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015), and Ant-Man (2015). Captain America: Civil War (2016) is the first film of Phase Three, and is followed by Doctor Strange (2016), Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017), Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017), Thor: Ragnarok (2017), Black Panther (2018), Avengers: Infinity War (2018), Ant-Man and the Wasp (2018), Captain Marvel (2019), Avengers: Endgame (2019), and Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019). The second three phases are collectively known as "The Multiverse Saga", and include television series on Disney+. Phase Four includes Black Widow (2021), Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings (2021), Eternals (2021), Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021), Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022), Thor: Love and Thunder (2022), and Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (2022). Phase Five begins with Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania (2023), followed by Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 (2023), The Marvels (2023), Deadpool & Wolverine (2024), Captain America: Brave New World (2025), and will conclude with Thunderbolts (2025). Phase Six begins with The Fantastic Four (2025), followed by Blade (2025), and will conclude with Avengers 5 (2026) and Avengers: Secret Wars (2027). Marvel Television produced multiple television series set in the MCU across broadcast, streaming, and cable. Its ABC series included Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2013–2020), Agent Carter (2015–2016), and Inhumans (2017); its Netflix series included Daredevil (2015–2018), Jessica Jones (2015–2019), Luke Cage (2016–2018), Iron Fist (2017–2018), the crossover miniseries The Defenders (2017), and The Punisher (2017–2019); its young adult series included Runaways (2017–2019) streaming on Hulu and Cloak & Dagger (2018–2019) airing on Freeform; and the Hulu series Helstrom (2020) was originally intended to be the start of a planned "Adventure into Fear" franchise, but ultimately was "not tied to the MCU", according to showrunner Paul Zbyszewski. Beginning with Phase Four, television series, which released on Disney+, were included as part of the Phases in addition to their feature films. Phase Four includes the series WandaVision (2021), The Falcon and the Winter Soldier (2021), the first season of Loki (2021), the first season of the animated series What If...? (2021), Hawkeye (2021), Moon Knight (2022), Ms. Marvel (2022), and She-Hulk: Attorney at Law (2022). The television specials Werewolf by Night (2022) and The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special (2022) are also included in the phase. Phase Five includes Secret Invasion (2023), the second season of Loki (2023), the second season of What If...? (2023), Echo (2024), Agatha (2024), Daredevil: Born Again (2025), and Ironheart (TBD). Marvel One-Shots are a series of direct-to-video short films that are included as special features in the MCU films' Blu-ray and digital distribution releases. The films included The Consultant (2011), A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to Thor's Hammer (2011), Item 47 (2012), Agent Carter (2013), and All Hail the King (2014). Following the One-Shots becoming available on Disney+ in January 2022, Marvel classified the Team Thor mockumentary shorts as One-Shots. Team Thor is a series of direct-to-video mockumentary short films that were released from 2016 to 2018, consisting of Team Thor, Team Thor: Part 2, and Team Darryl, all written and directed by Taika Waititi. I Am Groot is a series of photorealistic animated short films for Disney+ starring Baby Groot going on adventures with new and unusual characters. Vin Diesel reprises his role, with five shorts releasing on August 10, 2022. A second season, also consisting of five shorts, was released on September 6, 2023. WHIH Newsfront (2015–16) is an in-universe current affairs show that serves as a viral marketing campaign for some of the MCU films, created in partnership with Google for YouTube. The campaign is an extension of the fictional news network WHIH World News, which is seen reporting on major events in many MCU films and television series. Leslie Bibb reprises her role as Christine Everhart from the Iron Man films. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot (2016) is a digital series created for ABC.com and produced by Marvel Television that is a supplement to Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., with the main cast reprising their roles. The first two seasons of The Daily Bugle (2019–present) are an in-universe current affairs show serving as viral marketing campaign for the films Spider-Man: Far From Home and Spider-Man: No Way Home, with the videos released on YouTube and TikTok. It is based on the fictional sensationalist news outlet of the same name that appears in the MCU—itself based on the fictional newspaper agency of the same name appearing in several Marvel Comics publications. J. K. Simmons and Angourie Rice reprise their roles as J. Jonah Jameson and Betty Brant from the Spider-Man films. Multiple limited series or one-shot comics have been published by Marvel Comics that tie-into the MCU films and television series. They are intended to tell additional stories about existing characters, or to make connections between MCU projects, without necessarily expanding the universe or introducing new concepts or characters. The Wakanda Files: A Technological Exploration of the Avengers and Beyond is "a collection of papers, articles, blueprints, and notes amassed throughout history by Wakanda's War Dogs" at the request of Shuri. It is organized by areas of study and covers the technological advancements throughout the Marvel Cinematic Universe. The book, which exists in-universe, was written by Troy Benjamin and published by Epic Ink and Quarto Publishing Group. The Wakanda Files has content printed with UV ink that can be viewed with Kimoyo bead–shaped UV lights included with the book. It was released on October 20, 2020. Look Out for the Little Guy, the fictional memoir written by Scott Lang as seen in Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania, was released by Hyperion Avenue on September 5, 2023. It was created alongside Marvel Studios and the Quantumania filmmakers, and was written by Rob Kutner, featuring "over 20 short pieces exploring different aspects of Scott's experiences" as a father and Avenger. Quantumania writer Jeff Loveness wrote the material from the memoir that was featured in the film. Various composers have created the film and television scores of the MCU films, television series, One-Shots, Special Presentations, and other related projects of the MCU. Original songs have also been created specifically for use in the franchise, while Brian Tyler and Michael Giacchino have both scored fanfares for the Marvel Studios production logo. The fictional timeline of the MCU includes the feature films, television series, television specials, short films, and the I Am Groot shorts from Marvel Studios and Marvel Television's Netflix series. While the early films of Phase One and Phase Two of the franchise followed each other in the timeline similar to their release order, Phase Three saw many of the films overlapping with each other in the timeline, while also introducing the first prequel property, Captain Marvel. The Phase Three film Avengers: Endgame featured characters traveling into the past and introduced a five-year time jump, with many subsequent releases in Phase Four and Phase Five set after Endgame's events in the timeline. The television series Loki and What If...? were the first properties to occur outside of the main timeline and explore alternative timelines and universes. There have been numerous attempts by Marvel Studios and others to codify the events of the MCU, which have been subject to perceived continuity errors, resulting in Marvel Studios releasing an official timeline book in 2023 for their first four phases that were designated as part of their "Sacred Timeline". This book did not feature projects produced by other companies, such as Marvel Television's series which all had been loosely connected to the films, though it was noted all of these outside projects were part of the larger Marvel canon. In early 2024, Marvel Studios formally integrated Marvel Television's group of Netflix series into their Disney+ timeline. As of the Phase Five television series Secret Invasion and the film The Marvels, the "present day" in the MCU is 2026. The following covers and discusses MCU media released by Marvel Studios and the Netflix series by Marvel Television. Loki and What If...? are excluded from the diagram because they occur outside of the main timeline. Werewolf by Night is also excluded given the special explicitly does not indicate where it takes place in the MCU. Disney+'s timeline order places the first seasons of Loki and What If...? between Avengers: Endgame and WandaVision, their second seasons after The Marvels, and Werewolf by Night after Thor: Love and Thunder; Werewolf by Night is also placed here in The Marvel Cinematic Universe: An Official Timeline. The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe A to Z, Vol. 5, published in 2008, originally designated the Marvel Cinematic Universe as Earth-199999 within the continuity of Marvel's comic multiverse, a collection of fictional alternate universes, although this designation was rarely used officially outside of the source material. The television series Loki and What If...? were the first to explore the concept of the multiverse within the MCU, as well as the film Spider-Man: No Way Home, which connected the MCU to other Spider-Man film franchises by featuring characters from Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy, Marc Webb's The Amazing Spider-Man films, and Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU). The SSU film Venom: Let There Be Carnage briefly featured the main universe of the MCU as well. In Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, the main universe of MCU events was designated as Earth-616 (a designation first referenced in Spider-Man: Far From Home), sharing the name of the main Marvel Comics universe, while another universe was designated as Earth-838. Sony's animated Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023) references the events of No Way Home, citing the MCU's primary reality as Earth-199999. Phases Four, Five, and Six will comprise "The Multiverse Saga". With the release of The Marvel Cinematic Universe: An Official Timeline in October 2023, Feige wrote in its foreword that Marvel Studios only considered, at that time, projects developed by them in their first four phases as part of their "Sacred Timeline", but acknowledged the history of other Marvel films and television series that would exist in the larger multiverse given they were "canonical to Marvel". In January 2024, Winderbaum acknowledged that Marvel Studios had previously been "a little bit cagey" about what was part of their Sacred Timeline, noting how there had been the corporate divide between what Marvel Studios created and what Marvel Television created. He continued that as time has passed, Marvel Studios has begun to see "how well integrated the [Marvel Television] stories are" and personally felt "confident" in saying Daredevil was part of the Sacred Timeline. List indicator(s) This section includes characters who will appear or have appeared in at least three MCU films/series and received main billing credit in at least two franchises. A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the media, or that the character's presence has not yet been confirmed. A P indicates an appearance in onscreen photographs. A V indicates a voice-only role. Additionally, Paul Bettany was the first actor to portray two main characters within the universe, voicing Tony Stark's artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. in the Iron Man and Avengers films, and portraying Vision in Avengers films, Captain America: Civil War, and the miniseries WandaVision. J. K. Simmons became the first actor to reprise a non-MCU role in the MCU when he appeared as J. Jonah Jameson (a role he played in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy from 2002 to 2007) in Spider-Man: Far From Home. Prior to his death in 2018, Stan Lee, creator or co-creator of many of the characters seen in the MCU, made cameo appearances in all of the feature films and television series except Inhumans. In Iron Fist, it is revealed his on-set photograph cameo in the Marvel Netflix series is as NYPD Captain Irving Forbush. His cameo in Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 sees Lee appearing as an informant to the Watchers, discussing previous adventures that include Lee's cameos in other MCU films; he specifically mentions his time as a FedEx delivery man, referring to Lee's cameo in Captain America: Civil War. This acknowledged the fan theory that Lee may be portraying the same character in all his cameos, with writer and director James Gunn noting that "people thought Stan Lee is [Uatu the Watcher] and that all of these cameos are part of him being a Watcher. So, Stan Lee as a guy who is working for the Watchers was something that I thought was fun for the MCU." Feige added that Lee "clearly exists, you know, above and apart from the reality of all the films. So the notion that he could be sitting there on a cosmic pit stop during the jump gate sequence in Guardians...really says, so wait a minute, he's this same character who's popped up in all these films?" Following Lee's death, Marvel Studios chose not to create any new Lee cameos in future projects. NY1 news anchor Pat Kiernan has also appeared in multiple MCU films and television series as himself. Early on, the shared universe element of the Marvel Cinematic Universe was criticized by some journalists. Around the release of The Avengers in 2012, Jim Vorel of Herald & Review called the Marvel Cinematic Universe "complicated" and "impressive", but said, "As more and more heroes get their own film adaptations, the overall universe becomes increasingly confusing." Kofi Outlaw of Screen Rant stated that while The Avengers was a success, "Marvel Studios still has room to improve their approach to building a shared movie universe". Some reviewers criticized the fact that the desire to create a shared universe led to films that did not hold as well on their own. In his review of Thor: The Dark World, Forbes critic Scott Mendelson likened the MCU to "a glorified television series", with The Dark World being a "'stand-alone' episode that contains little long-range mythology". Collider's Matt Goldberg considered that while Iron Man 2, Thor and Captain America: The First Avenger were quality productions, "they have never really been their own movies", feeling that the plot detours to S.H.I.E.L.D. or lead-ups to The Avengers dragged down the films' narratives. The metaphor of the MCU as "the world's biggest TV show" was discussed again, after the release of Captain America: Civil War, by Emily VanDerWerff of Vox, who felt that film in particular highlighted Marvel's success with the model, saying, "Viewed in complete isolation, the plot of Captain America: Civil War makes little to no sense ... [but] when you think about where [Captain America] has been in earlier Marvel films ... his leeriness about being subject to oversight makes a lot more sense." VanDerWerff continued that when thinking about the MCU as a television series, many "common criticisms people tend to level at it take on a new context" such as complaints that the films are formulaic, lack "visual spark", or "shoehorn in story elements" that "are necessary to set up future films", all characteristics that "are fairly typical on television, where a director's influence is much lower than that of the showrunner", in this case, Feige. Comparing the films to the series Game of Thrones specifically, VanDerWerff noted that each solo film checks "in on various characters and their individual side stories, before bringing everyone together in the finale (or, rather, an Avengers film)", with Guardians of the Galaxy being equivalent to the character Daenerys Targaryen—"both separated by long distances from everybody else". She noted that this format was an extension of early "TV-like" film franchises such as Star Wars, as well as the format of the comics upon which the films are based. "I say all of this not to suggest that film franchises resembling TV series is necessarily a good trend", VanDerWerff concluded, "For as much as I generally enjoy the Marvel movies, I'm disheartened by the possibility that their particular form might take over the film industry ... But I also don't think it's the end of the world if Marvel continues on ... there's a reason TV has stolen so much of the cultural conversation over the past few decades. There's something legitimately exciting about the way the medium tells stories when it's good, and if nothing else, Marvel's success shows the film world could learn from that." Following the conclusion of season one of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., Mary McNamara at the Los Angeles Times praised the connections between that series and the films, stating that "never before has television been literally married to film, charged with filling in the back story and creating the connective tissue of an ongoing film franchise ... [Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.] is now not only a very good show in its own right, it's part of Marvel's multiplatform city-state. It faces a future of perpetual re-invention, and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television's roller-coaster ride toward possible world domination." Terri Schwartz of Zap2it agreed with this sentiment, stating that "the fact that [Captain America: The Winter Soldier] so influenced the show is game-changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven", though "the fault there seems to be that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. had to bide time until The Winter Soldier's release", which led to much criticism. In January 2015, Michael Doran of Newsarama and Graeme McMillian of The Hollywood Reporter had a "point-counterpoint" debate in response to the first Ant-Man trailer. Doran stated, "Marvel has raised the bar sooo high that as opposed to just allowing another film to finish under the [MCU] bar, we're all overly and perhaps even eager to overreact to the first thing that doesn't clear it". McMillian responded, "at this point, Marvel's brand is such that I'm not sure it can offer up something like [the trailer] without it seeming like a crushing disappointment ... part of Marvel's brand is that it doesn't offer the kind of run-of-the-mill superhero movie that you're talking about, that it's ... at least different enough to tweak and play with the genre somehow ... The fact that there's such upset about this trailer being ... well, okay ... suggests to me that the audience is expecting something to knock their socks off." Doran concluded, "That does seem to be the point here—the expectations fans now have for everything Marvel Studios ... [and] Marvel is going to eventually falter." After seeing the portrayal of Yellowjacket in Ant-Man, the antagonist of the film, McMillian noted, It's hardly a secret that Marvel Studios has a bit of a problem when it comes to offering up exciting characters for their heroes to fight against ... [their] villains generally fall into one of two camps. There's the Unstoppable Monster ... or there's the Professional White Guy in a Suit with an Ego ... No matter which of the groups the above villains fall into, they share one common purpose: evil. The motivations for evil likely differ—although, invariably, they fall under the umbrella of 'misguided belief in a greater good that doesn't exist'—but that really doesn't matter, because without fail, there will be so little time in the movie to actually properly explore those motivations, meaning that to all intents and purposes, the villain is being evil for reasons of plot necessity and little else ... The strange thing about this is that Marvel's comic books offer a number of wonderful, colorful bad guys who could step outside the above parameters and offer an alternative to the formulaic villains audiences have gotten used to (and arguably bored with) ... In future movies, we can only hope [they are] treated in such a way that their freak flags are allowed to fly free. Following the release of Jessica Jones, David Priest at CNET wrote about how the series rescues "Marvel from itself ... Jessica Jones takes big steps forward in terms of theme, craft and diversity. It's a good story first, and a superhero show second. And for the first time, the MCU seems like it matters. Our culture needs stories like this. Here's hoping Marvel keeps them coming." For Paul Tassi and Erik Kain of Forbes, watching the series made them question the MCU, with Kain feeling that the "morally complex, violent, dark world of Jessica Jones has no place in the MCU ... right now, the MCU is holding back shows like Jessica Jones and Daredevil, while those shows are contributing absolutely nothing to the MCU." Tassi went so far as to wonder what "the point of the Marvel Cinematic Universe" is, lamenting the lack of major crossovers in the franchise since the Winter Soldier reveal on Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and saying that Jessica Jones is "so far removed from the world of The Avengers, it might as well not be in the same universe at all ... [I] really don't understand the point of [the MCU] if they're going to keep everything within it separated off in these little boxes". Conversely, Eric Francisco of Inverse called Jessica Jones's lack of overt connections to the MCU "the show's chief advantage. Besides demonstrating how physically wide open the MCU's scope really is, Jessica Jones also proves the MCU's thematic durability." In April 2016, Marvel Studios revealed that Alfre Woodard would appear in Captain America: Civil War, having already been cast as Mariah Dillard in Luke Cage the previous year. This "raised hopes that Marvel could be uniting its film and Netflix universes", with "one of the first and strongest connections" between the two. Civil War writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely revealed that Woodard would instead be portraying Miriam Sharpe in the film, explaining that she had been cast on the suggestion of Robert Downey Jr., and they had not learned of her casting in Luke Cage until afterwards. This was not the first instance of actors being cast in multiple roles in the MCU, but this casting was called more "significant", and seen by many as a "disappointing" indication of "the growing divide" and "lack of more satisfying cooperation" between Marvel Studios and Marvel Television following the September 2015 corporate reshuffling of Marvel Entertainment. Speaking to the 1990s setting of Captain Marvel, "the MCU's first full period piece since Phase One's Captain America: The First Avenger in 2011", Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter felt the return of younger versions of some characters introduced and killed in earlier films "open[ed] up the MCU in a whole new way and broaden[ed] the franchise's mantra of 'it's all connected'". Speaking specifically to Clark Gregg's appearance as Agent Phil Coulson in the film, Newby noted the appearance "doesn't exactly mend fences between Marvel's film and TV divisions, [but] it does strengthen the connective tissue and the sense that these characters still matter in the grand scheme of Marvel's film plans". He also hoped that continuity from Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. would be maintained in Captain Marvel, especially since Coulson has dealt with the Kree in the series. Newby also added that shifting to different time periods would help Marvel Studios "sustain this cinematic universe for the next 10 years" by allowing them to repeat some of the genres previously used, as they could then feel "fresh" and have "different rules and different restraints", as well as allow them to build upon material established in the television series such as Agent Carter. He concluded, Marvel Studios has an entire sandbox to play in, but, for necessary reasons, has largely chosen to remain in a small corner in order to ground audiences in these concepts. Now that the basis has been laid, the opportunity for exploration in both film and television lies ahead, with Captain Marvel leading the way. Wherever Marvel Studios plans to take the MCU in the future, it's refreshing to know that its past is expansive and filled with infinite possibilities. Likewise, in his review of Avengers: Endgame, Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal acknowledged the unique achievement that the Marvel Cinematic Universe had accomplished: These are difficult times for big-screen entertainment. As the medium declines and TV grows ascendant, authentic spectacles—as opposed to lavish embellishments of smallish ideas—threaten to become a thing of the fabled past. All the more reason, then, to cherish what Marvel has achieved, even though befuddling stumbles have occurred along the way. The studio has kept the faith by smartening up most of its films, not dumbing them down, by banking on, and raking in profits from, the audience's appetite for surprise, its capacity for complexity. When the final battle comes at the end of Avengers: Endgame, it's inevitably unwieldy—every Marvel character you can think of from the past decade shows up for one more assault on cosmic evil—but thrilling all the same, and followed by a delicate coda. So many stories. So many adventures. So much to sort out before the next cycle starts. Many famous filmmakers expressed different views both on the success and quality of MCU. In October 2019, filmmaker Martin Scorsese openly criticized Marvel films in an interview and during a David Lean lecture in London, later expanded in an op-ed in The New York Times, asserting that these films are not cinema, but are instead the equivalent of theme park rides that lack "mystery, revelation or genuine emotional danger". He also stated that such films are corporation products that have been "market-researched, audience-tested, vetted, modified, revetted and remodified until they're ready for consumption", and that the invasion of such "theme park" films in theaters crowded out films by other directors. Scorsese's remarks were dismissed by directors of MCU films such as Joss Whedon and James Gunn, while they were defended by Francis Ford Coppola, who described the potential effect of Marvel films in the film industry as "despicable". In September 2021, director Denis Villeneuve noted that Marvel films "are nothing more than a 'cut and paste' of others" that have "turned us into zombies a bit". In February 2022, director Roland Emmerich felt large blockbuster films such as the MCU and Star Wars films were "ruining our industry a little", since "nobody does anything original anymore". Conversely, George Miller stated, "To me, it's all cinema. I don't think you can ghettoize it and say, oh this is cinema or that is cinema. It applies to all the arts, to literature, the performing arts, painting and music, in all its form. It's such a broad spectrum, a wide range and to say that anyone is more significant or more important than the other, is missing the point. It's one big mosaic and each bit of work fits into it." In 2023, critics began describing the volume of interconnected storylines as a "homework assignment". Marvel's American audience was studied by Morning Consult in 2021, which found that only 9% of Marvel's fan base is Gen Z, 64% of fans are White adults, and 42% of fans live in suburban areas. After the release of The Avengers in May 2012, Tom Russo of Boston.com noted that aside from the occasional "novelty" such as Alien vs. Predator (2004), the idea of a shared universe was virtually unheard of in Hollywood. Since that time, the shared universe model created by Marvel Studios has begun to be replicated by other film studios that held rights to other comic book characters. In April 2014, Tuna Amobi, a media analyst for Standard & Poor's Equity Research Services, stated that in the previous three to five years, Hollywood studios began planning "megafranchises" for years to come, opposed to working one blockbuster at a time. Amobi added, "A lot of these superhero characters were just being left there to gather dust. Disney has proved that this [approach and genre] can be a gold mine." With more studios now "playing the megafranchise game", Doug Creutz, media analyst for Cowen and Company, feels the allure will eventually die for audiences: "If Marvel's going to make two or three films a year, and Warner Brothers is going to do at least a film every year, and Sony's going to do a film every year, and Fox [is] going to do a film every year, can everyone do well in that scenario? I'm not sure they can." In March 2018, Patrick Shanley of The Hollywood Reporter opined that "the key differences between a regular franchise, such as The Fast and the Furious or Pitch Perfect films, and a shared universe is the amount of planning and interweaving that goes into each individual film. Its all too easy to make a film that exists solely for the purpose of setting up future installments and expanding a world, rather than a film that stands on its own merits while deftly hinting or winking at its place in the larger mythos. In that, the MCU has flourished." He felt that Iron Man "itself was aimed at being an enjoyable stand-alone experience, not as an overall advertisement for 17 subsequent movies. That mentality has persisted through most of the MCU films over the past decade, which is all the more impressive as its roster of heroes now exceeds the two-dozen mark." In October 2012, following its legal victory over Joe Shuster's estate for the rights to Superman, Warner Bros. Pictures announced that it planned to move ahead with its long-awaited Justice League film, uniting such DC Comics superheroes as Batman, Superman, and Wonder Woman. The company was expected to take the opposite approach to Marvel, releasing individual films for the characters after they have appeared in a team-up film. The release of Man of Steel in 2013 was intended to be the start of a new shared universe for DC, "laying the groundwork for the future slate of films based on DC Comics". In 2014, Warner Bros. announced that slate of films, similarly to Disney and Marvel claiming dates for films years in advance. That year, DC chief creative officer Geoff Johns stated that the television series Arrow and The Flash were set in a separate universe from the new film one, later clarifying that "We look at it as the multiverse. We have our TV universe and our film universe, but they all co-exist. For us, creatively, it's about allowing everyone to make the best possible product, to tell the best story, to do the best world. Everyone has a vision and you really want to let the visions shine through ... It's just a different approach [to Marvel's]." Discussing the apparent failure of the cinematic universe's first team-up film, Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), to establish a successful equivalent to the MCU, Emily VanDerWerff noted that where the MCU has a television-like "showrunner" in Feige, "the visionary behind Marvel's entire slate", the DCEU has director Zack Snyder, whose DC films "seemingly start from the assumption that people have come not to see an individual story but a long series of teases for other ones. It's like he knows what he needs to do but can't focus on the task at hand. TV certainly isn't immune to that problem, but shows that get caught up in high-concept premises and big-picture thinking before doing the necessary legwork to establish characters and their relationships tend to be canceled." Subsequently, in May 2016, Warner Bros. gave oversight of the DCEU to Johns and executive Jon Berg in an attempt to "unify the disparate elements of the DC movies" and emulate Marvel's success. The two were made producers on the Justice League films, on top of Johns' involvement in several "solo" films, such as the post-production process of Suicide Squad (2016) or the writing process of a standalone Batman film. After the successful release of Wonder Woman in June 2017, DC decided to begin deemphasizing the shared nature of their films, with DC Entertainment president Diane Nelson stating, "Our intention, certainly, moving forward is using the continuity to help make sure nothing is diverging in a way that doesn't make sense, but there's no insistence upon an overall story line or interconnectivity in that universe... Moving forward, you'll see the DC movie universe being a universe, but one that comes from the heart of the filmmaker who's creating them." Additionally, DC began focusing on films "completely separate from everything else, set entirely outside" the DCEU as part of a new label, with the first film centered on the Joker. In August 2022, Warner Bros. Discovery CEO David Zaslav announced a 10-year plan for the DC Extended Universe similar to the one that Horn and Iger employed with Feige for the MCU, with James Gunn and Peter Safran appointed in October 2022 to serve as the co-chairmen and co-CEOs of the newly formed DC Studios to develop a new DC shared universe, the first content for which was announced in January 2023. In November 2012, 20th Century Fox announced plans to create their own shared universe, consisting of Marvel properties that it holds the rights to including the Fantastic Four and X-Men, with the hiring of Mark Millar as supervising producer. Millar said, "Fox are thinking, 'We're sitting on some really awesome things here. There is another side of the Marvel Universe. Let's try and get some cohesiveness going.' So they brought me in to oversee that really. To meet with the writers and directors to suggest new ways we could take this stuff and new properties that could spin out of it." X-Men: Days of Future Past, released in 2014, was Fox's first step towards expanding their stable of Marvel properties and creating this universe, ahead of the release of a Fantastic Four reboot film the next year. In May 2014, Days of Future Past and Fantastic Four screenwriter Simon Kinberg stated that the latter film would not take place in the same universe as the X-Men films, explaining that "none of the X-Men movies have acknowledged the notion of a sort of superhero team—the Fantastic Four. And the Fantastic Four acquire powers, so for them to live in a world where mutants are prevalent is kind of complicated, because you're like, 'Oh, you're just a mutant.' Like, 'What's so fantastic about you?' ... they live in discrete universes." In July 2015, X-Men director Bryan Singer said that there was still potential for a crossover between the X-Men and Fantastic Four franchises, if reactions to Fantastic Four and X-Men: Apocalypse warranted it. Feeling that Singer's efforts in Apocalypse to establish a larger world, similar to the MCU, did not meet the standards established by Marvel, VanDerWerff noted that unlike Feige's ability to serve as "pseudo-showrunner", Singer is instead "steeped in film and the way movie stories have always been told", so "when it comes time to have Apocalypse dovetail with story threads from the earlier X-Men: First Class", which was directed by Matthew Vaughn, "both Singer's direction and Simon Kinberg's script rely on hackneyed devices and clumsy storytelling", indicating a lack of "the kind of big-picture thinking this sort of mega franchise requires". In his review of Dark Phoenix, Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal characterized the entire X-Men film series as being a "notoriously erratic franchise". In March 2019, the film rights of Deadpool, the X-Men characters, and the Fantastic Four characters returned to Marvel Studios following the Walt Disney Company's acquisition of 21st Century Fox. In November 2013, Sony Pictures Entertainment co-chairman Amy Pascal announced that the studio intended to expand their universe created within Marc Webb's The Amazing Spider-Man series, with spin-off adventures for supporting characters, in an attempt to replicate Marvel and Disney's model. The next month, Sony announced Venom and Sinister Six films, both set in the Amazing Spider-Man universe. With this announcement, IGN stated that the spin-offs are "the latest example of what we can refer to as "the Avengers effect" in Hollywood, as studios work to build interlocking movie universes." Sony chose not to replicate the Marvel Studios model of introducing individual characters first before bringing them together in a team-up film, instead making the Spider-Man adversaries the stars of future films. In February 2015, Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that the Spider-Man franchise would be retooled, with a new film co-produced by Feige and Pascal being released in July 2017, and the character being integrated into the MCU. Sony Pictures would continue to finance, distribute, own, and have final creative control of the Spider-Man films. With this announcement, sequels to The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014) were canceled, and by November 2015 the Venom and Sinister Six films, as well as spin-offs based on female characters in the Spider-Man universe, were no longer moving forward. By March 2016, the Venom film had itself been retooled, to start its own franchise unrelated to the MCU Spider-Man. A year later, Sony officially announced the Venom film to be in development, for an October 5, 2018, release, along with a film centered on the characters Silver Sable and Black Cat known as Silver & Black. Both projects were not intended to be a part of the MCU nor spin-offs to Spider-Man: Homecoming, but rather part of an intended separate shared universe known as the Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU). The mid-credits scene of Venom: Let There Be Carnage (2021) hinted at Eddie Brock / Venom joining the MCU, which was confirmed with the release of Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) through an uncredited cameo appearance in its mid-credits scene. Spider-Man: No Way Home also featured the Spider-Man iterations from Sam Raimi and Webb's Spider-Man films, respectively reprised by Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield. After Sony canceled their shared universe plans and started sharing the Spider-Man character with Marvel Studios, multiple critics discussed their failure at replicating the MCU. Scott Meslow of The Week noted the perceived flaws of the first Amazing Spider-Man film, outside of its lead performances, and how the sequel "doubles down on all the missteps of the original while adding a few of its own. ...We now have a textbook example of how not to reboot a superhero franchise, and if Sony and Marvel are wise, they'll take virtually all those lessons to heart as they chart Spider-Man's next course." Scott Mendelson noted that The Amazing Spider-Man 2 "was sold as less a sequel to The Amazing Spider-Man than a backdoor pilot for Spider-Man vs. the Sinister Six. ...Had Sony stuck with the original plan of a scaled-down superhero franchise, one that really was rooted in romantic drama, they would have at least stuck out in a crowded field of superhero franchises. When every superhero film is now going bigger, Amazing Spider-Man could have distinguished itself by going small and intimate." This would have saved Sony "a boatload of money", and potentially reversed the film's relative financial failure. In September 2014, the University of Baltimore announced a course beginning in the 2015 spring semester revolving around the Marvel Cinematic Universe, to be taught by Arnold T. Blumberg. "Media Genres: Media Marvels" examines "how Marvel's series of interconnected films and television shows, plus related media and comic book sources and Joseph Campbell's monomyth of the 'hero's journey', offer important insights into modern culture" as well as Marvel's efforts "to establish a viable universe of plotlines, characters, and backstories." After the acquisition by Disney in 2009, Marvel films began to be marketed at the Innoventions attraction in Tomorrowland at Disneyland. For Iron Man 3, the exhibit, entitled "Iron Man Tech Presented by Stark Industries", featured the same armor display that was shown at the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con, with the Marks I-VII and the new Mark XLII. In addition, there was a simulator game, titled "Become Iron Man", that used Kinect-like technology to allow the viewer to be encased in an animated Mark XLII armor and take part in a series of "tests", in which you fire repulsor rays and fly through Tony Stark's workshop. The game was guided by J.A.R.V.I.S., who is voiced again by Paul Bettany. The exhibit also had smaller displays that included helmets and chest pieces from the earlier films and the gauntlet and boot from an action sequence in Iron Man 3. The exhibit for Thor: The Dark World was called "Thor: Treasures of Asgard", and featured displays of Asgardian relics and transports guests to Odin's throne room, where they were greeted by Thor. Captain America: The Winter Soldier's exhibit, "Captain America: The Living Legend and Symbol of Courage", featured a meet and greet experience. From May to September 2017, Disneyland Resort featured the "Summer of Heroes", which sees members of the Guardians and Avengers making appearances throughout the Disneyland Resort. Additionally, the Guardians of the Galaxy: Awesome Dance Off event was featured, which involved Peter Quill / Star-Lord blasting music from his boombox, along with the Avengers Training Initiative, a limited experience where Black Widow and Hawkeye "assemble a group of young recruits to see if they have what it takes to be an Avenger." Marvel-related food and merchandise was also available throughout Hollywood Land at Disney California Adventure during the "Summer of Heroes". In March 2018, the Walt Disney Company announced three new Marvel-themed areas inspired by the MCU to Disney California Adventure, Walt Disney Studios Paris, and Hong Kong Disneyland. The developments will be designed by Walt Disney Imagineering in collaboration with Marvel Studios and Marvel Themed Entertainment. As was established with Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!, Avengers Campus exists in its own theme park universe that is inspired by the MCU. Being in the MCU multiverse, Avengers Campus has a shared history with the MCU proper, with a few notable exceptions being the Blip from Avengers: Infinity War did not occur, and some characters who died, such as Tony Stark, are still alive. In October 2013, the Iron Man Experience attraction was announced for Hong Kong Disneyland. It is set in the Tomorrowland section of the park, with the area built to look like a new Stark Expo created by Tony Stark after the 2010 one, as seen in Iron Man 2, with various exhibit halls that include the Mark III armor from the films. The area also has Iron Man and Marvel-themed merchandise items and memorabilia, plus an interactive game where guests can have the chance to try on Iron Man's armor. Iron Man Experience sees guests assist Iron Man in defeating Hydra throughout Hong Kong, and opened on January 11, 2017. In March 2018, the Walt Disney Company announced a new Marvel-themed area inspired by the MCU to Hong Kong Disneyland and a new attraction where guests team up with Ant-Man and the Wasp, to join Iron Man Experience. Inspired by Ant-Man and the Wasp, Ant-Man and The Wasp: Nano Battle! is an enclosed interactive dark ride that sees guests use laser powered weapons to team up with Ant-Man and the Wasp to defeat Arnim Zola and his army of Hydra swarm bots. Ant Man and the Wasp: Nano Battle! replaces the Buzz Lightyear Astro Blasters ride, and opened on March 31, 2019. By San Diego Comic-Con 2016, the Tower of Terror at Disney California Adventure was set to be replaced by a new attraction, Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout!. Chris Pratt, Zoë Saldaña, Dave Bautista and Benicio del Toro all filmed exclusive footage for the attraction, reprising their roles as Peter Quill / Star-Lord, Gamora, Drax and Taneleer Tivan / The Collector, respectively. James Gunn, director of Guardians of the Galaxy and its sequel, directed footage for the attraction and consulted on all aspects of it. Guardians of the Galaxy – Mission: Breakout! sees visitors assisting Rocket to rescue the other Guardians from the Collector's fortress, while the attraction features randomized events during the experience and music inspired by the Awesome Mix Vol. 1 soundtrack. The attraction opened on May 27, 2017. In March 2018, the Walt Disney Company announced a new Marvel-themed area inspired by the MCU at Disney California Adventure, anchored by Mission: Breakout!, that sees characters from the MCU such as Iron Man and Spider-Man join the Guardians of the Galaxy in a "completely immersive superhero universe". The area replaced the "A Bug's Land" area, which closed in mid-2018 to start construction on the Marvel area. Tom Holland reprises his role as Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the attraction Web Slingers: A Spider-Man Adventure, in which Parker has set up W.E.B. (the Worldwide Engineers Brigade) to inspire a new generation to use technology to save the world. Riders are recruited by Spider-Man into the initiative to stop his malfunctioning Spider-Bots. Web Slingers was directed by Spider-Man director Jon Watts along with Brett Strong, and was written by Steven Spiegel and featured visual effects by Framestore. A one-act version of Rogers: The Musical premiered at the Hyperion Theater on June 30, 2023, and ran for a limited time until August 31. In March 2018, the Walt Disney Company announced a new Marvel-themed area inspired by the MCU to Disneyland Paris' Walt Disney Studios Park. The area includes a reimagined attraction where riders team up with Iron Man and other Avengers on a "hyper-kinetic adventure" on July 20, 2022. The park also hosted the "Summer of Super Heroes" live-action stage show from June–September 2018. In July 2021, the immersive family dining experience "Avengers: Quantum Encounter" at the Worlds of Marvel restaurant on the Disney Wish cruise ship was announced, which debuted when the cruise began voyages on July 14, 2022. The experience takes place during dinner with interactive elements and a full CGI recreation of the Wish's upper decks. Paul Rudd, Evangeline Lilly, Anthony Mackie, Brie Larson, Kerry Condon, and Iman Vellani reprised their MCU roles, while Ross Marquand voiced Ultron after previously doing so in What If...?, in which he replaced James Spader. Chris Waitt directed Rudd and Lilly's content, which was written by Steven Spiegel and featured visual effects by Framestore. The Marvels director Nia DaCosta filmed Vellani and Larson's content in London ahead of principal photography for the film. In September 2023, the Wish's sister ship the Disney Treasure was announced to also include the Worlds of Marvel restaurant with two nights of distinct shows and menus, featuring an appearance by Spider-Man. The Marvel Super Hero Academy is also included on the cruise, where young kids can train to be superheroes with Spider-Man, Black Panther, and Ant-Man. These will be available on the Treasure when it begins voyages on December 21, 2024. In May 2014, the Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. (Scientific Training and Tactical Intelligence Operative Network) exhibit opened at the Discovery Times Square center. The exhibit features replica set pieces, as well as actual props from the films, mixed with interactive technology and information, crafted through a partnership with NASA and other scientists. Titus Welliver also provides a "debrief" to visitors, reprising his role as S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Felix Blake. Created by Victory Hill Exhibits, Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. cost $7.5 million to create, and ran through early September 2015. The exhibit also opened in South Korea at the War Memorial of Korea in April 2015, in Paris, France, at Esplanade de La Défense a year later, and in Las Vegas at the Treasure Island Hotel and Casino in June 2016. The Las Vegas version of the exhibit featured updated character details and corresponding science to incorporate the Marvel films that have released since the original exhibit in New York. Additionally, the Las Vegas version features Cobie Smulders reprising her role as Maria Hill to "debrief" visitors, replacing Welliver. An art exhibit, titled Marvel: Creating the Cinematic Universe, was displayed exclusively at the Queensland Gallery of Modern Art (GOMA) in Brisbane, Australia, in 2017. The exhibit, which included "300 plus objects, films, costumes, drawings and other ephemera", featured content "from the collection of Marvel Studios and Marvel Entertainment and private collections" with "significant focus [given] to the creative artists who translate the drawn narrative to the screen through production design and storyboarding, costume and prop design, and special effects and post-production". Marvel: Creating the Cinematic Universe was also extended to GOMA's Australian Cinémathèque with a retrospective of the MCU films. In October 2019, Marvel Studios and ILMxLAB announced the virtual reality experience Avengers: Damage Control. The experience would be available for a limited time starting in mid-October 2019 at select Void VR locations. Avengers: Damage Control sees players taking control of one of Shuri's Emergency Response Suits–which combine Wakandan and Stark Industries technologies–to defeat a threat alongside Doctor Strange, Ant-Man, and the Wasp. Letitia Wright, Benedict Cumberbatch, Paul Rudd, and Evangeline Lilly all reprise their MCU roles, while Ross Marquand voices Ultron, replacing James Spader. The experience was extended to the end of 2019. On March 18, 2014, ABC aired a one-hour television special titled Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe, which documented the history of Marvel Studios and the development of the Marvel Cinematic Universe and included exclusive interviews and behind-the-scenes footage from all of the films, One-Shots, and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and sneak peeks of Avengers: Age of Ultron, Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Guardians of the Galaxy, unaired episodes of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and Ant-Man. Brian Lowry of Variety felt the special, "contains a pretty interesting business and creative story. While it might all make sense in hindsight, there was appreciable audacity in Marvel's plan to release five loosely connected movies from the same hero-filled world, beginning with the cinematically unproven Iron Man and culminating with superhero team The Avengers. As such, this fast-moving hour qualifies as more than just a cut-and-paste job from electronic press kits, although there's an element of that, certainly." The special was released on September 9, 2014, on the home media for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 1. In September 2014, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. executive producer Jeffrey Bell stated that in order to meet production demands and avoid having to air repeat episodes, ABC would likely air a Marvel special in place of a regular installment at some point during the first ten episodes of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s second season. In October, the special was revealed to be Marvel 75 Years: From Pulp to Pop!, which was hosted by Emily VanCamp, who portrays Agent 13 in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, and aired on November 4, 2014. The special features behind the scenes footage from Avengers: Age of Ultron and Ant-Man, as well as footage from the Agent Carter television series previously screened at New York Comic Con. Brian Lowry of Variety felt an hour for the special did not "do the topic justice" adding, "For anyone who has seen more than one Marvel movie but would shrug perplexedly at the mention of Jack Kirby or Steve Ditko, Marvel 75 Years: From Pulp To Pop! should probably be required viewing. Fun, fast-paced and encompassing many of the company's highlights along with a few lowlights, it's a solid primer on Marvel's history, while weaving in inevitable self-promotion and synergistic plugs." Eric Goldman of IGN also wished the special had been longer, adding, "Understandably, the more you already know about Marvel, the less you'll be surprised by Marvel 75 Years: From Pulp to Pop!, but it's important to remember who this special is really made for – a mainstream audience who have embraced the Marvel characters, via the hugely successful movies, in a way no one could have imagined." In November 2019, Disney+ announced that the streaming platform would include Expanding the Universe, a special that features a look at the original MCU TV series for Disney+, with interviews and concept art. A Marvel-themed orchestra performance of an extended version of Brian Tyler's Marvel Studios theme and Alan Silvestri's theme from The Avengers took place during China's Bilibili New Year's Gala on December 31, 2020, to promote the 2021 Marvel Studios film releases. A special titled Marvel Studios' 2021 Disney+ Day Special, which looked at the future of the MCU on Disney+, was released on the service on November 12, 2021, as part of its "Disney+ Day" celebration. Announced in December 2020, this series examines individual heroes, villains, moments, and objects from the Marvel Cinematic Universe and how they connect, in anticipation of the upcoming stories that will feature them in Phase Four. Marvel Studios: Legends premiered on Disney+ on January 8, 2021, with the release of the first two episodes. Additional episodes were released ahead of a character and objects' appearances in Disney+ series and films. Announced in February 2021, each special of the documentary series goes behind the scenes of the making of the MCU films and television series with cast members and additional creatives. Marvel Studios: Assembled premiered on Disney+ on March 12, 2021, with the release of the first special, followed by additional specials. Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever is a three-part documentary series detailing the creation process of Black Panther: Wakanda Forever's soundtrack. It premiered on Disney+ on February 28, 2023. The documentary series was originally scheduled to be removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023, as part of Disney's efforts to reduce content costs, but ultimately was decided to remain on the service at that time. In June 2021, Marvel Studios released a casting call for fans of "Marvel's strong women" to be a part of an unscripted Disney+ documentary series showcasing the women who create the MCU in front of and behind the camera, including actors and creatives, and the fans who applied to participate in the series. The series was titled MPower by February 2023 and premiered in its entirety on March 8, 2023, consisting of four episodes titled "The Women of Black Panther", "Captain Marvel", "Scarlet Witch", and "Gamora", which were directed by Quinn Wilson and used archival footage and animation. Its release coincided with International Women's Day. A number of MCU actresses were interviewed to discuss what makes their characters compelling to audiences, including Danai Gurira, Lupita Nyong'o, Florence Kasumba, and Letitia Wright; Brie Larson, Iman Vellani, and Teyonah Parris; Elizabeth Olsen, Kathryn Hahn, and Kat Dennings; and Zoë Saldaña, who executive produced the series alongside Victoria Alonso. Saldaña said the series was a tribute to the representation and empowerment of women with the intent to "ignite meaningful conversations and drive real change towards a more equal and inclusive world." Other creatives who were interviewed for episodes include Marvel Studios executive Trinh Tran, Black Panther costume designer Ruth E. Carter, production designer Hannah Beachler, and editor Debbie Berman. The documentary series was originally scheduled to be removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023, as part of Disney's efforts to reduce content costs, but ultimately was decided to remain on the service at that time. The series was produced by Herzog & Co., Saldaña's production company Cinestar Pictures, and Just Entertainment. Aaron Perine at ComicBook.com believed that the series would have "something for all fans to enjoy" with each character's entry because of the fan appreciation, while BJ Conagelo of /Film stated it was "fantastic to see a thoughtful and in-depth spotlight" of the work by diverse groups of women in the MCU, and found it was "equally as impressive" how much the series analyzed their impact as a "sincere assessment" of the importance of the stories beyond gender representation. Philip Watson at CGMagazine said that while the series seemed focused on "add[ing] depth" to the backstories of the females behind Marvel, a secondary focus was to honor the title and empower women, quoting Kasumba: "You could watch it and think 'people that look like me, we can be Super Heroes too'". Kai Young of Screen Rant felt that the series' exclusion of an episode focused on Scarlett Johansson's MCU character Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow was another "insult against" the character as she was "pivotal to the MCU", and had wanted such an episode to focus on developing Romanoff as an individual beyond her relationships with male characters and alongside her family. In September 2015, Marvel announced the Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe, named as a nod to the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe. Each guidebook is compiled by Mike O'Sullivan and the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe team, with cover art from Mike del Mundo and Pascal Campion, and features facts about the MCU films, film-to-comic comparisons, and production stills. The guidebooks released each month from October 2015 to January 2016 were Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe: Marvel's Iron Man, Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe: Marvel's Incredible Hulk / Marvel's Iron Man 2, Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe: Marvel's Thor, and Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe: Marvel's Captain America: The First Avenger. In November 2018, Marvel and Titan Publishing Group released Marvel Studios: The First Ten Years to celebrate the first ten years of the Marvel Cinematic Universe which featured cast interviews, in-depth sections on each film, and an Easter egg guide. In October 2021, a two-volume book The Story of Marvel Studios: The Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe was released, written by Tara Bennett and Paul Terry. This collection features a look at the evolution of Marvel Studios, personal stories from the 23-film "Infinity Saga", and interviews with cast and crew members. In April 2023, W. W. Norton & Company announced MCU: The Reign of Marvel Studios by Joanna Robinson, Dave Gonzales, and Gavin Edwards, for release on October 10, 2023. The book presents an unauthorized look at "the rise and uncertain reign of the MCU, analyzing Marvel Studios' place as a major player in Hollywood and global pop culture" from Marvel Studios' inception, through events in early 2023, conducted through numerous interviews with those closely associated with the MCU. Norton approached the writers to work on a book centered on the MCU in 2019. Robinson explained that the book was originally meant to be an oral history, until Disney was no longer enthused about the book's publication despite initially being open to it, and told current employees and former stars not to talk to the writers. The writers were able to supplement the interviews they were able to get with those from "cultural critics and comics experts" in addition to years of research. Robinson added that because of the long work put into the book, it was able to cover the studio's expansion to television on Disney+, as well as "this current state of what I like to call a 'wobble' in Marvel's long reign", and provide "a lot of answers about how we got here". Additionally, the book was not deterred by the then-recent firings of Alonso and Marvel Entertainment CEO Ike Perlmutter, needing only "a few cosmetic tweaks to weave the whole story together" with Robinson explaining those firings "actually reinforced our sense that we really had captured the story of Marvel in both its triumphs and its stumbling blocks". Robinson was able to interview many of the subjects while Gonazles did the majority of the book's research, with Edwards compiling it all to give the book a "flow". In February 2024, Abrams Books announced Marvel Studios: The Art of Ryan Meinerding, written by Bennett and Terry. The book includes over 500 of Meinerding's illustrations, from work-in-progress to completed pieces, along with interview material where Meinerding discusses his process and working in Marvel Studios' visual development department. It will be released on October 1, 2024. In February 2016, a commercial for Coca-Cola mini cans aired during Super Bowl 50. A Mini Marvel was created by Wieden+Kennedy for Coca-Cola through a partnership with Marvel, and was directed by the Russo brothers. In the ad, Ant-Man (voiced by Paul Rudd, reprising his role) and the Hulk first fight, and then bond, over a Coke mini can. Luma Pictures provided visual effects for the spot, having worked previously with the two characters in MCU films. For the Hulk, Luma redefined its previous muscular system and simulation process to create and render the character, while Ant-Man received new motion capture. The Super Bowl campaign extended to "limited-edition Coke mini cans [six packs] that are emblazoned with images of Marvel characters, including Hulk, Ant-Man, Black Widow, [Falcon, Iron Man] and Captain America." Consumers had the opportunity to purchase the cans by finding hidden clues in the commercial, though "if the program goes well, Coke will consider making the cans available in stores." The ad had the third most social media activity of all the film-related trailers that aired during the game, and was nominated for Outstanding Visual Effects in a Commercial at the 15th Visual Effects Society Awards. In June 2021, The Simpsons short film The Good, the Bart, and the Loki was announced, which released alongside "Journey into Mystery", the fifth episode of Loki on Disney+. The short sees Loki teaming up with Bart Simpson in a crossover that pays homage to the heroes and villains of the MCU. Hiddleston reprises his role as Loki in the short. Features of the Marvel Cinematic Universe Philbrick, Jami (April 26, 2010). "Kevin Fiege Talks Iron Man 2, The Avengers and More". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2010. Fritz, Ben; Harris, Dana (April 27, 2005). "Paramount pacts for Marvel pix". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Retrieved February 12, 2014. Benezra, Karen (July 8, 1996). "Marvel wants to be a movie mogul". MediaWeek. 6 (28). VNU eMedia, Inc. Waxman, Sharon (June 18, 2007). "Marvel Wants to Flex Its Own Heroic Muscles as a Moviemaker". The New York Times. p. 2. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved February 1, 2009. Leonard, Devin (April 3, 2014). "The Pow! Bang! Bam! Plan to Save Marvel, Starring B-List Heroes". Bloomberg Businessweek. Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Russo, Tom (April 25, 2012). "Super Group". Boston.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Beall, Mark (September 14, 2006). "Marvel Avengers Update". Cinematical. Archived from the original on September 14, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2010. Guedj, Philippe (May 2, 2014). "Avi Arad : 'J'ai pardonné à Kevin Feige, il suivait des ordres' (Exclu Daily Mars)". Daily Mars. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Orange, B. Alan (June 5, 2009). "Marvel's Kevin Feige on the Future of The Avengers, Thor, Ant Man, Doctor Strange, and Captain America!". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2010. Douglas, Edward (April 25, 2010). "Exclusive: Marvel Studios Production Head Kevin Feige". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Foutch, Haleigh (November 29, 2018). "Marvel's Netflix Heroes Were Considered for 'Infinity War', Confirm Russo Brothers". Collider. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Siegel, Lucas (October 28, 2014). "Marvel Announces Black Panther, Captain Marvel, Inhumans, Avengers: Infinity War Films, Cap & Thor 3 Subtitles". Newsarama. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014. Masters, Kim; Belloni, Matthew (August 31, 2015). "Marvel Shake-Up: Film Chief Kevin Feige Breaks Free of CEO Ike Perlmutter (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2015. Faraci, Drew (September 2, 2015). "The Marvel Creative Committee Is Over". Birth. Movies. Death. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2015. Kit, Borys; Masters, Kim (September 3, 2015). "Marvel's Civil War: Why Kevin Feige Demanded Emancipation from CEO Ike Perlmutter". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved September 3, 2015. Robinson, Joanna (November 27, 2017). "Secrets of the Marvel Universe". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved November 30, 2017. Ridgely, Charlie (June 24, 2019). "Kevin Feige Confirms Spider-Man: Far From Home Is the Conclusion to Marvel's Infinity Saga". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Littleton, Cynthia (November 9, 2017). "New 'Star Wars' Trilogy in Works With Rian Johnson, TV Series Also Coming to Disney Streaming Service". Variety. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. Sciretta, Peter (July 6, 2018). "Kevin Feige Explains How They Planned 'Ant-Man and The Wasp' Alongside 'Infinity War,' the Disney Streaming Service and More [Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on July 19, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Kroll, Justin (September 18, 2018). "Loki, Scarlet Witch, Other Marvel Heroes to Get Own TV Series on Disney Streaming Service (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Ford, Rebecca (November 2, 2018). "'I'm Not Going to Get You a Bear Playing a Tambourine': The Producer Roundtable". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Coggan, Devan (November 10, 2020). "Honey, I'm Chrome: Marvel prepares to take over TV with WandaVision". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 10, 2020. Retrieved November 10, 2020. George, Joe (September 10, 2022). "Marvel's Werewolf by Night Trailer: Man-Thing, Elsa Bloodstone, and More Hidden MCU Details". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved September 12, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (September 14, 2022). "James Gunn Confirms Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special Is a Marvel Studios Special Presentation". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Graves, Sabina (November 18, 2022). "The Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special Was the First Marvel Studios Project Created for Disney+". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on November 19, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (July 20, 2019). "Marvel Unveils Post-'Endgame' Slate with 'Eternals', 'Shang-Chi' and Multiple Sequels". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Shanfeld, Ethan (July 20, 2021). "Marvel's Victoria Alonso Teases 'Mini Studio' for Animation and Discusses Representation in Superhero Stories at NALIP Summit". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Lee, Chris (January 13, 2023). "Inside the VFX Union Brewing in Hollywood". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Alonso heads up Marvel's dedicated "mini-studio," Marvel Studios Animation, which is behind such shows as What If ...? [...] and the summer 2022 series of Vin Diesel–voiced original shorts, I Am Groot. Graff, Nicholas (September 29, 2021). "Marvel Studios Has 31 Projects In Development Confirms Executive". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Gardner, Chris; Giardina, Carolyn; McClintock, Pamela (April 27, 2022). "Disney Debuts First Look at David O. Russell's Star-Packed Film, 'Lightyear' and 'Doctor Strange' at CinemaCon". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (July 23, 2022). "Marvel Studios' Phases 5 and 6: Everything We Learned at Comic-Con About the Multiverse Saga". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (July 24, 2022). "Comic-Con 2022: Marvel's Kevin Feige Reveals Biggest Lessons Learned from Phase Four (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Coggan, Devan (February 14, 2023). "Kevin Feige opens up about Phase 5, Kang, and the future of the MCU". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. McPherson, Christopher (May 22, 2023). "Marvel Reportedly "Changed All Their Plans" Due to Jonathan Majors' Performance in 'Loki'". Collider. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (December 18, 2023). "Marvel Drops Jonathan Majors After Assault, Harassment Verdict". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Kit, Borys (March 24, 2023). "Inside the Firing of Victoria Alonso: Her Oscar-Nominated Movie 'Argentina, 1985' at Center of Exit (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Donnelly, Matt; Vary, Adam B. (March 22, 2023). "Inside Victoria Alonso's Shocking Exit From Marvel Studios". Variety. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Vary, Adam B.; Donnelly, Matt (March 24, 2023). "Victoria Alonso Attorney Blasts 'Ridiculous' Claim She Was Fired Over 'Argentina, 1985,' Says Executive Was 'Silenced' by Disney (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Patten, Dominic; D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 24, 2023). "Victoria Alonso Weighing Legal Action Against Disney, Marvel Over Sudden Firing; "Serious Consequences" Promises Lawyer Patty Glaser As Mouse House Points At "Indisputable Breach of Contract"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (March 28, 2023). "Victoria Alonso Clashed With Marvel Over Blurring Gay Pride References in 'Ant-Man 3' for Kuwait (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Patten, Dominic (April 20, 2023). "Disney Settles With Former Marvel Exec Victoria Alonso Over Sudden Firing". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 20, 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2023. Rizzo, Lillian (July 13, 2023). "Disney pulling back on making Marvel, Star Wars content, Iger says". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Sharf, Zack (July 13, 2023). "Marvel 'Diluted' Audience's 'Focus and Attention' by Making So Many Disney+ TV Shows, Says Bob Iger". Variety. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. "The Walt Disney Company To Acquire Twenty-First Century Fox, Inc., After Spinoff of Certain Businesses, For $52.4 Billion in Stock" (Press release). The Walt Disney Company. December 14, 2017. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Szalai, Georg (March 19, 2019). "Disney Closes $71.3 Billion Fox Deal, Creating Global Content Powerhouse". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved March 21, 2019. White, Brett (March 19, 2021). "'Falcon and Winter Soldier' Easter Eggs: 5 Things You May Have Missed in Episode 1". Decider. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Romano, Nick (April 2, 2021). "The Falcon and the Winter Soldier shows how Marvel is weaving X-Men elements into the MCU". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 4, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2021. Garbutt, Emily (May 5, 2022). "The Illuminati members in Doctor Strange 2, listed and explained". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Kleinman, Jake (July 13, 2022). "Ms. Marvel Ending Explained: Is Kamala Khan a [Spoilers]?". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Brail, Nathaniel (July 14, 2022). "Ms. Marvel Star Breaks Silence Since Mutant Reveal". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Travis, Ben (September 26, 2022). "Namor Is 'A Dream Antagonist' For Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Says Ryan Coogler – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on September 26, 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Andreeva, Natalie (June 28, 2010). "Marvel Entertainment Launches TV Division". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 9, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (July 27, 2012). "ABC And Marvel Eying 'Avengers'-Themed TV Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Goldberg, Lesley (January 17, 2014). "Marvel's 'Agent Carter': Hayley Atwell, Writers, Showrunners Confirmed for ABC Drama". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. "'Marvel's The Inhumans' Coming To IMAX & ABC in 2017". Marvel.com. November 14, 2016. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (November 14, 2016). "Marvel, ABC Set 'The Inhumans' TV Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (February 28, 2017). "'Marvel's Inhumans': 'Hell on Wheels' Anson Mount To Star As Black Bolt in ABC Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Lieberman, David (November 7, 2013). "Disney To Provide Netflix With Four Series Based on Marvel Characters". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Hibberd, James (April 29, 2016). "Marvel's The Punisher spin-off ordered by Netflix". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved April 29, 2016. Patten, Dominic (February 18, 2019). "'The Punisher' & 'Jessica Jones' Canceled By Netflix; Latter's 3rd Season Still To Air". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 19, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (April 7, 2016). "Freeform Greenlights Marvel Romance Superhero Series 'Cloak and Dagger' (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (May 3, 2017). "Marvel's 'Runaways,' From 'The O.C.' Creators, Ordered to Series at Hulu". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 3, 2017. Retrieved May 3, 2017. Goldberg, Leslie (May 1, 2019). "'Ghost Rider,' 'Helstrom' Marvel Live-Action Dramas a Go at Hulu". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 15, 2019). "Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige Adds Marvel Chief Creative Officer Title; He'll Oversee All Creative & Story Initiatives". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2019. Goldberg, Lesley (December 8, 2019). "Marvel TV Division Folded Into Studio Unit, Layoffs Expected". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 10, 2021). "Marvel Boss Kevin Feige On 'Black Panther 2' Post Boseman, 'Black Widow' Release & Why Streaming Plans Won't Burn MCU At The B.O." Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Otterson, Joe (May 19, 2022). "'Daredevil' Disney+ Series in the Works With Matt Corman, Chris Ord Set to Write (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2022. Tobin, Paul (October 20, 2008). "Paul Tobin on Iron Man: Fast Friends". Newsarama. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2013. Wigler, Josh (November 1, 2010). "Joe Quesada Outlines Plans For 'Marvel Cinematic Universe' Comics With Movie Creators". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved November 1, 2010. Strom, Marc (May 17, 2010). "Iron Man 2: Comic Tie-ins Expand Story!". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Retrieved June 22, 2014. Richards, David (February 25, 2015). "Exploring Untold Tales of the Marvel Cinematic Universe in Comics Form". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved February 28, 2015. Strom, Marc (August 2, 2011). "Marvel One-Shots: Expanding the Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2011. Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe. Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Complete First Season Home media, bonus material: ABC Home Entertainment. 2014. Graser, Marc (July 23, 2013). "How Marvel is Turning to Short Films to Sell More DVDs, Blu-rays". Variety. Archived from the original on June 14, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2014. Marston, George (March 29, 2015). "ECCC 2015: Marvel Talks About Animated 'AVENGERS DISASSEMBLED' And Possible MCU Tie-Ins". Newsarama. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2015. Collinson, Gary (July 2, 2015). "Leslie Bibb's Christine Everhart returns in Ant-Man viral video, plus new featurette". Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (December 7, 2016). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Sets 'Slingshot' Digital Series for December Hiatus". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. Jaworski, Michelle (September 26, 2019). "The Daily Bugle's website from 'Spider-Man: Far From Home' is now real". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Welk, Brian (September 26, 2019). "JK Simmons' J Jonah Jameson Labels Spider-Man a 'Miscreant' on New Daily Bugle Website (Video)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 29, 2019. Anderton, Ethan (December 10, 2020). "'Guardians of the Galaxy' is Getting a Live-Action Holiday Special in 2022 Before Vol. 3 Arrives in 2023". /Film. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Peters, Jay; Gartenberg, Chaim; Alexander, Julia (December 10, 2020). "Here are all the new Marvel, Star Wars, and other projects Disney announced at its investor day". The Verge. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Vary, Adam B. (August 11, 2021). "Marvel Studios Planning 'Multiple' New Animated Series Following Debut of 'What If...?'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. Sciretta, Peter (November 4, 2016). "Kevin Feige on How a Marvel Movie Like 'Doctor Strange' Is Developed, & Why Time Travel Won't Ruin the MCU". /Film. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Laporte, Nicole (February 21, 2018). "The Marvel Studios Mind-Set For Making Hit After Hit". Fast Company. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018. McIntyre, Gina (January 10, 2014). "'Captain America': Chris Evans fights evil, and the present, in 'Winter Soldier'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved January 10, 2014. Bibbiani, William (September 9, 2014). "The Russo Brothers on Captain America 2 & Captain America 3". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on September 13, 2014. Retrieved September 12, 2014. Foutch, Haleigh (April 30, 2016). "The Russo Brothers on What It Takes to Land a Marvel Directing Gig". Collider. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Lussier, Germain (April 11, 2016). "Avengers: Infinity War Parts 1 and 2 Will Be Very Different Movies". io9. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Kit, Borys (February 25, 2009). "Jackson's Fury in flurry of Marvel films". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 24, 2014. Retrieved January 13, 2014. Perry, Spencer (July 26, 2014). "Comic-Con Interview: Kevin Feige Talks The Future of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2014. Couch, Aaron (July 7, 2021). "Kevin Feige and 'Black Widow' Team on Straddling Marvel's Past and Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 8, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Fischer, Russ (August 8, 2012). "Marvel Has Joss Whedon on Contract Through 2015". /Film. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. Couch, Aaron (April 17, 2017). "'Guardians of the Galaxy 3': James Gunn Returning to Write and Direct". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (October 25, 2022). "DC Shocker: James Gunn, Peter Safran to Lead Film, TV and Animation Division (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Gonzalez, Umberto (December 15, 2020). "Marvel Is Exploring New Talent Deals in Case Films End Up Going to Disney+ (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 16, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Holloway, Daniel (July 19, 2017). "Marvel Television's Jeph Loeb Talks Studio's Rise, Importance of Netflix's 'Daredevil'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. "Dardevil's Charlie Cox About His New-Found Love of Comic Books". Close-Up Film. April 25, 2015. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. Tilly, Chris (October 1, 2014). "Adrianne Palicki Says Mockingbird Joining The Avengers Has Been Discussed". IGN. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014. Li, Shirley (January 13, 2017). "The Defenders EP talks juggling four heroes – and the 'crisis' that unites them". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 14, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2017. O'Connell, Sean (December 5, 2021). "Kevin Feige Confirms Daredevil Casting In The MCU And Fans Will Be Pumped". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Romano, Nick (December 18, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home cameo hints at a major Marvel comeback". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Jaworski, Michelle (August 15, 2018). "This is what the Marvel Cinematic Universe phases look like". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2020. McEwan, Cameron K.; Longridge, Chris (August 7, 2019). "Marvel's 'Phases' explained: What goes when & why". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2020. McClintock, Pamela (October 18, 2010). "Disney, Paramount restructure Marvel deal". Variety. Archived from the original on October 23, 2010. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Russell, Bradley (September 12, 2022). "Marvel Phase 4: recap, release dates, news, and more". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Sandwell, Ian; Longridge, Chris (November 10, 2023). "Marvel's 'Phases' explained: What is Phase 5? What happened in Phase 3?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 14, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Couch, Aaron; McClintock, Pamela (February 14, 2024). "Fantastic Four Cast Revealed for Marvel Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Patten, Dominic (August 12, 2019). "Marvel TV Boss Jeph Loeb On Secret ABC Series, Disney+, 'Legion' End, More Crossovers, 'Ghost Rider' & Hulu Plans". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2019. Barnhardt, Andrew (October 18, 2020). "Here's How Helstrom Connects to Marvel World". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Kit, Borys (September 1, 2023). "Marvel Shuffles TV Calendar with New Dates for 'Agatha,' 'Echo,' X-Men '97' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Sneider, Jeff (January 12, 2024). "'Daredevil' Exclusive: Deborah Ann Woll and Elden Henson Are Back Again in Marvel's 'Born Again'". TheInSneider. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Breznican, Anthony (July 3, 2012). "First Look: Marvel unveils top-secret 'Avengers' short film 'Item 47' – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2014. Manning, Shaun (July 22, 2013). "SDCC: Marvel Debuts Atwell's 'Agent Carter One-Shot'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2014. Breznican, Anthony (January 9, 2014). "Marvel One-Shot: First Look at Ben Kingsley's Mandarin encore in 'All Hail the King' short film – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Zogbi, Emily (January 21, 2022). "Disney+'s MCU Hub Adds Every Marvel One-Shot". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Perine, Aaron (January 21, 2022). "5 Marvel One-Shots Just Got Added to Disney+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Disney+ [@disneyplus] (January 21, 2022). "Go for the Gold(blum) 🌟 New episodes of #TheWorldAccordingToJeffGoldblum, a new chapter of #TheBookofBobaFett, and Marvel Studios' One-Shot shorts are now streaming on #DisneyPlus!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on January 21, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022 – via Twitter. Breznican, Anthony (August 28, 2016). "Captain America Civil War: 'Team Thor' video shows what thunder god was up to". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Couch, Aaron (February 14, 2017). "'Thor' Mockumentary Gets the Sequel Darryl Deserves". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Lussier, Germain (January 10, 2018). "Thor's Pal Darryl Is Back for the Ragnarok Blu-ray With a New Roommate You'll Love". io9. Archived from the original on January 17, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Lerner, Jessica (June 6, 2022). "Disney+ Adds I Am Groot to Summer Lineup". Adweek. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. "'I Am Groot': First Trailer for Season 2 Reveals New Mischief". Marvel.com. August 6, 2023. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Garcia, James (June 25, 2015). "Iron Man actress Leslie Bibb teases return to the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016. Smith, Alanna (July 19, 2015). "WHiH Newsfront is a Real Marvel Cinematic Universe News Channel". Geek Chic Elite. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016. Al-Heeti, Abrar (November 24, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home joins TikTok with an account for The Daily Bugle". CNET. Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021. "Captain America Movie Tie-In Debuts Sunday". Marvel.com. February 14, 2011. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Dinh, Christine (September 24, 2020). "Unlock Shuri's Knowledge of the Avengers and Beyond". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2020. Paige, Rachel (February 2, 2023). "Scott Lang Announces New Memoir 'Look Out for The Little Guy' Coming this Fall". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Davids, Brian (February 24, 2023). "'Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania' Writer Jeff Loveness Talks Deleted Hope Story, Jennifer Coolidge's Potential Role and 'Avengers: The Kang Dynasty'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Strom, Marc (November 12, 2013). "Introducing the New Marvel Studios Logo". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. Goldberg, Matt (July 24, 2016). "Watch: Marvel Studios Debuts New Logo with Fanfare by Michael Giacchino". Collider. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016. Smith, Chris (June 23, 2023). "Secret Invasion timeline revealed – here's why it's so important". Boy Genius Report. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (April 2, 2023). "Marvel's 'Secret Invasion' Trailer: Samuel L. Jackson Returns As Nick Fury For "One Last Fight" As Premiere Date Is Revealed". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Edwards, Molly (November 10, 2023). "Where does The Marvels take place on the Marvel timeline?". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Bacon, Thomas (November 17, 2018). "Marvel Has Released An Official MCU Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 18, 2018. Retrieved November 20, 2018. "『キャプテン・マーベル』日本版予告解禁‼ 記憶を失ったミステリアスな女性ヒーロー<キャプテン・マーベル>登場‼ "アベンジャーズ"誕生の鍵を握るヒーローの始まりを描く". Marvel.com (in Japanese). November 1, 2018. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Franich, Darren (May 17, 2012). "'Avengers' timeline: Nick Fury's busy week". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 15, 2015. Retrieved November 18, 2018. Bacon, Thomas (April 27, 2019). "Every Previous Marvel Movie Visited In Avengers: Endgame". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Lussier, Germain (September 30, 2013). "'Captain America: The Winter Soldier' Takes Place Two Years After 'The Avengers'". /Film. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Tylwalk, Nick (May 4, 2017). "Where does Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 fit into the MCU timeline?". FanSided. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved July 13, 2017. Falconer, Daniel (August 10, 2022). "Is I Am Groot Canon and Where Does It Fit Into the MCU Timeline? Disney Plus Has the Answer..." GameRevolution. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. Sciretta, Peter (February 6, 2017). "'Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2': Everything We Learned While on Set". /Film. Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017. Erdmann, Kevin (September 8, 2023). "All 8 MCU Easter Eggs You Missed In I Am Groot Season 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 8, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2023. Rusak, Rotem (January 10, 2024). "Daredevil and Entire Defenders Saga Added to Official MCU Timeline on Disney+". Nerdist. Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Fink, Richard; Deegan, Jack (January 10, 2024). "Marvel's The Defenders Saga in Order: How to Watch Chronologically and by Release Date". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "New MCU Timelines Arrive on Disney+". Marvel.com. February 8, 2024. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Lussier, Germain (June 22, 2015). "65 Things We Learned on the Set of Marvel's 'Ant-Man'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Siegel, Lucas (October 12, 2015). "Mike Colter Reveals Where And When Marvel's Luke Cage Will Take Place". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2015. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Davis, Brandon (January 8, 2016). "Exclusive: Russo Brothers Explain Where Captain America: Civil War Starts". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2016. Grebey, James (July 9, 2021). "When Does Black Widow Fit into the MCU Timeline? It's Only Slightly More Complicated Than You Think". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2021. Breznican, Anthony (January 26, 2017). "Marvel confirms Andy Serkis for Black Panther, releases plot summary". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 28, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Keyes, Rob (April 18, 2017). "Spider-Man: Homecoming Producer Explains MCU Connections". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Bacon, Thomas (May 14, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Fixes Doctor Strange's MCU Timeline Problem". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Cargill, C. Robert [@Massawyrm] (September 14, 2022). "Stars Feb 2nd 2016 and ends late fall 2016, near the release date of the film" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 18, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022 – via Twitter. Strom, Marc (October 28, 2014). "Thor Brings Ragnarok to the Marvel Cinematic Universe in 2017". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 28, 2014. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 22, 2017). "'Thor: Ragnarok' Trailer Stomps Into Hall H With Battling Superheroes – Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 23, 2017. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Hornshaw, Phil; Owen, Phil (April 30, 2018). "'Ant-Man and the Wasp' Takes Place During 'Avengers: Infinity War'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2018. Keene, Allison (March 15, 2018). "'Avengers: Infinity War:' The Russo Brothers on Action, Tone, and Movies That Influenced the MCU Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Leadbeater, Alex (April 27, 2019). "Avengers: Endgame Creates Marvel's Biggest Timeline Challenge Yet (Seriously)". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019. Mancuso, Vinnie (January 29, 2021). "Here's Exactly When 'WandaVision' Takes Place in the MCU Timeline". Collider. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2021. Bacon, Thomas (November 26, 2022). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Messes Up MCU's Timeline On Disney+". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Miller, Liz Shannon (March 16, 2021). "Here's When 'The Falcon and the Winter Soldier' Takes Place in the MCU Timeline — and Why". Collider. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Dumaraog, Ana (July 4, 2019). "When Is Spider-Man: Far From Home Set? How Long After Endgame?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2019. Power, Tom (September 8, 2021). "Where does Eternals take place on the MCU timeline?". TechRadar. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Kim, Brendan (November 10, 2021). "Eternals Is At Same Time As Falcon & Winter Soldier In MCU Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Oddo, Marco Vito (December 17, 2021). "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Timeline Explained: When Does the Movie Take Place in the MCU?". Collider. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Outlaw, Kofi (June 23, 2022). "Marvel Releases Official Updated MCU Timeline". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022. Thomas, Rhys [@RhysThom2] (November 24, 2021). "It's 2024. For a period of time, we were going to set it two years out – which would make it 2025 – hence me messing with your minds about the timeline. But it's 1 year out" (Tweet). Archived from the original on November 25, 2021. Retrieved November 26, 2021 – via Twitter. Brail, Nathaniel (March 31, 2022). "Disney+ Reveals Moon Knight Takes Place After The Events of Hawkeye". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022. Freitag, Lee (February 1, 2023). "Marvel Confirms Black Panther 2's Position on the MCU Timeline". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Ayala, Nicolas (January 10, 2024). "When Echo Is Set In The MCU Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Bacon, Thomas (August 18, 2022). "She-Hulk Episode 1 MCU Easter Eggs & References". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Zogbi, Emily (June 10, 2022). "Disney+ Confirms Ms. Marvel's Place in the MCU's Official Timeline". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Bacon, Thomas (September 8, 2022). "Love & Thunder's MCU Timeline Placement Makes Zero Sense Now". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 8, 2022. Retrieved September 8, 2022. Bacon, Thomas (November 25, 2022). "Guardians Of The Galaxy Holiday Special Fixes Love & Thunder's MCU Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Vaux, Robert (February 19, 2023). "When Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania Takes Place in the MCU Timeline". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 20, 2023. Retrieved February 20, 2023. Davis, Brandon (April 22, 2021). "Guardians Of The Galaxy Director Finishes Holiday Special Script". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 22, 2021. Thompson, David (August 2, 2023). "Disney+ Reveals New MCU Timeline Order With Guardians of the Galaxy 3". The Direct. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Noronha, Remus (June 21, 2023). "'Secret Invasion' Episode 1 Recap: We Have a Situation". Collider. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Kleinman, Jake (May 5, 2022). "The Marvel Multiverse Explained: Earth-616 vs. Earth-838 vs. Earth-199999". Inverse. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved May 12, 2022. Hunt, James (June 8, 2021). "Where Loki Fits Into The MCU Timeline". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 1, 2021). "'What If...?' Actor Jeffrey Wright On Chadwick Boseman's Final "Mythic" Turn As T'Challa In MCU". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2021. Debruge, Peter (December 13, 2021). "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Review: Tom Holland Cleans Out the Cobwebs of Sprawling Franchise With Multiverse Super-Battle". Variety. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Sandwell, Ian (December 15, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home credits scene explained". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 16, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Russell, Bradley (May 5, 2022). "Why that number in Doctor Strange 2 got cheers in the cinema". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Gvozden, Dan (June 4, 2023). "The Definitive List of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Easter Eggs". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Johnston, Dais (October 23, 2023). "Kevin Feige Just Shattered MCU TV Canon". Inverse. Archived from the original on October 30, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Deckelmeier, Joe (January 3, 2024). "Echo Interview: Brad Winderbaum On Wilson Fisk's Importance & The Marvel Spotlight Banner". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 3, 2024. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Damshenas, Sam (July 28, 2022). "Michaela Coel confirmed to play iconic queer hero in Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Gay Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Fernandez, Jay A. (August 15, 2007). "Signing on to a writing co-op". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Ebert, Roger (June 12, 2008). "The Incredible Hulk (PG-13)". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Finke, Nikki (July 23, 2010). "Toldja! Marvel & Ruffalo Ink Hulk Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 15, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2010. Paige, Rachel (December 10, 2020). "Tatiana Maslany Stars in new 'She-Hulk' Comedy Series Coming to Disney+". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Carbone, Gina (April 12, 2019). "Yes! Chris Hemsworth Is Down For A Team Thor TV Show With Darryl". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Mancuso, Vinnie (July 20, 2019). "Marvel's 'What If?' Announces Massive Voice Cast of MCU Stars & Jeffrey Wright as The Watcher". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Freitag, Lee (September 12, 2022). "MCU Star Sebastian Stan Opens Up About Finally Joining the Thunderbolts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Robbins, Jason (November 23, 2021). "Hawkeye Movies in Order: How to Watch All of the Avenger's MCU Appearances So Far". Collider. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Theil, Michele (October 14, 2021). "Marvel's Hawkeye trailer confirms MCU character's return". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Anderton, Joe (October 22, 2022). "Florence Pugh has another Marvel movie lined up after Thunderbolts". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Knight, Rosie (October 13, 2022). "Abomination's final She-Hulk scene makes Marvel's least loved film weirdly relevant". Polygon. Archived from the original on October 30, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Busch, Jenna (June 13, 2022). "Would Mike Colter Return As Luke Cage In The MCU?". /Film. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (May 10, 2014). "First Poster and Synopsis for New ABC Series Marvel's Agent Carter". Collider. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Singh, Olivia (April 27, 2021). "'The Falcon and the Winter Soldier' star Emily VanCamp says the big reveal about her character 'made perfect sense'". Insider. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Campbell, Scott (August 1, 2021). "Here Are All the Marvel Actors Doing Voices in 'What If...?'". Collider. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2021. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (March 7, 2023). "Jon Bernthal Returning as The Punisher for 'Daredevil: Born Again'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Laverde, Jake (August 10, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD's Agent Coulson Has One Last Message for His Fans". Game Rant. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "Watch Marvel's Agents of SHIELD: Slingshot in Full!". ComingSoon.net. December 13, 2016. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Sarkisian, Jacob (September 12, 2022). "Brie Larson addresses MCU future after The Marvels". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Gallagher, Simon (August 25, 2021). "What If...? Episode 3 Cast Guide: Every New & Returning MCU Character". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Sharma, Abhishek (May 21, 2021). "Shirtless Drax Scenes Are a Big Reason Why Dave Bautista Is Retiring from the MCU". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 26, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Gallagher, Simon (August 18, 2021). "What If...? Episode 2 Cast Guide: Every New & Returning MCU Character". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Kroll, Justin (November 1, 2019). "'Ant-Man 3' Moving Forward With Director Peyton Reed". Variety. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Warner, Sam (September 2, 2022). "Daredevil: Born Again's Vincent D'Onofrio shares strange Kingpin tease". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 26, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Dockterman, Eliana (November 11, 2022). "How a Major Reveal About Valentina in Wakanda Forever Sets Up The Thunderbolts". Time. Archived from the original on November 24, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Otterson, Joe (September 25, 2020). "Samuel L. Jackson to Play Nick Fury in New Marvel Disney Plus Series (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. West, Amy (February 15, 2022). "Zoe Saldaña teases Guardians of the Galaxy 3's emotional story". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Lethbridge, Thomas (October 6, 2021). "What If...? Episode 9 Cast Guide: Every New & Returning MCU Character". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Dick, Jeremy (June 5, 2022). "I Am Groot Poster Reveals August Premiere Date". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Young, Kai (December 29, 2023). "Every MCU Actor Replaced In Marvel's What If...? Season 2". ScreenRant. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Snider, Mike (June 9, 2009). "First look: Mickey Rourke suits up as Whiplash for 'Iron Man 2'". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Wheeler, Andrew (March 28, 2014). "Gay Punchlines, LGBT Visibility and Marvel Studios' One-Shot 'All Hail The King'". ComicsAlliance. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Schreur, Brandon (December 22, 2023). "Disney Confirms Which MCU Stars Are Returning to Voice Characters in What If? Season 2". SuperHeroHype. Archived from the original on December 23, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Nolan, Liam (August 19, 2022). "Idris Elba Suggests Heimdall May Return to the MCU". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Parvanae (May 14, 2022). "Maria Hill: Every Time Cobie Smulders Played the Character in the MCU, Ranked". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. "Jon Favreau receives star on Hollywood Walk of Fame". CBS News. February 13, 2023. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Miller, Liz Shannon (December 10, 2020). "'Captain Marvel 2' Reveals New Release Date, Roles for Ms. Marvel and Monica Rambeau". Collider. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Kroll, Justin (September 30, 2020). "Newcomer Iman Vellani To Play Title Role In Marvel's 'Ms. Marvel' Series For Disney Plus". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Millheim, Russ (November 28, 2023). "Disney Plus' Marvel Zombies Show Gets Exciting Production Update from Star (Exclusive)". The Direct. Archived from the original on November 28, 2023. Retrieved November 28, 2023. Nemiroff, Perri (March 13, 2022). "Patton Oswalt Attempts to Follow Up His 'Parks and Rec' Boba Fett Prediction With One for the MCU". Collider. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Schaeffer, Sandy (December 14, 2021). "Guardians Of The Galaxy Villain Djimon Hounsou Would Like To Return To The MCU". /Film. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "Paul Rudd Set to Star in Marvel's Ant-Man". Marvel.com. December 19, 2013. Archived from the original on May 19, 2014. Retrieved December 19, 2013. Fischer, Russ; Sciretta, Peter (July 16, 2015). "'Ant-Man' Viral: Interviews With Scott Lang and Pym Technologies CEO Darren Cross". /Film. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Dockterman, Eliana (July 8, 2022). "All the Cameos in Thor: Love and Thunder". Time. Archived from the original on December 21, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Keane, Sean (June 9, 2021). "What to know about Loki's timeline before the Disney Plus series". CNET. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Adshead, Travis (November 25, 2022). "James Gunn Shares Behind the Scenes Image of Pom Klementieff in 'Guardians of the Galaxy Holiday Special'". Collider. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Aurthur, Kate (September 27, 2022). "Marvel Boss Kevin Feige Teases Elizabeth Olsen's MCU Return: 'Anything's Possible in the Multiverse'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Galuppo, Mia; Kit, Borys (July 22, 2022). "Spider-Man, X-Men and Zombies Wow Comic-Con at Marvel's First Animation Panel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Abbate, Jake (May 4, 2022). "Karen Gillan Celebrates Her Last Day on Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Leite, Marcelo (March 16, 2022). "Daredevil & All Marvel Crossovers: Every Character In Multiple Shows". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Speakman, Kimberlee (January 14, 2023). "Danai Gurira Hints at 'Black Panther' Spinoff Series Focused on Her Fan-Favorite Okoye Character". People. Archived from the original on January 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Fashingbauer Cooper, Gael (February 15, 2023). "Tom Holland Will Return as Spider-Man, Kevin Feige Says". CNET. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Dominguez, Noah (December 24, 2021). "Spider-Man Sits Down for Tense Daily Bugle Interview in New No Way Home Video". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 25, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (September 8, 2021). "Here's the Full Voice Cast for 'Marvel's What If...?' Episode 5". Collider. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Stolworthy, Jacob (August 10, 2019). "Gwyneth Paltrow had no idea Avengers: Endgame co-star Samuel L Jackson was in MCU, Marvel boss reveals". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Lethbridge, Thomas (September 15, 2021). "What If...? Episode 6 Cast Guide: Every New & Returning MCU Character". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Kroll, Justin (January 13, 2014). "Michael Douglas to Star as Hank Pym in Marvel's Ant-Man". Variety. Archived from the original on December 22, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2023. George, Joe (April 19, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Cast – Who's Back and New Characters". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Lussier, Germain (February 1, 2019). "A New Captain Marvel TV Spot Gives Us Hope for Marvel's Next Generation". io9. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2019. Miller, Liz Shannon (December 10, 2020). "'Captain Marvel 2' Reveals New Release Date, Roles for Ms. Marvel and Monica Rambeau". Collider. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 20, 2019). "Teyonah Parris Joins Elizabeth Olsen And Paul Bettany For 'WandaVision' As Monica Rambeau". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved February 3, 2020. Morse, Ben (November 21, 2016). "Angela Bassett Boards Marvel's "Black Panther"". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2022. "Terrence Howard cast in Iron Man!". GamesRadar+. October 12, 2006. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved December 3, 2016. Susman, Gary (October 14, 2008). "'Iron Man 2': Terrence Howard's out, Don Cheadle's in". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2012. Gelman, Vlada (December 10, 2020). "Secret Invasion, Marvel Series Starring Samuel L. Jackson, Coming to Disney+". TVLine. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Vincent, Maxance (July 22, 2022). "Bradley Cooper Returning As Rocket Before Guardians of the Galaxy 3". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. McMillan, Graeme (March 22, 2018). "Chris Evans to Retire as Captain America After 'Avengers 4'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Jorgensen, Tom (August 10, 2021). "What If...? Season 1, Episode 1 – Review". IGN. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Travis, Emlyn (July 9, 2021). "Scarlett Johansson's 'Black Widow' Story Is Right On Time, Even If It Took A Decade". MTV. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Shannon Miller, Liz (August 10, 2021). "'Marvel's What If...?' Review: Guaranteed Fun for the MCU Superfans". Collider. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. De Semlyen, Phil (February 22, 2016). "Martin Freeman's Captain America: Civil War character revealed". Empire. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (March 12, 2022). "Black Panther Star Martin Freeman Returns in Marvel's Secret Invasion". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Zogbi, Emily (March 13, 2022). "William Hurt – the MCU's Thunderbolt Ross – Dies at 71". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Galuppo, Mia (October 17, 2022). "Harrison Ford Joining 'Captain America 4'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Stellan Skarsgård klar för ny superhjältefilm". Expressen (in Swedish). March 3, 2011. Archived from the original on August 27, 2011. Retrieved March 3, 2011. The Avengers is the dream team of superheroes, a group consisting of among others Iron Man, the Hulk, Captain America and Thor. The film is planned to premier in 3D in May of next year. Stellan Skarsgård confirms to TT Spektra that he will play the same role as in the upcoming Thor: Doctor Selvig. Not much is yet known about the character apart from that Selvig is a scientist in New Mexico. Jones, Marcus (December 15, 2022). "Ryan Coogler and Letitia Wright on Pivoting 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' to a Mother-Daughter Story". IndieWire. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Jasper, Gavin (September 15, 2021). "What If...? Episode 6 Review: Killmonger to the Rescue". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Otterson, Joe (August 30, 2022). "Ben Kingsley to Reprise Trevor Slattery Role in Marvel Studios' Wonder Man Series at Disney+ (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 30, 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2022. Holtreman, Vic (August 22, 2013). "Iron Man 2: Set Visit, Story Details & Meet Howard Stark". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 1, 2009. Retrieved August 20, 2014. Vejvoda, Jim (June 4, 2009). "Iron Man 2 Sneak Peek". IGN. Archived from the original on December 22, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2009. Philbrick, Jami (June 21, 2011). "Dominic Cooper talks 'Captain America: The First Avenger'". IAmRogue.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Grubbs, Jefferson (January 6, 2015). "Dominic Cooper Is More than Iron Man's Dad". Bustle. Archived from the original on May 27, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Bowles, Scott (April 27, 2007). "First look: Downey forges a bond with 'Iron Man' role". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved March 23, 2013. Travis, Ben (August 10, 2021). "What If...? Review". Empire. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Singh, Olivia (May 7, 2022). "Benedict Cumberbatch says it's 'mortifying' acting out Doctor Strange's magic movements: 'I don't find it funny anymore'". Insider. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Trenholm, Richard; Keane, Sean (September 11, 2022). "'Secret Invasion' Trailer Brings Back Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury". CNET. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Whitten, Sarah (November 18, 2022). "Marvel didn't recast Chadwick Boseman in 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' — and it was the right move". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Finke, Nikki (May 16, 2009). "Exclusive: Chris Hemsworth is Thor". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 17, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2009. Bacon, Jess (June 28, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder's Tessa Thompson explains Valkyrie's big change". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Jasper, Gavin (January 16, 2021). "Marvel's WandaVision: Vision's Avengers and MCU History Recap". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on January 21, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Abrams, Simon (March 17, 2021). "'The Falcon and the Winter Soldier': What You Need to Know". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Odman, Sydney (September 14, 2022). "'She-Hulk' Actor Benedict Wong Talks Living in the "Wong Cinematic Universe"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Newby, Richard (February 18, 2023). "7 Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania Easter Eggs". Vulture. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Kroll, Justin (February 6, 2014). "Paul Bettany to Play the Vision in Marvel's 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 7, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. "Marvel Studios Begins Production on Marvel's 'Captain America: Civil War'". Marvel.com. May 7, 2015. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Simpson, George (September 26, 2016). "Benedict Cumberbatch's Doctor Strange Confirmed for Avengers: Infinity War". Daily Express. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2016. Dinh, Christine (April 12, 2019). "All of the Marvel Disney+ News Coming Out of The Walt Disney Company's Investor Day". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019. Owen, Phil (July 3, 2019). "Yes, That Was Who You Thought It Was at the End of 'Spider-Man: Far From Home'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Commandeur, Jordan (March 25, 2017). "Iron Fist: 15 Easter Eggs And References". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2017. Libbey, Dirk (May 15, 2017). "The Mistake James Gunn Admits He Left in Guardians of the Galaxy 2". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on May 15, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2017. Lovett, Jamie (May 14, 2017). "Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 Nearly Included A Deadpool Movie Reference". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2017. Leadbeater, Alex (April 27, 2017). "Kevin Feige Endorses Stan Lee MCU Cameo Fan Theory". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 28, 2017. Retrieved April 28, 2017. Vary, Adam B. (July 7, 2021). "How 'The Simpsons' Used 'Loki' to Invade the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Variety. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Elvy, Craig (September 30, 2019). "The One Person Who Connects The MCU & Marvel Netflix Together". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Fritz, Ben (May 7, 2012). "The Marvel Cinematic Universe". Herald & Review. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2013. Outlaw, Kofi (June 6, 2012). "Marvel's 'Avengers' Movie Universe: Was it Worth It?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved December 16, 2013. Mendelson, Scott (October 31, 2013). "Review: 'Thor: The Dark World' Is Flimsy But Functional". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Goldberg, Matt (August 2, 2011). "Editorial: What Did Marvel Disassemble to Make The Avengers?". Collider. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2014. VanDerWerff, Emily (May 12, 2016). "How Marvel films like Captain America: Civil War became the world's biggest TV show". Vox. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. McNamara, Mary (May 13, 2014). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' is a true television marvel". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 20, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Schwartz, Terri (May 2, 2014). "'Marvel's Agents of SHIELD' shaped up to be an incredible show". Zap2it. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Doran, Michael; McMillian, Graeme (January 7, 2015). "Ant-Man Teaser Trailer Point – Counterpoint: A Misstep or An Overreaction?". Newsarama. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved January 17, 2015. McMillian, Graeme (July 18, 2015). "Bring on the Bad Guys: Marvel Needs Better Villains Than 'Ant-Man's' Yellowjacket". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 19, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Priest, David (December 12, 2015). "How 'Jessica Jones' is rescuing Marvel from itself". CNET. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Kain, Erik (December 30, 2015). "'Jessica Jones' Shouldn't Be Part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe To Begin With". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Tassi, Paul (November 22, 2015). "'Jessica Jones' Makes Me Question The Point of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 25, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Francisco, Eric (January 5, 2016). "'Jessica Jones' Doesn't Need Season Two". Inverse. Archived from the original on January 25, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Sampson, Mike (April 5, 2016). "Here's Who Alfre Woodard Plays in 'Captain America: Civil War'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016. Erfanian, Sasha (April 6, 2016). "Alfre Woodard's Captain America: Civil War Character is Different Than Her Luke Cage Role". IGN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016. Anderton, Ethan (April 6, 2016). "Alfre Woodard Has a Role in 'Captain America: Civil War' But It's Not Tied to 'Luke Cage'". /Film. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2016. Newby, Richard (March 27, 2018). "'Captain Marvel' Looks to the Past to Ensure Marvel's Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018. Morgenstern, Joe (April 25, 2019). "'Avengers: Endgame' Review: A Marvelous Wrap". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2019. Bell, Breanna (October 4, 2019). "Martin Scorsese Compares Marvel Movies to Theme Parks: 'That's Not Cinema'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Scorsese, Martin (November 4, 2019). "Martin Scorsese: I Said Marvel Movies Aren't Cinema. Let Me Explain". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Dalton, Ben (October 13, 2019). "Martin Scorsese talks "theme park films", Netflix trade-off, de-ageing concerns". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Lattanzio, Ryan (November 4, 2019). "Martin Scorsese Defends Marvel Comments in New York Times Op-Ed: These Films Have No Mystery or Risk". IndieWire. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 29, 2019). "Turns Out The Most Despicable Thing About Francis Coppola's Superhero Movie Comments Was The Faulty Translation". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 29, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Lattanzio, Ryan (September 16, 2021). "Denis Villeneuve Says 'Cut and Paste' Marvel Movies Have 'Turned Us Into Zombies'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 22, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Crow, David (February 2, 2022). "Roland Emmerich: Marvel and Star Wars Are 'Ruining Our Industry'". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 6, 2019). "George Miller On March Start Date For Next Film, More 'Mad Max', Defending Superheroes As Cinema & The Search For Depth That Makes Movies Like 'Fury Road' Unforgettable'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved December 22, 2019. Scribner, Herb (November 7, 2023). "9 things to know before you see 'The Marvels'". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Salazar, Savannah (November 6, 2023). "Echo Will Introduce 'Marvel Spotlight' to Help Ease Your Canon Malaise". Vulture. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Rivera, Joshua (November 6, 2023). "Marvel quietly admits there's too much MCU homework". Polygon. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Meyers, Alyssa; Shevenock, Sarah (December 6, 2021). "Is Gen Z Too Cool for Marvel? Just 9% of Marvel Fans Identify as Part of the Generation". Morning Consult. Archived from the original on December 16, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Vilkomerson, Sara (April 8, 2014). "Inside 'The Amazing Spider-Man 2' – And Sony's strategy to supersize its franchise". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Shanley, Patrick (March 29, 2018). "Can Anyone Besides Marvel Make a Cinematic Universe Work?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018. Fritz, Ben (October 29, 2012). "'Justice League' aims for summer 2015 after Superman victory". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Breznican, Anthony (April 11, 2013). "'Man of Steel' will open door for more DC Comics superhero movies – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016. "'Batman V. Superman' Moves Release Date Again As Warner Bros Sets Its DC Game Plan". Deadline Hollywood. August 6, 2014. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Cornet, Roth (July 18, 2014). "Batman V Superman: Dawn Of Justice – Geoff Johns: 'No DC Movie/TV Crossover'". IGN. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014. Wieselman, Jarett (October 23, 2014). "The Man at the Center of DC's TV Multiverse". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved October 30, 2014. Kit, Borys (May 17, 2016). "'Batman v. Superman' Fallout: Warner Bros. Shakes Up Executive Roles (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Riesman, Abraham (September 29, 2017). "DC Rethinks Its Universe". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 1, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2017. Massoto, Erik (August 5, 2022). "New Warner Bros. CEO David Zaslav Announces 10-Year Plan For DC Movies". Collider. Archived from the original on August 5, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Kit, Borys (January 31, 2023). "DC Slate Unveiled: New Batman, Supergirl Movies, a Green Lantern TV Show, and More from James Gunn, Peter Safran". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Fischer, Russ (November 9, 2012). "Mark Millar Discusses His Role in Creating a Cohesive Marvel Universe For Fox". /Film. Archived from the original on August 11, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Collura, Scott (November 21, 2013). "Sony Chief Hints That the Spider-Man Movies Will Be Getting New Heroes and Villains". IGN. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Ryan, Mike (May 12, 2014). "'Fantastic Four' Writer-Producer Simon Kinberg on Shared Universes and the Challenges of an Origin Story". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016. Falk, Ben (July 23, 2015). "Bryan Singer Hints at 'X-Men'/'Fantastic Four' Crossover (Exclusive)". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 25, 2015. Morgenstern, Joe (June 6, 2019). "'Dark Phoenix' Review: Taking Flight, Then Crashing and Burning". The Wall Street Journal. 273 (132): A11. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Goldman, Eric (December 13, 2013). "The Amazing Spider-Man Spinoffs Venom and The Sinister Six Announced by Sony". IGN. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2013. "Sony Pictures Entertainment Brings Marvel Studios into The Amazing World of Spider-Man". Marvel.com. February 9, 2015. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Graser, Marc; Lang, Brent (February 10, 2015). "Spider-Man: How Sony, Marvel Will Benefit from Unique Deal (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Sneider, Jeff (November 10, 2015). "17 Movies Shaken by Sony Hack, From 'The Interview' to 'Spectre' to 'Steve Jobs'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 23, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2016. Kit, Borys (March 4, 2016). "'Spider-Man' Spinoff 'Venom' Revived at Sony (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Kit, Borys (March 16, 2017). "'Spider-Man' Spinoff 'Venom' Gets a Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2017. Kit, Borys (March 22, 2017). "'Spider-Man' Spinoff: 'Thor' Writer Tackling Silver Sable, Black Cat Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2017. Davis, Erik (March 28, 2017). "Exclusive Interview: 'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Director Jon Watts On Easter Eggs, Iron Man, John Hughes And More". Fandango. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2017. Kim, Brendan (August 24, 2021). "Sony's Spider-Man Universe Is Official Title For Non-MCU Marvel Movies". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Britt, Ryan (October 1, 2021). "Unpacking the Venom: Let There Be Carnage Post-Credits Scene". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Sandwell, Ian (December 15, 2021). "Spider-Man: No Way Home credits scene explained". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 16, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2022. Couch, Aaron (December 29, 2021). "How Spider-Man: No Way Home Was "Shaped" by Its Secret Stars". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2022. Meslow, Scott (February 11, 2015). "When franchises fail: Saying goodbye to the not-so-Amazing Spider-Man". The Week. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. Mendelson, Scott (May 13, 2014). "The Price Sony Paid For Rebooting 'Spider-Man'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. "First-of-Its-Kind Course to Examine 'Universe' of Cinematic Storytelling, Perspectives in Ongoing Marvel Films". University of Baltimore. September 16, 2014. Archived from the original on September 23, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2014. Linshi, Jack (September 24, 2014). "University of Baltimore to Offer Course on Marvel Movies". Time. Archived from the original on May 16, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. Goldman, Eric (April 12, 2013). "Disneyland Introduces Their First Marvel Exhibit with Iron Man Tech". IGN. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2013. Lesnick, Silas (October 25, 2013). "CS Explores Disneyland's Thor: The Dark World Attraction, Treasures of Asgard". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2013. Slater, Shawn (February 10, 2014). "Captain America Arrives at Disneyland Park in Anaheim March 7". Disney Parks Blog. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014. Brown, Tracy; Martens, Todd (February 15, 2017). "Disney sets opening date for Guardians of the Galaxy attraction at California Adventure". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved February 15, 2017. McNary, Dave (March 20, 2018). "Marvel-Themed Lands Coming to Three Disney Parks". Variety. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Lussier, Germain (May 25, 2017). "The New Guardians of the Galaxy Ride Exists in Its Own Unique Marvel Universe". io9. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017. Bonomolo, Cameron (April 3, 2020). "Avengers Campus: Thanos Snap Never Happened in Disney Parks Version of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Chu, Karen (October 8, 2013). "Hong Kong Disneyland to Open 'Iron Man' Experience in 2016". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Read-Dominguez, Jennifer (January 16, 2017). "First look: Iron Man Experience opens in Disneyland Hong Kong – complete with Iron Girls". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Davis, Brandon (November 8, 2018). "A Look Inside of Hong Kong Disney's Iron Man Experience Ride". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 25, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. "Iron Man Experience – Presented by AIA". Hong Kong Disneyland. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Smith, Thomas (November 11, 2016). "Opening Date Set for Iron Man Experience, Hong Kong Disneyland's Marvel-Themed Ride". Disney Parks Blog. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved March 21, 2018. Glover, Erin (March 20, 2018). "Avengers and Other Super Heroes to Assemble in New Themed Areas at Disneyland Resort, Disneyland Paris and Hong Kong Disneyland". Disney Parks Blog. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018. Nolfi, Joel (February 14, 2018). "Disney unveils new Ant-Man and the Wasp ride images". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018. Frater, Patrick (July 25, 2018). "'Ant-Man and the Wasp' Theme Park Ride Heads to Hong Kong Disneyland". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. "Ant-Man and The Wasp: Nano Battle! set to open on March 31, 2019". Hong Kong Disneyland. January 8, 2019. Archived from the original on November 4, 2019. Retrieved January 8, 2019. Ching, Albert (July 23, 2016). "SDCC: Marvel Studios Reveals Latest Phase 3 Secrets". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. Marston, George (July 23, 2016). "Star-Lord's Father Revealed ... James Gunn Explains in Detail". Newsarama. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. Gunn, James (January 31, 2017). "I directed the actors and consulted on all aspects of the ride. Kevin Feige and I just rode it last week and it was an absolute blast". Facebook. Retrieved February 1, 2017. Whitbrook, James (January 19, 2021). "Watch Tom Holland Thwip Around Disneyland's New Spider-Man Ride". io9. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. "Chris Waitt Portfolio – Web Slingers: A Spider-Man Adventure". ChrisWaitt.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. Graves, Sabina (June 20, 2023). "Get in Line for Marvel Studios' Rogers: The Musical at Disney Parks". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Perine, Aaron (November 20, 2021). "Disney Announces New Avengers Campus Opening Date". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved July 1, 2022. Paige, Rachel (July 8, 2021). "Science and Cuisine Collide with 'Avengers: Quantum Encounter' Dining Experience Aboard the Disney Wish". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Tribou, Richard (February 3, 2022). "Disney Cruise Line delays debut of Disney Wish at Port Canaveral". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Goslin, Austen (October 26, 2021). "Disney made a new Avengers show but you'll have to take a cruise to see it". Polygon. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Sternberg, Sabrina (October 26, 2021). "Brie Larson, Paul Rudd, Anthony Mackie and More to Star in Marvel Dining Adventure on Disney Wish Cruise Ship". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2021. Paige, Rachel (June 16, 2022). "Ms. Marvel Boards the Disney Wish and Joins 'Avengers: Quantum Encounter'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (April 7, 2022). "Ant-Man Star Paul Rudd Appears in New Photo for Avengers: Quantum Encounter". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. "Chris Waitt Portfolio – Avengers: Quantum Encounter". ChrisWaitt.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 8, 2022. Libbey, Dirk (July 2, 2022). "The Marvels' Director Actually Teamed Up With Brie Larson For A Disney Project Ahead Of Her MCU Debut". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "Disney Treasure Sets Sail with Worlds of Marvel Restaurant". Marvel.com. September 5, 2023. Archived from the original on September 16, 2023. Retrieved September 17, 2023. Sacks, Ethan (May 25, 2014). "Exclusive: Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N exhibit fan-tastic blend of props, high-tech". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 25, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2014. Towers, Andrea (May 30, 2014). "Marvel's 'Avengers' S.T.A.T.I.O.N. exhibit: We took the tour (and chatted with Stan Lee)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2014. Nelson, Craig (October 6, 2015). "10 Essential Exhibits at Marvel's Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N." NewYork.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2015. Hyo-won, Lee (April 17, 2015). "South Korea Hypes Up for 'Avengers: Age of Ultron'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2016. Victory Hill Exhibitions (June 25, 2016). "Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. Immersive Attraction Opens in Las Vegas". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2016. Ouellette, Jennifer (June 24, 2016). "Explore the Science of The Avengers with This Sneak Peek into a New Vegas Exhibit". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2016. "'Marvel: Creating The Cinematic Universe' Comes To GOMA". Queensland Gallery of Modern Art. October 31, 2016. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Stafford, Andrew (May 16, 2017). "Marvel: Creating the Cinematic Universe at GOMA sets the superheroes among us". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on March 18, 2024. Retrieved March 28, 2024. Whitbrook, James (October 3, 2019). "Test Out Shuri's Latest Gadgets in ILM's New Marvel VR Experience, Avengers: Damage Control". io9. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2019. Davis, Brandon (October 15, 2019). "Avengers: Damage Control Recasts James Spader's Ultron". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Paige, Rachel (November 18, 2019). "'Avengers: Damage Control' Extended: Team Up to Fight Alongside Earth's Mightiest Heroes". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 18, 2019. "Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe TV Special Premieres March 18 on ABC". Marvel.com. February 27, 2014. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. Breznican, Anthony (March 18, 2014). "'Avengers: Age of Ultron': Marvel reveals new Scarlet Witch and Quicksilver concept art". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2021. Lowry, Brian (March 16, 2014). "TV Review: 'Marvel Studios: Assembling a Universe'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved March 18, 2014. Fowler, Matt (May 30, 2014). "Marvel's Agents of SHIELD Blu-ray And DVD Details". IGN. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. Connelly, Brendon (September 11, 2014). "Exclusive! Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Showrunner Talks Interconnection With Avengers: Age Of Ultron, Agent Carter, & Marvel Cinematic Universe". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2014. Cavanaugh, Patrick (October 9, 2014). "Marvel to Celebrate 75 Years With 1-Hour Primetime Special on ABC". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved October 9, 2014. Goldman, Eric (November 4, 2014). "Looking Back at How The Marvel Age Began". IGN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Lowry, Brian (November 4, 2014). "TV Review: 'Marvel, 75 Years: From Pulp to Pop!'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Gelman, Samuel (November 11, 2019). "Expanding the Universe: Disney+ Offering New Look at Marvel Original Series". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019. Davis, Brandon (December 23, 2020). "Marvel Studios Announces New Year's 2021 Musical Show". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Marnell, Blair (December 31, 2020). "Watch Marvel Studios' New Year's Eve Musical Medley". Superhero Hype. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 21, 2021). "'Shang-Chi' Heading Into Homes On November 12, Which Bob Chapek Announces As "Disney+ Day"; Here's Lineup Of Content". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Spangler, Todd (November 8, 2021). "Disney Plus Priced at $1.99 for First Month as Part of Company-Wide 'Disney Plus Day' Promotions". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. Paige, Rachel (December 15, 2020). "Marvel Studios Announces New Series Debuting Exclusively on Disney+". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Dela Paz, Maggie (May 18, 2021). "Disney+ June 2021 Schedule: Movies and TV Titles Revealed". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Ridgely, Charlie (June 16, 2021). "Disney+: Every Movie and TV Show Arriving in July 2021". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Paige, Rachel (February 16, 2021). "Marvel Studios Announces Assembled, a Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021. "Now Streaming on Disney+: 'Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever'". Marvel.com. February 28, 2023. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Andreeva, Nellie (May 18, 2023). "Disney Removes Dozens Of Series From Disney+ & Hulu, Including 'Big Shot', 'Willow', 'Y' & 'Dollface'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Marvel Studios Casting Call: Super Women of the MCU". Marvel.com. June 10, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. "Everything New You Can Stream on Disney+ in March 2023". D23. February 16, 2023. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Perine, Aaron (March 8, 2023). "Marvel Releases MPower Disney+ Documentary Series Trailer". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. "Original Series 'MPower' is Now Streaming on Disney+". Marvel.com. March 8, 2023. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Young, Kai (March 16, 2023). "The MCU's Latest Streaming Series Is An Insult To An Original Avenger". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Paige, Rachel (March 16, 2023). "MPower: Mariel and Cisely Saldaña Talk Their Behind-the-Scenes Work on the Series". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Conagelo, BJ (March 8, 2023). "The Women Of The MCU Deserve Your Attention In MPower, Now On Disney+". /Film. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Watson, Philip (March 8, 2023). "MPower A New Disney+ Series Debuts Today, Highlighting The Mightiest Women In Marvel". CGMagazine. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Cowen, Trace William (September 9, 2015). "Earn a PhD in Marvel With the Official 'Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe' Series". Complex. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015. "Preview: Guidebook To The Marvel Cinematic Universe – Marvel's Thor #1". Comic Book Resources. December 17, 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. "Preview: Guidebook To The Marvel Cinematic Universe – Marvel's Captain America: The First Avenger #1". Comic Book Resources. January 21, 2016. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. Mueller, Matthew (November 6, 2018). "Marvel Studios' Kevin Feige Talks 'The First Ten Years' In New Collectors Hardcover". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 24, 2018. Dinh, Christine (May 17, 2021). "The Definitive Story of How Marvel Studios Created the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Lenker, Maureen Lee (April 26, 2023). "MCU: The Reign of Marvel Studios takes you behind the scenes of the Marvel Cinematic Universe — see the cover". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved April 26, 2023. Pearson, Ben (September 18, 2023). "MCU Authors On Crafting The Definitive Marvel Studios History And How The MCU Can Bounce Back [Exclusive Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Perine, Aaron (February 16, 2024). "Marvel Studios Announces MCU Concept Art Book". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2024. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Geddes, Ryan (March 20, 2008). "Iron Man Film Cast To Voice Game". IGN. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Burg, Dustin (April 9, 2008). "The Incredible Hulk features incredible voice talent". Engadget. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Iron Man 2". Game Informer. Archived from the original on May 9, 2010. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Iron Man". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Hands-On Mobile And Marvel Entertainment Bring Iron Man To Mobile". IGN. April 30, 2008. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Provo, Frank (June 11, 2008). "The Incredible Hulk Review". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "The Incredible Hulk Nintendo DS". Nintendo. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "The Incredible Hulk Smashes onto Mobile Phone Worldwide". IGN. June 13, 2008. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Devries, Jack (May 21, 2010). "Iron Man 2 Review (Wii)". IGN. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Iron Man 2". IGN. Archived from the original on July 1, 2012. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Buchanan, Levi (May 10, 2010). "Iron Man 2 iPad Review". IGN. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Iron Man 2". BlackBerry World. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2017. "Thor: God of Thunder". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 26, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Captain America: Super Soldier". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Nouch, James (May 15, 2012). "The Avengers". Pocket Gamer. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2020. Davis, Justin (April 30, 2013). "Iron Man 3 – The Official Game Review". IGN. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Thor: The Dark World – The Official Game". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. "Captain America: The Winter Soldier – The Official Game". IGN. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Dornbush, Jonathon (October 12, 2015). "Lego Marvel's Avengers to include Phase 2, Agent Carter, more content". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 29, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "LEGO® Marvel's Avengers™: A brand new action-packed, Super Hero adventure out now for Mac!". Feral Interactive. March 10, 2016. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016. "Sony Pictures Virtual Reality Launches 'Spider-Man™: Homecoming' Experience". Sony Pictures. June 16, 2017. Archived from the original on June 23, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2020. "Sony Pictures Launches Spider-Man™: Far From Home, Virtual Reality". Sony Pictures. June 25, 2019. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Schultz, E.J. (February 7, 2016). "The Strategy Behind Coke's Marvel Super Bowl Ad". Ad Age. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. "A Mini Marvel". Luma Pictures. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016. Busch, Anita (February 9, 2016). "Super Bowl: 'Bourne' Explodes On Social Media But Isn't The 'Captain'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Giardina, Carolyn (February 7, 2017). "The Jungle Book Takes Top Visual Effects Society Honors". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Ferme, Antonio (June 30, 2021). "Loki and Bart Simpson Team Up in Marvel-'Simpsons' Crossover Short on Disney Plus". Variety. Archived from the original on June 30, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Schulman, Michael (June 5, 2023). "How the Marvel Cinematic Universe Swallowed Hollywood". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Marvel Cinematic Universe on Marvel Cinematic Universe Wiki, an external wiki MCU timeline: How to watch all 23 Marvel movies in the perfect order Marvel Cinematic Universe on Marvel Database, a Marvel Comics wiki Portals:  Film  Television  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics