Gwendolyne Maxine "Gwen" Stacy is a character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics, usually as a supporting character in those featuring Spider-Man. A college student and the daughter of George and Helen Stacy, she is the first romantic interest for Peter following his high school graduation before she is murdered by the Green Goblin (Norman Osborn). Her death has haunted Peter ever since, and stories published long afterwards indicate she still holds a special place in his heart. Gwen is posthumously subjected to numerous cloning experiments by her former professor Miles Warren, Peter's clone Ben Reilly, and an A.I. of Harry Osborn, the latter resulting in the creation of the Kindreds, and Ben briefly resurrecting Gwen in "Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy" (2016–2017), with the embodiment of Death herself confirming in Ben Reilly: The Scarlet Spider (2017–2018) that all clones Ben created of deceased people had their souls intact on being brought back, while clones of living people (like Ben himself) had unique souls of their own. In the alternate realities of Ultimate Marvel and Spider-Gwen, a still-living Gwen respectively becomes their universe's versions of Carnage and Spider-Woman. The character was portrayed by Bryce Dallas Howard in Spider-Man 3 (2007) and by Emma Stone in The Amazing Spider-Man film series (2012–2014) and Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023; archive footage). A multiverse Spider-Gwen is voiced by Hailee Steinfeld in the 2018 animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse and its sequel Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023), and will reprise the role in Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse (TBA) and Spider-Woman (TBA). Created by writer Stan Lee and artist Steve Ditko, Gwen Stacy first appeared in The Amazing Spider-Man #31 (December 1965). Stan Lee claimed that his wife, Joan, was the inspiration for Gwen. In her initial appearances, Peter Parker meets Gwen while both are studying as undergraduates at Empire State University, but with Aunt May in the hospital, Peter is troubled and ignores her advances. She dates both Flash Thompson and Harry Osborn to make Peter jealous. Gradually, however, a romance develops; Gwen, a science major, appreciates Peter's intellect. Their relationship begins almost immediately after Peter stops going out with Mary Jane Watson, whom he begins to see as shallow and self-absorbed.[volume & issue needed] Later issues introduce Gwen's father, NYPD Captain George Stacy, as well as her mother Helen Stacy and her uncle Arthur Stacy. Though her father is both fond of Peter and supportive of his alter-ego Spider-Man, his death strains Peter's relationship with Gwen after he is killed by falling debris during a battle involving Spider-Man and Doctor Octopus. Gwen blames Spider-Man for his death, and leaves for Europe to cope with her loss. She wants Peter to ask her to marry him and convince her to stay, but his guilt stops him from proposing. Gwen's feelings for Peter eventually prompt her to return to New York, and their relationship is rekindled. According to Lee, who scripted all of the stories featuring Gwen Stacy up to this point, the original intent was for Gwen Stacy to be Spider-Man's central love interest. However, Mary Jane Watson's unexpected popularity with readers after her debut changed the course of the plan as fans liked Mary Jane more and demanded she be Peter Parker's main love interest instead, and that "no matter how we [i.e. Lee and his artist/co-plotter collaborators] wrote it, Mary Jane always seemed more interesting!" Gerry Conway and Roy Thomas succeeded Stan Lee as writer and editor, respectively, of The Amazing Spider-Man. Together with inker John Romita, Sr., they came to the decision to have Gwen Stacy killed. It was Romita who first suggested the idea, during a plotting session with Conway when Romita was still penciller on The Amazing Spider-Man. Conway later said his contribution to the decision was motivated by a desire to bring Mary Jane Watson to the forefront, as he shared Lee's feeling that she was a more interesting character than Gwen Stacy: "[Mary Jane] hadn't lost the edge that made her an interesting character. Gwen didn't have an edge. She was just a nice person". In The Amazing Spider-Man #121 ("Night Gwen Stacy Died", June 1973), the Green Goblin kidnaps Gwen Stacy and throws her off a bridge (depicted as the Brooklyn Bridge but described in the text as the George Washington Bridge). Spider-Man shoots a web strand at Gwen's legs and catches her, but her neck is broken by the whiplash from her sudden stop. In Superior Spider-Man #3, Peter briefly reunites with Gwen and her father in the afterlife, along with all his other lost loved ones, while in Doctor Octopus's failing body. Peter apologizes to them both for failing them but neither hold Peter accountable with Gwen even saying that “it worked out” because they were “together” and kissed him on the cheek. Both the decision to kill Gwen and the method in which Marvel implemented it remain controversial among fans because some believe that Peter himself was the one who caused her death. The death became a pivotal point in both Spider-Man's history and in American comic books in general. Many point to Gwen's death as the end of the Silver Age of Comics. Before her death, except possibly as part of an origin story, superheroes did not fail so catastrophically, nor did the hero's loved ones die so suddenly and without warning. A note on the letters page of The Amazing Spider-Man #125 states: "It saddens us to say that the whiplash effect she underwent when Spidey's webbing stopped her so suddenly was, in fact, what killed her". The comic book Civil War: Casualties of War: Captain America/Iron Man (2007) concurred that the proximate cause of death was the sudden stop during a high-speed fall. An issue of Peter Parker/Spider-Man revisits the issue, and further confirms Gwen died of a broken neck due to the use of the webbing. On the other hand, in the 1987 edition of the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe, Gwen's death is attributed to the fall, not to Spider-Man's webbing, though the listed cause of death is still technically true – if she hadn't fallen from the bridge, the event that caused her death couldn't have happened. In his book The Physics of Superheroes, physicist James Kakalios confirms that, consistent with Newton's laws of motion, the sudden stop would have killed Gwen Stacy. Within the Marvel Comics, Gwen Stacy's death has enormous repercussions. Mary Jane Watson feels the loss of Gwen deeply and becomes a more mature, compassionate person. Gwen's death also draws Peter and Mary Jane into a closer friendship, and eventually to romance.[volume & issue needed] Miles Warren, one of Gwen's professors, was secretly in love with her. Following her death, Warren goes insane and adopts the persona of the Jackal. In the fourth and final issue of the miniseries Marvels (April 1994), photographer Phil Sheldon befriends Gwen Stacy, who has absolved Spider-Man of any blame for her father's death. Gwen's simple faith in heroes convinces Sheldon of the purpose of the "Marvels" (i.e., superheroes)—to protect innocents such as Gwen. He resolves to write a book to praise the heroes and what they should mean to humanity. When the Green Goblin kidnaps Gwen and holds her hostage to bait Spider-Man, Sheldon frantically follows the resulting chase in a taxi and witnesses her death. While it is reported that she died from the shock of the fall, Sheldon thinks it looks like something else. Sheldon's faith in the Marvels is shattered. Following the publication of The Amazing Spider-Man #121, Stan Lee (who had since become Marvel's publisher) was frequently criticized by fans during his public appearances for killing off Gwen Stacy. Lee, who had also found the character's death objectionable, insisted that Conway write a story bringing her back. Conway strongly objected since he felt any sort of resurrection would break the plausibility of the stories, but ultimately gave in under the condition that after reviving Gwen, he could write her out of the book as soon as he wanted. He decided that cloning would be the best means to bring the character back. In the resulting story, written approximately two years after the story of Gwen Stacy's death, "Gwen" reappears, perfectly healthy but with no memory of the time since her death. This story, published in Amazing Spider-Man #144 (May 1975), initiated the original Clone Saga. At the end of that story, Gwen's clone, a creation of Spider-Man villain the Jackal, leaves to find a new life for herself, coming to accept that she is not really the same person who had a relationship with Peter Parker. In the 1988 crossover "The Evolutionary War", the High Evolutionary, who had once been Miles Warren's teacher, captures Gwen's clone. He determines that Warren had actually not perfected the process, and instead injected a young woman with a genetic virus carrying Gwen's DNA, turning her into a copy of Gwen. After a subsequent altercation of Spider-Man and the Young Gods against the High Evolutionary's Purifiers, this woman is purged of the virus by the Young Goddess Daydreamer. This is later retconned, with the High Evolutionary stating that Warren had in fact succeeded in perfecting his own cloning technique, and Daydreamer had accidentally given the Gwen clone a false new life under the name of Joyce Delaney. During the second "Clone Saga", Joyce, now married to a clone of Professor Warren named Warren Miles, sees a copy of Peter Parker's book of Spider-Man photos, Webs, and remembers (to an extent) her real history. She returns to New York City, but after helping Spider-Man and Scarlet Spider fight the Jackal, she again disappears from Spider-Man's life. She makes herself a new life in London, but before she is murdered by the Gwen Stacy clone known as Abby-L shows signs of clone degeneration. Another Gwen clone appears in The Amazing Spider-Man #399 (March 1995). This clone believes she is the real Gwen. She dies from clone degeneration in Spider-Man #56 (March 1995), the next issue of the story arc. A further Gwen clone appears in the "Sibling Rivalry" crossover storyline between Superior Spider-Man Team-Up and Scarlet Spider. She joins the Jackal (alongside Carrion and a regular Miles Warren clone) in capturing Superior Spider-Man and Kaine. She is sympathetic towards "Peter" and Kaine, but at the same time utterly loyal to the Jackal. When the Spiders break free, Superior Spider-Man disarms and attempts to kill her, but is stopped by Kaine. When the Jackal's lab is engulfed in flames, Kaine offers to save her, but she refuses, and is seemingly consumed by the fire. The story arc "Sins Past" by J. Michael Straczynski apparently reveals that Gwen Stacy had an affair with Norman Osborn and fell pregnant with twins, a girl and a boy, to whom she gave birth while in France, and named Sarah and Gabriel Stacy, respectively. Gwen vowed to raise the twins with Peter Parker and refused to allow Norman access—an event which precipitated Norman's decision to kill her. By the time that Peter and his (then-considered-to-be) wife, Mary Jane Watson-Parker, discovered the twins' existence, they were grown to adult proportions, despite the relatively "short" time since Gwen's death, due to the genetic effects of their father's "goblin formula". Sarah and Gabriel revealed their existence to Peter, with threats and as masked figures, after their father was publicly exposed as the Green Goblin—sending to Peter a page of an unsent letter from Gwen "from a time when she traveled to Europe between college semesters"—which revealed her pregnancy; an analysis of the letter by police detective Lamont revealed handwriting impressions of a second page—saying that she had given birth, with the twins born fully developed after only seven month's gestation. When Peter as Spider-Man went a genetics lab, where he would prove Gwen's maternity of the twins, Sarah confronted him, and Spider-Man unmasked Sarah—finding her to be "a dead ringer for Gwen". Gwen Stacy herself, however, only appears in this story arc in flashback, as Mary Jane explained to Peter that she knew about Gwen's illegitimate offspring and Norman's paternity thereof because she overheard Gwen and Norman arguing over custody of the children—a secret of Gwen's that Mary Jane had "promised to keep all these years". Sarah later signed up with Interpol, while Gabriel later become the Gray Goblin. Marvel would later retcon this revelation in the pages of Nick Spencer's run on Amazing Spider-Man during the Sinister War event. Norman Osborn arrives at the safe house of Gabriel and Sarah in Paris, where an Artificial Intelligence back-up copy of his son Harry reveals to Norman that he never truly fathered the twins, and that he never had a sexual encounter with Gwen Stacy. The whole plan was to convince him he had the heirs he always wanted, so AI Harry hypnotized Norman and Mary Jane Watson with the help of Mysterio and the Chameleon, while Mendel Stromm created the mutated twins in a lab (this explains their rapid aging, as it's not truly related to Osborn's Goblin serum). Thus, this is all an elaborate scheme of Harry's to torment both his father and Peter. In the "Clone Conspiracy" storyline, a flashback revealed that Gwen Stacy was conscious during Spider-Man and Green Goblin's battle on the bridge, and as she was falling to her death. She overheard their conversation and discovered Peter is Spider-Man in the process. She was angry at Peter for keeping this secret and for his involvement in her father's death. This flashback confirms the Green Goblin's real motivations for the murder: he clearly states that Gwen "is just a pawn", contradicting the whole core of Sins Past in which Osborn wanted to kill her to keep the twins with him and silence her forever. The whole "Stacy-Osborn" affair was retconned during the Sinister War event, 17 years later. In the present, Gwen is revived by the Jackal—who here would later be revealed to be a re-animated Ben Reilly (Spider-Man's main clone)—with his clones. The Jackal tells her she is not a clone but the real Gwen, who was harvested and reanimated from her remains and still has all her memories, including those of her death. The Jackal offers Gwen the opportunity to be his business partner as he tries to change the world with his new technology. Gwen is hesitant about this new life at first but accepts it when the Jackal shows that he has reanimated her father, who is in much better health than he was before he died. When Spider-Man arrives at the incorporation and discovers the Jackal's experiments, he is surprised by Gwen's presence and notes that unlike the other people the Jackal revived, who were all clones, Gwen does not trigger his spider sense, making him wonder if she was the real one. He is attacked by the "reborn" Doctor Octopus before he can question the issue further. After the Jackal breaks up the fight and shows Spider-Man around the New U, George Stacy recognizes something off about Gwen's face and points his gun at her. It is revealed that this Gwen was actually her Earth-65 counterpart Spider-Woman who assists Spider-Man in escaping. The real Gwen is kidnapped by Kaine and taken to Parker Industries to be studied. Kaine reveals that he and Spider-Woman came to this Earth to assist Spider-Man because they saw that Spider-Man agreeing with the Jackal's offer on other worlds always results in a global disaster. Rhino and the second Electro are sent to retrieve Gwen after attacking the staff, but Gwen tells them to take Kaine with him too because his condition could help with Jackal's experiments. Anna Maria Marconi also volunteers to come with because she has studied both Kaine and the drug. When Spider-Man is taken to Haven, he catches up with Gwen in the household in the facility, where she tries to convince him to support New U Technologies. Peter still has a hard time believing she is the real Gwen given his other experiences with clones. Gwen tries justifying her existence by telling Peter her memories, including how she overheard the Green Goblin talking to Spider-Man before her death. Peter thinks she died hating him, but Gwen said that she did not hate him, but rather died feeling betrayed. Peter again still has doubts towards Gwen not being a clone. She tries kissing him, to no avail which only pushes him to put the mask back on. Gwen witnesses Jackal order his cloned villains to kill Spider-Man and decides to help Peter. Doctor Octopus pulls a switch that activates the Carrion Virus in all of the revived, including Gwen and George, and causes them to start rapidly decaying. After Gwen's father deteriorates in her arms, she assists Spider-Man by helping him get to the lab. When the cloned villains get to the lab doors, Gwen locks Spider-Man inside the lab and sacrifices herself to give him more time. Following the Carrion Virus being thwarted, Spider-Man and Anna check the building and see that Gwen has been reduced to dust. In the sequel ongoing series Ben Reilly: The Scarlet Spider, the embodiment of Death herself confirms that all clones Ben created of deceased people had their souls intact on being brought back, while clones of living people (like Ben himself) had unique souls of their own, making Gwen's revival by him a legitimate resurrection. During the "Last Remains" storyline, Kindred later visited the cemetery where Gwen Stacy and George Stacy were buried. He exhumed their bodies and placed them around the table at his hideout while awaiting for Spider-Man to find him. When Spider-Man finally confronts Kindred, Gwen and George's corpses were sat around a dinner table alongside the exhumed bodies of Ben Parker, Flash Thompson, J. Jonah Jameson Sr., Jean DeWolff, and Marla Jameson. In the Judgment Day crossover event, the Celestial known as the Progenitor is resurrected and gives humanity 24 hours to justify their existence and judges each human individually. The Progenitor appears to Peter in the form of Gwen, who watches him as he spends the day helping his friends and loved ones. When he shows visible discomfort over Peter working for Norman Osborn, Peter tells him he has a responsibility to help Norman and keep him from becoming the Green Goblin again. The Progenitor deems Peter as worthy and rewards him by briefly resurrecting the real Gwen to give them one last moment together. Norman witnesses their reunion but brushes it aside as it is revealed the Progenitor also appeared to him as Gwen. In the two-issue mini-series X-Universe, which details what happened to the rest of the Marvel Universe during the "Age of Apocalypse" storyline, the Green Goblin never killed Gwen Stacy. Instead, she became the bodyguard of Donald Blake, who, in this reality, had never become the Mighty Thor. Sometime later in the mainstream universe in X-Man #37, the Age of Apocalypse version of Gwen is pulled from her reality to the mainstream Earth's George Washington Bridge, much to Spider-Man's shock. In the Heroes Reborn event, a change in the timeline results in a continuity in which the Squadron Supreme are Earth's mightiest heroes while the Avengers never came to be. In this reality, Gwen was inspired by her mother to become a psychiatrist at Ravencroft Asylum. After the death of the Falcon (which mirrors how Gwen died in the main continuity), she was trained by Nighthawk and became the vigilante known as Nightbird. She briefly dated Flash Thompson for a time, but her refusal to be with him drove him to be insane and become the second Jackal. She also appears to have a close relationship with Misty Knight. In the reality seen in the "House of M" storyline, in which the Scarlet Witch alters reality to make mutants the ruling class over humans, Gwen was never killed. Instead, she married Peter Parker, and the couple had a young son. She had become a scientist, a savvy businesswoman, and a peace activist – and had a decidedly hostile relationship with chemical weapon developer Norman Osborn. Mary Jane Watson, a popular actress in this reality, played Gwen Stacy in the film adaptation of Spider-Man's life story. Gwen and her father read textual accounts of their deaths in the main universe, though they believe this simply to be the morbid imaginings of Peter Parker, who is suffering from mental health issues. Gwen Stacy first appeared in Marvel Adventures Spider-Man #53 as a new student of Midtown High. She had transferred from her previous school after the Torino Gang, a powerful New York mob, began harassing her in an attempt to keep her father, police captain George Stacy, from arresting members of their gang. However, the Torinos continued to harass Gwen at Midtown, prompting Spider-Man to help the police take down the gang. Like her father, Gwen believes Spider-Man is a hero. She subsequently began participating in a "Spider-Man Appreciation Society" designed to foster better public opinion of Spider-Man. Gwen is also attracted to Spider-Man's alter ego Peter Parker; although she openly flirted with him, Peter began dating a different girl, Sophia "Chat" Sanduval, which made Gwen very unhappy. Later, Gwen was brainwashed by Emma Frost into believing she was dating Peter. Gwen's brainwashing wore off (or was undone by Emma), but Gwen now believes her relationship with Peter ended when he chose Chat over her, causing her to treat Chat very coldly. She has since warmed to Chat, however. Recently, Gwen began a close friendship with Carter Torino who is the grandson of the head of the Torino Gang. Their relationship is complicated by the fact Gwen's father is still trying to take down Carter's criminal family. In the limited series, Marvel Zombies Return, Gwen of 'Earth Z' is still a college student out with her friends Mary Jane and Harry Osborn. The zombified Spider-Man travels to this earth and, despite his best intentions, turns the Sinister Six. They then slay and partly consume Gwen and her friends. To stop the spread of the virus, Spider-Man obliterates the bodies. In the Powerless mini-series, Gwen Stacy again appears as the girlfriend of Peter Parker. Norman Osborn again kidnaps and attempts to kill her as a part of a plan to intimidate Peter. In a twist, the powerless Peter (with a limb crippled from a spider bite) manages to save Gwen from falling to her death.[volume & issue needed] In the alternate reality designated Earth-65, Gwen Stacy is the one bitten by the radioactive spider, and becomes a superhero going by the name of Spider-Woman. She is also a member of a band fronted by Mary Jane Watson, simply called the Mary Janes. Shortly after Gwen begins fighting crime, Peter Parker, her best friend attempts to exact revenge on those who bullied him, becoming this universe's version of the Lizard. Gwen subdues him, but Peter dies towards the end of the battle due to the chemical he used. Spider-Woman is blamed for his death, causing an outcry for her arrest, led by J. Jonah Jameson. Her father, who is also a police chief in this world, begins a hunt for her. This follows Gwen into college, where she is still a member of the Mary Janes. At a gig of theirs, an assassin is sent after Gwen's father, who is in the audience. Gwen defeats the assassin, the audience and band clearing out during the battle. While they are alone, Captain Stacy holds Spider-Woman at gun point, with Gwen taking off her mask to reveal who she is. Shocked upon learning Spider-Woman's identity, he tells her to run before he changes his mind. In the distance, the Captain Britain from Earth-833, called Spider-UK, is watching, saying that Gwen will "do quite nicely". Gwen is recruited by Spider-UK to team up with other Spider-Totems across the multiverse, and next appears on Earth-616 with Old Man Spider-Man of Earth-4 and Spider-Man of Earth-70105 (who in that reality is Bruce Banner) to rescue Kaine, who was under attack by the Inheritors. Marvel-616 Peter is hesitant to put Gwen in action and she is told by the others of how he failed to save her in his world. However he does recruit her for a mission and they both agree to look out for each other. Gwen is sent to recruit an alternate version of Peter Parker who is driven insane after he failed to save the Gwen Stacy in his dimension, killed the Green Goblin, and became the Hobgoblin. She tells him that he can become the man he once was if he joins them, but they are attacked by the Inheritors. Hobgoblin sacrifices himself to save Gwen. After the events of Spider-Verse, Gwen returns to her home of Earth-65 where she continues her career as Spider-Woman in her own solo series, Spider-Gwen. She first saves George Stacy from mercenary Aleksei Sytsevich who was sent by Wilson Fisk and his lawyer Matt Murdock to target him; Murdock is ultimately revealed to be the real Kingpin, with Fisk serving as his patsy. Then she begins a hunt for the Vulture who has been terrorizing the city in her absence. She appears as one of the main characters in the Secret Wars Spider-Verse event with Spider-Ham, Spider-Girl, Spider-UK, Spider-Man Noir, and Spider-Man India in a Battleworld called Archania ruled by Norman Osborn. They eventually form a team called the Web Warriors where they help other Spider-Men and Women in various dimensions. A child version of her also appears in Giant Size Little Marvel Avengers vs X-Men as a new kid that Tony Stark tries to ask out on a date. She rejects him because he's a kid with a goatee and mustache. Another version of her is a member of Arcadia's's A-Force. On Earth-8, she is married to Miles Morales and they have two children with Spider Powers. In Web Warriors, Spider-Punk mentions that the Gwen Stacy in his dimension was a musical icon, who ultimately died young. Issue #1 of Spider-Man: Fairy Tales follows the fairy tale of Little Red Riding Hood, reimagined with Mary Jane Watson as the titular character. Gwen Stacy has been previously killed by the wolf. Issue #4 is an adaption of Cinderella with Gwen as Princess Gwendolyn. She falls in love with the masked "Prince of Arachne" who is revealed to be Peter Parker, servant to Sir Osborn, but is killed during a fight between Osborn and Parker. Gwen Stacy first appears at the end of Spider-Man Loves Mary Jane #5. She is the new girl at school and quickly becomes close friends with Peter Parker. In Spider-Man Loves Mary Jane #9, Peter and Gwen take their relationship to the next level by sharing a tender kiss, much to the dismay of Mary Jane. They date for a time, though Gwen breaks up with Peter when she learns Mary Jane is the girl he claims he truly loves. MJ, attempting to fix this, breaks up with Peter and reunites with Harry, though eventually she and Peter realize that neither of them are as happy with Gwen and Harry as they were with each other, and break up with them to start dating each other again. Spider-Man: Life Story features an alternate continuity where the characters naturally age after Peter Parker becomes Spider-Man in 1962. In 1966, Gwen discovers that Peter is Spider-Man when she sees his costume underneath Peter's shirt at the train station shortly after Flash was deployed to Vietnam. She eventually marries Peter and becomes Chief Biologist for Miles Warren's bio-engineering company. In 1977, Harry Osborn's attack on Warren's company as the Black Goblin revealed that Miles created clones of Norman Osborn, Peter, and Gwen. Harry blows up the containment tubes containing the clones which kills all of them except for Peter's clone. However, Miles reveals that the "Gwen" Peter was with was actually her clone; he abducted the real Gwen with the intention of attempting to win her over later, with the result that the real Gwen died in the explosion. A year later, Peter and Gwen's clones rename themselves as Ben and Helen Parker and move out of New York for a second chance at life, the clone's relationship with the original Peter apparently not surviving the revelation of her clone status. She and Ben eventually split up and she renamed herself Helen Carroll. After years of therapy, she was inspired to become a prison therapist to help those whose lives were ruined by super heroes and worked closely with Norman Osborn and J. Jonah Jameson. In the fourth issue of the comic book based on the Spider-Man Unlimited animated series, Spidey encounters a Counter-Earth version of Gwen Stacy. She helps him escape a hidden paradise known as "The Haven". Gwen Stacy first appears in the Ultimate Marvel universe in Ultimate Spider-Man #15 (January 2002) as a teenage girl at Peter's high school. In this continuity, Gwen, whose rendition by artist Mark Bagley was inspired by an early-career Madonna, has amber eyes, wears punk-style clothing, and harbors a rebellious personality. In her first appearance, she gives a rousing speech on 'super powers' and later pulls a knife on Kong, one of Peter's bullies, and is suspended from school temporarily. Gwen becomes friends with Peter, which leads Mary Jane Watson to believe she is vying for his affections.[volume & issue needed] Gwen is later taken in by Aunt May after her father, police captain John Stacy, is killed by a burglar wearing a Spider-Man costume and her estranged mother does not want to take her in. Her living in the Parker house creates more tension between Peter and Mary Jane, and leads to their temporary break-up. Peter's relationship with Gwen is further complicated by her hatred of Spider-Man, whom she blames for her father's death. When Peter finds his friend Eddie Brock, Gwen confides in him about her feelings of isolation. Eddie then tries to kiss her and Gwen is shocked.[volume & issue needed] When she eventually learns Peter is Spider-Man, the angry Gwen pulls her father's gun on him. He manages to convince her he is not to blame for her father's death. Gwen runs off but returns, explaining she is just really mad at everything at the moment. She wouldn't have really shot him, a fact Peter already knew because his spider sense didn't go off despite Gwen's wrath. Gwen then agrees to keep his secret.[volume & issue needed] Gwen Stacy dies in Ultimate Spider-Man #62. Before her death, she made peace with Mary Jane and assured her she never had romantic feelings for Peter. She considered him just as a friend. She is killed by Carnage, a symbiote which was the offspring of the Venom symbiote, as he sucks the essence from her, draining her body to a husk. Although Peter is not in the area when she dies, he still feels some responsibility for her death, as he allowed Dr. Connors to use his genetic material for experimentation. His guilt makes him decide to retire as Spider-Man for a while. Eventually, he takes up his hero identity when his responsibility for the innocent becomes too great to overlook.[volume & issue needed] At the end of the arc, there was an issue that dealt with Gwen's death. Flash Thompson makes an off-color remark about Gwen's passing. It infuriates MJ to the point where she physically attacks Flash. It is revealed Flash had a crush on Gwen all along.[volume & issue needed] Gwen Stacy returns to life in Ultimate Spider-Man #98. According to Mark Bagley, "Gwen’s return is integral to the Clone storyline and is basically a way to rock Peter's world...again".[dead link] In this issue, Gwen appears to have no memory of her "death" and believes she was in a hospital, from which she has escaped. In issue #100, after a raft of revelations, the stress of the situation enrages "Gwen". She transforms into Carnage before leaping out the window.[volume & issue needed] In the next issue, "Richard Parker" claims Gwen should not have met Peter at all, and was merely an experiment in stem cell research. This Gwen/Carnage fights with the Fantastic Four, Nick Fury, and the Spider-Slayer drones, until she is knocked unconscious by a beam of light, and taken into custody. In issue #113, Norman Osborn as the Green Goblin causes a massive prison break from the Triskelion, with Gwen walking out amidst the chaos, disappearing in the shadows. It was then revealed that during government experiments to regrow the Carnage symbiote from its remains, Gwen's consciousness (still alive inside of Carnage) had assumed control over the symbiote to reconstitute her body, with no knowledge of her death.[dead link] During the "War of the Symbiotes" storyline, Gwen/Carnage's back story in the Triskelion is revealed. It is shown Gwen has been taking some form of therapy with Tony Stark. However, when the Green Goblin broke out of the Triskelion, Gwen escaped and went to Peter Parker's house in a confused and terrified state, with Carnage's face on her body. During an exchange between Peter and Gwen, Eddie Brock attempts to attack Aunt May and retake his symbiote. In a rage, Spider-Man engages Venom on a nearby rooftop. During the fight, Gwen is shown to be able to use her symbiote to fight off Eddie but Eddie reabsorbs his symbiote along with the Carnage symbiote rendering Gwen Stacy an average girl. After a series of tests, it is concluded that Gwen is not a clone but consciously and genetically is the original reborn (though Gwen's original body died, the Carnage symbiote absorbed her being and they had bonded since her original death) with her eyes turned blue (originally, they were hazel). After S.H.I.E.L.D. intervenes, S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Danvers states Gwen will remain in S.H.I.E.L.D. custody. Peter and May argue for her to come back to live with them, with Tony Stark supporting the Parkers. In Ultimate Spider-Man #129, the Parkers are now helping to rebuild Gwen's life. Her ghastly experience with the Carnage symbiote also causes her to develop a death anxiety she gradually controls. Six months after the "Ultimatum" storyline, in Ultimate Comics Spider-Man #1, Gwen is living with the Parkers again and is dating Peter after MJ broke up with him. However, circumstances involving the Chameleon made Gwen realize that Peter and MJ are still in love, and believes that they shouldn't be together, even if she wants to be with him. She breaks up with him, but vows to be his loyal friend. She also continues to live with the Parkers due to Gwen and Aunt May having become close in a surrogate mother-daughter fashion. After Peter's death, Gwen and May re-locate to France but return to New York after hearing about the re-emergence of a new Spider-Man, Miles Morales. During the "Spider-Men" storyline, Gwen and Aunt May meet the Peter Parker of the Earth-616 continuity after he is accidentally and briefly sent to the Ultimate universe. They even attack him, as they believe he is trying to imposter their Peter. It is only through his mannerisms similar to Peter and his choice of words that they believe that he is not an imposter. Gwen, being intrigued to learn about her counterpart (although she is not informed of her other self's death, not does she inform him of her own previous death and resurrection), talks with him. Later, she also tries to tell Mary Jane about the other Peter's arrival in their world, as the two have formed a friendship. When Green Goblin escapes custody after S.H.I.E.L.D. was shut down, he arrives at the front yard of Aunt May's house and confronts Miles. Gwen and Aunt May are inside watching the television where the battle of Miles and Green Goblin was being broadcast. Soon, Peter emerges to aid Miles in the fight, to the surprise of Gwen and Aunt May. Green Goblin flees at his arrival and the two Spider-Men depart. Gwen is unsure of the identity of the original Spider-Man, but Aunt May assures her that his motives show that it is him. Later, Gwen and Aunt May walk over to Mary Jane's house and overhear Peter's explanation of his unknown resurrection. Gwen sprints over and joyfully reunites with him. After the two Spider-Men defeat Green Goblin, Peter tells Gwen that he intends to go on a quest to find out the truth of his mystery resurrection and leaves her and Aunt May once more, promising to return. The Ultimate Universe is destroyed in the Secret Wars event, but the world is restored later on. In it, Peter returns to the role of Spider-Man and Gwen is possibly still living with Aunt May. Early in the series, Ultimate Spider-Man #25 (October 2002) paid homage to Gwen Stacy's death in the Earth-616 continuity, although Gwen herself was not involved. The Green Goblin tossed Mary Jane off the Queensboro Bridge. Spider-Man caught her leg with his webbing, just as with Gwen. The issue ended with a cliffhanger: when Spider-Man pulled Mary Jane up, she appeared to be either unconscious or dead. The cliffhanger was resolved in the next issue when Mary Jane awoke in #26, uninjured.[volume & issue needed] In "What if Gwen Stacy had lived?", Peter saves Gwen by jumping after her rather than catching her with a web-line. In doing this, he cushions her from the impact as they hit the water and subsequently gives her CPR. After regaining consciousness, Gwen sees him without his mask. After explaining himself to her, Peter proposes to Gwen, and she accepts. Meanwhile, the Green Goblin mails to J. Jonah Jameson proof of Spider-Man's real identity. On the day of Peter's wedding to Gwen, Jonah has published the expose and uses it to acquire a warrant for Peter's arrest. Peter escapes from the police moments after his wedding to Gwen, but the issue ends with Peter on the run from the law and pondering his uncertain future. As the issue ends, Gwen departs with Joe 'Robbie' Robertson, who promises Gwen they will do whatever they can to help Peter and quits the Bugle. In "What If Spider-Man Had Kept His Six Arms?", Spider-Man (whose six-arms mutation was permanent here) is able to prevent Gwen Stacy's death. At the very end of Peter David's one-shot "What If: The Other", Peter Parker (now calling himself "Poison") uses part of the Venom symbiote attached to him in the resurrection of Gwen Stacy. She takes the appearance of Carnage. In "What if Peter Parker became the Punisher?", Peter (who is the Punisher in this continuity) is able to save Gwen by killing the Green Goblin and webbing her body to a suspended scaffold on the bridge. Feeling guilty over almost getting her killed, he quits being the Punisher to be with her. In What If...Dark?: Spider-Gwen #1, Peter saves Gwen by jumping after her, but is killed when the Green Goblin cuts his web line and causes him to break his neck on a bridge pillar before his body cushions Gwen's fall. Upon discovering his secret, Gwen protects Peter's identity by discarding his costume and claiming Goblin took them both hostage at random. She subsequently dons Spider-Man's spare costume and vows revenge against the Goblin. She works together with Harry to trap the villain, but refuses to kill him as she realizes doing so would not be what Peter wanted. Harry does choose to kill him, but is horrified when he discovers the Goblin was his father. Blaming Gwen for Norman's death, Harry becomes the new Green Goblin while Gwen promises Peter she'll resolve her mistakes as the new Spider-Woman despite being powerless. The Gwen Stacy of this reality had a similar history to the main iteration of the character, until she encountered a Gwen Stacy from a future alternate timeline. At first, thinking that this Gwen was a clone, she later learned that this Gwen was actually a superhero, but when trying to get more information, Spider-Gwen fled in a rage. She learned that Spider-Gwen's father had been put in a coma, which caused her rage, then Gwen helped her counterpart to come to epiphany that she should treasure that she still has her father alive in contrast to her, whose father had died. After that, Gwen with the help of Tony Stark and Hank Pym of this reality, successfully send Spider-Gwen to her timeline. After this encounter, Gwen was inspired to become a detective and bonded to the Venom symbiote of her reality to become Spider-Woman. With the use of a Dimensional Travel Watch, she was able to travel across the multiverse and encountered other versions of herself; some of which who had also become Spider-Woman. With these Spider-Women, they formed the Council of Spider-Women and they avoided the Spider-Verse event. She then came across the Spider-Gwen from the past and sent her to her past timeline, creating a time-loop. She then terrorized the Uatus from Earth-65 and Earth-8, since they were fighting the children of Miles Morales and Gwen Stacy. After that, she returned to her reality to fight crime. In Secret Wars: Battleworld #3, a version of Gwen with the powers of Wolverine called Gwenverine, was brought along with the other Wolverines by Mojo, into fighting the pacifist Monk Wolverine. During the return of the Inheritors, Spider-Gwen's device to travel through the multiverse got destroyed by Verna and then Gwen got stranded in an alternate universe. In this universe, Peter Parker and this universe's Gwen Stacy got jobs at Oscorp and Peter wanted to create a cure for cancer, after his Uncle Ben died from it. Peter was experimenting with spider venom to create the cure, but one of the spiders bit Harry Osborn, making Harry this universe's Spider-Man. Harry, alongside Gwen Stacy as this universe's Green Goblin, started to fight crime together, where they even took down Vulture. This lasted until a fight with the Sandman where both Harry and George Stacy were killed. The accident did something to the circuitry that enabled Gwen to control the Goblin Glider that left her mostly acting like the Green Goblin, with no memory of being Gwen Stacy. Spider-Gwen is eventually able to free her counterpart from her insanity. To thank her, the Goblin Gwen fixes Spider-Gwen's multiversal travel device to allow her to return to her allies. Green Goblin A.I.M. – A criminal organization. M.O.D.A.A.K. – Short for Mental Organism Designed As America's King, M.O.D.A.A.K. is a variation of MODOK created by A.I.M. Latour based this character's appearance and tone on American then-U.S. Presidential candidate Donald Trump. The Bodega Bandit – The Bodega Bandit is a petty criminal who was stopped many times by Spider-Woman. He had a dog named Bandito who was later eaten by a Lizard. Spider-Woman made it up to him by giving him a hamster named Pine Cone. Frank Castle – The Captain of the NYPD's Special Crimes Task Force who succeeds George Stacy as head of the investigation into Spider-Woman, due to George being relieved of duty by Mayor Jameson. Castle is shown to be a cold and brutal individual, with nihilistic tendencies and a one track mind when it comes to dispensing justice. Doctorangutan – An intelligent orangutan. The Hand – A ninja organization. Matt Murdock / Kingpin – In this reality, Matt Murdock is Wilson Fisk's lawyer who was trained by Stick and later the Hand, serving as the Kingpin of Crime. The cause of his blindness is the same as his Earth-616 counterpart.[citation needed] The Rhino – In this reality, Aleksei Sytsevich is a mercenary with gray skin and blue hair who the Kingpin once hired to kill George Stacy.[citation needed] He later became the Rhino upon joining the Hand. After the Rhino beat up George Stacy, Spider-Woman wanted revenge only to find that Captain Frank Castle had beaten her to it when he killed the Rhino. The Koala Kommander – The masked koala-weaponizing menace of New York. In hindsight, this character exercised poor judgment in creating living weapons. Kraven the Hunter – A hunter enlisted by Frank Castle. Peter Parker / The Lizard – Peter's life largely mirrors that of his Earth-616 counterpart but he is never bitten by the spider. He was best friends with Gwen Stacy, and was regularly tormented by bullies. As a result of the latter, Peter had begun to develop an inferiority complex and an obsession with Spider-Woman after her emergence, wanting to become "special" like her. He eventually injected himself with a serum that would turn him into the Lizard, and would come into conflict with Spider-Woman. During their fight, Peter fatally suffers under the physical strain of both Spider-Woman's attacks and the serum, resulting in his death and Spider-Woman gaining criminal status, as she was blamed for killing him. Peter's death serves as the main catalyst for much of the challenges Gwen faces over the course of the comic books.[citation needed] Harry Osborn / The Green Goblin / The Lizard – In this reality, Harry watched his best friend Peter Parker get beaten to death by Spider-Woman. His intense feeling of guilt drives him to join and subsequently betray S.H.I.E.L.D. on his quest to kill Spider-Woman. During the "Radioactive" story arc in the comics, Harry comes back into Gwen's life, and later battles Spider-Woman with a super suit and glider. After Harry injects himself with the Lizard formula, he discovers Spider-Woman is Gwen Stacy and is consumed by anger. Finally, he escapes and is now on the run from S.H.I.E.L.D. Wilson Fisk – A mobster who was arrested by George Stacy years ago and is still in prison, but apparently still runs his criminal empire with his lawyer, Matt Murdock, serving as his proxy as the Kingpin. Murdock is ultimately revealed to be the real Kingpin, with Fisk serving as his patsy. S.I.L.K. – A terrorist organization that splintered from S.H.I.E.L.D. Cindy Moon – The billionaire head of S.I.L.K.. Cindy's life largely mirrors that of her Earth-616 counterpart, up until the point where a spider that almost bit her was instead killed by a newspaper. At some point, S.H.I.E.L.D. recruited Cindy and she had begun researching spiders. Cindy cured fellow agent Jesse Drew of radiation poisoning, and both later decided to rebel against S.H.I.E.L.D.. In a fight with Captain America, one of the spiders Cindy developed got loose and escaped into the wild, where it would make its way to Gwen Stacy. Jesse Drew – A former S.H.I.E.L.D. Agent and the Earth-65 version of Jessica Drew / Spider-Woman that sided with Cindy Moon after she cured him of his radiation poisoning. As a member of S.I.L.K., Jesse Drew operates as Agent 77. Otto Octavius – A scientist that works for S.I.L.K. Project Green – In this reality, the Super-Adaptoid was known as Project Green. Adrian Toomes / the Vulture – An ex-Oscorp employee who targeted police officers. This version secretes a green cloud of gas wherever he goes. Susan and Johnny Storm – In this reality, the Storm Twins (modelled after Cersei and Jaime Lannister as respectively portrayed by Lena Headey and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau in Game of Thrones) are former child stars-turned-influencer sitcom leads of the popular television series The Fantastic Four. Secretly sharing an incestuous and manipulative relationship, both siblings publicly go missing on a trip to Latveria while in-fact seducing and manipulating the benevolent Latverian ruler Victor Von Doom over the course of five years into granting them superpowers, before Susan murders him and takes his place as Doctor Doom, converting Latveria to a dictatorship under her command. When the siblings return to New York, they murder their own mother, before blackmailing Gwen Stacy into leaving her home reality, taking control over the criminal underworld while posing as vigilantes to "stop" crimes they themselves instigated. Gwen Stacy was deliberately excluded from Spider-Man: The Animated Series as the creators felt they could neither allow her to live nor include a character who was going to die, leading to Felicia Hardy filling her role as Peter Parker's first love interest prior to Mary Jane's introduction. Despite this, an alternate universe version of Stacy appears in the two-part series finale "Spider Wars", voiced by Mary Kay Bergman. This version is the fiancée of an alternate universe version of Spider-Man who became a rich industrialist. Gwen Stacy appears in The Spectacular Spider-Man, voiced by Lacey Chabert. This version is a teenager and friend of Peter Parker and Harry Osborn who has hidden romantic feelings for the former, expressing hurt whenever he expresses interest in other girls. Throughout the first season, she becomes concerned when Harry becomes addicted to the drug Gobulin Green and kisses Parker, leaving them in an awkward standing in the second season. Despite their feelings for each other, Parker begins dating Liz Allan while Stacy dates Harry. In the series finale, she and Parker acknowledge their feelings for each other and agree to break up with Harry and Allan. Following Norman Osborn's apparent death however, Stacy stays with Harry to care for him. Spider-Gwen appears in the Ultimate Spider-Man episode "Return to the Spider-Verse" Pt. 4, voiced by Dove Cameron. After Miles Morales vanished from her universe, Gwen Stacy allied with her universe's May Parker to become Spider-Woman and reign in the chaos that befell her city using technology to mimic Morales' spider powers. Morales later returns with the "prime" version of Peter Parker and join forces with Gwen to defeat Wolf Spider. She is later chosen by Morales to continue being their universe's Spider hero while the Morales family move to Parker's universe. Spider-Gwen / Ghost-Spider appears in Marvel's Spider-Man, voiced by Laura Bailey. This version is one of Peter Parker's classmates at Horizon High, as well as best friends with Anya Corazon, who specializes in DNA formulas after she was inspired by her uncle Raymond Warren to pursue science. Later in the series, she develops spider powers after being exposed to Warren's chemicals, with admirers referring to her as "Spider-Gwen" after adopting her comic book costume sans mask. Though she temporarily loses her powers, she later regains them and adopts the Ghost-Spider alias after adding a mask to her costume. Spider-Gwen appears in Marvel Super Hero Adventures, voiced by Emily Tennant. Ghost-Spider appears in the Marvel Rising animated media franchise, voiced again by Dove Cameron. While this version is primarily based on Stacy, she uses an alias that originated in the comics as a Ghost Rider variant of Spider-Man and has the partially dyed pink hair of Gwen Poole in her civilian identity. This redesign was cited by a Marvel Rising character designer, who mistook an image of Gwen Poole by Gurihiru for Gwen Stacy while using Google Images to reference the former character's physical appearance during the series' development. The "Ghost-Spider" alias was later integrated into Marvel Comics and related animated Spider-Man media to distinguish the character from other Spider-Women. Stacy first appears in the Initiation shorts, in which she goes on the run from the police after she is blamed for the death of her Inhuman friend, Kevin. Eventually, S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Daisy Johnson finds similar reports of the suspect in question and gives the information to Ghost-Spider. Ghost-Spider returns in the TV special "Chasing Ghosts", in which she tracks down Sheath, a female Inhuman responsible for Kevin's death, and works with the Secret Warriors to stop her before eventually joining the team. Ghost-Spider appears in Lego Marvel Spider-Man: Vexed by Venom, voiced again by Laura Bailey. This version's design and portrayal is a combination of her counterparts from Marvel's Spider-Man and Marvel Rising. Ghost-Spider appears in Marvel's Spidey and His Amazing Friends, voiced initially by Lily Sanfelippo and by Audrey Bennett from the third season onward. Like the Marvel Rising incarnation, this version has Gwen Poole's partially dyed pink highlights. A student in Peter Parker's university class from Spider-Man 2, portrayed by an uncredited extra, is identified as Gwen Stacy in the film's novelization. Gwen Stacy appears in Spider-Man 3, portrayed by Bryce Dallas Howard. This version is a model, classmate, and lab partner of Peter's, and Eddie Brock's ex-girlfriend. After Spider-Man rescues Gwen, he urges her to kiss him during a public ceremony, upsetting his girlfriend, Mary Jane Watson. After breaking up with Eddie, Gwen goes on a date with a symbiote-influenced Peter, only to realize he was trying to make Watson jealous. Upset, Gwen apologizes to Mary Jane and leaves Peter. Later, Eddie becomes Venom and targets Parker in revenge for ruining his life. She is present at Harry Osborn's funeral. Howard has stated she would love to be a part of any continuation of the film franchise, while acknowledging her character's opportunity may have passed, especially after Spider-Man 3 ended with Parker and Watson once again in each other's arms. In May 2007, actor James Cromwell, who played, Captain Stacy in the film, stated he thought the natural progression for the character would be for both to die early in Spider-Man 4, mirroring the comics, with Howard adding that it would not have bothered her. Due to a reboot however, the film was cancelled, although Stacy was left in the draft. Emma Stone portrays Gwen Stacy in The Amazing Spider-Man and its sequel The Amazing Spider-Man 2. This version serves as Peter Parker's love interest, classmate, and character foil. Additionally, she works at Oscorp as an assistant to Dr. Curt Connors. After falling in love in the first film, the second film sees Parker and Stacy going through an on-and-off relationship before she is killed by the Green Goblin. In an interview with Screen Rant, Stone expressed interest in returning as a resurrected Stacy in a future The Amazing Spider-Man film, despite the character's death at the end of The Amazing Spider-Man 2. However, by July 2014, development on the follow-up films Sinister Six, The Amazing Spider-Man 3, and The Amazing Spider-Man 4 had stalled. The films would have seen Stone reprise her role, with the plot following Norman Osborn setting a resurrected amnesiac Stacy as Carnage against Parker, Harry, and the Sinister Six. By early 2015, a deal to reboot the series within the Marvel Cinematic Universe was reached, cancelling The Amazing Spider-Man franchise. In both films, Kari Coleman, Charlie DePew, Skyler Gisondo and Jacob Rodier portray members of the Stacy family: Gwen's mother Helen Stacy and Gwen's younger brothers Philip, Howard, and Simon Stacy respectively. Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman appears in Sony's Spider-Verse film franchise, voiced by Hailee Steinfeld. This version has operated as Spider-Woman for two years, saved her father George Stacy, but failed to save her friend Peter Parker after he became the Lizard. She first appears in Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) before returning in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023). Additionally, she will appear in the upcoming Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse[citation needed] and Spider-Woman, a female-centered spin-off film. In addition to Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman being a major character, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse also introduces Gayatri Singh, a Spider-Man: India-inspired, alternate universe variant of Gwen Stacy and the girlfriend of her universe's Spider-Man, whose voice actress is uncredited. Gwen Stacy appears in The Amazing Spider-Man film tie-in game, voiced by Kari Wahlgren. Gwen Stacy appears as a playable character in Lego Marvel Super Heroes, voiced again by Kari Wahlgren. Spider-Gwen appears as an unlockable playable character in: Marvel: Contest of Champions. Marvel: Avengers Alliance. Marvel Heroes, voiced by Ashley Johnson. Marvel Future Fight. Marvel Puzzle Quest. Marvel Avengers Academy, voiced by Catherine Luciani. Lego Marvel Super Heroes 2, voiced by Melli Bond. Spider-Gwen and Gwenom appear as separate unlockable playable characters in Spider-Man Unlimited, voiced again by Laura Bailey. Spider-Gwen appears as a playable character in Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3: The Black Order, voiced by Allegra Clark. Spider-Gwen's suit, based on her appearance in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, appears as an alternate skin in Fortnite. While she does not appear directly, Gwen Stacy's death plays an important role in the novel Revenge of the Sinister Six, by Adam-Troy Castro, the second part of his Sinister Six trilogy. Mysterio poses as Electro to take hostages on the same bridge where Stacy died and uses a holographic projection of her death to put Spider-Man at a psychological disadvantage. After Spider-Man drives Mysterio away, he takes a moment beside the hologram projector to mourn Stacy. Gwen Stacy is reinterpreted as "Paige Embry" in The Refrigerator Monologues. Embry is the unofficial leader of the Hell Hath Club, a group of women in the afterlife trying to cope with the brutal termination of their plot lines, and provides connecting narration for each of their stories. Gwen Stacy was an American metalcore band from Indianapolis, Indiana, active between 2004 and 2010, whose name came from the comic book character Gwen Stacy. The band announced a reunion in April 2014. Due to the popularity of Spider-Gwen, an alternate reality version of Gwen as Spider-Woman introduced in Edge of Spider-Verse in September 2014, in June 2015 Marvel published variant covers for 20 of their current series, which saw Gwen Stacy re-imagined as other Marvel characters, such as Doctor Strange, Groot and Wolverine. One of those variants, for Deadpool's Secret Secret Wars #2, featured an amalgam of the design of Gwen Stacy and Wade Wilson dubbed "Gwenpool", which came to be especially popular with the fans. As a result, Marvel produced two stories featuring Gwenpool as an original character, a backup story in the series Howard the Duck, and a one-shot, Gwenpool Holiday Special #1, with Howard the Duck #1 establishing that her name is actually "Gwen Poole", not Gwen Stacy, or even an alternate version of either Gwen Stacy or Wade Wilson, presented as a fangirl from the real world who finds herself transported to the Marvel Universe. Following the publication of the one-shot, an ongoing series titled The Unbelievable Gwenpool by the same creative team (Christopher Hastings and Gurihiru) was announced, starting in April 2016, with a webtoon spin-off, It's Jeff!, premiering in September 2021. Spider-Man supporting characters Gwen Stacy states her full name as "Gwen Maxine Stacy" in Ultimate Spider-Man #127. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (a). "If This Be My Destiny…" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 31 (December 1965). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Vincent, Alice (2017-07-07). "Joan Lee, inspiration behind Spider-Man's Gwen Stacy and wife of Marvel mastermind Stan Lee, dies aged 93". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2022-01-10. Retrieved 2020-09-05. Sanderson, Peter (2007). The Marvel Comics Guide to New York City. New York City: Pocket Books. pp. 30–33. ISBN 978-1-4165-3141-8. The Amazing Spider-Man #90. Marvel Comics. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 55: "Captain George Stacy had always believed in Spider-Man and had given him the benefit of the doubt whenever possible. So in Spider-Man's world, there was a good chance that he would be destined to die." The Amazing Spider-Man #93. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man #98. Marvel Comics. Fisch, Sholly (September 1987). "The Wedding of the Year". Marvel Age. No. 54. Marvel Comics. pp. 12–15. Thomas, Roy (August 2011). "Stan Lee's Amazing Marvel Interview!". Alter Ego (104). TwoMorrows Publishing: 30. Thomas, Roy (August 2011). "Stan Lee's Amazing Marvel Interview!". Alter Ego (104). TwoMorrows Publishing: 32. Conway, Gerry (June 1995). "Foreword". Spider-Man: Clone Genesis. Marvel Comics. pp. 4–5. ISBN 0-7851-0158-6. Veronese, Keith (October 2010). "Spider-Man: The Beginnings of the Clone Saga". Back Issue! (44). TwoMorrows Publishing: 69. Walker, Karen (October 2010). "Gwen, the Goblin, and the Spider-Fans". Back Issue! (44). TwoMorrows Publishing: 21. Saffel, Steve. Spider-Man the Icon: The Life and Times of a Pop Culture Phenomenon (Titan Books, 2007) ISBN 978-1-84576-324-4, p. 65. Sanderson, Peter. Marvel Universe: The Complete Encyclopedia of Marvel's Greatest Characters (Harry N. Abrams, New York, 1998) ISBN 0-8109-8171-8, p. 84. Blumberg, Arnold T. (Fall 2003). "'The Night Gwen Stacy Died:' The End of Innocence and the Birth of the Bronze Age". Reconstruction. 3 (4). Archived from the original on 2010-01-16. Retrieved 2008-11-14. Sanderson, Peter (2008). "1970s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Marvel Chronicle A Year by Year History. Dorling Kindersley. p. 159. ISBN 978-0756641238. In June [1973], Marvel embarked on a story that would have far-reaching effects. The Amazing Spider-Man artist John Romita, Sr. suggested killing off Spider-Man's beloved Gwen Stacy in order to shake up the book's status quo. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 68: "This story by writer Gerry Conway and penciler Gil Kane would go down in history as one of the most memorable events of Spider-Man's life." David, Peter; Greenberger, Robert (2010). The Spider-Man Vault: A Museum-in-a-Book with Rare Collectibles Spun from Marvel's Web. Running Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0762437726. The idea of beloved supporting characters meeting their deaths may be standard operating procedure now but in 1973 it was unprecedented...Gwen's death took villainy and victimhood to an entirely new level. Peter Parker: Spider-Man #26. Marvel Comics. Inventing Tomorrow (University of Minnesota Institute of Technology magazine), Spring 2002: "Jim Kakalios enlists the aid of costumed crimefighters to teach critical thinking in an imaginative freshman seminar" by Paul Sorenson Archived 2006-06-15 at the Wayback Machine The Amazing Spider-Man #129. Marvel Comics. Marvels #4. Marvel Comics. "SpiderFan.org – Comics : Giant-Size Spider-Man #5". www.spiderfan.org. The Amazing Spider-Man #149. Marvel Comics. Peter Parker, the Spectacular Spider-Man #8 (November 1988). Marvel Comics. Scarlet Spider Unlimited #1 (November 1995). Marvel Comics. Spider-Man #61: "Heading Toward Omega" (August 1995) and Spider-Man: Maximum Clonage Omega (August 1995). Marvel Comics. Spider-Island Deadly Foes #1 (October 2011). Marvel Comics. Superior Spider-Man Team-Up #2. Marvel Comics. Scarlet Spider vol. 2 #20. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man 509–514 (August 2004 – January 2005). Marvel Comics. The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe, "Stacy Twins" (2005). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man #511 (October 2004). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man #512 (November 2004). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man #514 (January 2005). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man #74. Marvel Comics Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #1–5 (December 2016 – April 2017) and contempraneous The Amazing Spider-Man tie-ins. Marvel Comics. Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #1 (December 2016). Marvel Comics. Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #2 (January 2017). Marvel Comics. Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #3 (February 2017). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 4 #23 (March 2017). Marvel Comics. Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #4 (March 2017). Marvel Comics. Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy #5 (April 2017). Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 5 #50. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 5 #51. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 6 #10. Marvel Comics. Heroes Reborn: Night-Gwen #1. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man: House of M #1–3 (2005). Marvel Comics. Marvel Adventures Spider-Man #55. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man Marvel Adventures #2. Marvel Comics. Marvel Adventures Spider-Man #54. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man Marvel Adventures #1. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man Marvel Adventures #6. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man Marvel Adventures #5. Marvel Comics. Marvel Zombies Return #1 (2009). Marvel Comics. Edge of Spider-Verse #2. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 3 #9. Marvel Comics. The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 3 #11. Marvel Comics. Spider-Verse Team-Up #2. Marvel Comics. Spider-Gwen #1 Spider-Gwen #2. Spider-Gwen #18. Web Warriors #7. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man Loves Mary Jane #9. Marvel Comics. Spider-Man: Life Story #1–2 Spider-Man: Life Story Annual #1 Spider-Man Unlimited vol. 2 #4. Marvel Comics. Brucie, Dylan (March 2007). "Ultimate Spider-Man". Wizard Xtra!. p. 110. In an interview in Wizard Magazine #180 (2006), Mark Bagley remarked there were some "coloring issues" in Gwen's first appearances. He did not intend her eyes to be yellow. "Wizard Universe" Archived January 22, 2008, at the Wayback Machine "Ultimate Spider-Man Pictures Full Size". IGN. Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man #11. Marvel Comics. Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man #13. Marvel Comics. Spider-Men #3. Marvel Comics. Spider-Men #4. Marvel Comics. Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man #3. Marvel Comics. Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man #4. Marvel Comics. Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man #6. Marvel Comics. Miles Morales: Ultimate Spider-Man #7. Marvel Comics. What If? #24. Marvel Comics. What If? vol. 2 #42 What If: The Other. Marvel Comics. What If? Punisher #1 (October 2018). Marvel Comics. What If...? Dark: Spider-Gwen #1. Marvel Comics. Spider-Gwen vol. 2 #29–31. Marvel Comics. Secret Wars: Battleworld #3. Marvel Comics. Spider-Geddon #2. Marvel Comics. Spider-Gwen: Ghost Spider #1–3. Marvel Comics. Spider-Gwen Annual #1 Suebsaeng, Asawin (July 6, 2016). "Marvel Artist Who Made a Trump Supervillain Thinks Donald Is a 'Goddamn Idiot'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Spider-Gwen (vol. 2) #10 Spider-Gwen #2 Spider-Women Alpha #1 Ghost-Spider #9 (May 13, 2020) Goldman, Eric (23 August 2016). "Ultimate Spider-Man Introducing Spider-Gwen into Animation in "Return to the Spider-Verse" Storyline". IGN. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016. Retrieved 26 August 2016. Rey, Leo (December 18, 2016). "SPIDER-MAN 2017 CARTOON WILL FEATURE VENOM, SPIDER-GWEN, AND MILES MORALES". Nerdspan. "Osborn Academy". Spider-Man. Season 1. Episode 3. August 26, 2017. Disney XD. "The Day Without Spider-Man". Spider-Man. Season 2. Episode 14. September 8, 2019. Disney XD. "Spider-Woman / Gwen Stacy – Spider-Man franchise | Behind The Voice Actors". behindthevoiceactors.com. Retrieved July 19, 2019. Check mark indicates role has been confirmed using screenshots of closing credits and other reliable sources.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) "MARVEL TO LAUNCH NEW ANIMATION FRANCHISE 'MARVEL RISING'". Marvel.com. December 7, 2017. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. "LEGO Marvel Spider-Man: Vexed By Venom". YouTube. Marvel HQ. "'Spidey and his Amazing Friends' Swings Back for Season 3". www.marvel.com. December 5, 2023. Retrieved January 7, 2024. ""Jump Into Wow" This Summer on Disney Junior with "Marvel's Spidey and His Amazing Friends" and "Mickey Mouse Funhouse"" (Press release). Disney Channel. June 16, 2021 – via The Futon Critic. Outlaw, Kofi (2014-11-03). "Rumor Patrol: Emma Stone Returning for 'Amazing Spider-Man' Sequel or Spinoff". Screenrant.com. Retrieved 2022-01-06. "Marc Webb Confirms Mysterio And Kraven As Sinister Six !". YouTube. August 20, 2014. ""Amazing Spider-Man 3" Would Have Starred Norman Osborn's Head In A Box". Comic Book Resources. March 21, 2016. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Vilkomerson, Sara (May 8, 2014). "'Amazing Spider-Man 2' director Marc Webb on Gwen Stacy's fate in sequel: 'There's a cost to being a hero'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 8, 2014. McNary, Drew (July 23, 2014). "Sony Pushes Back 'Spider-Man 3' to 2018, Dates 'Sinister Six' for 2016". Variety. Retrieved July 23, 2014. Varma, Arjun (September 18, 2014). "The Amazing Spider-Man 3 Plot: Gwen Stacy to Return as Villain Carnage Along With The Sinister Six and Venom". International Business Times. Retrieved September 18, 2014. "Spider-Man: How Sony, Marvel Will Benefit from Unique Deal (Exclusive)". Variety. February 10, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Nyrem, Erin (June 6, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider Verse' Casts Hailee Steinfeld, Mahershala Ali and Lily Tomlin". Variety. Archived from the original on June 6, 2018. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Sony Finally Untangles Its Spider Web". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Malkin, Marc (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man' Producers Tease Live-Action Miles Morales Movie and Animated 'Spider-Woman' Film: 'It's All Happening'". Variety. Retrieved May 31, 2023. Tangonan, EJ (June 5, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse: Hailee Steinfeld talks Gwen Stacy's emotional journey and a possible spin-off". JoBlo. Retrieved June 5, 2023. "For something a little different, here is Gayatri. One of the last designs I did on the movie, an absolute blast. Had a lot of fun working in little hints to classic Gwen color schemes". Kris Anka. Twitter. June 19, 2023. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Yehl, Joshua (23 June 2015). "Spider-Gwen Gets a New Comic and Joins Marvel Contest of Champions". IGN. Retrieved 24 August 2016. @MarvelHeroes (October 13, 2015). "You know who really get the roles she voices? @MarvelHeroes' voice of Spider-Gwen, @TheVulcanSalute" (Tweet). Retrieved June 22, 2017 – via Twitter. Stonecipher, David (9 October 2015). "Spider-Gwen, Captain Marvel Now Available In 'Marvel Heroes' With 'All-New, All-Different' Update". Inquisitr. Retrieved 26 August 2016. Stewart, Marcus (16 December 2015). "Big Marvel Future Fight Update Headlined By A Trio Of Spider-Men". Game Informer. Retrieved 26 August 2016. Semel, Paul (8 February 2016). "EXCLUSIVE: Spider-Gwen Swings Into "Marvel Puzzle Quest"". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved 26 August 2016. Shiach, Kieran. "'Avengers Academy' Event Brings In Symbiotes And Spider-Gwen". ComicsAlliance. "Characters". IGN Database. Retrieved 28 January 2018. "MELLI BOND". spotlight.com. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Bailey, Laura (December 11, 2014). "True! "@frogoat: @LauraBaileyVO Is it true you voice Spider-Girl (and other Spider-Women) in the Spider-@SpideyUnlimted game?"". Twitter. Retrieved 10 September 2016. Reeves, Ben (May 15, 2019). "Exclusive Spider-Gwen Gameplay Details In Marvel Ultimate Alliance 3". Game Informer. Archived from the original on May 21, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "A Guide to the Comic Book Wives and Girlfriends Who Inspired the Refrigerator Monologues". 7 June 2017. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. "GWEN TAKES OVER". Marvel. 14 April 2015. Archived from the original on 27 August 2015. Retrieved 5 September 2015. Johnston, Rich (August 21, 2015). "And Finally… Has Marvel Noticed That Gwenpool Is A Thing Now?R". Bleeding Cool. "MARVEL ANNOUNCES "GWENPOOL HOLIDAY SPECIAL", "HOWARD THE DUCK" BACKUP STORIES". Comicbookresources. September 11, 2015. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved September 17, 2015. "Marvel announces new Gwenpool series". Entertainment Weekly. December 22, 2015. "Marvel Announces "Gwenpool Holiday Special," "Howard the Duck" Backup Stories". CBR. September 11, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Johnston, Rich (September 9, 2021). "Jeff the Land Shark Gets a Marvel Comic by Kelly Thompson & Gurihiru". Bleeding Cool. Gwen Stacy in Marvel Comics Database The Unofficial Handbook of Marvel Comics Creators Physics of Superheroes 1 – Death of Gwen Stacy Spiderfan.org – Gwen Stacy