The Classic Brugge–De Panne is a road cycling race in Belgium in late March. Since 2018 it is raced over two days with a men's race on Wednesday and a women's race on Thursday. Both races start in Bruges and finish in the seaside resort of De Panne. The women's event is included in the UCI Women's World Tour; the men's race was part of the UCI Europe Tour as a 1.HC event, but was promoted to the UCI World Tour as a 1.WT event in 2019. The 2020 edition was rescheduled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Three Days of De Panne was created in 1977 as a three-day cycling event in the week leading up to the Tour of Flanders, in late March or early April. The first day was usually a hilly stage starting in De Panne and finishing in the Flemish Ardennes. The second day held a long flat stage back to the Flemish coast, with a finish in Koksijde. The third day consisted of two stages that both started and finished in De Panne, of which the final stage was an individual time trial. Raced from Tuesday to Thursday, it was the last Flemish race ahead of the Tour of Flanders and was considered a desirable preparation for the main event on Sunday. Eric Vanderaerden, a strong sprinter and time triallist, won the race five times in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Since 2018, the Three Days of De Panne is raced under a new format following a calendar switch with Dwars door Vlaanderen. The race comes one week earlier, in the week following Milan–San Remo, and the men's event has morphed into a one-day race on Wednesday. The Flemish Ardennes roads and the concluding time trial were abandoned in favour of a route entirely in the province of West Flanders. The iconic Kemmelberg and several cobbled sectors have a more prominent part in the new course. In order to continue the multi-day format, a women's event was inaugurated on the day after the men's race. Both races start in Bruges and have two finishing circuits in and around De Panne. The women's race is part of the UCI Women's World Tour, cycling's top tier professional competition. Jolien D'Hoore won the first running of the women's Three Days in a sprint. Flanders Classics, organizer of Dwars door Vlaanderen, lobbied with UCI and was granted the date formerly held by the Three Days of De Panne. The organizers of the Three Days were granted the slot held by Dwars door Vlaanderen, but chose to shorten their race, as the next Flemish classic, E3 Harelbeke, is raced on a Friday. Initially the Three Days organizers had another three-day concept in mind, with a two-day contest for men and one day for women. The event would kick off with a sprinters challenge on Tuesday, but this idea was abandoned due to a lack of teams' interest. However, organizers intend to return to a three-day format in the future. "Driedaagse De Panne wordt dit jaar een tweedaagse" [Three-day De Panne will be a two-day event this year]. Sporza (in Dutch). Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroeporganisatie. Archived from the original on 24 May 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2018. Coorevits, Hugo. "3 zaken om naar uit te kijken in nieuwe Driedaagse: kasseien, wind én hellingen" [3 things to look forward to in the new Three Days: cobblestones, wind and hills]. Sportwereld (in Dutch). Mediahuis. Retrieved 21 March 2018. "Salary cap still an option as part of 2020 WorldTour reforms". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 2018-11-21. "The UCI unveils the revised 2020 calendars for the UCI WorldTour & UCI Women's WorldTour". UCI. 5 May 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Les Trois jours de Bruges-La Panne sur une journée ce mercredi". Le Soir (in French). Rossel & Cie. S.A. Retrieved 21 March 2018. The three days of Bruges-De Panne in one day on Wednesday Plouvin, Antoine. "Les 3 Jours de Bruges – La Panne: Le parcours et les 12 premières équipes dévoilés". Cyclingpro.net (in French). Retrieved 21 March 2018. The 3 Days of Bruges – De Panne: The course and the first 12 teams unveiled "Ryan looks for Women's WorldTour win at Driedaagse De Panne-Koksijde". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 21 March 2018. "Siggaard to lead Team Virtu Cycling at Driesdaagse de Panne-Koksijde". Cyclingnews.com. 19 March 2018. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2018. Knöfler, Lukas. "D'hoore unaware she was sprinting for Driedaagse De Panne victory". Cyclingnews. Retrieved 15 April 2018. CyclingNews.com coverage Official website Official website