Mukachevo (Ukrainian: Мукачево, pronounced [mʊˈkɑt͡ʃewo] ; Hungarian: Munkács; see name section) is a city in the valley of the Latorica river in Zakarpattia Oblast (province), in Western Ukraine serving as the administrative center of Mukachevo Raion (district). The city is a rail terminus and highway junction, and has beer, wine, tobacco, food, textile, timber, and furniture industries. During the Cold War, it was home to Mukachevo air base and a radar station. Mukachevo lies close to the borders of four neighbouring countries: Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania. Today, the population is 85,569 (2022 estimate). The city is a traditional stronghold of the Rusyn language, and the population of Mukachevo is officially reported as 77.1% ethnic Ukrainian. There are also significant minorities of: Russians (9.0%); Hungarians (8.5%); Germans (1.9%); and Roma (1.4%). While Uzhhorod is the main administrative city in the region, Mukachevo is a historic spiritual center of the region and center of the former Eastern Orthodox eparchy of Kyivan Metropolis. In 17th century it united with Catholic church by the Union of Uzhhorod, similar to the Union of Brest. Up until World War II and the Holocaust, Mukachevo was primarily a Jewish town, and half the population was Jewish (see below), the rest of the population being Russians, Hungarians, Slovaks, and other minorities. Formerly in Czechoslovakia, and before that in Hungary, it was incorporated into Soviet Ukraine after World War II. Most probably, the name derived from the Hungarian surname "Muncas" - munkás (worker) which later transformed into Munkács, while another version points that the name contains proto-Slavic root "Muka" which means (flour). On 23 May 2017 the Ukrainian parliament officially renamed Mukacheve (Мукачеве) into Mukachevo (Мукачево), a year after the city council had decided to rename the city. Previously, it was usually spelled in Standard Literary Ukrainian as Mukacheve while Мукачів (Mukachiv) was sometimes also used. The city's name in Russian is Мукачево (Mukachevo), which is also the Russian transliteration (Russian: Мукачево) as well as a name adopted by the local authorities and portrayed on the city's coat of arms. Other names are Hungarian: Munkács; Rusyn: Мукачово (Mukachovo), Belarusian: Мукачава (Mukačava), Romanian: Muncaci, Munceag; Polish Mukaczewo; Slovak and Czech: Mukačevo; German: Munkatsch; Yiddish: מונקאַטש (Munkatsh). Archaeological excavation suggest that early settlements existed here before the Middle Ages. For example, a Celtic oppidum and metal works center that existed in the 3rd-1st century BC were found between the Halish and Lovachka mountains. A Thracian fort of the Iron Age (10th century BC) was found on the mountain of Tupcha. Around the 1st century the area was occupied by the Carpi people who displaced the local Celts from the area. The Slavs settled the territory in the 6th century. In 895 the Hungarian tribes entered the Carpathian Basin through the Veretskyi Pass, about 60 km (37 mi) north of present-day Mukachevo. In 1397, the town and its surrounding was granted by Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor, to his distant cousin, the exiled prince of Grand Duchy of Lithuania Fyodor Koriatovych, who used to administer the Ruthenian Podolia region of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, until was exiled for disobedience by Grand Duke Vytautas the Great in 1392. Theodor therefore became a vassal of Hungary and settled many Ruthenians in the territory. Other sources, however, state that Theodor bought the town and the surrounding area in 1396. During the 15th century, the city prospered and became a prominent craft and trade center for the region. In 1445, the town became a Hungarian royal free city. It was also granted Magdeburg rights. During the 16th century, Munkács became part of the Principality of Transylvania. The 17th century (from 1604 to 1711) was a time of continuous struggle against the expansionist intentions of the Habsburg Empire for the Principality. In 1678 the anti-Habsburg Revolt of Emeric Thököly started out from Munkács. The region also played an important role in Rákóczi's War of Independence. After the defeat of Francis II Rákóczi the city came under Austrian control in the mid-18th century as part of the Kingdom of Hungary and was made a key fortress of the Habsburg monarchy. In 1726, the Palanok Castle and the town, before 1711 owned by the Rákóczi family, was given by the Habsburgs to the Schönborn family, who were responsible for an expansion of the town. They also settled many Germans in the territory, thereby causing an economic boom of the region. During 1796–1897, the city's castle, until then a strong fortress, became a prison. The Greek national hero Alexander Ypsilanti was imprisoned at the Palanok Castle between 1821 and 1823. In 1919, after the Rusyn Americans agreed with Tomáš Masaryk on incorporating Carpathian Ruthenia into Czechoslovakia, the whole of Carpathian Ruthenia was occupied by Czechoslovak troops. On June 4, 1920, Mukachevo officially became part of Czechoslovakia through the Treaty of Trianon. In November 1938, a part of the territory of the former Kingdom of Hungary was re-annexed by Hungary as part of the First Vienna Award. Without delay the new authorities decreed the expulsion of all the Jews without Hungarian citizenship. As a consequence Polish and Russian Jews, long-term residents of the now Hungarian-controlled Transcarpathian region, and also from Mukachevo, as well as the native Jews who could not prove their citizenship, were deported over the Ukrainian border where they were turned over to the German Einsatzgruppe commando led by Friedrich Jeckeln. On August 27 - 28, 1941, they were all murdered by the Germans in Kamianets-Podilskyi's massacre. Even so, Mukachevo's population still held an important Jewish component, until in 1944 all the Jews were deported to the Auschwitz concentration camp by Adolf Eichmann. In the end of 1944, the Red Army stormed Carpathian Ruthenia. At first the territory was given to the reestablished Czechoslovakia, then became part of the Soviet Union by a treaty between the two countries, later in 1945. The Soviet Union began a policy of expulsion of the Hungarian population. In 1945, the city was ceded to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, and is now in Ukraine. Since 2002, Mukachevo has been the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mukachevo. The 128th Mountain Assault Brigade of the Ukrainian Ground Forces has been based in Mukachevo since after World War II. Mukachevo has a humid continental climate (Köppen: Dfb). In 1921, 21,000 people lived in Mukachevo. Of these, 48 percent were Jews, 24 percent were Rusyns, and 22 percent were Hungarians. The city's population in 1966 was 50,500. Of these, 60% were Ukrainians, 18% were Hungarians, 10% were Russians, and 6% were Jews. According to the 2001 census, 82,200 people live in Mukachevo. The population in 1989 was 91,000, in 2004 77,300 and in 2008 93,738. Its population includes: Ukrainians (77.1%) Russians (9.0%) Hungarians (8.5%) Germans (1.9%) Roma (1.4%) Ashkenazi & Sephardic Jews (1.1%) Residents in seven villages of the Mukachevo Raion have the option to learn the Hungarian language in a school or home school environment. Fischer Sports, an Austrian company that produces Nordic skiing, Alpine skiing, and ice hockey equipment, has a factory in Mukachevo. The firm benefits from provisional application on January 1, 2016 of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area provisions of the European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement. See also Munkacs (Hasidic dynasty) There are documents in the Berehove (Beregszász) State Archives which indicate that Ashkenazi Jews lived in Munkács and the surrounding villages as early as the second half of the seventeenth century. The Jewish community of Munkács was an amalgam of Galician and Hungarian Hasidic Jewry, Orthodox Jews, and Zionists. The town is most noted for its Chief Rabbi Chaim Elazar Spira who led the community until his death in 1937. By 1851, Munkács supported a large yeshiva, thereby demonstrating the community's commitment to Talmudic learning and piety. Materially impoverished, yet wealthy in ideological debate, the Jews of interwar Munkács constituted almost half of the town's population. The Munkács Jewish community was famous for its Hasidic activity as well as its innovations in Zionism and modern Jewish education. The Jewish population of Munkács grew from 2,131 in 1825 to 5049 in 1891 (almost 50 percent of the total population) to 7675 in 1910 (about 44 percent). By 1921, the 10,000 Jews still made up about half the residents, though by 1930, the proportion had dropped to 43 percent, with a little over 11,000 Jews. The Jews of Munkács constituted 11 percent of the Jewry of Subcarpathian Rus'. Interwar Munkács had a very large Jewish population, which was most visible on Shabbat. On that day most stores were closed and, after services, the streets filled with Hasidic Jews in their traditional garb. The first movie house in the town was established by a Hasidic Jew, and it too closed on the Shabbat and Jewish holidays. The Chief Rabbi of Munkács, Chaim Elazar Spira (who led the community from 1913 until his death in 1937) was the most outspoken voice of religious anti-Zionism. He had succeeded his father, Rabbi Zvi Hirsh Spira, who had earlier inherited the mantle of leadership from his father Rabbi Shlomo Spira. He was also a Hasidic rebbe with a significant number of followers. Rabbi Chaim Elazar Spira was succeeded by his son-in-law, Rabbi Baruch Yehoshua Yerachmiel Rabinowicz. Along with the dominant Munkácser hasidic community there co-existed smaller yet vibrant Hasidic groups who were followers of the rebbes Belz, of Spinka, Zidichov, and Vizhnitz. By the time of the Holocaust there were nearly 30 synagogues in town, many of which were shtibelekh ("[small] house" - small [Hasidic] synagogues). The Hebrew Gymnasium (high school) was founded in Munkács five years after the first Hebrew speaking elementary school in Czechoslovakia was established there in 1920. It soon became the most prestigious Hebrew high school east of Warsaw. Zionist activism along with Hasidic pietism contributed to a community percolating with excitement, intrigue and at times internecine conflict. In 1935, Chaim Kugel, formerly director of the Munkács gymnasium (Jewish high school) and then Jewish Party delegate to the Czechoslovak Parliament, gave a speech during a parliamentary debate: "…It is completely impossible to adequately describe the poverty in the area. The Jews… are affected equally along with the rest…. I strongly wish to protest any attempt to blame the poverty of the Subcarpathian Ruthenian peasantry on the Jews" (Kugel later got to Mandatory Palestine and eventually became mayor of the Israeli city of Holon). Government policies were covertly directed against Jews, who bore a heavy share of taxes and had difficulty getting high civil service positions. In 1939, the Hungarians seized and annexed Subcarpathian Rus—including Munkács—taking advantage of the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia. Though antisemitic legislation was introduced by the Hungarian authorities, Subcarpathian Rus, like the rest of Hungary, remained a relative haven for Jews until Nazi Germany occupied Hungary in 1944. In the spring of 1944 there were nearly 15,000 Jewish residents of the town. This ended on May 30, 1944, when the city was pronounced Judenrein (free of Jews after ghettoization and a series of deportations to Auschwitz). Today, Mukachevo is experiencing a Jewish renaissance of sorts with the establishment of a supervised kosher kitchen, a mikveh, Jewish summer camp in addition to the prayer services which take place three times daily. In July 2006, a new synagogue was dedicated on the site of a pre-war hasidic synagogue.[citation needed] Palanok Castle, 14th century. The castle of Munkács played an important role during the anti-Habsburg revolts in this territory and present-day Slovakia (1604–1711), especially at the beginning of the anti-Habsburg Revolt of Imre Thököly (1685–1688), as well as at the beginning of the revolt of Ferenc II. Rákóczi (early 18th century). This important fortress became a prison from the end of the 18th century and was used until 1897. The Greek national hero Alexander Ypsilanti was imprisoned in Munkács castle from 1821 to 1823. Saint Nicholas Monastery Wooden church built in the Ukrainian architectural style, 18th century The main soccer team is MFA Mukachevo, which play in Ukrainian Second League. Lojza Baránek Samuel Gottesman Helena Kahan Jockel Helena Jockel (1919-), Memoir: We Sang in Hushed Voices (Azrieli Series of Holocaust Survivor Memoirs; VI), 2014. Ihor Kharatin Fyodor Koriatovych Lolita Milyavskaya Ivan Mozer Mihály Munkácsy Rio Preisner Baruch Yehoshua Yerachmiel Rabinowicz Moshe Leib Rabinovich Ludvík Ráža Ján Strausz Svyatoslav Vakarchuk Yitzchok Yaakov Weiss Joseph Meir Weiss Yuri Yukechev Naomi Blake Irina Galay Ilona Zrinyi Dmytro Yeblusha Mukachevo is twinned with: Celldömölk, Hungary Dabas, Hungary Eger, Hungary Humenné, Slovakia Kisvárda, Hungary Mátészalka, Hungary Nyírmeggyes, Hungary Mielec, Poland Pag, Croatia Pelhřimov, Czech Republic Prešov, Slovakia Senta, Serbia Várkerület (Budapest), Hungary Dormition Cathedral A historical building on Yaroslava Mudroho Street Mukachevo drama theater Palace of Culture and Arts (Old Trade Academy Munkacs) A street in the old town (Ilona Zrínyi Street) Andriy Kuzmenko Park in Mukachevo Aerial view of Palanok Castle Northern outskirts of Mukachevo, Halish and Lovachka mountains A church in Mukachevo Central square of Mukachevo Roman Catholic cathedral Orthodox Church of Pochaiv Icon of Virgin Mary Zakarpattia Oblast Eparchy of Mukachevo and Prešov Saint Nicholas Monastery (Mukachevo) Byzantine Catholic Eparchy of Mukachevo Roman Catholic Diocese of Mukachevo "In Ukraine, local elections legitimise a new political system - and the old faces behind it". www.opendemocracy.net. openDemocracy. 13 November 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Andriy Baloha wins Mukachevo mayoral election at first round". Interfax Ukraine. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. Ukraine Census Archived 2009-04-30 at the Wayback Machine Halai, O.,Ivanovchyk, I., Lengyel, I., Mohylevets, K., Turianytsia, T. (2020). Mukachevo (Мукачево). Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine. ISBN 9789660220744. Retrieved 25 November 2020.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Council renamed Mukacheve into Mukachevo, BBC Ukrainian (23 May 2017) Mukachiv in the Encyclopedia of Ukraine Kamenets-Podolski in Yad Vashem "Climate: Mukachevo". Climate-Data.org. Retrieved 18 April 2014. "Всеукраїнський перепис населення 2001 | English version | Results | General results of the census | National composition of population | Zakarpattia region". Ukrcensus.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 2007-09-11. Retrieved 2009-07-08. "Скільки дітей в Україні навчаються мовами національних меншин?". Andrew E. Kramer (May 9, 2016). "Ukraine Makes Iffy Progress After Trade Pact With Europe". The New York Times. Retrieved May 10, 2016. One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and has been released under the GFDL: "Jewish Community of Munkacs: An Overview". United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Retrieved 2009-07-08. Quoted in Sole, "Subcarpathian Ruthenia, 1918-1938," in The Jews of Czechoslovakia, vol. 1, p. 132. "Munkács megyei jogú város településfejlesztési stratégiája" (PDF). mukachevo-rada.gov.ua (in Hungarian). Mukachevo. 2019. p. 2. Retrieved 2020-03-31. Jelinek A. Yeshayahu, The Carpathian Diaspora : The Jews of Sub-Carpathian Rus' and Mukachevo, 1848-1948, New-York, Columbia University Press -East European Monographs, 2007, 412p. Pekar, Athanasius B. (1979). The Bishops of the Eparchy of Mukachevo, with Historical Outlines. Pittsburgh: Byzantine Seminary Pres. Véghseő, Tamás (2015). "Reflections on the Background to the Union of Uzhhorod / Ungvár (1646)" (PDF). Eastern Theological Journal. 1 (1): 147–181. The History of Cities and Villages of the Ukrainian SSR of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine Mukacheve travel guide from Wikivoyage Media related to Mukachevo at Wikimedia Commons Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Munkács" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Diocese of Munkács" . Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Mukachevo City Council - Mukachevo City Council website mukachevo.net – Mukachevo city portal Newspaper "Mukachivsjka Ratusha" Official news Mukachevo Mayor Mukachevo News, Panorama Mukachevo - http://panorama-mukachevo.com Mukachevo, Ukraine (Munkács, HU) ShtetLink on JewishGen.org The Palanok Castle - Pictures of the Palanok castle and view on Mukachevo from Sergey Sorokin - a private mountain guide Mukachiv in the Encyclopedia of Ukraine United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Jewish Community of Munkacs A Jewish Community in the Carpathian Mountains- The Story of Munkács - Yad Vashem A Film of Jewish Life in Munkacs Archived 2012-02-04 at the Wayback Machine security agency "schit" Mukachevo Survey City tour Mukacheve - ShtetLink Mukacheve Mukachevo, historical information, archival and contemporary photos, landmarks (in English)