Venice 1km 0.6miles Tronchetto 12 Santa Lucia railway station 11 Santa Croce 10 Dorsoduro 9 Castello 8 Isola di San Michele 7 Cannaregio 6 Santa Maria della Salute 5 Bridge of Sighs 4 Grand Canal 3 Piazza San Marco 2 Rialto Bridge 1    Venice (/ˈvɛnɪs/ VEN-iss, Italian: Venezia, Italian: [veˈnɛttsja] ) is a city in northeastern Italy and the capital of the Veneto region. It is built on a group of 126 islands that are separated by expanses of open water and by canals; portions of the city are linked by 472 bridges. The islands are in the shallow Venetian Lagoon, an enclosed bay lying between the mouths of the Po and the Piave rivers (more exactly between the Brenta and the Sile). In 2020, around 258,685 people resided in greater Venice or the Comune di Venezia, of whom around 51,000 live in the historical island city of Venice (centro storico) and the rest on the mainland (terraferma). Together with the cities of Padua and Treviso, Venice is included in the Padua-Treviso-Venice Metropolitan Area (PATREVE), which is considered a statistical metropolitan area, with a total population of 2.6 million. The name is derived from the ancient Veneti people who inhabited the region by the 10th century BC. The city was historically the capital of the Republic of Venice for almost a millennium, from 810 to 1797. It was a major financial and maritime power during the Middle Ages and Renaissance, and a staging area for the Crusades and the Battle of Lepanto, as well as an important centre of commerce—especially silk, grain, and spice, and of art from the 13th century to the end of the 17th. The city-state of Venice is considered to have been the first real international financial centre, emerging in the 9th century and reaching its greatest prominence in the 14th century. This made Venice a wealthy city throughout most of its history. For centuries Venice possessed numerous territories along the Adriatic Sea and within the Italian peninsula, leaving a significant impact on the architecture and culture that can still be seen today. The Venetian Arsenal is considered by several historians to be the first factory in history, and was the base of Venice's naval power. The sovereignty of Venice came to an end in 1797, at the hands of Napoleon. Subsequently, in 1866, the city became part of the Kingdom of Italy. Venice has been known as "La Dominante", "La Serenissima", "Queen of the Adriatic", "City of Water", "City of Masks", "City of Bridges", "The Floating City", and "City of Canals". The lagoon and the historic parts of the city within the lagoon were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, covering an area of 70,176.4 hectares (173,410 acres). In view of the fact that Venice and its lagoon are under constant threat in terms of their ecology and the safeguarding of the cultural heritage, Venice's UNESCO listing has been under constant examination by UNESCO. Parts of Venice are renowned for the beauty of their settings, their architecture, and artwork. Venice is known for several important artistic movements – especially during the Renaissance period – and has played an important role in the history of instrumental and operatic music; it is the birthplace of Baroque composers Tomaso Albinoni and Antonio Vivaldi. In the 21st century, Venice remains a very popular tourist destination, a major cultural centre, and has been ranked many times the most beautiful city in the world. It has been described by The Times as one of Europe's most romantic cities and by The New York Times as "undoubtedly the most beautiful city built by man". However, the city faces challenges including an excessive number of tourists, pollution, tide peaks and cruise ships sailing too close to buildings. Although no surviving historical records deal directly with the founding or building of Venice, tradition and the available evidence have led several historians to agree that the original population of Venice consisted of refugees – from nearby Roman cities such as Padua, Aquileia, Treviso, Altino, and Concordia (modern Portogruaro), as well as from the undefended countryside – who were fleeing successive waves of Germanic and Hun invasions. This is further supported by the documentation on the so-called "apostolic families", the twelve founding families of Venice who elected the first doge, who in most cases trace their lineage back to Roman families. Some late Roman sources reveal the existence of fishermen, on the islands in the original marshy lagoons, who were referred to as incolae lacunae ("lagoon dwellers"). The traditional founding is identified with the dedication of the first church, that of San Giacomo on the islet of Rialto (Rivoalto, "High Shore")—said to have taken place at the stroke of noon on 25 March 421 (the Feast of the Annunciation). Beginning as early as AD 166–168, the Quadi and Marcomanni destroyed the main Roman town in the area, present-day Oderzo. This part of Roman Italy was again overrun in the early 5th century by the Visigoths and, some 50 years later, by the Huns led by Attila. The last and most enduring immigration into the north of the Italian peninsula, that of the Lombards in 568, left the Eastern Roman Empire only a small strip of coastline in the current Veneto, including Venice. The Roman/Byzantine territory was organized as the Exarchate of Ravenna, administered from that ancient port and overseen by a viceroy (the Exarch) appointed by the Emperor in Constantinople. Ravenna and Venice were connected only by sea routes, and with the Venetians' isolation came increasing autonomy. New ports were built, including those at Malamocco and Torcello in the Venetian lagoon. The tribuni maiores formed the earliest central standing governing committee of the islands in the lagoon, dating from c. 568. The traditional first doge of Venice, Paolo Lucio Anafesto (Anafestus Paulicius), was elected in 697, as written in the oldest chronicle by John, deacon of Venice c. 1008. Some modern historians claim Paolo Lucio Anafesto was actually the Exarch Paul, and Paul's successor, Marcello Tegalliano, was Paul's magister militum (or "general"), literally "master of soldiers". In 726 the soldiers and citizens of the exarchate rose in a rebellion over the iconoclastic controversy, at the urging of Pope Gregory II. The exarch, held responsible for the acts of his master, Byzantine Emperor Leo III, was murdered, and many officials were put to flight in the chaos. At about this time, the people of the lagoon elected their own independent leader for the first time, although the relationship of this to the uprisings is not clear. Ursus was the first of 117 "doges" (doge) is the Venetian dialectal equivalent of the Latin dux ("leader"); the corresponding word in English is duke, in standard Italian duca (see also "duce".) Whatever his original views, Ursus supported Emperor Leo III's successful military expedition to recover Ravenna, sending both men and ships. In recognition of this, Venice was "granted numerous privileges and concessions" and Ursus, who had personally taken the field, was confirmed by Leo as dux and given the added title of hypatus (from the Greek for "consul"). In 751, the Lombard King Aistulf conquered most of the Exarchate of Ravenna, leaving Venice a lonely and increasingly autonomous Byzantine outpost. During this period, the seat of the local Byzantine governor (the "duke/dux", later "doge"), was at Malamocco. Settlement on the islands in the lagoon probably increased with the Lombard conquest of other Byzantine territories, as refugees sought asylum in the area. In 775/6, the episcopal seat of Olivolo (San Pietro di Castello) was created. During the reign of duke Agnello Particiaco (811–827) the ducal seat moved from Malamocco to the more protected Rialto, within present-day Venice. The monastery of St Zachary and the first ducal palace and basilica of St. Mark, as well as a walled defense (civitatis murus) between Olivolo and Rialto, were subsequently built here. Charlemagne sought to subdue the city to his rule. He ordered the pope to expel the Venetians from the Pentapolis along the Adriatic coast; Charlemagne's own son Pepin of Italy, king of the Lombards, under the authority of his father, embarked on a siege of Venice itself. This, however, proved a costly failure. The siege lasted six months, with Pepin's army ravaged by the diseases of the local swamps and eventually forced to withdraw in 810. A few months later, Pepin himself died, apparently as a result of a disease contracted there. In the aftermath, an agreement between Charlemagne and the Byzantine Emperor Nicephorus in 814 recognized Venice as Byzantine territory, and granted the city trading rights along the Adriatic coast. In 828 the new city's prestige increased with the acquisition, from Alexandria, of relics claimed to be of St Mark the Evangelist; these were placed in the new basilica. Winged lions – visible throughout Venice – are the emblem of St Mark. The patriarchal seat was also moved to Rialto. As the community continued to develop, and as Byzantine power waned, its own autonomy grew, leading to eventual independence. From the 9th to the 12th centuries, Venice developed into a powerful maritime empire (an Italian thalassocracy known also as repubblica marinara). In addition to Venice there were seven others: the most important ones were Genoa, Pisa, and Amalfi; and the lesser known were Ragusa, Ancona, Gaeta and Noli. Its own strategic position at the head of the Adriatic made Venetian naval and commercial power almost invulnerable. With the elimination of pirates along the Dalmatian coast, the city became a flourishing trade centre between Western Europe and the rest of the world, especially with the Byzantine Empire and Asia, where its navy protected sea routes against piracy. The Republic of Venice seized a number of places on the eastern shores of the Adriatic before 1200, mostly for commercial reasons, because pirates based there were a menace to trade. The doge already possessed the titles of Duke of Dalmatia and Duke of Istria. Later mainland possessions, which extended across Lake Garda as far west as the Adda River, were known as the Terraferma; they were acquired partly as a buffer against belligerent neighbours, partly to guarantee Alpine trade routes, and partly to ensure the supply of mainland wheat (on which the city depended). In building its maritime commercial empire, Venice dominated the trade in salt, acquired control of most of the islands in the Aegean, including Crete, and Cyprus in the Mediterranean, and became a major power-broker in the Near East. By the standards of the time, Venice's stewardship of its mainland territories was relatively enlightened and the citizens of such towns as Bergamo, Brescia, and Verona rallied to the defence of Venetian sovereignty when it was threatened by invaders. Venice remained closely associated with Constantinople, being twice granted trading privileges in the Eastern Roman Empire, through the so-called golden bulls or "chrysobulls", in return for aiding the Eastern Empire to resist Norman and Turkish incursions. In the first chrysobull, Venice acknowledged its homage to the empire; but not in the second, reflecting the decline of Byzantium and the rise of Venice's power. Venice became an imperial power following the Fourth Crusade, which, having veered off course, culminated in 1204 by capturing and sacking Constantinople and establishing the Latin Empire. As a result of this conquest, considerable Byzantine plunder was brought back to Venice. This plunder included the gilt bronze horses from the Hippodrome of Constantinople, which were originally placed above the entrance to the cathedral of Venice, St Mark's Basilica (The originals have been replaced with replicas, and are now stored within the basilica.) After the fall of Constantinople, the former Eastern Roman Empire was partitioned among the Latin crusaders and the Venetians. Venice subsequently carved out a sphere of influence in the Mediterranean known as the Duchy of the Archipelago, and captured Crete. The seizure of Constantinople proved as decisive a factor in ending the Byzantine Empire as the loss of the Anatolian themes, after Manzikert. Although the Byzantines recovered control of the ravaged city a half-century later, the Byzantine Empire was terminally weakened, and existed as a ghost of its old self, until Sultan Mehmet The Conqueror took the city in 1453. Situated on the Adriatic Sea, Venice had always traded extensively with the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East. By the late 13th century, Venice was the most prosperous city in all of Europe. At the peak of its power and wealth, it had 36,000 sailors operating 3,300 ships, dominating Mediterranean commerce. Venice's leading families vied with each other to build the grandest palaces and to support the work of the greatest and most talented artists. The city was governed by the Great Council, which was made up of members of the noble families of Venice. The Great Council appointed all public officials, and elected a Senate of 200 to 300 individuals. Since this group was too large for efficient administration, a Council of Ten (also called the Ducal Council, or the Signoria), controlled much of the administration of the city. One member of the great council was elected "doge", or duke, to be the chief executive; he would usually hold the title until his death, although several Doges were forced, by pressure from their oligarchical peers, to resign and retire into monastic seclusion, when they were felt to have been discredited by political failure. The Venetian governmental structure was similar in some ways to the republican system of ancient Rome, with an elected chief executive (the doge), a senator-like assembly of nobles, and the general citizenry with limited political power, who originally had the power to grant or withhold their approval of each newly elected doge. Church and various private property was tied to military service, although there was no knight tenure within the city itself. The Cavalieri di San Marco was the only order of chivalry ever instituted in Venice, and no citizen could accept or join a foreign order without the government's consent. Venice remained a republic throughout its independent period, and politics and the military were kept separate, except when on occasion the Doge personally headed the military. War was regarded as a continuation of commerce by other means. Therefore, the city's early employment of large numbers of mercenaries for service elsewhere, and later its reliance on foreign mercenaries when the ruling class was preoccupied with commerce. Although the people of Venice generally remained orthodox Roman Catholics, the state of Venice was notable for its freedom from religious fanaticism, and executed nobody for religious heresy during the Counter-Reformation. This apparent lack of zeal contributed to Venice's frequent conflicts with the papacy. In this context, the writings of the Anglican divine William Bedell are particularly illuminating. Venice was threatened with the interdict on a number of occasions and twice suffered its imposition. The second, most noted, occasion was in 1606, by order of Pope Paul V. The newly invented German printing press spread rapidly throughout Europe in the 15th century, and Venice was quick to adopt it. By 1482, Venice was the printing capital of the world; the leading printer was Aldus Manutius, who invented paperback books that could be carried in a saddlebag. His Aldine Editions included translations of nearly all the known Greek manuscripts of the era. Venice's long decline started in the 15th century. Venice confronted the Ottoman Empire in the Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430) and sent ships to help defend Constantinople against the besieging Turks in 1453. After the Fall of Constantinople, Sultan Mehmed II declared the first of a series of Ottoman-Venetian wars that cost Venice much of its eastern Mediterranean possessions. Vasco da Gama's 1497–1499 voyage opened a sea route to India around the Cape of Good Hope and destroyed Venice's monopoly. Venice's oared vessels were at a disadvantage when it came to traversing oceans, therefore Venice was left behind in the race for colonies. The Black Death devastated Venice in 1348 and struck again between 1575 and 1577. In three years, the plague killed some 50,000 people. In 1630, the Italian plague of 1629–31 killed a third of Venice's 150,000 citizens. Venice began to lose the position as a centre of international trade during the later part of the Renaissance as Portugal became Europe's principal intermediary in the trade with the East, striking at the very foundation of Venice's great wealth. France and Spain fought for hegemony over Italy in the Italian Wars, marginalising its political influence. However, Venice remained a major exporter of agricultural products and until the mid-18th century, a significant manufacturing centre. The Republic of Venice lost its independence when Napoleon Bonaparte conquered Venice on 12 May 1797 during the War of the First Coalition. Napoleon was seen as something of a liberator by the city's Jewish population. He removed the gates of the Ghetto and ended the restrictions on when and where Jews could live and travel in the city. Venice became Austrian territory when Napoleon signed the Treaty of Campo Formio on 12 October 1797. The Austrians took control of the city on 18 January 1798. Venice was taken from Austria by the Treaty of Pressburg in 1805 and became part of Napoleon's Kingdom of Italy. It was returned to Austria following Napoleon's defeat in 1814, when it became part of the Austrian-held Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia. In 1848 a revolt briefly re-established the Venetian republic under Daniele Manin, but this was crushed in 1849. In 1866, after the Third Italian War of Independence, Venice, along with the rest of the Veneto, became part of the newly created Kingdom of Italy. From the middle of the 18th century, Trieste and papal Ancona, both of which became free ports, competed with Venice more and more economically. Habsburg Trieste in particular boomed and increasingly served trade via the Suez Canal, which opened in 1869, between Asia and Central Europe, while Venice very quickly lost its competitive edge and commercial strength. During World War II, the historic city was largely free from attack, the only aggressive effort of note being Operation Bowler, a successful Royal Air Force precision strike on the German naval operations in the city in March 1945. The targets were destroyed with virtually no architectural damage inflicted on the city itself. However, the industrial areas in Mestre and Marghera and the railway lines to Padua, Trieste, and Trento were repeatedly bombed. On 29 April 1945, a force of British and New Zealand troops of the British Eighth Army, under Lieutenant General Freyberg, liberated Venice, which had been a hotbed of anti-Mussolini Italian partisan activity. Venice was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, inscribing it as "Venice and its Lagoon". Venice is located in northeastern Italy, in the Veneto region. The city is situated on a group of 118 small islands that are separated by canals and linked by 438 bridges. The historic center of Venice is divided into six districts, or sestieri, which are named Cannaregio, Castello, Dorsoduro, San Marco, San Polo, and Santa Croce. Venice sits atop alluvial silt washed into the sea by the rivers flowing eastward from the Alps across the Veneto plain, with the silt being stretched into long banks, or lidi, by the action of the current flowing around the head of the Adriatic Sea from east to west. Subsidence, the gradual lowering of the surface of Venice, has contributed – along with other factors – to the seasonal Acqua alta ("high water") when the city's lowest lying surfaces may be covered at high tide. Those fleeing barbarian invasions who found refuge on the sandy islands of Torcello, Iesolo, and Malamocco, in this coastal lagoon, learned to build by driving closely spaced piles consisting of the trunks of alder trees, a wood noted for its water resistance, into the mud and sand, until they reached a much harder layer of compressed clay. Building foundations rested on plates of Istrian limestone placed on top of the piles. Between autumn and early spring, the city is often threatened by flood tides pushing in from the Adriatic. Six hundred years ago, Venetians protected themselves from land-based attacks by diverting all the major rivers flowing into the lagoon and thus preventing sediment from filling the area around the city. This created an ever-deeper lagoon environment. Additionally, the lowest part of Venice, St Mark's Basilica, is only 64 centimetres (25 in) above sea level, and one of the most flood-prone parts of the city. In 1604, to defray the cost of flood relief, Venice introduced what could be considered the first example of a stamp tax. When the revenue fell short of expectations in 1608, Venice introduced paper, with the superscription "AQ" and imprinted instructions, which was to be used for "letters to officials". At first, this was to be a temporary tax, but it remained in effect until the fall of the Republic in 1797. Shortly after the introduction of the tax, Spain produced similar paper for general taxation purposes, and the practice spread to other countries. During the 20th century, when many artesian wells were sunk into the periphery of the lagoon to draw water for local industry, Venice began to subside. It was realized that extraction of water from the aquifer was the cause. The sinking has slowed markedly since artesian wells were banned in the 1960s. However, the city is still threatened by more frequent low-level floods – the Acqua alta, that rise to a height of several centimetres over its quays – regularly following certain tides. In many old houses, staircases once used to unload goods are now flooded, rendering the former ground floor uninhabitable.[citation needed] Studies indicate that the city continues sinking at a relatively slow rate of 1–2 mm per year; therefore, the state of alert has not been revoked. In May 2003, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi inaugurated the MOSE Project (Italian: Modulo Sperimentale Elettromeccanico), an experimental model for evaluating the performance of hollow floatable gates, expected to be completed in late 2023; the idea is to fix a series of 78 hollow pontoons to the sea bed across the three entrances to the lagoon. When tides are predicted to rise above 110 centimetres (43 in), the pontoons will be filled with air, causing them to float on lagoon side while hinged at sea floor on seaside, thus blocking the incoming water from the Adriatic Sea. This engineering work was due to be completed by 2018. A Reuters report stated that the MOSE Project attributed the delay to "corruption scandals". The project is not guaranteed to be successful and the cost has been very high, with as much as approximately €2 billion of the cost lost to corruption. According to a spokesman for the National Trust of Italy (Fondo Ambiente Italiano): Mose is a pharaonic project that should have cost €800m [£675m] but will cost at least €7bn [£6bn]. If the barriers are closed at only 90 cm of high water, most of St Mark's will be flooded anyway; but if closed at very high levels only, then people will wonder at the logic of spending such sums on something that didn't solve the problem. And pressure will come from the cruise ships to keep the gates open. On 13 November 2019, Venice was flooded when waters peaked at 1.87 m (6 ft), the highest tide since 1966 (1.94 m). More than 80% of the city was covered by water, which damaged cultural heritage sites, including more than 50 churches, leading to tourists cancelling their visits. The planned flood barrier would have prevented this incident according to various sources, including Marco Piana, the head of conservation at St Mark's Basilica. The mayor promised that work on the flood barrier would continue, and the Prime Minister announced that the government would be accelerating the project. The city's mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, blamed the floods on climate change. The chambers of the Regional Council of Veneto began to be flooded around 10 pm, two minutes after the council rejected a plan to combat global warming. One of the effects of climate change is sea level rise which causes an increase in frequency and magnitude of floodings in the city. A Washington Post report provided a more thorough analysis: "The sea level has been rising even more rapidly in Venice than in other parts of the world. At the same time, the city is sinking, the result of tectonic plates shifting below the Italian coast. Those factors together, along with the more frequent extreme weather events associated with climate change, contribute to floods." Henk Ovink, an expert on flooding, told CNN that, while environmental factors are part of the problem, "historic floods in Venice are not only a result of the climate crisis but poor infrastructure and mismanagement". The government of Italy committed to providing 20 million euros in funding to help the city repair the most urgent aspects although Brugnaro's estimate of the total damage was "hundreds of millions" to at least 1 billion euros. On 3 October 2020, the MOSE was activated for the first time in response to a predicted high tide event, preventing some of the low-lying parts of the city (in particular the Piazza San Marco) from being flooded. According to the Köppen climate classification, Venice has a mid-latitude, four season humid subtropical climate (Cfa), with cool, damp winters and warm, humid summers. The 24-hour average temperature in January is 3.3 °C (37.9 °F), and for July this figure is 23.0 °C (73.4 °F). Precipitation is spread relatively evenly throughout the year, and averages 748 millimetres (29.4 in); snow isn't a rarity between late November and early March. During the most severe winters, the canals and parts of the lagoon can freeze, but with the warming trend of the past 30–40 years, the occurrence has become rarer. The city was one of the largest in Europe in the High Middle Ages, with a population of 60,000 in AD 1000; 80,000 in 1200; and rising up to 110,000–180,000 in 1300. In the mid-1500s the city's population was 170,000, and by 1600 it approached 200,000. In 2021, there were 254,850 people residing in the Comune of Venice (the population figure includes 50,434 in the historic city of Venice (Centro storico), 177,621 in Terraferma (the mainland); and 26,795 on other islands in the lagoon). 47.8% of the population in 2021 were male and 52.2% were female; minors (ages 18 and younger) were 14.7% of the population compared to elderly people (ages 65 and older) who numbered 27.9%. This compared with the Italian average of 16.7% and 23.5%, respectively. The average age of Venice residents was 48.6 compared to the Italian average of 45.9. In the five years between 2016 and 2021, the population of Venice declined by 2.7%, while Italy as a whole declined by 2.2%. The population in the historic old city declined much faster: from about 120,000 in 1980 to about 60,000 in 2009, and to 50,000 in 2021. As of 2021[update], 84.2% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant groups include: 7,814 (3.1%) Bangladeshis, 6,258 (2.5%) Romanians, 4,054 (1.6%) Moldovans, 4,014 (1.6%) Chinese, and 2,514 (1%) Ukrainians. Venice is predominantly Roman Catholic (85.0% of the resident population in the area of the Patriarchate of Venice in 2022), but because of the long-standing relationship with Constantinople, there is also a noticeable Orthodox presence; and as a result of immigration, there is now a large Muslim community (about 25,000 or 9.5% of city population in 2018) and some Hindu, and Buddhist inhabitants. Since 1991, the Church of San Giorgio dei Greci in Venice has become the see of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Italy and Malta and Exarchate of Southern Europe, a Byzantine-rite diocese under the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. There is also a historic Jewish community in Venice. The Venetian Ghetto was the area in which Jews were compelled to live under the Venetian Republic. The word ghetto (ghèto), originally Venetian, is now found in many languages. Shakespeare's play The Merchant of Venice, written in the late 16th century, features Shylock, a Venetian Jew. The first complete and uncensored printed edition of the Talmud was printed in Venice by Daniel Bomberg in 1523. During World War II, Jews were rounded up in Venice and deported to extermination camps. Since the end of the war, the Jewish population of Venice has declined from 1500 to about 500. Only around 30 Jews live in the former ghetto, which houses the city's major Jewish institutions. In modern times, Venice has an eruv, used by the Jewish community. The legislative body of the Comune is the City Council (Consiglio Comunale), which is composed of 36 councillors elected every five years with a proportional system, contextually to the mayoral elections. The executive body is the City Administration (Giunta Comunale), composed of 12 assessors nominated and presided over by a directly elected Mayor. Venice was governed by centre-left parties from the early 1990s until the 2010s, when the Mayor started to be elected directly. Its region, Veneto, has long been a conservative stronghold, with the coalition between the regionalist Lega Nord and the centre-right Forza Italia winning absolute majorities of the electorate in many elections at local, national, and regional levels. The current Mayor of Venice is Luigi Brugnaro, a centre-right independent businessman who is currently serving his second term in office. The municipality of Venice is also subdivided into six administrative boroughs (municipalità). Each borough is governed by a council (Consiglio) and a president, elected every five years. The urban organization is dictated by Article 114 of the Italian Constitution. The boroughs have the power to advise the Mayor with nonbinding opinions on a large spectrum of topics (environment, construction, public health, local markets) and exercise the functions delegated to them by the City Council; in addition, they are supplied with autonomous funding to finance local activities. Notes Annexed with a Royal Decree to the municipality of Venice in 1926. The historic city of Venice has historically been divided into six sestieri, and is made up of a total of 127 individual islands, most of which are separated from their neighbors by narrow channels only. Each sestiere is now a statistical and historical area without any degree of autonomy. The six fingers or phalanges of the ferro on the bow of a gondola represent the six sestieri. The sestieri are divided into parishes—initially 70 in 1033, but reduced under Napoleon, and now numbering just 38. These parishes predate the sestieri, which were created in about 1170. Each parish exhibited unique characteristics but also belonged to an integrated network. Each community chose its own patron saint, staged its own festivals, congregated around its own market centre, constructed its own bell towers, and developed its own customs. Other islands of the Venetian Lagoon do not form part of any of the sestieri, having historically enjoyed a considerable degree of autonomy. Each sestiere has its own house numbering system. Each house has a unique number in the district, from one to several thousand, generally numbered from one corner of the area to another, but not usually in a readily understandable manner. Venice's economy has changed throughout history. Although there is little specific information about the earliest years, it is likely that an important source of the city's prosperity was the trade in slaves, captured in central Europe and sold to North Africa and the Levant. Venice's location at the head of the Adriatic, and directly south of the terminus of the Brenner Pass over the Alps, would have given it a distinct advantage as a middleman in this important trade. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice was a major centre for commerce and trade, as it controlled a vast sea-empire, and became an extremely wealthy European city and a leader in political and economic affairs. From the 11th century until the 15th century, pilgrimages to the Holy Land were offered in Venice. Other ports such as Genoa, Pisa, Marseille, Ancona, and Dubrovnik were hardly able to compete with the well organized transportation of pilgrims from Venice. Armenian merchants from Julfa were the leading traders in Venice, especially the Sceriman family in the 17th century. They were specialized in the gems and diamonds business. The trade volume reached millions of tons, which was exceptional for 17th century. This all changed by the 17th century, when Venice's trade empire was taken over by countries such as Portugal, and its importance as a naval power was reduced. In the 18th century, it became a major agricultural and industrial exporter. The 18th century's biggest industrial complex was the Venice Arsenal, and the Italian Army still uses it today (even though some space has been used for major theatrical and cultural productions, and as spaces for art). Since World War II, many Venetians have moved to the neighboring cities of Mestre and Porto Marghera, seeking employment as well as affordable housing. Today, Venice's economy is mainly based on tourism, shipbuilding (mainly in Mestre and Porto Marghera), services, trade, and industrial exports. Murano glass production in Murano and lace production in Burano are also highly important to the economy. The city is facing financial challenges. In late 2016, it had a major deficit in its budget and debts in excess of €400 million. "In effect, the place is bankrupt", according to a report by The Guardian. Many locals are leaving the historic centre due to rapidly increasing rents. The declining native population affects the character of the city, as an October 2016 National Geographic article pointed out in its subtitle: "Residents are abandoning the city, which is in danger of becoming an overpriced theme park". The city is also facing other challenges, including erosion, pollution, subsidence, an excessive number of tourists in peak periods, and problems caused by oversized cruise ships sailing close to the banks of the historical city. In June 2017, Italy was required to bail out two Venetian banks – the Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca – to prevent their bankruptcies. Both banks would be wound down and their assets that have value taken over by another Italian bank, Intesa Sanpaolo, which would receive €5.2 billion as compensation. The Italian government would be responsible for losses from any uncollectible loans from the closed banks. The cost would be €5.2 billion, with further guarantees to cover bad loans totaling €12 billion. Venice is an important destination for tourists who want to see its celebrated art and architecture. The city hosts up to 60,000 tourists per day (2017 estimate). Estimates of the annual number of tourists vary from 22 million to 30 million. This "overtourism" creates overcrowding and environmental problems for Venice's ecosystem. By 2017, UNESCO was considering the addition of Venice to its "In-Danger" list, which includes historical ruins in war-torn countries. To reduce the number of visitors, who are causing irreversible changes in Venice, the agency supports limiting the number of cruise ships as well as implementing a strategy for more sustainable tourism. Tourism has been a major part of the Venetian economy since the 18th century, when Venice – with its beautiful cityscape, uniqueness, and rich musical and artistic cultural heritage – was a stop on the Grand Tour. In the 19th century, Venice became a fashionable centre for the "rich and famous", who often stayed and dined at luxury establishments such as the Danieli Hotel and the Caffè Florian, and continued to be a fashionable city into the early 20th century. In the 1980s, the Carnival of Venice was revived; and the city has become a major centre of international conferences and festivals, such as the prestigious Venice Biennale and the Venice Film Festival, which attract visitors from all over the world for their theatrical, cultural, cinematic, artistic, and musical productions. Today, there are numerous attractions in Venice, such as St Mark's Basilica, the Doge's Palace, the Grand Canal, and the Piazza San Marco. The Lido di Venezia is also a popular international luxury destination, attracting thousands of actors, critics, celebrities, and others in the cinematic industry. The city also relies heavily on the cruise business. The Cruise Venice Committee has estimated that cruise ship passengers spend more than 150 million euros (US$193 million) annually in the city, according to a 2015 report. Other reports, however, point out that such day-trippers spend relatively little in the few hours of their visits to the city. Venice is regarded by some as a tourist trap, and by others as a "living museum". The need to protect the city's historic environment and fragile canals, in the face of a possible loss of jobs produced by cruise tourism, has seen the Italian Transport Ministry attempt to introduce a ban on large cruise ships visiting the city. A 2013 ban would have allowed only cruise ships smaller than 40,000-gross tons to enter the Giudecca Canal and St Mark's basin. In January 2015, a regional court scrapped the ban, but some global cruise lines indicated that they would continue to respect it until a long-term solution for the protection of Venice is found. P&O Cruises removed Venice from its summer schedule; Holland America moved one of its ships from this area to Alaska; and Cunard reduced (in 2017 and further in 2018) the number of visits by its ships. As a result, the Venice Port Authority estimated an 11.4 per cent drop in cruise ships arriving in 2017 versus 2016, leading to a similar reduction in income for Venice. Having failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the city switched to a new strategy in mid-2017, banning the creation of any additional hotels. Currently, there are over 24,000 hotel rooms. The ban does not affect short-term rentals in the historic centre which are causing an increase in the cost of living for the native residents of Venice. The city had already banned any additional fast food "take-away" outlets, to retain the historic character of the city, which was another reason for freezing the number of hotel rooms. Fewer than half of the millions of annual visitors stay overnight, however. The city also considered a ban on wheeled suitcases, but settled for banning hard plastic wheels for transporting cargo from May 2015. In addition to accelerating erosion of the ancient city's foundations and creating some pollution in the lagoon, cruise ships dropping an excessive number of day trippers can make St. Marks Square and other popular attractions too crowded to walk through during the peak season. Government officials see little value to the economy from the "eat and flee" tourists who stay for less than a day, which is typical of those from cruise ships. Some locals continued to aggressively lobby for new methods that would reduce the number of cruise ship passengers; their estimate indicated that there are up to 30,000 such sightseers per day at peak periods, while others concentrate their effort on promoting a more responsible way of visiting the city. An unofficial referendum to ban large cruise ships was held in June 2017. More than 18,000 people voted at 60 polling booths set up by activists, and 17,874 favored banning large ships from the lagoon. The population of Venice at the time was about 50,000. The organizers of the referendum backed a plan to build a new cruise ship terminal at one of the three entrances to the Venetian Lagoon. Passengers would be transferred to the historic area in smaller boats. On 28 February 2019, the Venice City Council voted in favour of a new municipal regulation requiring day-trippers visiting the historic centre, and the islands in the lagoon, to pay a new access fee. The extra revenue from the fee would be used for cleaning, maintaining security, reducing the financial burden on residents of Venice, and to "allow Venetians to live with more decorum". The new tax would be between €3 and €10 per person, depending on the expected tourist flow into the old city. The fee could be waived for certain types of travelers: including students, children under the age of 6, voluntary workers, residents of the Veneto region, and participants in sporting events. Overnight visitors, who already pay a "stay" tax and account for around 40% of Venice's yearly total of 28 million visitors, would also be exempted. The access fee was expected to come into effect in September 2019; but it was postponed, firstly, until 1 January 2020, and then, again, due to the coronavirus pandemic. The new charges would be imposed on those tourists who were not staying overnight and is expected to come into force on 1 April 2024. Having failed in its 2013 bid to ban oversized cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, the Italian inter-ministerial Comitatone overseeing Venice's lagoon released an official directive in November 2017 to keep the largest cruise ships away from the Piazza San Marco and the entrance to the Grand Canal. Ships over 55,000 tons will be required to follow a specific route through the Vittorio Emmanuele III Canal to reach Marghera, an industrial area of the mainland, where a passenger terminal would be built. In 2014, the United Nations warned the city that it may be placed on UNESCO's List of World Heritage in Danger sites unless cruise ships are banned from the canals near the historic centre. According to the officials, the plan to create an alternative route for ships would require extensive dredging of the canal and the building of a new port, which would take four years, in total, to complete. However, the activist group No Grandi Navi (No big Ships), argued that the effects of pollution caused by the ships would not be diminished by the re-routing plan. On 2 June 2019, the cruise ship MSC Opera rammed a tourist riverboat, the River Countess, which was docked on the Giudecca Canal, injuring five people, in addition to causing property damage. The incident immediately led to renewed demands to ban large cruise ships from the Giudecca Canal, including a Twitter message to that effect posted by the environment minister. The city's mayor urged authorities to accelerate the steps required for cruise ships to begin using the alternate Vittorio Emanuele canal. Italy's transport minister spoke of a "solution to protect both the lagoon and tourism ... after many years of inertia" but specifics were not reported. As of June 2019[update], the 2017 plan to establish an alternative route for large ships, preventing them from coming near the historic area of the city, has not yet been approved. Nonetheless, the Italian government released an announcement on 7 August 2019 that it would begin rerouting cruise ships larger than 1000 tonnes away from the historic city's Giudecca Canal. For the last four months of 2019, all heavy vessels will dock at the Fusina and Lombardia terminals which are still on the lagoon but away from the central islands. By 2020, one-third of all cruise ships will be rerouted, according to Danilo Toninelli, the minister for Venice. Preparation work for the Vittorio Emanuele Canal needed to begin soon for a long-term solution, according to the Cruise Lines International Association. In the long-term, space for ships would be provided at new terminals, perhaps at Chioggia or Lido San Nicolo. That plan was not imminent however, since public consultations had not yet begun. Over 1.5 million people per year arrive in Venice on cruise ships. The Italian government decided to divert large cruise ships beginning August 2021. Venice is built on an archipelago of 118 islands in a shallow, 550 km2 (212 sq mi) lagoon, connected by 400 bridges over 177 canals. In the 19th century, a causeway to the mainland brought the railroad to Venice. The adjoining Ponte della Libertà road causeway and terminal parking facilities in Tronchetto island and Piazzale Roma were built during the 20th century. Beyond these rail and road terminals on the northern edge of the city, transportation within the city's historic centre remains, as it was in centuries past, entirely on water or on foot. Venice is Europe's largest urban car-free area and is unique in Europe in having remained a sizable functioning city in the 21st century entirely without motorcars or trucks. The classic Venetian boat is the gondola, (plural: gondole) although it is now mostly used for tourists, or for weddings, funerals, or other ceremonies, or as traghetti (sing.: traghetto) to cross the Grand Canal in lieu of a nearby bridge. The traghetti are operated by two oarsmen. There are approximately 400 licensed gondoliers in Venice, in their distinctive livery, and a similar number of boats, down from 10,000 two centuries ago. Many gondolas are lushly appointed with crushed velvet seats and Persian rugs. At the front of each gondola that works in the city, there is a large piece of metal called the fèro (iron). Its shape has evolved through the centuries, as documented in many well-known paintings. Its form, topped by a likeness of the Doge's hat, became gradually standardized, and was then fixed by local law. It consists of six bars pointing forward representing the sestieri of the city, and one that points backwards representing the Giudecca. A lesser-known boat is the smaller, simpler, but similar, sandolo. Venice's small islands were enhanced during the Middle Ages by the dredging of soil to raise the marshy ground above the tides. The resulting canals encouraged the flourishing of a nautical culture which proved central to the economy of the city. Today those canals still provide the means for transport of goods and people within the city. The maze of canals threading through the city requires more than 400 bridges to permit the flow of foot traffic. In 2011, the city opened the Ponte della Costituzione, the fourth bridge across the Grand Canal, which connects the Piazzale Roma bus-terminal area with the Venezia Santa Lucia railway station. The other bridges are the original Ponte di Rialto, the Ponte dell'Accademia, and the Ponte degli Scalzi. Azienda del Consorzio Trasporti Veneziano (ACTV) is a public company responsible for public transportation in Venice. The main means of public transportation consists of motorised waterbuses (vaporetti) which ply regular routes along the Grand Canal and between the city's islands. Private motorised water taxis are also active. The only gondole still in common use by Venetians are the traghetti, foot passenger ferries crossing the Grand Canal at certain points where there are no convenient bridges. Other gondole are rented by tourists on an hourly basis. The Venice People Mover is an elevated shuttle train public transit system connecting Tronchetto island with its car parking facility with Piazzale Roma where visitors arrive in the city by bus, taxi, or automobile. The train makes a stop at the Marittima cruise terminal at the Port of Venice. Lido and Pellestrina are two islands forming a barrier between the southern Venetian Lagoon and the Adriatic Sea. On those islands, road traffic, including bus service, is allowed. Vaporetti link them with other islands (Venice, Murano, Burano) and with the peninsula of Cavallino-Treporti. The mainland of Venice is composed of 4 boroughs: Mestre-Carpenedo, Marghera, Chirignago-Zelarino, and Favaro Veneto. Mestre is the centre and the most populous urban area of the mainland. There are several bus routes and two Translohr tramway lines. Several bus routes and one of the tramway lines link the mainland with Piazzale Roma, the main bus station in Venice, via Ponte della Libertà, the road bridge connecting the mainland with the group of islands that comprise the historic centre of Venice. The average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Venice, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 52 min. Only 12.2% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 10 min, while 17.6% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 7 kilometres (4.3 mi), while 12% travel for over 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) in a single direction. Venice is served by regional and national trains, including trains to Florence (1h53), Milan (2h13), Turin (3h10), Rome (3h33), and Naples (4h50). In addition there are international day trains to Zurich, Innsbruck, Munich, and Vienna, plus overnight sleeper services, to Paris and Dijon on Thello trains, and to Munich and Vienna via Austrian Federal Railways. The Venezia Santa Lucia railway station is a few steps away from a vaporetti stop, Ferovia, in the historic city next to the Piazzale Roma. This station is the terminus of local trains and of the luxury Venice Simplon Orient Express from London via Paris and other cities. The Venezia Mestre railway station is on the mainland, on the border between the boroughs of Mestre and Marghera. Both stations are managed by Grandi Stazioni; they are linked by the Ponte della Libertà (Liberty Bridge) between the mainland and the city centre. Other stations in the municipality are Venezia Porto Marghera, Venezia Carpenedo, Venezia Mestre Ospedale, and Venezia Mestre Porta Ovest. The Port of Venice (Italian: Porto di Venezia) is the eighth-busiest commercial port in Italy and was a major hub for the cruise sector in the Mediterranean, as since August 2021 ships of more 25,000 tons are forbidden to pass the Giudecca Canal. It is one of the major Italian ports and is included in the list of the leading European ports which are located on the strategic nodes of trans-European networks. In 2002, the port handled 262,337 containers. In 2006, 30,936,931 tonnes passed through the port, of which 14,541,961 was commercial traffic, and saw 1,453,513 passengers. The Marco Polo International Airport (Aeroporto di Venezia Marco Polo) is named in honor of Marco Polo. The airport is on the mainland and was rebuilt away from the coast. Public transport from the airport takes one to: Venice Piazzale Roma by ATVO (provincial company) buses and by ACTV (city company) buses (route 5 aerobus); Venice, Lido, and Murano by Allilaguna (private company) motor boats; Mestre, the mainland, where Venice Mestre railway station is convenient for connections to Milan, Padua, Trieste, Verona and the rest of Italy, and for ACTV (routes 15 and 45) and ATVO buses and other transport; Regional destinations, such as Treviso and Padua, by ATVO and Busitalia Sita Nord buses. Venice-Treviso Airport, about 30 kilometres (19 mi) from Venice, is used mainly by low-cost airlines. There are public buses from this airport to Venice. Venezia-Lido "Giovanni Nicelli", a public airport suitable for smaller aircraft, is at the northeast end of Lido di Venezia. It has a 994-metre (3,261 ft) grass runway. The most famous Venetian sport is probably Voga alla Veneta [it] ("Venetian-style rowing"), also commonly called voga veneta. A technique invented in the Venetian Lagoon, Venetian rowing is unusual in that the rower(s), one or more, row standing, looking forward. Today, Voga alla Veneta is not only the way the gondoliers row tourists around Venice but also the way Venetians row for pleasure and sport. Many races called regata(e) happen throughout the year. The culminating event of the rowing season is the day of the "Regata Storica", which occurs on the first Sunday of September each year. The main football club in the city is Venezia F.C., founded in 1907, which currently plays in the Serie B. Their ground, the Stadio Pier Luigi Penzo, situated in Sant'Elena, is the second-oldest continually used stadium in Italy. The local basketball club is Reyer Venezia, founded in 1872 as the gymnastics club Società Sportiva Costantino Reyer, and in 1907 as the basketball club. Reyer currently plays in the Lega Basket Serie A. The men's team were the Italian champions in 1942, 1943, and 2017. Their arena is the Palasport Giuseppe Taliercio, situated in Mestre. Luigi Brugnaro is both the president of the club and the mayor of the city. Venice is a major international centre for higher education. The city hosts the Ca' Foscari University of Venice, founded in 1868; the Università Iuav di Venezia, founded in 1926; the Venice International University, founded in 1995 and located on the island of San Servolo and the EIUC-European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation, located on the island of Lido di Venezia. Other Venetian institutions of higher education are: the Accademia di Belle Arti (Academy of Fine Arts), established in 1750, whose first chairman was Giovanni Battista Piazzetta, and the Benedetto Marcello Conservatory of Music, which was first established in 1876 as a high school and musical society, later (1915) became Liceo Musicale, and then, when its director was Gian Francesco Malipiero, the State Conservatory of Music (1940). Venice has long been a source of inspiration for authors, playwrights, and poets, and at the forefront of the technological development of printing and publishing. Two of the most noted Venetian writers were Marco Polo in the Middle Ages and, later, Giacomo Casanova. Polo (1254–1324) was a merchant who voyaged to the Orient. His series of books, co-written with Rustichello da Pisa and titled Il Milione provided important knowledge of the lands east of Europe, from the Middle East to China, Japan, and Russia. Giacomo Casanova (1725–1798) was a prolific writer and adventurer best remembered for his autobiography, Histoire De Ma Vie (Story of My Life), which links his colourful lifestyle to the city of Venice. Venetian playwrights followed the old Italian theatre tradition of commedia dell'arte. Ruzante (1502–1542), Carlo Goldoni (1707–1793), and Carlo Gozzi (1720–1806) used the Venetian dialect extensively in their comedies. Venice has also inspired writers from abroad. Shakespeare set Othello and The Merchant of Venice in the city, as did Thomas Mann his novel, Death in Venice (1912). The French writer Philippe Sollers spent most of his life in Venice and published A Dictionary For Lovers of Venice in 2004. The city features prominently in Henry James's The Aspern Papers and The Wings of the Dove. It is also visited in Evelyn Waugh's Brideshead Revisited and Marcel Proust's In Search of Lost Time. Perhaps the best-known children's book set in Venice is The Thief Lord, written by the German author Cornelia Funke. The poet Ugo Foscolo (1778–1827), born in Zante, an island that at the time belonged to the Republic of Venice, was also a revolutionary who wanted to see a free republic established in Venice following its fall to Napoleon. Venice also inspired the poetry of Ezra Pound, who wrote his first literary work in the city. Pound died in 1972, and his remains are buried in Venice's cemetery island of San Michele. Venice is also linked to the technological aspects of writing. The city was the location of one of Italy's earliest printing presses called Aldine Press, established by Aldus Manutius in 1494. From this beginning Venice developed as an important typographic centre. Around fifteen percent of all printing of the fifteenth century came from Venice, and even as late as the 18th century was responsible for printing half of Italy's published books.[citation needed] The city is a particularly popular setting for essays, novels, and other works of fictional or non-fictional literature. Examples of these include: Aretino's works (1492–1556) Shakespeare's Merchant of Venice (c. 1596–1598) and Othello (1603). Ben Jonson's Volpone (1605–6). Casanova's autobiographical History of My Life c. 1789–1797. Voltaire's Candide (1759). Letitia Elizabeth Landon wrote poetry for two pictures of Venice; one for The Embarkation, drawn by Clarkson Stanfield for The Amulet, 1833, the other for Santa Salute, drawn by Charles Bentley for the Literary Souvenir, 1835. Ernest Hemingway's Across the River and into the Trees (1950). Italo Calvino's Invisible Cities (1972). Anne Rice's Cry to Heaven (1982). Donna Leon's Commissario Guido Brunetti crime fiction series and cookbook, and the German television series based on the novels (1992–2019). Philippe Sollers' Watteau in Venice (1994). Michael Dibdin's Dead Lagoon (1994), one in a series of novels featuring Venice-born policeman Aurelio Zen. Jacqueline Carey's Kushiel's Chosen (2002), an historical fantasy or alternate history of Venice – complete with masquerades, canals, and a doge – taking place in a city known as La Serenissima. John Berendt's The City of Falling Angels (2005) Additionally, Thomas Mann's novella, Death in Venice (1912), was the basis for Benjamin Britten's eponymous opera (1973). Some English words with a Venetian etymology include arsenal, ciao, ghetto, gondola, imbroglio, lagoon, lazaret, lido, Montenegro, and regatta. By the end of the 15th century, Venice had become the European capital of printing, having 417 printers by 1500, and being one of the first cities in Italy (after Subiaco and Rome) to have a printing press, after those established in Germany. The most important printing office was the Aldine Press of Aldus Manutius; which in 1497 issued the first printed work of Aristotle; in 1499 printed the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili, considered the most beautiful book of the Renaissance; and established modern punctuation, page format, and italic type. Venice, especially during the Renaissance, and Baroque periods, was a major centre of art and developed a unique style known as the Venetian painting. In the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Venice, along with Florence and Rome, became one of the most important centres of art in Europe, and numerous wealthy Venetians became patrons of the arts. Venice at the time was a rich and prosperous Maritime Republic, which controlled a vast sea and trade empire. In the 16th century, Venetian painting was developed through influences from the Paduan School and Antonello da Messina, who introduced the oil painting technique of the Van Eyck brothers. It is signified by a warm colour scale and a picturesque use of colour. Early masters were the Bellini and Vivarini families, followed by Giorgione and Titian, then Tintoretto and Veronese. In the early 16th century, there was rivalry in Venetian painting between the disegno and colorito techniques. Canvases (the common painting surface) originated in Venice during the early Renaissance. In the 18th century, Venetian painting had a revival with Tiepolo's decorative painting and Canaletto's and Guardi's panoramic views. Venice is built on unstable mud-banks, and had a very crowded city centre by the Middle Ages. On the other hand, the city was largely safe from riot, civil feuds, and invasion much earlier than most European cities. These factors, with the canals and the great wealth of the city, made for unique building styles. Venice has a rich and diverse architectural style, the most prominent of which is the Gothic style. Venetian Gothic architecture is a term given to a Venetian building style combining the use of the Gothic lancet arch with the curved ogee arch, due to Byzantine and Ottoman influences. The style originated in 14th-century Venice, with a confluence of Byzantine style from Constantinople, Islamic influences from Spain and Venice's eastern trading partners, and early Gothic forms from mainland Italy.[citation needed] Chief examples of the style are the Doge's Palace and the Ca' d'Oro in the city. The city also has several Renaissance and Baroque buildings, including the Ca' Pesaro and the Ca' Rezzonico. Venetian taste was conservative and Renaissance architecture only really became popular in buildings from about the 1470s. More than in the rest of Italy, it kept much of the typical form of the Gothic palazzi, which had evolved to suit Venetian conditions. In turn the transition to Baroque architecture was also fairly gentle. This gives the crowded buildings on the Grand Canal and elsewhere an essential harmony, even where buildings from very different periods sit together. For example, round-topped arches are far more common in Renaissance buildings than elsewhere. It can be argued that Venice produced the best and most refined Rococo designs. At the time, the Venetian economy was in decline. It had lost most of its maritime power, was lagging behind its rivals in political importance, and its society had become decadent, with tourism increasingly the mainstay of the economy. But Venice remained a centre of fashion. Venetian rococo was well known as rich and luxurious, with usually very extravagant designs. Unique Venetian furniture types included the divani da portego, and long rococo couches and pozzetti, objects meant to be placed against the wall. Bedrooms of rich Venetians were usually sumptuous and grand, with rich damask, velvet, and silk drapery and curtains, and beautifully carved rococo beds with statues of putti, flowers, and angels. Venice was especially known for its girandole mirrors, which remained among, if not the, finest in Europe. Chandeliers were usually very colourful, using Murano glass to make them look more vibrant and stand out from others; and precious stones and materials from abroad were used, since Venice still held a vast trade empire. Lacquer was very common, and many items of furniture were covered with it, the most noted being lacca povera (poor lacquer), in which allegories and images of social life were painted. Lacquerwork and Chinoiserie were particularly common in bureau cabinets. Venice is known for its ornate glass-work, known as Venetian glass, which is world-renowned for being colourful, elaborate, and skilfully made. Many of the important characteristics of these objects had been developed by the 13th century. Toward the end of that century, the centre of the Venetian glass industry moved to Murano, an offshore island in Venice. The glass made there is known as Murano glass. Byzantine craftsmen played an important role in the development of Venetian glass. When Constantinople was sacked in the Fourth Crusade in 1204, some fleeing artisans came to Venice; when the Ottomans took Constantinople in 1453, still more glassworkers arrived. By the 16th century, Venetian artisans had gained even greater control over the colour and transparency of their glass, and had mastered a variety of decorative techniques. Despite efforts to keep Venetian glassmaking techniques within Venice, they became known elsewhere, and Venetian-style glassware was produced in other Italian cities and other countries of Europe. Some of the most important brands of glass in the world today are still produced in the historical glass factories on Murano. They are: Venini, Barovier & Toso, Pauly, Millevetri, and Seguso. Barovier & Toso is considered one of the 100 oldest companies in the world, formed in 1295. In February 2021, the world learned that Venetian glass trade beads had been found at three prehistoric Inuit sites in Alaska, including Punyik Point. Uninhabited today, and located 1 mile (1.6 km) from the Continental Divide in the Brooks Range, the area was on ancient trade routes from the Bering Sea to the Arctic Ocean. From their creation in Venice, researchers believe the likely route these artifacts traveled was across Europe, then Eurasia and finally over the Bering Strait, making this discovery "the first documented instance of the presence of indubitable European materials in prehistoric sites in the western hemisphere as the result of overland transport across the Eurasian continent." After radiocarbon dating materials found near the beads, archaeologists estimated their arrival on the continent to sometime between 1440 and 1480, predating Christopher Columbus. The dating and provenance has been challenged by other researchers who point out that such beads were not made in Venice until the mid-16th century and that an early 17th century French origin is possible. The Carnival of Venice is held annually in the city, It lasts for around two weeks and ends on Shrove Tuesday. Venetian masks are worn. The Venice Biennale is one of the most important events in the arts calendar. In 1895 an Esposizione biennale artistica nazionale (biennial exhibition of Italian art) was inaugurated. In September 1942, the activities of the Biennale were interrupted by the war, but resumed in 1948. The Festa del Redentore is held in mid-July. It began as a feast to give thanks for the end of the plague of 1576. A bridge of barges is built connecting Giudecca to the rest of Venice, and fireworks play an important role. The Venice Film Festival (Italian: Mostra Internazionale d'Arte Cinematografica di Venezia) is the oldest film festival in the world. Founded by Count Giuseppe Volpi di Misurata in 1932 as the Esposizione Internazionale d'Arte Cinematografica, the festival has since taken place every year in late August or early September on the island of the Lido. Screenings take place in the historic Palazzo del Cinema on the Lungomare Marconi. It is one of the world's most prestigious film festivals and is part of the Venice Biennale. The city of Venice in Italy has played an important role in the development of the music of Italy. The Venetian state (the medieval Republic of Venice) was often popularly called the "Republic of Music", and an anonymous Frenchman of the 17th century is said to have remarked that "In every home, someone is playing a musical instrument or singing. There is music everywhere." During the 16th century, Venice became one of the most important musical centres of Europe, marked by a characteristic style of composition (the Venetian school) and the development of the Venetian polychoral style under composers such as Adrian Willaert, who worked at St Mark's Basilica. Venice was the early centre of music printing; Ottaviano Petrucci began publishing music almost as soon as this technology was available, and his publishing enterprise helped to attract composers from all over Europe, especially from France and Flanders. By the end of the century, Venice was known for the splendor of its music, as exemplified in the "colossal style" of Andrea and Giovanni Gabrieli, which used multiple choruses and instrumental groups. Venice was also the home of many noted composers during the baroque period, such as Antonio Vivaldi, Ippolito Ciera, Giovanni Picchi, and Girolamo Dalla Casa, to name but a few. Venice is the home of numerous orchestras such as, the Orchestra della Fenice, Rondò Veneziano, Interpreti Veneziani, and Venice Baroque Orchestra. The city has been the setting or chosen location of numerous films, games, works of fine art and literature (including essays, fiction, non-fiction, and poems), music videos, television shows, and other cultural references.[citation needed] Fulvio Roiter was the pioneer in artistic photography in Venice, followed by a number of photographers whose works are often reproduced on postcards, thus reaching a widest international popular exposure.[citation needed] Luca Zordan, a New York City based photographer was born in Venice. Venetian cuisine is characterized by seafood, but also includes garden products from the islands of the lagoon, rice from the mainland, game, and polenta. Venice is not known for a particular cuisine of its own: it combines local traditions with influences stemming from age-old contacts with distant countries.[clarification needed] These include sarde in saór (sardines marinated to preserve them for long voyages); bacalà mantecato (a recipe based on Norwegian stockfish and extra-virgin olive oil); bisàto (marinated eel); risi e bisi – rice, peas and (unsmoked) bacon; fegato alla veneziana, Venetian-style veal liver; risòto col néro de sépe (risotto with cuttlefish, blackened by their own ink); cichéti, refined and delicious tidbits (akin to tapas); antipasti (appetizers); and prosecco, an effervescent, mildly sweet wine. In addition, Venice is known for the golden, oval-shaped cookies called baìcoli, and for other types of sweets, such as: pan del pescaór (bread of the fisherman); cookies with almonds and pistachio nuts; cookies with fried Venetian cream, or the bussolài (butter biscuits and shortbread made in the shape of a ring or an "S") from the island of Burano; the galàni or cróstoli (angel wings); the frìtole (fried spherical doughnuts); the fregolòtta (a crumbly cake with almonds); a milk pudding called rosàda; and cookies called zaléti, whose ingredients include yellow maize flour. The dessert tiramisù is generally thought to have been invented in Treviso in the 1970s, and is popular in the Veneto area. In the 14th century, many young Venetian men began wearing tight-fitting multicoloured hose, the designs on which indicated the Compagnie della Calza ("Trouser Club") to which they belonged. The Venetian Senate passed sumptuary laws, but these merely resulted in changes in fashion in order to circumvent the law. Dull garments were worn over colourful ones, which then were cut to show the hidden colours resulting in the spread of men's "slashed" fashions in the 15th century.[citation needed] Today, Venice is a major fashion and shopping centre; not as important as Milan, Florence, and Rome, but on a par with Verona, Turin, Vicenza, Naples, and Genoa. Roberta di Camerino is the only major Italian fashion brand to be based in Venice. Founded in 1945, it is renowned for its innovative handbags made by Venetian artisans and often covered in locally woven velvet. Venice is twinned with: Dubrovnik, Croatia Istanbul, Turkey Palembang, Indonesia Saint Petersburg, Russia Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina Suzhou, China Tallinn, Estonia Yerevan, Armenia Odesa, Ukraine Aksaray, Turkey In 2013, Venice announced that it wants to end the sister city relationship with St. Petersburg in opposition to laws Russia had passed against homosexuals and those who support gay rights. In January 2000, the City of Venice and the Central Association of Cities and Communities of Greece (KEDKE) established, in pursuance to EC Regulation No. 2137/85, the Marco Polo System European Economic Interest Grouping (E.E.I.G.), to promote and realise European projects within transnational cultural and tourist fields, particularly in reference to the preservation and safeguarding of artistic and architectural heritage. In April 2001, the city signed an agreement with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs's office of cultural promotion and cooperation, to coordinate efforts at promoting Italian culture abroad. Venice also has cooperation agreements with: Lübeck, Germany (1979) Nuremberg, Germany (1999) Qingdao, China (2001, Science and Technology Partnership) Thessaloniki, Greece (2003) Miami, United States (2020) The name "Venezuela" is a Spanish diminutive of Venice (Veneziola). Many additional places around the world are named after Venice, such as: Venice, Los Angeles, home of Venice Beach Venice, Alberta, in Canada Venice, Florida, city in Sarasota County Venice, New York Venice, Louisiana Little Venice, London Others closely associated with the city include: Andrea Gabrieli (c. 1510–1586), Italian composer and organist at St Mark's Basilica Giovanni Gabrieli (1554/1557–1612), composer and organist at St Mark's Basilica Claudio Monteverdi (1567–1643), composer, string player, choirmaster and Catholic priest Francesco Cavalli (1602–1676), a baroque composer Tomaso Albinoni (1671–1751), a baroque composer Antonio Vivaldi (1678–1741), composer and violinist of the Baroque Era Domenico Montagnana (1686–1750), an Italian master luthier. He made the violin and cello. Pietro Guarneri (1695–1762), luthier, settled in Venice 1717, Peter of Venice Lorenzo Da Ponte (1749–1838), opera librettist and poet. He wrote the librettos for 28 operas by 11 composers, including Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. Domenico Dragonetti (1763–1846), a double bass virtuoso and composer Ermanno Wolf-Ferrari (1876–1948), Italian composer, mostly of comic opera Virgilio Ranzato (1883–1937), Italian composer and violinist Bruno Maderna (1920–1973), Italian-German orchestra director and music composer Luigi Nono (1924–1990), a leading composer of instrumental and electronic music Giuseppe Sinopoli (1946–2001), conductor and composer Claudio Ambrosini (born 1948), composer and conductor Giovanni Bellini (c. 1430 – 1516), Renaissance painter from the Bellini family of painters Vittore Carpaccio (c. 1465 – 1525/1526), Italian painter of the Venetian school Lorenzo Lotto (c. 1480 – 1556), painter, draughtsman and illustrator, in the Venetian school Sebastiano del Piombo (c. 1485 – 1547), High Renaissance painter and early Mannerist Titian (c. 1488/90 – 1576), leader of the Venetian school of the Italian Renaissance Tintoretto (1518–1594), the last great painter of Italian Renaissance Baldassare d'Anna (c. 1560 – after 1639), painter of the late-Renaissance period Niccolò Cassana (1659–1714), late-Baroque painter Rosalba Carriera (1675–1757), Rococo painter, known for her pastel works Giovanni Battista Tiepolo (1696–1770), painter and printmaker. He painted in the Rococo style, Venetian school. Canaletto (1697–1768), painter, known for his landscapes or vedute of Venice Pietro Longhi (c. 1702 – 1785) painter of contemporary genre scenes of life Giuseppe Santomaso (1907–1990), Italian painter Emilio Vedova (1919–2006), an important modern painter of Italy Ludovico de Luigi (born 1933), Venetian Surrealistic artist Christine de Pizan (1364 – c. 1430), poet and court writer for King Charles VI of France Aldus Manutius (1449–1515), an important printer. He founded the Aldine Press. Jean-Antoine de Baïf (1532–1589), French poet and member of La Pléiade Veronica Franco (1546–1591), poet and courtesan during the Renaissance Paolo Sarpi (1552–1623), historian, scientist, canon lawyer, statesman, defender of the liberties of Republican Venice. His writings inspired Thomas Hobbes, Edward Gibbon, and the founding fathers of the United States. Leon Modena (1571–1648), author, poet and preacher, active in the Venetian Ghetto Carlo Goldoni (1707–1793), playwright and librettist, notable name in Italian theatre Carlo Gozzi (1720–1806), playwright and champion of commedia dell'arte Elisabetta Caminèr Turra (1751–1796), writer and translator of foreign plays Frederick Rolfe (1860–1913), English author of the Venetian novel The Desire and Pursuit of the Whole Enrico Dandolo (c. 1107 – 1205), Doge of Venice from 1192 to his death. He played a direct role in the Sack of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade. Pope Eugene IV (1383–1447), pope, 1431–1447, nephew of Pope Gregory XII Pope Paul II (1417–1471), pope, 1464–1471. He succeeded Pope Pius II. Andrea Gritti (1455–1538), Doge of the Venetian Republic from 1523 to 1538 Pietro Bembo (1470–1547), scholar, poet, literary theorist and cardinal Sebastiano Venier (c. 1496 – 1578), Doge of Venice from 11 June 1577 to 1578 Marco Antonio Bragadin (died 1571), general, flayed alive by the Turks after a fierce resistance during the siege of Famagusta Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia (1646–1684), the first woman in the world to receive a doctorate degree Jacopo Riccati (1676–1754), a Venetian mathematician. He wrote the Riccati equation. Pope Clement XIII (1693–1769), pope, 1758 to his death in 1769 Count Vincenzo Dandolo (1758–1819), chemist, agronomist and politician of the Enlightenment Era Daniele Manin (1804–1857), Italian patriot, statesman and leader of the Risorgimento in Venice Marco Polo (c. 1254 – 1324), trader and explorer, one of the first Westerners to travel the Silk Road to China Sebastian Cabot (c. 1484 – 1557), explorer Pietro Cesare Alberti (1608–1655), the first Italian-American in New Amsterdam in 1635 Giacomo Casanova (1725–1798 in Dux, Bohemia), a Venetian adventurer, writer and womanizer Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472), architect, humanist author, artist, poet, priest, linguist, philosopher and cryptographer Baldassare Longhena (1598–1682), exponent of Baroque architecture Andrea Tirali (c. 1660 – 1737), architect. He designed the pavement in the Piazza San Marco Giovanni Battista Meduna (1800–1886), architect, led reconstruction and restoration works of the St Mark's Basilica and the Gran Teatro La Fenice, among others Carlo Scarpa (1906–1978), an architect with a profound understanding of materials Marietta Zanfretta (1837–1898), high-wire dancer who found success in Europe and the USA Romano Scarpa (1927–2005), a noted Italian creator of Disney comics Francesco Borgato (born 1990), Italian recording artist and dancer Ercole Olgeni (1883–1947), rower, team gold and silver medallist at the 1920 & 1924 Summer Olympics Erminio Dones (1887–1945), rower, team silver medallist at the 1920 Summer Olympics Dominic DeNucci (1932–2021), Italian-American professional wrestler Angelo Spanio (1939–1999), Italian footballer with over 280 club caps Ivano Bordon (born 1951), former football goalkeeper with 449 club caps and 21 for Italy Roberto Ravaglia (born 1957), racing driver and fouder of ROAL Motorsport Alessandro Santin (born 1958), racing driver Mauro Numa (born 1961), fencer and gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics Andrea Borella (born 1961), fencer, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics Andrea Cipressa (born 1963), fencer, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics Dorina Vaccaroni (born 1963), former foil fencer, three time medallist at the 1984, 1988 & 1992 Summer Olympics Daniele Scarpa (born 1964), sprint canoer, gold and silver medallist at the 1996 Summer Olympics Carolina Morace (born 1964), former footballer with over 220 club caps and 150 for Italy women Giuseppe Cipriani (born 1965), racing driver Tommaso Rocchi (born 1977), former footballer with 664 club caps Giovanni Paramithiotti. He was the founding chairmen and owner of Inter Milan football club. Italy portal European Union portal Cities portal List of islands of Italy List of buildings and structures in Venice List of bridges in Venice List of churches in Venice List of car-free places List of painters and architects of Venice List of places called Venice of the East Outline of Italy Su e zo per i ponti Venetian blinds Venetic language – the ancient spoken language of the region Venezia Mestre Rugby FC – a rugby team Venice of the North Venetian: Venesia [veˈnɛsja], outdatedly Venexia [veˈnɛzja] Traditional date as given in William J. Langer, ed. An Encyclopedia of World History. In other areas of Italy similar sweets are known by many other names, e.g. cénci (rags) (Florence), frappe (flounces) (Rome), bugìe (lies) (Turin, Genoa, etc.), chiàcchiere (chatter) (Milan and many other places in northern, central and southern Italy). Vid.: Pellegrino Artusi, La Scienza in cucina e l'Arte di mangiar bene, 93ª ristampa, Firenze, Giunti, 1960, p. 387, #595; Ranieri da Mosto, Il Veneto in cucina, Firenze, Aldo Martello-Giunti, 1974, p. 364; Luigi Veronelli (edited by), Il Carnacina, 10th ed., Milano, Garzanti, 1975, p. 656, #2013; to name but a few. "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Popolazione Residente al 1° Gennaio 2020" [Resident population as of 1 January 2020]. Italian National Institute of Statistics. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "The Bridges of Venice". ArcGIS StoryMaps. 19 June 2023. Archived from the original on 6 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Patreve, l'attuale governance non-funziona" [Patreve, the current governance doesn't work] (PDF) (in Italian). Venice International University. 6 March 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 December 2023. Retrieved 6 October 2016. Harper, Douglas (10 October 2017). "Venice | Etymology of the name Venice by etymonline". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 28 February 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Charnock, Richard Stephen (1859). Local Etymology: A derivative dictionary of geographical names. London: Houlston and Wright. p. 288. LCCN 08032183. OCLC 4696115. Pepin, as king of Italy, granted some territory along the banks of the Adige, and Rivo Alto (Rialto), united with neighbouring islands, took the name of Venetiæ, from the province of Venetia, the territory of the ancient Veneti, of which these islands formed a dependency. Coispeau, Olivier (10 August 2016). Finance Masters: A brief history of international financial centers in the last millennium. World Scientific. ISBN 9789813108844. Klotz, Justin (11 October 1998). "Venetian Music of the Renaissance". Vanderbilt University. Archived from the original on 14 June 2009. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Vladisavljevic, Anja (19 February 2020). "Giovanni Vale: Venice's Legacy Still Shapes the Balkans". Balkan Insight. Retrieved 24 June 2022. River, Charles (2019). The Republic of Venice: The History of the Venetian Empire and Its Influence Across the Mediterranean. Independently Published. Coulling, Ian (3 October 2020). "The Arsenal of Venice". Images of Venice. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "History of Venice – Present, past and future of Venice". www.introducingvenice.com. Retrieved 24 June 2022. "Venice and its Lagoon". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Decision 44 COM 7B.50 Venice and its Lagoon (Italy) (C 394)". UNESCO. Retrieved 5 March 2023. Chambers, David (1992). Venice: A documentary history. England: Oxford. p. 78. ISBN 0-8020-8424-9. "Top 10 most Beautiful Cities in the World 2017". The Mesh News. 28 July 2016. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2017. "Top 10 most Beautiful Cities in the World 2018". worldchacha.com. 2 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. Bleach, Stephen; Schofield, Brian; Crump, Vincent (17 June 2007). "Europe's most romantic city breaks". The Times. London. Retrieved 27 May 2010. Barzini, Luigi (30 May 1982). "The Most Beautiful and Wonderful City In The World". The New York Times. Worrall, Simon (16 October 2016). "Tourists could destroy Venice – If floods don't first". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2017. Buckley, Jonathan (2 November 2016). "When will Venice sink? You asked Google – Here's the answer". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "Venice just banned mega cruise ships from sailing through the city". The Independent. UK. 8 November 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Zeno, Apostolo (1847). Compendio della storia Veneta di Apostolo Zeno continuata fino alla caduta della repubblica [Compendium of the Venetian history of Apostolo Zeno which continued until the fall of the republic] (in Italian). Bonvecchiato. p. 9. Imperciocchè nascendo i principati [Because principalities are born] Bosio, Le origini di Venezia Barbaro, Marco. L'Origine e discendenza delle famiglie patrizie. Cappellari Vivaro, Girolamo Alessandro (1740). Il Campidoglio veneto. Zeno, Compendio 1847:10. Trudy Ring; Robert M. Salkin; Sharon La Boda (1 January 1996). International Dictionary of Historic Places: Southern Europe. Taylor & Francis. p. 745. ISBN 978-1-884964-02-2. Retrieved 24 March 2011. Burckhardt, Jacob (1990). The civilization of the Renaissance in Italy. London, England: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-044534-X. OCLC 23255316. Norwich, John Julius (1982). A History of Venice. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 13. Alethea Wiel (1995)[1898]. A History of Venice, pp. 26–27. New York: Barnes & Noble (reprint orig. 1898 London). Langer Madden, Thomas F. (2012). Venice: A New History. Penguin Publishing Group. ISBN 9781101601136. Hammer, Michael B. (2017). The Dot On the I In History: Of Gentiles and Jews—a Hebrew Odyssey Scrolling the Internet. Morrisville: Lulu Publishing Services. p. 239. ISBN 978-1483427010. OL 30680683M. Burns, Robert I (1980). "Piracy as an Islamic-Christian Interface in the Thirteenth Century". Viator. 11: 165. doi:10.1484/J.VIATOR.2.301504. Cowen, Richard. "The importance of salt". Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Herrin, Judith (2008). Byzantium: The Surprising Life of a Medieval Empire. Penguin Adult. ISBN 9780141031026. Madden, Thomas F. (2006). Enrico Dandolo and the Rise of Venice. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 9780801885396. Loughlin, James Francis (1911). "Pope Paul V" . Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. Nadeau, Barbie Latza (6 November 2015). "The Man Who Changed Reading Forever". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 28 February 2022. James Burke, Connections (Little, Brown and Co., 1978/1995), ISBN 978-0-316-11672-5, p.105 Angione, Edoardo (15 July 2019). "Repubblica di Venezia: storia, cronologia e caratteristiche della Serenissima" [Republic of Venice: history, chronology and characteristics of the Serenissima]. Studenti (in Italian). Retrieved 7 July 2023. Bernstein, William J. (2009). A Splendid Exchange: How Trade Shaped the World. Grove Press. p. 143. ISBN 978-0802144164. State of Texas, Texas Department of State Health Services. "History of Plague". Dshs.state.tx.us. Archived from the original on 11 April 2016. Retrieved 28 March 2009. Lindemann, Mary (1999). Medicine and society in early modern Europe. Cambridge University Press. p. 41. ISBN 0521423546. Kretschmayr, Heinrich (2017). Geschichte von Venedig. Vol. 3. p. 450. "Group Captain George Westlake". The Daily Telegraph. London. 26 January 2006. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2013. Patrick G. Skelly, Pocasset MA (6 May 2005). "US Army Air Force Operations Mediterranean Theater". Mil Hist. Archived from the original on 23 August 2010. Retrieved 27 July 2010. Jones, Michael (2015). After Hitler: The Last Days of the Second World War in Europe. John Murray Press. ISBN 9781848544970. Patrick G. Skelly, Pocasset MA (21 July 1945). "New Zealand troops relieve Venice". Mil Hist. Archived from the original on 21 September 2010. Retrieved 28 March 2009.  Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Venice". Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 995. Kendall, Paul (25 August 2010). "Mythology and Folklore of the Alder". Trees for Life. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 6 August 2011. "Alder – Alnus glutinosa". Conservation Volunteers Northern Ireland. Retrieved 6 August 2011. Standish, Dominic (2003). "Barriers to barriers: why environmental precaution has delayed mobile floodgates to protect Venice". In Okonski, Kendra (ed.). Adapt or die: the science, politics and economics of climate change. London: Profile Books. p. 40. ISBN 978-1-86197-795-3. Retrieved 28 November 2014. "NOVA | Sinking City of Venice | Venice Under Siege (non-Flash) | PBS". PBS. Brown, Hannah (9 August 2021). "Venice floods: Watch tourists wade through knee-deep water". euronews. Retrieved 15 November 2021. Iwu, Rita (19 May 2021). "Stamp Tax". International Business Times. Retrieved 26 October 2022. Bock, Y.; et al. (2012). Recent Subsidence of the Venice Lagoon from Continuous GPS and Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (PDF) (Report). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "La subsidenza e l'eustatismo" [Subsidence and eustatism]. City of Venice (in Italian and English). 25 March 2022. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023. Phelan, Joseph (28 September 2022). "Italy's plan to save Venice from sinking". BBC. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "MOSE Project, Venice, Venetian Lagoon". Water Technology. 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. "'Moses project' to secure future of Venice". The Daily Telegraph. London. 11 January 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2012. Bastianello, Riccardo (13 November 2019). "Venice mayor declares disaster as city hit with 2nd-highest tide in history". Global News. Gerard-Sharp, Lisa (16 August 2016). "Is Venice going under?". National Geographic. "Venice floods: Climate change behind highest tide in 50 years, says mayor". BBC. 13 November 2019. Hill, Jenny (15 November 2019). "Flooded Venice battles new tidal surge". BBC. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Harlan, Chico; Pitrelli, Stefano (13 November 2019). "Venice submerged by highest tides in half a century". The Washington Post. Giuffrida, Angela (13 November 2019). "'An apocalypse happened': Venice counts cost of devastating floods". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 November 2019. Work began in 2003 but has been dogged by delays and myriad issues, including a corruption scandal that emerged in 2014. The Venice mayor, Luigi Brugnaro, promised on Wednesday that the flood barrier would be completed. Georgiou, Aristos (13 November 2019). "Venice flooding sees more than 85 percent of city underwater as right-wing mayor blames climate change". Newsweek. Retrieved 14 November 2019. Mezzofiore, Gianluca (15 November 2019). "Italian council is flooded immediately after rejecting measures on climate change". CNN. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Calma, Justine (14 November 2019). "Venice's historic flooding blamed on human failure and climate change". The Verge. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Shepherd, Marshall (16 November 2019). "Venice Flooding Reveals A Real Hoax About Climate Change – Framing It As "Either/Or"". Forbes. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Harlan, Chico; Pitrelli, Stefano (13 November 2019). "Venice submerged by highest tides in half a century". The Washington Post. The [increased flooding] is a trend that jibes with the extremization of climate", said Paolo Canestrelli, founder and former head of the municipality's Tide Monitoring and Forecast Centre. "If we look at the course of history, we have documents dating back to 1872, and we can see that these phenomena didn't used to exist. "Historic floods in Venice a 'man-made disaster'". CNN. 11 July 2007. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Venice flooded again 3 days after near-record high tide". CBC News. 15 November 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2019. Venice's mayor said the damage is estimated at hundreds of millions of euros and blamed climate change for the "dramatic situation" in the historic city. He called for the speedy completion of the city's long-delayed Moses flood defence project. Barry, Colleen (16 November 2019). "St. Mark's Square in Venice Reopens After Flooding, but Water Remains High". Time. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. Silvestri, Manuel (3 October 2020). "Mose flood barrier finally holds the waters back for fragile Venice". Reuters. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Sibilla, Marco. "Laguna ghiacciata" [Frozen lagoon]. Meteo Venezia (in Italian). Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Valori climatici normali in Italia" [Normal climate values in Italy]. Istituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca Ambientale. Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Venezia/Tessera" (PDF). Italian Air Force National Meteorological Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2013. "Tabella CLINO". MeteoAM. Archived from the original on 10 August 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2013. "Venice, Italy – Monthly weather forecast and Climate data". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on 28 February 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Venezia Tessera" (in Italian). Temperature estreme in Toscana. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. Tellier, Luc-Normand (2009). Urban World History. ISBN 9782760522091. Dursteler, Eric, ed. (2013). "The Venetian Economy". A Companion to Venetian History, 1400–1797. Brill's Companions to European History. Vol. 4. BRILL. p. 257. ISBN 978-90-04-25252-3. Chant, Colin; Goodman, David (8 November 2005). Pre-Industrial Cities and Technology. Routledge. ISBN 9781134636204. Abu-Lughod, Janet L. (1989). Before European Hegemony: The World System A.D. 1250–1350. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 125. Spruyt, Hendrik (1994). The Sovereign State and Its Competitors: An Analysis of Systems Change. Princeton University Press. p. 132. ISBN 9780691029108. LCCN lc94010759. "Serie Storica Popolazione – Anni dal 1871 al 2021". City of Venice (in Italian). 17 February 2022. Archived from the original on 6 August 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2022. "Statistiche demografiche Venezia" [Demographic statistics Venice]. Tuttitalia (in Italian). Retrieved 6 August 2022. Newman, Cathy (August 2009). "Vanishing Venice". National Geographic. Gherardo Ortalli, a professor of medieval history [...] says [...] 'When I arrived 30 years ago, the population was 120,000. Now it is less than 60,000.' "Cittadini stranieri Venezia 2021" (in Italian). Tuttitalia. Retrieved 6 August 2022. Cheney, David M. "Patriarchate of Venezia (Venice)". Catholic-Hierarchy. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Sperandio, Alvise (24 October 2018). "La Comunità islamica: "Vogliamo la moschea" (Venezia)" [The Islamic Community: "We want the mosque" (Venice)]. Il Gazzettino (in Italian). Retrieved 15 November 2019. 25 mila persone di fede mussulmana che risiedono in città [25 thousand people of Muslim faith who reside in the city] "Italian Orthodox Bishops concelebrating in Venice". Archived from the original on 15 December 2008. Retrieved 24 April 2018. "Venice". Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2020. "Venice, Italy Jewish History Tour". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Today Venice has a Jewish population of about 500 peoples, only 30 of them live in the former ghetto. The ghetto houses all of the city's major Jewish institutions. Foà, Ruben. "Venetian Ghetto – Eruv in Venice". www.ghetto.it. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2010. Georges Gauthier, David McDonald, Jenna O’Connell, Nick Panzarino: Exploring the City of Islands: Interactive Resources for Analyzing the Islands of Venice. Worcester 2015, linking to Google Drive, darin ICQ, Spreadsheets, VE15-Isles_Isles_Lagoon_data Coulling, Ian (2 November 2020). "Districts & Attractions – Introduction". Images of Venice. Retrieved 7 July 2023. Ferraro, Joanne (2012). Venice: History Of The Floating City. New York: Cambridge University Press. Mancebo, Ivanka Garcia. "Sestieri – Quartieri di Venezia" [Sestieri – Neighborhoods of Venice]. www.scoprivenezia.com (in Italian). Retrieved 7 July 2023. "The economy of Venice, Italy". Aboutvenice.org. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Pilgerreisen von Venedig nach Jerusalem im späten Mittelalter- Die Verträge mit dem Schiffspatron, Seite 2, Fabian H. Flöper, GRIN Verlag, 2011. ISBN 978-3-656-04783-4 Venice, page 71, Beryl D. De Sélincourt, May (Sturge) Gretton, Chatto & Windus, London 1907., reprinted BiblioBazaar 2010, ISBN 978-1-177-40448-8 Foundation, Encyclopaedia Iranica. "Welcome to Encyclopaedia Iranica". iranicaonline.org. Retrieved 13 May 2021. Bakhchinyan, Artsvi (2017). "The Activity of Armenian Merchants in International Trade" (PDF). p. 25. "Venice (Italy) :: Economy – Britannica Online Encyclopedia". Britannica.com. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Venice. Funk & Wagnalls New World Encyclopedia. 2016. p. 1. Johnston, Chris (25 June 2017). "Italy forced to bail out two more banks". BBC News. Pratley, Nils (26 June 2017). "Italy's €17bn bank job: self-preservation at a long-term EU price? – Nils Pratley". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. Haines, Gavin (12 June 2017). "Venice bans new hotels as crackdown on tourism continues". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Buckley, Julia (9 June 2017). "Venice bans new hotels". The Independent. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Usborne, Simon (27 September 2016). "Don't look now, Venice tourists – the locals are sick of you". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. Rodriguez, Cecilia (29 May 2017). "Blacklisting Venice To Save It From Too Many Tourists And Too Few Venetians". Forbes. Settis, Salvatore (29 August 2016). "Opinion – Can We Save Venice Before It's Too Late?". The New York Times – via www.nytimes.com. "Venice, to be or not to be a UNESCO 'World Heritage in Danger'? That is the question". Venezia Autentica. 25 January 2017. Mack, Benjamin (9 November 2012). "Tourism overwhelms vanishing Venice". DW.de. Retrieved 13 January 2015. "Italy to ban large cruise ships in Venice". The Daily Telegraph. 9 August 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2015. "CLIA says cruise lines will continue to respect Venice cruise ship ban despite new ruling". Cruise Arabia & Africa. 13 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015. Archer, Jane (June 2017). "Venice authorities lament lack of cruise ships as residents and Unesco fight for the city's future". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Petroff, Alanna; Di Donato, Valentina (10 May 2017). "Venice bans cheap takeout joints to keep city beautiful". CNN Money. Frank, Kasper (24 November 2014). "Turistby indfører forbud mod larmende kufferthjul" [Tourist town introduces a ban on noisy suitcases]. Lifestyle. Jyllands-Posten (in Danish). Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2019. Livesay, Christopher (25 November 2016). "As Tourists Crowd Out Locals, Venice Faces 'Endangered' List". NPR. Logan, Ross (4 August 2017). "'It's like Disneyland-on-Sea' Now Italy says ENOUGH and plans to BAN tourists from Venice". Daily Express. McCarthy, AnneMarie. "Top tips for sustainable travel in Venice from local experts". www.lonelyplanet.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2018. Retrieved 26 November 2017. Rome, Tom Kington (20 June 2017). "Residents vote to ban towering cruise ships from Venice". The Times – via www.thetimes.co.uk. Squires, Nick (19 June 2017). "Venetians vote to ban giant cruise ships from city's lagoon". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. "Contributo di accesso a Venezia: tutte le informazioni utili" [Access fee for Venice: all useful information]. City of Venice (in Italian). 24 October 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "Tourism" (PDF). City of Venice. 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Contributo di accesso: sospesi tutti gli obblighi e gli adempimenti previsti dal Regolamento in fase di revisione" [Access fee: all obligations and fulfillments set out in the Regulation currently being revised are suspended]. Comune di Venezia – Live – Le notizie di oggi e i servizi della città. 16 July 2019. Hughes, Rebecca Ann (15 February 2023). "Do You Have To Pay To Visit Venice? Here's What To Know About The Entry Fee". Forbes. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "'Grandi navi a Marghera': L'atto di indirizzo del Comitatone" ['Large ships to Marghera': The directive from the Comitatone]. Italian Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport (in Italian). 7 November 2017. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "Giant cruise ships banned from historic centre of Venice". Sky News. 9 November 2017. "Outcome of the long-awaited Government decision on the future for cruiseships (Comitatone 7.11.2017)". We Are Here Venice. Retrieved 30 March 2019. "Cruise ship crashes into tourist boat in Venice, injuring five people". Angle News. 2 June 2019. Archived from the original on 3 June 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "UNESCO Pressures Italy to Ban Cruise Ships from Venice". Artnet News. 16 October 2014. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Giuffrida, Angela (8 November 2017). "Venice to divert giant cruise ships away from historic centre". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 June 2019. Giuffrida, Angela; et al. (2 June 2019). "Cruise ship crashes into tourist boat in Venice, injuring five people". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 June 2019. "Venice crash reignites calls for cruise ship ban". BBC News. 2 June 2019. Retrieved 2 June 2019. Standish, Dominic (8 November 2017). "Decisions Made for Venice Cruise Ships, Channel Routes and Offshore Platform". Dstandish's Weblog. Retrieved 4 June 2019. "Venice crash reignites calls for cruise ship ban". BBC News. 2 June 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2019. "Cruise ship plows into tourist boat docked in Venice". CBC News. Associated Press. 2 June 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2019. Sharpe, Olivia (8 August 2019). "Large cruise ships to be banned from Venice grand canal". Cruise Trade News. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Kumar, Kalyan (9 August 2019). "Cruise Ships Banned From Venice Grand Canal, City Center After Boat Crashed Into Dock". International Business Times. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Roberts, Hannah (7 August 2019). "Venice to give cruise ships a wide berth". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. "Italy bans cruise liners from Venice, after years of hesitation". Reuters. 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Poggioli, Sylvia (7 January 2008). "MOSE Project Aims to Part Venice Floods". Morning Edition (Radio program). NPR. Retrieved 1 August 2019. "Venice Study Abroad". www.studyabroad.com. Retrieved 6 October 2010. Hanley, Anne (10 November 2015). "Venice attractions". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Ferrier, Morwenna (11 August 2016). "The right stripes: how fashion fell for the gondolier". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. "The Gondolas of Venice – Rick Steves' Europe". www.ricksteves.com. "Visit Venice through Gondola's symbolism". Hotel Sant'Elena. 16 May 2013. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Imboden, Durant. "Venice People Mover". Europe for Visitors. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Venezia Public Transportation Statistics". Global Public Transit Index by Moovit. Retrieved 19 June 2017. Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Fletcher, C. A.; Spencer, T. (14 July 2005). Flooding and Environmental Challenges for Venice and Its Lagoon: State of Knowledge. Cambridge University Press. p. 263. ISBN 978-0-521-84046-0. "ATVO". Atvo.it. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "Linee Urbane". www.actv.it. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "Autolinea Montegrotto – Aeroporto Marco Polo" [Montegrotto Bus Line – Marco Polo Airport] (PDF) (in Italian). Busitalia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 28 February 2012. "Treviso Airport Shuttle Bus – Airbus Treviso Antonio Canova Airport". www.trevisoairport.it. Treviso Airport. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Autenticazione per servizi online" [Authentication for online services] (PDF). 10 May 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 May 2016. "All that you need to know about the Venetian rowing regattas in Venice". Venezia Autentica. 31 October 2016. Alvarez, Joe; Orlova, Tamara A (10 September 2016). "Regata Storica is The Spectacle to See". Ikon London Magazine. Retrieved 23 February 2018. "Global Campus of Human Rights – Education & Research". GlobalCampus of Human Rights – GCHumanRights. Retrieved 7 July 2023. "Home – Conservatorio Venezia". Conservatorio di Musica Benedetto Marcello (in Italian). Retrieved 15 May 2022. Barolini, Helen (1992). Aldus and His Dream Book. New York, New York: Italica Press, Inc. ISBN 0-934977-22-4. John Rylands University library Manchester, The introduction of printing in Italy: Rome, Naples and Venice Fielding, Hannah (9 November 2013). "Foreign words of Venetian origination". hannahfielding.net. "The Renaissance in Venice – Art History Basics on the Venetian School – ca 1450–1600". Arthistory.about.com. 29 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 22 April 2010. "Venetian art around 1500". Webexhibits.org. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Miller (2005) p.82 Miller (2005) p.83 Carl I. Gable, Murano Magic: Complete Guide to Venetian Glass, its History and Artists (Schiffer, 2004). ISBN 978-0-7643-1946-4. "Venetian Glass Beads Found in Arctic Alaska Predate Arrival of Columbus". Sci-News. 16 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. Geggel, Laura (11 February 2021). "European beads found in Alaska predate Columbus, controversial study claims". Live Science. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Blair, Elliot H. (July 2021). "Reconsidering the Precolumbian Presence of Venetian Glass Beads in Alaska". American Antiquity. 86 (3): 638–642. doi:10.1017/aaq.2021.38. ISSN 0002-7316. S2CID 236162517. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "The Venice Biennale: History of the Venice Biennale". Venice Biennale. Archived from the original on 10 January 2009. Retrieved 28 March 2009. "The Venice Biennale: History From the beginnings until the Second World War (1893–1945)". Venice Biennale. Archived from the original on 10 January 2009. Retrieved 28 March 2009. Morris, Roderick Conway (29 August 2012). "Special Report – Venice Film Festival; World's Oldest Cinematic Fest Turns 80". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 17 January 2018. Touring Club p. 79 Anderson, Ariston (24 July 2014). "Venice: David Gordon Green's 'Manglehorn,' Abel Ferrara's 'Pasolini' in Competition Lineup". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 18 February 2016. Corliss, Mary; Corliss, Richard (7 September 2014). "Addio, Lido: Last Postcards from the Venice Film Festival". Time. Archived from the original on 20 September 2014. Biolchini, Stefano (19 April 2016). "Addio a Fulvio Roiter. Era sua la più bella Venezia in bianco nero" [Goodbye to Fulvio Roiter. It was his most beautiful Venice in black and white.]. Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). Retrieved 19 April 2016. "Children of South Africa". www.thechildrenofsouthafrica.org. Retrieved 29 November 2019. Ranieri da Mosto, Il Veneto in cucina, Firenze, Aldo Martello-Giunti, 1974, p. 57; Mariù Salvatori de Zuliani, A tola co i nostri veci. La cucina veneziana, Milano, Franco Angeli, 2008, p. 63 Mariù Salvatori de Zuliani, A tola co i nostri veci. La cucina veneziana, Milano, Franco Angeli, 2008, pp. 449–450 Squires, Nick (17 May 2016). "Italian regions battle over who invented tiramisu". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. Patner, Josh (26 February 2006). "From Bags to Riches". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 May 2010. "Gemellaggi e Accordi" [Twinning and Agreements]. City of Venice (in Italian). 11 December 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2020. Morgan, Glennisha (30 January 2013). "Venice To Cut Ties With St. Petersburg Over Anti-Gay Law". HuffPost. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Pons, François Joseph (1806). A Voyage to the Eastern Part of Terra Firma, Or the Spanish Main, in South-America, During the Years 1801, 1802, 1803, and 1804. I. Riley and Company. p. xi. "Gabrieli, Giovanni" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 11 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 381; see line 2. "Gabrieli, Giovanni" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 11 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 381. "Monteverde, Claudio" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 18 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 778. "Cavalli, Francesco" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 563. Domenico, Roy Palmer (2002). The Regions of Italy: A Reference Guide to History and Culture. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 379. ISBN 9780313307331. "Albinoni, Tomasso" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 1 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 510. "Guarnieri" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 660. "Dragonetti, Domenico" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 8 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 468. Elmer, Michele (4 October 2013). Imagine Math 2: Between Culture and Mathematics. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 11. ISBN 9788847028890. Knight, Christopher (13 October 2017). "Bellini masterpieces at the Getty make for one of the year's best museum shows". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. Colvin, Sidney (1911). "Bellini" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 3 (11th ed.). pp. 700–703, see page 702. III. Giovanni Bellini (1430–1431–1516) "Carpaccio, Vittorio" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 382. "Lotto, Lorenzo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 22. Rossetti, William Michael (1911). "Sebastiano del Piombo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 24 (11th ed.). pp. 567–568. Rossetti, William Michael (1911). "Titian" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). pp. 1023–1026. Rossetti, William Michael (1911). "Tintoretto, Jacopo Robusti" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). pp. 1001–1003. "Anna, Baldasarre" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 2 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 59. "Cassana, Niccolò" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 456. Zelazko, Alicja. "Rosalba Carriera". Britannica.com. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "Rosalba Carriera". The National Gallery. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Tiepolo, Giovanni Battista" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 26 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 963–964. "Longhi, Pietro" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 16 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 981. Symonds, John Addington (1911). "Manutius" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). pp. 624–626. "Baïf, Jean Antoine de" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 214–215. Garnett, Richard (1911). "Sarpi, Paolo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 24 (11th ed.). pp. 221–222. Abrahams, Israel (1911). "Leon of Modena" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 16 (11th ed.). p. 443. "Goldoni, Carlo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 213. "Gozzi, Carlo, Count" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 12 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 305. Villari, Luigi (1911). "Dandolo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 7 (11th ed.). pp. 801–802. Hayes, Carlton Joseph Huntley (1911). "Eugenius/Eugenius IV" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 9 (11th ed.). p. 886. "Paul (popes)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 20 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 955–957, see para 2. Paul II (Pietro Barbo), pope from the 30th of August 1464 to... Bowd, Stephen D. (March 1999). "Pietro Bembo and the 'monster' of Bologna (1514)". Renaissance Studies. 13 (1). Wiley: 40–54. doi:10.1111/j.1477-4658.1999.tb00064.x. JSTOR 24412789. S2CID 190702209. "Bembo, Pietro" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 714. "Riccati, Jacopo Francesco, Count" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 23 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 288. Collier, Theodore Freylinghuysen (1911). "Clement/Clement XIII" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 6 (11th ed.). p. 487. "Manin, Daniele" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 17 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 581. Yule, Henry; Beazley, Charles Raymond (1911). "Polo, Marco" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 22 (11th ed.). pp. 7–11. Biddle, Richard (1831). A Memoir of Sebastian Cabot: With a Review of the History of Maritime Discovery. Carey and Lea. p. 68. Biggar, Henry Percival (1911). "Cabot, John" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 4 (11th ed.). pp. 921–923, see page 922. His son, Sebastian Cabot (1476–1557)... Klett, Joseph R. (1996). Genealogies of New Jersey Families: Families A-Z, pre-American notes on old New Netherland families. Genealogical Publishing Com. p. 941. ISBN 9780806314914. "Casanova de Seingalt, Giovanni Jacopo" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 5 (11th ed.). 1911. pp. 440–441. "Alberti, Leone Battista" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 1 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 502. Bosio, Luciano. Le origini di Venezia. Novara: Istituto Geografico De Agostini. Brown, Horatio, Venice, chapter 8 of Cambridge Modern History vol. I The Renaissance (1902) Brown, Horatio, Calendar of State Papers (Venetian): 1581–1591, 1895; 1592–1603, 1897; 1603–1607, 1900; 1607–1610, 1904; 1610–1613, 1905 Brown, Horatio, Studies in the history of Venice (London, 1907) Brown, Horatio Robert Forbes (1911). "Venice" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 27 (11th ed.). pp. 995–1007. Chambers, D.S. (1970). The Imperial Age of Venice, 1380–1580. London: Thames & Hudson. Contarini, Gasparo (1599). The Commonwealth and Gouernment of Venice. Lewes Lewkenor, trsl. London: "Imprinted by I. Windet for E. Mattes." Da Canal, Martin, "Les estoires de Venise" (13th-century chronicle), translated by Laura Morreale. Padua, Unipress 2009. Drechsler, Wolfgang (2002). "Venice Misappropriated." Trames 6(2), pp. 192–201. Garrett, Martin, "Venice: a Cultural History" (2006). Revised edition of "Venice: a Cultural and Literary Companion" (2001). Grubb, James S. (1986). "When Myths Lose Power: Four Decades of Venetian Historiography." Journal of Modern History 58, pp. 43–94. Lane, Frederic Chapin. Venice: Maritime Republic (1973) (ISBN 978-0-8018-1445-7) Laven, Mary, "Virgins of Venice: Enclosed Lives and Broken Vows in the Renaissance Convent (2002). Madden, Thomas F. Enrico Dandolo and the Rise of Venice Johns Hopkins University Press. Martin, John Jeffries and Dennis Romano (eds). Venice Reconsidered. The History and Civilization of an Italian City-State, 1297–1797. (2002) Johns Hopkins University Press. Muir, Edward (1981). Civic Ritual in Renaissance Venice. Princeton UP. Oppenheimer, Gerald J. (2010). "Venetian Palazzi and Case: A Guide to the Literature". University of Washington, Seattle. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2010. Rösch, Gerhard (2000). Venedig. Geschichte einer Seerepublik. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag. Miller, Judith (2005). Furniture: world styles from classical to contemporary. DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7566-1340-2. Ackroyd, Peter, Venice: Pure City. London, Chatto & Windus, 2009. ISBN 978-0-7011-8478-0 Brown, Horatio, Life on the Lagoons, 1884; revised ed. 1894; further eds. 1900, 1904, 1909. Cole, Toby. Venice: A Portable Reader, Lawrence Hill, 1979. ISBN 978-0-88208-097-0 (hardcover); ISBN 978-0-88208-107-6 (softcover). Keates, Jonathan, The Siege of Venice. London: Chatto & Windus, 2005. ISBN 978-0-70116-637-3 Madden, Thomas, Venice: A New History. New York: Viking, 2012. ISBN 978-0-670-02542-8. McCarthy, Mary, Venice Observed (1956), Harvest/HBJ, 1963 edition: ISBN 0-15-693521-X Morris, Jan (1993), Venice. 3rd revised edition. Faber & Faber, ISBN 978-0-571-16897-2. Ruskin, John (1853), The Stones of Venice. Abridged edition Links, JG (Ed), Penguin Books, 2001. ISBN 978-0-14-139065-9. di Robilant, Andrea (2004). A Venetian Affair. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-1-84115-542-5 Sethre, Janet, The Souls of Venice McFarland & Company, Inc., 2003. ISBN 978-0-7864-1573-1 (softcover). Venice at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official Site of the City of Venice Fondazione Musei Civici di Venezia (Italian/English) Venezia Autentica, a website about Life and travel in Venice (English)