Svit (Hungarian: Szvit) (Polish: Świt) is a small town in Poprad District in the Prešov Region in northern Slovakia. It lies 8 km (5 mi) west of the city of Poprad, at the foothills of the High Tatras. Svit is one of the youngest Slovak towns. It was established in 1934 by business industrialist Jan Antonín Baťa of Zlín, Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic) through his organization Baťa a.s., Zlin in accordance with his policy of setting up villages around the country for his workers. As a boy, Jan Baťa saw the poverty and sickness of his fellow countrymen. He wanted to change this by creating cities full of the most modern factories and filled with the best (and happiest) workers in Europe. The Baťa System under Jan's administration brought prosperity first to Moravia, and later Slovakia and Bohemia. It was Jan's policy for full employment that drove him to create each Baťa town for a different purpose: Shoes, Rubber and Tires, Textiles, Airplanes, Chemicals, Plastics, Media, Stockings, Leather, Machinery. When the World War II came, Jan Baťa's policy was to secretly fund the Czechoslovak government-in-exile, to supply the Czech Army with shoes and clothing and to secretly fund the Slovak National Uprising that started at Baťovany (now Partizánske) on 29 August 1944. Jan Baťa represented Czech/Slovak freedom and prosperity. Svit is short for "Slovenské vizkózové továrne" (in English Slovak Viscose Works). (Also, the word svit means 'shine' in Slovak) Svit is the smallest town in Slovakia (4.5 km²) with the population of 7,790. According to the 2001 census, the town had 7,445 inhabitants. 96.44% of inhabitants were Slovaks, 1.11% Romani and 0.79% Czechs. The religious make-up was 62.53% Roman Catholics, 20.67% people with no religious affiliation, 8.62% Lutherans and 4.00% Greek Catholics. Roman Catholic Church of St. Joseph Roman Catholic Church of St. Cyril and Methodius Greek Catholic Chapel of St. Cyril and Methodius Lutheran Church The town is home to the professional basketball team BK Iskra Svit, which plays in the Slovak Extraliga. Svit is twinned with: Česká Třebová, Czech Republic Knurów, Poland Partizánske, Slovakia San Lorenzo in Campo, Italy List of company towns Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Hustota obyvateľstva - obce". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Základná charakteristika". www.statistics.sk (in Slovak). Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic. 17 April 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Počet obyvateľov podľa pohlavia - obce (ročne)". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic" (PDF). Výsledky SODB 2011. Štatistický úrad SR. Retrieved 9 August 2012. "Municipal Statistics". Statistical Office of the Slovak republic. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 19 December 2007. "Partnerské mestá" (in Slovak). Svit. Retrieved 3 September 2019. Official website (in Slovak only) v t e