Nicolás Maduro Moros (Spanish: [nikoˈlas maˈðuɾo ˈmoɾos] ; born 23 November 1962) is a Venezuelan politician who has served as the president of Venezuela since 2013. Beginning his working life as a bus driver, Maduro rose to become a trade union leader before being elected to the National Assembly in 2000. He was appointed to a number of positions under President Hugo Chávez, serving as President of the National Assembly from 2005 to 2006, as Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2006 to 2013 and as the vice president from 2012 to 2013 under Chávez. After Chávez's death was announced on 5 March 2013, Maduro assumed the presidency. A special presidential election was held in 2013, where Maduro was declared the winner with 50.62% of the vote as the United Socialist Party of Venezuela candidate. He has ruled Venezuela by decree since 2015 through powers granted to him by the ruling party legislature. Shortages in Venezuela and decreased living standards led to a wave of protests in 2014 that escalated into daily marches nationwide, repression of dissent and a decline in Maduro's popularity. An opposition-led National Assembly was elected in 2015 and a movement toward recalling Maduro began in 2016, which was ultimately cancelled by Maduro's government; Maduro maintained power through the Supreme Tribunal, the National Electoral Council and the military. The Supreme Tribunal removed power from the elected National Assembly, resulting in a constitutional crisis and another wave of protests in 2017. As a response to the protests, Maduro called for a rewrite of the constitution, and the Constituent Assembly of Venezuela was elected in 2017 under voting conditions that many concluded were irregular. On 20 May 2018, presidential elections were held; President Maduro was sworn in on 10 January 2019 with widespread condemnation, and the president of the National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, was declared interim president on 23 January 2019 by the opposition legislative body—kicking off a presidential crisis that spanned nearly four years and divided the international community. Maduro has been described as an autocrat and a dictator. Between 2013 and 2023, Venezuela dropped 42 places in the Press Freedom Index. According to estimations by the United Nations (UN) and Human Rights Watch, under Maduro's administration, more than 20,000 people have been subject to extrajudicial killings and seven million Venezuelans have been forced to flee the country. The UN Fact-Finding Mission on Venezuela concluded that the country's justice system independence has been deeply eroded; the mission also identified frequent due process violations, including political external interference and the admission of evidence through torture. Most Venezuelan television channels are controlled by the state, and information unfavorable to the government is not covered completely. In 2018, a Board of Independent Experts designated by the Organization of American States (OAS) found that crimes against humanity have been committed in Venezuela during Maduro's presidency, and in 2021 the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) announced the opening of an investigation regarding the situation in the country. Nicolás Maduro Moros was born on 23 November 1962 in Caracas, Venezuela, into a working-class family. His father, Nicolás Maduro García, who was a prominent trade union leader, died in a motor vehicle accident on 22 April 1989. His mother, Teresa de Jesús Moros, was born in Cúcuta, a Colombian border town at the boundary with Venezuela. He was born into a leftist family and "militant dreamer of the Movimiento Electoral del Pueblo (MEP)". Maduro was raised in Calle 14, a street in Los Jardines, El Valle, a working-class neighborhood on the western outskirts of Caracas. The only male of four siblings, he had "three sisters, María Teresa, Josefina, and Anita". Maduro was raised as a Roman Catholic. In 2012, it was reported by the New York Times that he was a follower of Indian Hindu guru Sathya Sai Baba and previously visited the guru in India in 2005. He stated in a 2013 interview that "my grandparents were Jewish, from a Sephardic Moorish background, and converted to Catholicism in Venezuela". Maduro has been married twice. His first marriage was to Adriana Guerra Angulo, with whom he had his only son, Nicolás Maduro Guerra, also known as "Nicolasito", who was appointed to several senior government posts (Chief of the Presidency's Special Inspectors Body, head of the National Film School, and a seat in the National Assembly). He later married Cilia Flores, a lawyer and politician who replaced Maduro as president of the National Assembly in August 2006, when he resigned to become Minister of Foreign Affairs, becoming the first woman to serve as president of the National Assembly. The two had been in a romantic relationship since the 1990s when Flores was Hugo Chávez's lawyer following the 1992 Venezuelan coup d'état attempts and were married in July 2013 months after Maduro became president. While they have no children together, Maduro has three step-children from his wife's first marriage to Walter Ramón Gavidia; Walter Jacob, Yoswel, and Yosser. Maduro is a fan of John Lennon's music and his campaigns for peace and love. Maduro has said that he was inspired by the music and counter-culture of 1960s and 70s, mentioning also Robert Plant and Led Zeppelin. Maduro attended a public high school, the Liceo José Ávalos, in El Valle. His introduction to politics was when he became a member of his high school's student union. According to school records, Maduro did not graduate from high school. According to Carlos Peñaloza, Maduro was considered a person of interest by Venezuelan authorities in the kidnapping of William Niehous [es], an American businessman and head of Owens-Illinois in Venezuela, who was held hostage by leftist militants who would later become close to Hugo Chávez. Maduro found employment as a bus driver for many years for the Caracas Metro company. He began his political career in the 1980s, by becoming an unofficial trade unionist representing the bus drivers of the Caracas Metro system. He was also employed as a bodyguard for José Vicente Rangel during Rangel's unsuccessful 1983 presidential campaign. At 24 years of age, Maduro resided in Havana with other militants of leftist organizations in South America who had moved to Cuba in 1986, attending a one-year course at the Escuela Nacional de Cuadros Julio Antonio Mella, a centre of political education directed by the Union of Young Communists.[clarification needed] During his time in Cuba, Maduro was instructed by Pedro Miret Prieto [es], a senior member of the Politburo of the Communist Party of Cuba who was close to Fidel Castro. According to Carlos Peñaloza, Maduro was allegedly tasked by the Castro government to serve as a "mole" working for the Cuba's Dirección de Inteligencia to approach Hugo Chávez, who was experiencing a burgeoning military career. In the early 1990s, he joined MBR-200 and campaigned for the release of Chávez when he was jailed for his role in the 1992 Venezuelan coup d'état attempts. In the late 1990s, Maduro was instrumental in founding the Movement of the Fifth Republic, which supported Chávez in his run for president in 1998. Maduro was elected on the MVR ticket to the Venezuelan Chamber of Deputies in 1998, to the National Constituent Assembly in 1999, and finally to the National Assembly in 2000, at all times representing the Capital District. The Assembly elected him as Speaker, a role he held from 2005 until 2006.[citation needed] Maduro was appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs in 2006, and served under Chávez in that position until being appointed Vice President of Venezuela in October 2012, after the presidential elections. According to BBC Mundo, during Maduro's tenure as foreign minister, "he was considered a key player in pushing the foreign policy of his country beyond Latin American borders to approach almost any government that rivaled the United States." Venezuela's foreign policy stances during his term included ending unofficial relations with Taiwan in favor of the People's Republic of China, support for Libya under Muammar Gaddafi, breaking off diplomatic ties with Israel during the 2008–09 Gaza War, recognizing and establishing diplomatic relations with the State of Palestine, a turnaround in relations with Colombia in 2008 (with Ecuador) and again in 2010, recognizing Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states, and support for Bashar al-Assad during the Syrian Civil War. Temir Porras, a 2019 visiting professor at Paris Institute of Political Studies who was Maduro's chief of staff during his tenure as foreign minister, said that in the early days of Chavismo, Maduro was considered "pragmatic" and a "very skilled politician" who was "good at negotiating and bargaining". Porras said the Maduro "was extremely effective at getting in touch with heads of state and getting the agreements (...) signed and achieved in a very rapid period of time". According to Rory Carroll, Maduro did not speak any foreign languages while serving as the Minister of Foreign Affairs. In September 2006, while attempting to travel back to Venezuela via Miami, Florida, Maduro was briefly detained by Homeland Security officers at the John F. Kennedy International Airport for around 90 minutes, after paying for three airplane tickets in cash. Both Maduro and President Hugo Chávez were in New York City attending the 61st session of the UN General Assembly, where President Chávez called US President George W. Bush "the devil" during his speech. The incident began when Maduro tried to pick up an item that had been screened at a security checkpoint at JFK International Airport, and security personnel told Maduro that he was prohibited from doing so. Maduro later identified himself as a diplomat from the Venezuelan government, but officials still escorted him to a room for conducting secondary screening. At one point, authorities ordered Maduro and other Venezuelan officials to spread their arms and legs and be frisked, but Maduro and others forcefully refused. His diplomatic passport and ticket were retained for a time, and finally given back to him. Speaking at the Venezuelan mission to the UN after his release, Maduro said his detention by the US authorities was illegal and he filed a complaint at the United Nations. US and UN officials called the incident regrettable but said Maduro had been identified for "secondary screening". Homeland Security spokesman Russ Knocke denied that Maduro was mistreated, saying that there was not evidence of abnormalities during the screening process. A UN diplomat said that Maduro was not authorized to speak publicly while his trip was delayed because he had shown up late without a ticket, prompting the screening. Maduro said the incident prevented him from traveling home on the same day.[citation needed] When he was informed of the incident, President Chávez said Maduro's detention was retaliation for his own speech at the UN General Assembly and stated that the authorities detained Maduro over his links to the Venezuelan failed coup in 1992, a charge that President Chávez denied. Prior to his appointment to the vice presidency, Maduro had been chosen by Chávez in 2011 to succeed him in the presidency if he were to die from cancer. This choice was made due to Maduro's loyalty to Chávez and because of his good relations with other chavistas such as Elías Jaua, former minister Jesse Chacón and Jorge Rodríguez. Bolivarian officials[who?] predicted that following Chávez's death, Maduro would have political difficulties and that Venezuela would experience instability. Chávez appointed Maduro Vice President of Venezuela on 13 October 2012, shortly after Chavez' victory in that month's presidential election. Two months later, on 8 December 2012, Chávez announced that his recurring cancer had returned and that he would be returning to Cuba for emergency surgery and further medical treatment. Chávez said that, should his condition worsen and a new presidential election be called to replace him, Venezuelans should vote for Maduro to succeed him. This was the first time that Chávez named a potential successor to his movement, as well as the first time he publicly acknowledged the possibility of his death. Chávez's endorsement of Maduro sidelined Diosdado Cabello, a former vice president and powerful Socialist Party official with ties to the armed forces, who had been widely considered a top candidate to be Chávez's successor. After Maduro was endorsed by Chávez, Cabello "immediately pledged loyalty" to both men. My firm opinion, as clear as the full moon – irrevocable, absolute, total – is ... that you elect Nicolas Maduro as President. I ask this of you from my heart. He is one of the young leaders with the greatest ability to continue, if I cannot. —Hugo Chávez during a nationwide TV address (cadena nacional) (8 December 2012) Upon the death of Hugo Chávez on 5 March 2013, Maduro assumed the powers and responsibilities of the president. He appointed Jorge Arreaza to take his place as vice president. Since Chávez died within the first four years of his term, the Constitution of Venezuela stated that a presidential election had to be held within 30 days of his death. Maduro was unanimously chosen as the Socialist Party's candidate in the election. When he assumed temporary power, opposition leaders argued that Maduro violated articles 229, 231, and 233 of the Venezuelan Constitution, by assuming power over the president of the National Assembly. The succession to the presidency of Maduro in 2013, according to Corrales and Penfold, was due to multiple mechanisms established by Maduro's predecessor, Chávez. Initially, oil prices were high enough for Maduro to maintain necessary spending for support, specifically with the military. Foreign ties that were established by Chávez were also used by Maduro as he applied skills that he had learned while serving as a foreign minister. Finally, the PSUV and government institutions aligned behind Maduro, and "the regime used the institutions of repression and autocracy, also created under Chávez, to become more repressive vis-à-vis the opposition". In April 2013, Maduro was elected president, narrowly defeating opposition candidate Henrique Capriles with just 1.5% of the vote separating the two. Capriles demanded a recount, refusing to recognize the outcome as valid. Maduro was inaugurated as president on 19 April, after the election commission had promised a full audit of the election results. In October 2013, he announced the creation of a new agency, the Vice Ministry of Supreme Happiness, to coordinate social programmes. Opposition leaders in Venezuela delivered a May 2016 petition to the National Electoral Council (CNE) calling for a recall referendum, with the populace to vote on whether to remove Maduro from office. On 5 July 2016, the Venezuelan intelligence service detained five opposition activists involved with the recall referendum, with two other activists of the same party, Popular Will, also arrested. After delays in verification of the signatures, protestors alleged the government was intentionally delaying the process. The government, in response, argued the protestors were part of a plot to topple Maduro. On 1 August 2016, CNE announced that enough signatures had been validated for the recall process to continue. While opposition leaders pushed for the recall to be held before the end of 2016, allowing a new presidential election to take place, the government vowed a recall would not occur until 2017, ensuring the current vice president would potentially come to power. In May 2017, Maduro proposed the 2017 Venezuelan Constituent Assembly election, which was later held on 30 July 2017 despite wide international condemnation. The United States sanctioned Maduro following the election, labeling him as a "dictator", preventing him from entering the United States. Other nations, such as China, Russia, and Cuba offered their support to Maduro and the Constituent Assembly elections. The presidential elections, whose original electoral date was scheduled for December 2018, was subsequently pulled ahead to 22 April before being pushed back to 20 May. Analysts described the poll as a show election, with the elections having the lowest voter turnout in the country's democratic era. Beginning six months after being elected, Maduro was given the power to rule by decree by the pre-2015 Venezuelan legislature (from 19 November 2013 to 19 November 2014, 15 March 2015 to 31 December 2015) and later by the Supreme Tribunal (since 15 January 2016) to address the ongoing economic crisis in the country, with strong condemnation by the Venezuelan opposition claiming that the legislature's power had been usurped by the court. His presidency has coincided with a decline in Venezuela's socioeconomic status, with crime, inflation, poverty and hunger increasing; analysts have attributed Venezuela's decline to both Chávez and Maduro's economic policies, while Maduro has blamed speculation and economic warfare waged by his political opponents. A 2018 Amnesty International report "accused Nicolas Maduro's government of committing some of the worst human rights violations in Venezuela's history". The report found the violence was carried out especially in Venezuela's poor neighborhoods, and included "8,292 extrajudicial executions carried out between 2015 and 2017". In one year, 22% of homicides (4,667) were committed by security forces. Amnesty International's Erika Guevara-Rosas said, "The government of President Maduro should guarantee the right to life, instead of taking the lives of the country's young people." During the later years of Maduro's presidency, pro-government police and military forces launched the "Liberation of the People Operation [es]", which they stated targeted street gangs and non-state paramilitary formations which they alleged had taken control of poor neighbourhoods. The operations reportedly resulted in thousands of arrests and an estimated 9,000 deaths, with the Venezuelan opposition claiming that the operations are actually a state instrument of repression. The UN subsequently released a report condemning the violent methods of the operation. Although the Venezuelan Government's Ombudsman, Tarek William Saab has admitted that his office received dozens of reports of "police excesses", he defended the need for the operations and stated that his office would be working alongside the police and military "to safeguard human rights". The Venezuelan Foreign Ministry has criticised the UN's report, calling it "neither objective, nor impartial" and listed what it believed were a total of 60 errors in the report. On 4 August 2018, at least two drones armed with explosives detonated in the area where Maduro was delivering an address to military officers in Venezuela. The Venezuelan government claims the event was a targeted attempt to assassinate Maduro, though the cause and intention of the explosions is debated. Others[who?] have suggested the incident was a false flag operation designed by the government to justify repression of opposition in Venezuela. Porras (Maduro's former chief of staff) said in 2019 that Maduro "delivered practically nothing in terms of public policy, in terms of direction" during his first term because, in Porras' opinion, "he does not have a clear vision for the country. He is very much focused on consolidating his power among his own peers in Chavismo and much less on exercising or implementing a strategic vision for the country." However, following increased international sanctions during the Venezuelan crisis in 2019, the Maduro government abandoned socialist policies established by Chávez, such as price and currency controls, which resulted in the country seeing a rebound from economic decline. The Economist wrote that Venezuela had also obtained "extra money from selling gold (both from illegal mines and from its reserves) and narcotics". On 3 May 2020, Venezuelan security forces prevented an attempt to overthrow Maduro by armed Venezuelan dissidents. The attempt was organised by an American private security company, Silvercorp USA, headed by Jordan Goudreau and the men were trained in Colombia. Goudreau claimed the operation had involved 60 troops, including two former US special forces members. The Venezuelan government claimed the United States and its Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) were responsible for the operation and had support from Colombia. Juan Guaidó denied involvement in the operation. Goudreau claimed that Guaidó and two political advisers had signed a contract with him for US$213 million in October 2019. Eight of the attackers were killed, with another thirteen, including two Americans, captured. On 6 March 2014, marking the 1 year anniversary of Hugo Chavez's death, Maduro announced on live television that he was breaking diplomatic and commercial relations with Panama after the country's president Ricardo Martinelli expressed support for the demonstrators during the protests that began on 12 February and called on the OAS to investigate. Relations were later restored in July 2014, after Vice President Jorge Arreaza attended the inauguration of President Juan Carlos Varela. On 11 August 2017, President Donald Trump said that he is “not going to rule out a military option” to confront the government of Nicolás Maduro. On 23 January 2019, Maduro announced that Venezuela was breaking ties with the United States following President Trump's announcement of recognizing Juan Guaidó, the Venezuelan opposition leader, as the interim President of Venezuela. On 14 January 2019, days after Brazil recognised Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaidó as the country's interim president, Maduro called Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro “a Hitler of the modern era”. Maduro has a strategic partnership with Russian leader Vladimir Putin. After Russia invaded Ukraine in February 2022, Maduro discussed increasing cooperation with Russia. Due to the raised oil prices resulting from the conflict, conversations have begun between Maduro and US officials, suggesting the possibility of lifting of US sanctions on Venezuela and improved relations between the two countries.[needs update] During the 2022 United Nations Climate Change Conference in November, multiple world leaders interacted with Maduro, including President of France Emmanuel Macron, Prime Minister of Portugal António Costa and American John Kerry, with President Macron addressing Maduro as "president" and stating "I would be happy if we could talk to each other for longer to engage in useful bilateral work for the region." Days later on 27 November, the United States eased sanctions on Venezuela and allowed Chevron Corporation to temporarily work with the Venezuelan government. Maduro made an official state visit to Saudi Arabia in June 2023. He also visited China in September 2023, requesting China's support for Venezuela to join the economic bloc BRICS and saying he wanted China's investment in Latin America and the Caribbean to increase. Brazil's president Lula da Silva supported Maduro's request to join BRICS. During the visit, Maduro also signed an agreement that included the training of Venezuelan astronauts, expressing his wish to send Venezuelans to the Moon. In the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, Maduro has frequently supported the Palestinian cause in international forums. On 7 November 2023, he condemned Israel's actions in the Gaza Strip during the Israel–Hamas war and accused Israel of committing genocide against Palestinians in Gaza. During the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, Maduro declared that "Jesus Christ was a young Palestinian unjustly crucified by the Spanish Empire". Maduro promoted a consultative referendum in Venezuela to support Venezuela's claim to the Guayana Esequiba region, which is disputed with, and controlled by, neighboring Guyana. The referendum took place on 3 December 2023. With widespread condemnation, President Maduro was sworn in on 10 January 2019. Minutes after he took the oath, the Organization of American States (OAS) approved a resolution declaring his presidency illegitimate, and calling for new elections. The National Assembly invoked a state of emergency, and some nations removed their embassies from Venezuela, with Colombia, and the United States saying Maduro was converting Venezuela into a de facto dictatorship. The president of the National Assembly, Juan Guaidó, was declared interim president on 23 January 2019; the US, Canada, Brazil and several Latin American countries supported Guaidó as interim president the same day; Russia, China, and Cuba supported Maduro. As of March 2019, over 50 countries, the OAS, and the Lima Group do not recognize Maduro as the legitimate president of Venezuela. The Supreme Tribunal rejected the National Assembly decisions, while the Supreme Tribunal of Justice of Venezuela in exile welcomed Guaidó as interim president. The United States Department of State issued a communication stating that Maduro had used unconstitutional means and a "sham electoral system" to maintain an unlawful presidency that is not recognized by most of Venezuela's neighbors. Maduro disputed Guaidó's claim and broke off diplomatic ties with several nations who recognized Guaidó's claim. Maduro's government states that the crisis is a "coup d'état led by the United States to topple him and control the country's oil reserves." Maduro has been accused of authoritarian leadership since he took office in 2013. After the opposition won the 2015 parliamentary elections, the lame duck National Assembly—consisting of pro-Maduro Bolivarian officials—filled the Supreme Tribunal of Justice with Maduro allies; the New York Times reported that Venezuela was "moving closer to one-man rule". In 2016, the Supreme Tribunal refused to acknowledge the democratically elected National Assembly's attempts to recall Maduro, and the words dictator and authoritarianism began to appear: Foreign Affairs wrote of a "full-on dictatorship", Javier Corrales wrote in Americas Quarterly that Venezuela was "transition[ing] to a full dictatorship", and OAS General Secretary Luis Almagro said that Maduro was becoming a dictator. After election officials closely aligned with the government blocked an attempt to summon a recall referendum against Maduro, Venezuelan political analysts cited in The Guardian warned of authoritarianism and a dictatorship. The Supreme Tribunal took over the legislative powers of the National Assembly in March, provoking the 2017 Venezuelan constitutional crisis; a Corrales opinion piece in the Washington Post asked, "What happens next for the dictatorship of President Nicolás Maduro?" With the 2017 Constituent National Assembly poised to declare itself the governing body of Venezuela, the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned President Maduro, labeled him a dictator, and prevented him from entering the United States. Chilean president Sebastián Piñera also labeled Maduro a dictator. Human Rights Watch described the process that had led to the National Assembly's being taken over, labeled Venezuela a dictatorship, and said the "Venezuelan government is tightening its stranglehold on the country’s basic institutions of democracy at a terrifying speed." The Financial Times published an article,"Sending a message to Venezuela’s dictatorship" discussing "international censure of Nicolás Maduro, Venezuela’s thuggish president". The Chicago Tribune editorial board wrote an opinion that "the Trump administration should harbor no illusions about Maduro, who appears bent on assuming the mantle of dictator." Vox Media published an opinion entitled "How Venezuela went from a rich democracy to a dictatorship on the brink of collapse." The Economist Intelligence Unit stated that during Maduro's presidency, the country's democracy deteriorated further, with the 2017 report downgrading Venezuela from a hybrid regime to an authoritarian regime, the lowest category, with an index of 3.87 (the second lowest in Latin America, along with Cuba), reflecting "Venezuela's continued slide towards dictatorship" as the government has side-lined the opposition-dominated National Assembly, jailed or disenfranchised leading opposition politicians and violently suppressed opposition protests. Venezuelan presidential elections were held prematurely in May 2018; the New York Times printed a news piece about the elections, headlining the word dictator, "Critics Say He Can't Beat a dictator. This Venezuelan thinks he can". Miguel Angel Latouche, a political science professor at Central University of Venezuela wrote an opinion piece entitled, "Venezuela is now a dictatorship", and CNN reported that US Republicans were using the term Venezuelan dictator to describe a Democratic candidate. Roger Noriega wrote in the Miami Herald that a "lawless regime" and "narcodictatorship" headed by Maduro, Tareck El Aissami and Diosdado Cabello had driven "Venezuela to the brink of collapse". The 10 January 2019 second inauguration of Nicolás Maduro was widely condemned and led to further commentary that Maduro had consolidated power and become a dictator from the Irish Times, the Times, the Council on Foreign Relations, German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, and the Economist. Canada's prime minister Justin Trudeau labeled Maduro an "illegitimate dictator" responsible for "terrible oppression" and the humanitarian crisis. The Canadian minister of foreign affairs, Chrystia Freeland, stated that "Having seized power through fraudulent and anti-democratic elections held on May 20, 2018, the Maduro regime is now fully entrenched as a dictatorship." Presidents Mauricio Macri of Argentina and Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil condemned what they called Maduro's dictatorship. Univisión announcer Jorge Ramos described his detention following a live interview of Maduro, saying that if Maduro does not release the seized video of the interview, "he is behaving exactly like a dictator". In an interview with Telemundo, U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders stated "of course Maduro is a dictator". Reporter Kenneth Rapoza wrote an opinion piece for Forbes with the title, "Basically everyone now knows Venezuela is a dictatorship." To be elected as President of the Republic it is required to be Venezuelan by birth, to not have another nationality, to be older than thirty years old, to be of a secular state and not having a firm court sentence and to comply with the other requirements established in this Constitution Article 227 of the Constitution of Venezuela Nicolás Maduro's birthplace and nationality have been questioned several times, with some placing doubt that he could hold the office of the presidency, given that Article 227 of the Venezuelan constitution states that "To be chosen as president of the Republic it is required to be Venezuelan by birth, not having another nationality, being over thirty years old, of a secular state and not being in any state or being in another firm position and fulfilling the other requirements in this Constitution." After his triumph in the 2013 presidential elections, opposition deputies warned that they would investigate the double nationality of Maduro.[citation needed] By 2014, official declarations by the Venezuela government shared four different birthplaces of Maduro. Tachira state's governor José Vielma Mora assured that Maduro was born in El Palotal sector of San Antonio del Táchira and that he had relatives that live in the towns of Capacho and Rubio. The opposition deputy Abelardo Díaz [es] reviewed the civil registry of El Valle, as well as the civil registry referenced by Vielma Mora, without finding any proof or documentation that could confirm Maduro's birthplace. In June 2013, two months after assuming the presidency, Maduro claimed in a press conference in Rome that he was born in Caracas, in Los Chaguaramos, in San Pedro Parish. During an interview with a Spanish journalist, also in June 2013, Elías Jaua claimed that Maduro was born in El Valle parish, in the Libertador Municipality of Caracas. In October 2013 Tibisay Lucena, head of the National Electoral Council, assured in the Globovisión TV show Vladimir a la 1 that Maduro was born in La Candelaria Parish in Caracas, showing copies of the registry presentation book of all the newborns the day when allegedly Maduro was born. In April 2016 during a cadena nacional, Maduro changed his birthplace narrative once more, saying that he was born in Los Chaguaramos, specifically in Valle Abajo, adding that he was baptized in the San Pedro church. In 2016 a group of Venezuelans asked the National Assembly to investigate whether Nicolás Maduro was Colombian in an open letter addressed to the National Assembly president Henry Ramos Allup that justified the request by the "reasonable doubts there are around the true origins of Maduro, because, to date, he has refused to show his birth certificate". The 62 petitioners, including former ambassador Diego Arria, businessman Marcel Granier and opposition former military, assuring that according to the Colombian constitution Maduro is "Colombian by birth" for being "the son of a Colombian mother and for having resided" in the neighboring country "during his childhood". The same year several former members of the Electoral Council sent an open letter to Tibisay Lucena requesting to "exhibit publicly, in a printed media of national circulation the documents that certify the strict compliance with Articles 41 and 227 of the Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, that is to say, the birth certificate and the Certificate of Venezuelan Nationality by Birth of Nicolás Maduro Moros in order to verify if he is Venezuelan by birth and without another nationality". The document mentions that the current president of the CNE incurs in "a serious error, and even an irresponsibility, when she affirms that Maduro's nationality 'is not a motto of the National Electoral Council'" and the signatories also refer to the four different moments in which different politicians have awarded four different places of birth as official. Diario Las Américas claimed to have access to the birth inscriptions of Teresa de Jesús Moros, Maduro's mother, and of José Mario Moros, his uncle, both registered in the parish church of San Antonio of Cúcuta, Colombia. Opposition deputies have assured that the birth certificate of Maduro must say that he is the son of a Colombian mother, which would represent the proof that confirms that the president has double nationality and that he cannot hold any office under Article 41 of the constitution. Deputy Dennis Fernández has headed a special commission that investigates the origins of the president and has declared that "Maduro's mother is a Colombian citizen" and that the Venezuelan head of State would also be Colombian. The researcher, historian and former deputy Walter Márquez declared months after the presidential elections that Maduro's mother was born in Colombia and not in Rubio, Táchira. Márquez has also declared that Maduro "was born in Bogotá, according to the verbal testimonies of people who knew him as a child in Colombia and the documentary research we did" and what "there are more than 10 witnesses that corroborate this information, five of them live in Bogotá". On 28 October 2016, the Supreme Tribunal of Justice issued a ruling stating that according to "incontrovertible" proofs it has "absolute certainty" that Maduro was born in Caracas, in the parish of La Candelaria, known then as the Libertador Department of the Federal District, on 23 November 1962. The ruling does not reproduce Maduro's birth certificate but it quotes a communication signed on 8 June by the Colombian Vice minister of foreign affairs, Patti Londoño Jaramillo, where it states that "no related information was found, nor civil registry of birth, nor citizenship card that allows to infer that president Nicolás Maduro Moros is a Colombian national". The Supreme Court warned the deputies and the Venezuelans that "sowing doubts about the origins of the president" may "lead to the corresponding criminal, civil, administrative and, if applicable, disciplinary consequences" for "attack against the State". On 11 January 2018, the Supreme Tribunal of Justice of Venezuela in exile decreed the nullity of the 2013 presidential elections after lawyer Enrique Aristeguita Gramcko presented evidence about the presumed non-existence of ineligibility conditions of Nicolás Maduro to be elected and to hold the office of the presidency. Aristeguieta argued in the appeal that, under Article 96, Section B, of the Political Constitution of Colombia, Nicolás Maduro Moros, even in the unproven case of having been born in Venezuela, is "Colombian by birth" because he is the son of a Colombian mother and by having resided in that territory during his youth. The Constitutional Chamber admitted the demand and requested the presidency and the Electoral Council to send a certified copy of the president's birth certificate, in addition to his resignation from Colombian nationality. In March 2018 former Colombian president Andrés Pastrana made reference to the baptism certificate of Maduro's mother, noting that the disclosed document reiterates the Colombian origin of the mother of the president and that therefore Nicolás Maduro has Colombian citizenship. Maduro continued the practice of his predecessor, Hugo Chávez, of denouncing alleged conspiracies against him or his government; in a period of fifteen months following his election, dozens of conspiracies, some supposedly linked to assassination and coup attempts, were reported by Maduro's government. In this same period, the number of attempted coups claimed by the Venezuelan government outnumbered all attempted and executed coups occurring worldwide in the same period. In TV program La Hojilla, Mario Silva, a TV personality of the main state-run channel Venezolana de Televisión, stated in March 2015 that Maduro had received about 13 million psychological attacks. Observers say that Maduro uses such conspiracy theories as a strategy to distract Venezuelans from the root causes of problems facing his government. According to American news publication Foreign Policy, Maduro's predecessor, Hugo Chávez, "relied on his considerable populist charm, conspiratorial rhetoric, and his prodigious talent for crafting excuses" to avoid backlash from troubles Venezuela was facing, with Foreign Policy further stating that for Maduro, "the appeal of reworking the magic that once saved his mentor is obvious". Andrés Cañizales, a researcher at the Andrés Bello Catholic University, said that as a result of the lack of reliable mainstream news broadcasting, most Venezuelans stay informed via social networking services, and fake news and internet hoaxes have a higher impact in Venezuela than in other countries. In early 2015, the Maduro government accused the United States of attempting to overthrow him. The Venezuelan government performed elaborate actions[clarification needed] to respond to such alleged attempts and to convince the public that its claims were true. The reactions included the arrest of Antonio Ledezma in February 2015, placing travel restrictions on American tourists and holding military marches and public exercises "for the first time in Venezuela's democratic history". After the United States ordered sanctions to be placed on seven Venezuelan officials for human rights violations, Maduro used anti-U.S. rhetoric to bump up his approval ratings. However, according to Venezuelan political scientist Isabella Picón, only about 15% of Venezuelans believed in the alleged coup attempt accusations at the time. In 2016, Maduro again claimed that the United States was attempting to assist the opposition with a coup attempt[citation needed]. On 12 January 2016, Secretary General of the Organization of American States (OAS), Luis Almagro, threatened to invoke the Inter-American Democratic Charter, an instrument used to defend democracy in the Americas when threatened, when opposition National Assembly member were barred from taking their seats by the Maduro-aligned Supreme Court. Human rights organizations such as Human Rights Watch, and the Human Rights Foundation called for the OAS to invoke the Democratic Charter. After more controversies and pursuing a recall on Maduro, on 2 May 2016, opposition members of the National Assembly met with OAS officials to ask for the body to implement the Democratic Charter. Two days later on 4 May, the Maduro government called for a meeting the next day with the OAS, with Venezuelan Foreign Minister Delcy Rodríguez stating that the United States and the OAS were attempting to overthrow Maduro. On 17 May 2016 in a national speech, Maduro called OAS Secretary General Luis Almagro "a traitor" and stated that he worked for the CIA. Almagro sent a letter rebuking Maduro, and refuting the claim. The Trump administration described Maduro's government as a "dictatorship". When meeting with Latin American leaders during the seventy-second session of the UN General Assembly, President Donald Trump discussed possible United States military intervention in Venezuela, to which they all denied the offer. Maduro's son, Nicolás Maduro Guerra, stated during the 5th Constituent Assembly of Venezuela session that if the United States were to attack Venezuela, "the rifles would arrive in New York, Mr. Trump, we would arrive and take the White House". According to Michael Shifter, president of the Inter-American Dialogue think tank, "a military action of the United States against Venezuela would be contrary to the movements of the Trump administration to retire troops from Syria or Afghanistan." John Bolton has declared that "all options are on the table" but has also said that "our objective is a peaceful transfer of power". During Nicolás Maduro's first tenure, 115 media outlets were shut down between 2013 and 2018 according to the National Union of Press Workers of Venezuela, including 41 printed means, 65 radio outlets and 9 television channels. and during the first seven months of 2019 the Press and Society Institute of Venezuela found at least 350 cases of violations of freedom of expression . Since the beginning of the presidential crisis, Venezuela has been exposed to frequent "information blackouts", periods without access to internet or other news services during important political events. Since January, the National Assembly and Guaido's speeches are regularly disrupted, television channels and radio programs have been censored and many journalists were illegally detained. The Venezuelan press workers union reported that in 2019, 40 journalists had been illegally detained as of 12 March. As of June 2019, journalists have been denied access to seven sessions of the National Assembly by the National Guard. Most Venezuelan television channels are controlled by the state, and information unfavorable to the government is not covered completely. Newspapers and magazines are scarce, as most are unable to afford paper to print. The underfunded web infrastructure has led to slow Internet connection speeds. The information blackouts have promoted the creation of underground news coverage that is usually broadcast through social media and instant message services like WhatsApp. The dependence of Venezuelans on social media has also promoted the spread of disinformation and pro-Maduro propaganda. Venezuela's rank on the World Press Freedom Index of Reporters Without Borders has dropped 42 places since 2013. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) has made a call to Maduro administration to reestablish TV and radio channels that have been closed, cease on the restrictions to Internet access, and to protect the rights of journalists. A Board of Independent Experts designated by the Organization of American States (OAS) published a 400-page report in 2018 that crimes against humanity have been committed in Venezuela during Nicolás Maduro's presidency. The Board concluded that Maduro could be "responsible for dozens of murders, thousands of extra-judicial executions, more than 12,000 cases of arbitrary detentions, more than 290 cases of torture, attacks against the judiciary and a 'state-sanctioned humanitarian crisis' affecting hundreds of thousands of people". In February 2018, the International Criminal Court (ICC) announced that it would open preliminary probes into the alleged crimes against humanity performed by Venezuelan authorities. On 27 September 2018, six states parties to the Rome Statute: Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Chile, Paraguay and Peru, referred the situation in Venezuela since 12 February 2014 to the ICC, requesting the Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda to initiate an investigation on crimes against humanity allegedly committed in the territory. The following day, the Presidency assigned the situation to Pre-Trial Chamber I. In March 2019 The Wall Street Journal reported in an article entitled "Maduro loses grip on Venezuela's poor, a vital source of his power" that barrios are turning against Maduro and that "many blame government brutality for the shift". Foro Penal said that 50 people—mostly in barrios—had been killed by security forces in only the first two months of the year, and 653 had been arrested for protesting or speaking against the government. Cofavic, a victims' rights group, estimated "3,717 extrajudicial killings in the past two years, mostly of suspected criminals in barrios". In April 2019, the US Department of State alleged that Venezuela, "led by Nicolas Maduro, has consistently violated the human rights and dignity of its citizens" and "driven a once prosperous nation into economic ruin with his authoritarian rule" and that "Maduro's thugs have engaged in extra-judicial killings and torture, taken political prisoners, and severely restricted freedom of speech, all in a brutal effort to retain power." The State Department report highlighted abuse by the nation's security forces, including a number of deaths, the suspicious death of opposition politician Fernando Albán Salazar, the detention of Roberto Marrero, and repression of demonstrators during Venezuelan protests which left at least 40 dead in 2019. The third and last report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights addressed extrajudicial executions, torture, enforced disappearances and other right violations allegedly committed by Venezuelan security forces in the recent years. The High Commissioner Michelle Bachelet expressed her concerns for the "shockingly high" number of extrajudiciary killings and urged for the dissolution of the FAES. According to the report, 1569 cases of executions as consequence as a result of "resistance to authority" were registered by the Venezuelan authorities from 1 January to 19 March. Other 52 deaths that occurred during 2019 protests have been attributed to colectivos. The report also details how the Venezuelan government has "aimed at neutralising, repressing and criminalising political opponents and people critical of the government" since 2016. A report by the human rights advocacy group Human Rights Watch reported in September 2019 that the poor communities in Venezuela no longer in support of Nicolás Maduro's government have witnessed arbitrary arrests and extrajudicial executions at the hands of Venezuelan police unit. The Venezuelan government has repeatedly declared that the victims were armed criminals who had died during "confrontations", but several witnesses or families of victims have challenged these claims and in many cases victims were last seen alive in police custody. Although Venezuelan authorities told the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) that five FAES agents were convicted on charges including attempted murder for crimes committed in 2018, and that 388 agents were under investigation for crimes committed between 2017 and 2019, the OHCHR also reported that "[i]nstitutions responsible for the protection of human rights, such as the Attorney General’s Office, the courts and the Ombudsperson, usually do not conduct prompt, effective, thorough, independent, impartial and transparent investigations into human rights violations and other crimes committed by State actors, bring perpetrators to justice, and protect victims and witnesses." The government made three times more observations than the amount of recommendations included in the UN report, and at the same time included false or incomplete claims. On 14 December 2020, the Office of the Prosecutor released a report on the office's year activities, stating that it believed there was a "reasonable basis" to believe that "since at least April 2017, civilian authorities, members of the armed forces and pro-government individuals have committed the crimes against humanity." and that it expected to decide in 2021 whether to open an investigation or not. On 4 November 2021, ICC Prosecutor Karim Khan announced the opening of an investigation regarding the situation in Venezuela. On 16 September 2021, the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on Venezuela released its second report on the country's situation, concluding that the independence of the Venezuelan justice system under Nicolás Maduro has been deeply eroded, to the extent of playing an important role in aiding state repression and perpetuating state impunity for human rights violations. The document identified frequent due process violations, including the use of pre-trial detention as a routine (rather than an exceptional measure) and judges sustaining detentions or charges based on manipulated or fabricated evidence, evidence obtained through illegal means, and evidence obtained through coercion or torture; in some of the reviewed cases, the judges also failed to protect torture victims, returning them to detentions centers were torture was denounced, "despite having heard victims, sometimes bearing visible injuries consistent with torture, make the allegation in court". The report also concluded that prosecutorial and judicial individuals at all levels witness or experienced external interference in decision-making, and that several reported receiving instructions either from the judicial or prosecutorial hierarchy or from political officials on how to decide cases. Two nephews of Maduro's wife, Efraín Antonio Campo Flores and Francisco Flores de Freitas, were found guilty in a US court of conspiracy to import cocaine in November 2016, with some of their funds possibly assisting Maduro's presidential campaign in the 2013 Venezuelan presidential election and potentially for the 2015 Venezuelan parliamentary elections, with the funds mainly used to "help their family stay in power". One informant stated that the two often flew out of Terminal 4 of Simon Bolivar Airport, a terminal reserved for the president. After Maduro's nephews were apprehended by the US Drug Enforcement Administration for the illegal distribution of cocaine on 10 November 2015, carrying diplomatic passports, Maduro posted a statement on Twitter criticizing "attacks and imperialist ambushes", saying "the Father land will continue on its path". Diosdado Cabello, a senior official in Maduro's government, was quoted as saying the arrests were a "kidnapping" by the United States. Ex-Venezuelan vice president Tareck El Aissami, who served Maduro from 2017 to 2018 is under U.S. sanctions for drug trafficking and aiding state terrorism. He is accused by the U.S State Department of aiding sanctioned Iran terrorist backed groups including Hezbollah and Quds Force. He is also accused of having ties with various illicit organizations including Los Zetas and Cartel of the Suns. On 18 May 2018, the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) of the United States Department of the Treasury placed sanctions in effect against high-level official Diosdado Cabello. OFAC stated that Cabello and others used their power within the Bolivarian government "to personally profit from extortion, money laundering, and embezzlement", with Cabello allegedly directing drug trafficking activities with Venezuelan Vice President Tareck El Aissami while dividing drug profits with President Nicolás Maduro. On 26 March 2020, the United States Department of Justice charged Maduro and other Venezuelan officials and some Colombian former FARC members, for what William Barr described as "narco-terrorism": the shipping of cocaine to the US to wage a health war on US citizens. According to Barr, Venezuelan leaders and the FARC faction organised an "air bridge" from a Venezuelan airbase transporting cocaine to Central America and a sea route to the Caribbean. The US government offered $15 million for any information that would lead to his arrest. Maduro's nephews were freed in October 2022 as a prisoner swap for seven jailed Americans. As foreign minister, during a tenth anniversary gathering commemorating the 2002 Venezuelan coup d'état attempt going into the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election, Maduro called opposition members "snobs" and "little faggots." During the presidential campaign of 2013, Maduro used anti-gay attacks as a political weapon, calling representatives of the opposition "faggots". Maduro used anti-gay speech toward his opponent Henrique Capriles calling him a "little princess" and saying "I do have a wife, you know? I do like women!" In August 2017, Luisa Ortega Díaz, Chief Prosecutor of Venezuela from 2007 until her sacking in August 2017, accused Maduro of profiting from the shortages in Venezuela. The government-operated Local Committees for Supply and Production (CLAP), which provides food to impoverished Venezuelans, made contracts with Group Grand Limited, a company that Ortega said was "presumably owned by Nicolás Maduro" through front-men Rodolfo Reyes, Álvaro Uguedo Vargas and Alex Saab. Group Grand Limited, a Mexican entity, was paid by the Venezuelan government for basic foods which it supplied to CLAP. Maduro accused Ortega of working with the United States to damage his government. An April 2019 communication from the United States Department of State highlighted a 2017 National Assembly investigation finding that the government paid US$42 for food that cost under US$13, and that "Maduro's inner circle kept the difference, which totaled more than $200 million dollars in at least one case", adding that food boxes were "distributed in exchange for votes". On 18 October 2018, Mexican prosecutors accused the Venezuelan government and Mexican individuals of buying poor-quality food products for CLAP and exporting them to Venezuela to double their value for sale. During the Venezuelan presidential crisis, Venezuelan National Assembly president Juan Guaidó said that the Maduro government had plans to steal for humanitarian purposes the products that entered the country, including plans to distribute these products through the government's food-distribution program CLAP. While Venezuelans were affected by hunger and shortages, Maduro and his government officials publicly shared images of themselves eating luxurious meals, images that were met with displeasure by Venezuelans. Despite the majority of Venezuelans losing weight due to hunger, members of the Maduro's administration appeared to gain weight. In November 2017, while giving a lengthy, live cadena broadcast, Maduro, unaware he was still being filmed, pulled out an empanada from his desk and began eating it. This occurred amid controversy over Maduro's gaining weight during the nationwide food and medicine shortage; with many on social media criticizing the publicly broadcast incident. In September 2018, Maduro ate at a Nusret Gökçe's, a luxurious Istanbul restaurant. Gökçe, popularly known as Salt Bae, served Maduro and his wife a meat meal, offering also a personalized shirt and a box of cigars with Maduro's name engraved upon it. The incident received international criticism and The Wall Street Journal also reported that the incident left poor Venezuelans incensed. In December 2018, videos and pictures were leaked showing a glamorous Christmas party that counted with an expensive feast, including French wine, taking place in the seat of the pro-Maduro Supreme Tribunal of Justice. The images received considerable backlash from social networks, criticizing the costs of the party during the grave economic crisis in the country and the hypocrisy of Maduro's government. In an investigative interview with Euzenando Prazeres de Azevedo, president of Constructora Odebrecht in Venezuela, the executive revealed how Odebrecht paid $35 million to fund Maduro's 2013 presidential campaign if Odebrecht projects would be prioritized in Venezuela. Americo Mata, Maduro's campaign manager, initially asked for $50 million for Maduro, though the final $35 million was settled. Maduro was sentenced to 18 years and 3 months in prison on 15 August 2018 by the Supreme Tribunal of Justice of Venezuela in exile, with the exiled high court stating "there is enough evidence to establish the guilt ... [of] corruption and legitimation of capital". The Organization of American States Secretary General, Luis Almagro, supported the verdict and asked for the Venezuelan National Assembly to recognize the ruling of the Supreme Tribunal in exile. The US State Department issued a fact sheet stating that Maduro's most serious corruption involved embezzlement in which "a European bank accepted exorbitant commissions to process approximately $2 billion in transactions related to Venezuelan third–party money launderers, shell companies, and complex financial products to siphon off funds from PdVSA". The State Department also alleges that Maduro expelled authorized foreign companies from the mining sector to allow officials to exploit Venezuela's resources for their own gain, using unregulated miners under the control of Venezuela's armed forces. Thirteen government officials were sanctioned by the United States Department of Treasury due to their involvement with the 2017 Venezuelan Constituent Assembly election. Two months later, the Canadian government sanctioned members of the Maduro government, including Maduro, preventing Canadian nationals from participating in property and financial deals with him due to the rupture of Venezuela's constitutional order. After the Constituent Assembly election, the United States sanctioned Maduro on 31 July 2017, making him the fourth foreign head of state to be sanctioned by the United States after Bashar al-Assad of Syria, Kim Jong-un of North Korea and Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe. Secretary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin stating "Maduro is a dictator who disregards the will of the Venezuelan people". Maduro fired back at the sanctions during his victory speech saying "I don't obey imperial orders. I'm against the Ku Klux Klan that governs the White House, and I'm proud to feel that way." On 29 March 2018, Maduro was sanctioned by the Panamanian government for his alleged involvement with "money laundering, financing of terrorism and financing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction". Maduro is also banned from entering Colombia. The Colombian government maintains a list of people banned from entering Colombia or subject to expulsion; as of January 2019, the list had 200 people with a "close relationship and support for the Nicolás Maduro regime". After the breakdown of the Barbados Agreements, he disqualified the pre-candidate Maria Corina Machado through the supreme court, similar to the official government. After that, the US Sanctions were reapplied under administration's Biden. In October 2013, Maduro's approval rating stood between 45% and 50% with Reuters stating that it was possibly due to Hugo Chávez's endorsement. One year later in October 2014, Maduro's approval rating was at 24.5% according to pollster Datanálisis. In November 2014, Datanálisis polls indicated that more than 66% of Venezuelans believed that Maduro should not finish his six-year term, with government supporters representing more than 25% of those believing that Maduro should resign. In March and April 2015, Maduro saw a small increase in approval after initiating a campaign of anti-US rhetoric following the sanctioning of seven officials accused by the United States of participating in human rights violations. During a recall movement gathered from late-October through November 2016, a poll by Venebarómetro found that "88% of 'likely' voters in a recall would choose to oust Maduro." Among similar polls, Hercon concluded that up to 81,3% of voters responded being willing to recall Maduro, Meganálisis that up to 78,3% of respondents disagreed that Maduro continued governing, and Datanálisis that 75% of Venezuelans considered that Maduro should be recalled. In September 2018, Meganálisis polls found that 84.6% of Venezuelans surveyed wanted Maduro and his government to be removed from power. Following the suspension of the recall movement, a Venebarómetro poll found that 61.4% found that Maduro had become a dictator, while in a poll taken by Keller and Associates 63% of those questioned thought that Maduro was a dictator. Before the 2018 presidential elections, a Datanálisis poll indicated that 16,7% of voters would vote for Nicolás Maduro as candidate, compared to 27,6% and 17,1% of voters that would choose rival candidates Henri Falcón and Javier Bertucci, respectively. During the presidential crisis, The Wall Street Journal reported that barrios were turning against Maduro in "a shift born of economic misery and police violence". Surveys between 30 January and 1 February 2019 by Meganálisis recorded that 4.1% of Venezuelans recognized Maduro as president, 11.2% were undecided, and 84.6% of respondents recognized Guaidó as interim president. The study of 1,030 Venezuelans was conducted in 16 states and 32 cities. A separate pollster, Hinterlaces, ran a poll from 21 January to 2 February 2019 that found that 57% of Venezuelans recognized Maduro as the legitimate president of Venezuela, 32% recognized Guaidó, and 11% were unsure. By 4 March 2019, a Datanálisis poll found Guaidó's approval at 61%, and Maduro's at all-time low of 14%, with Guaidó win 77% in a theoretical election with Maduro, who received 23% of support. Datanálisis found that, among the poorest 20% of Venezuelans, Maduro's support had fallen to 18% in February 2019 from 40% two years earlier. In February 2023, a year before the 2024 presidential elections, a Datincorp poll concluded that 15.69% of voters would vote for Maduro as a candidate, in contrast to 16.86% that would vote for opposition candidate María Corina Machado. Maduro was parodied in the animated web series Isla Presidencial, along with most of the other Latin American leaders, portrayed as a man of limited intelligence, twisted speech, and capable of talking with birds, the latter being a reference to a comment made by Maduro during the 2013 presidential elections, when he said that the late Chávez had reincarnated in a little bird and talked to him to bless his candidacy. The 2020 revival of the Animaniacs series has featured Maduro, mocking him and the hyperinflation in Venezuela. Several documentaries that discuss the Bolivarian Revolution and the Crisis in Venezuela, including In the Shadow of the Revolution, Chavismo: The Plague of the 21st Century, El pueblo soy yo, and A La Calle, depict Maduro as well.   Revoked and returned awards and honours. In 2014, Maduro was named as one of TIME magazine's 100 Most Influential People. In the article, it explained that whether or not Venezuela collapses "now depends on Maduro", saying it also depends on whether Maduro "can step out of the shadow of his pugnacious predecessor and compromise with his opponents". In 2016, the Reporters Without Borders (RSF) Top 35 Predators of Press Freedom list placed Maduro as a "predator" to press freedom in Venezuela, with RSF noting his method of "carefully orchestrated censorship and economic asphyxiation" toward media organizations. In 2016, the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), an international non-governmental organization that investigates crime and corruption, gave President Maduro the Person of the Year Award that "recognizes the individual who has done the most in the world to advance organized criminal activity and corruption". The OCCRP stated that they "chose Maduro for the global award on the strength of his corrupt and oppressive reign, so rife with mismanagement that citizens of his oil-rich nation are literally starving and begging for medicines" and that Maduro and his family steal millions of dollars from government coffers to fund patronage that maintains President Maduro's power in Venezuela. The group also explains how Maduro had overruled the legislative branch filled with opposition politicians, repressed citizen protests and had relatives involved in drug trafficking. Nicolás Maduro won the second presidential election after the death of Hugo Chávez, with 50.61% of the votes against the opposition's candidate Henrique Capriles Radonski who had 49.12% of the votes. The Democratic Unity Roundtable contested his election as fraud and as a violation of the constitution. However, the Supreme Court of Venezuela ruled that under Venezuela's Constitution, Nicolás Maduro is the legitimate president and was invested as such by the Venezuelan National Assembly (Asamblea Nacional). Maduro was declared as the winner of the 2018 election with 67.8% of the vote. The result was denounced as fraudulent by most neighboring countries, including Argentina, Peña Nieto's Mexico, Chile, Colombia, Brazil, Canada and the United States, as well as organizations such as the European Union, and the Organization of American States, but recognized as legitimate by other neighboring countries such as López Obrador's Mexico, Bolivia, Cuba, Suriname, Nicaragua and some other ALBA countries, along with South Africa, China, Russia, North Korea, and Turkey. Venezuela portal 2016 state of emergency in Venezuela List of presidents of Venezuela Although Nicolás Maduro's exact birthplace has been questioned on several occasions and high-ranking government officials have differed on its details, most sources agree that he was born in Caracas. See § Birthplace and nationality for more details. The original electoral date was December 2018 but was pulled ahead to 22 April and then pushed back to 20 May. See "§ Dictatorship charges" for full discussion and sources. de Córdoba, José; Vyas, Kejal (9 December 2012). "Venezuela's Future in Balance". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 5 April 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2012. Diaz-Struck, Emilia and Juan Forero (19 November 2013). "Venezuelan president Maduro given power to rule by decree". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2015. Venezuela's legislature on Tuesday gave President Nicolás Maduro decree powers that he says are necessary for an 'economic offensive' against the spiraling inflation and food shortages buffeting the country's economy ahead of important municipal elections. "Venezuela: President Maduro granted power to govern by decree". BBC News. 16 March 2015. Archived from the original on 12 January 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2015. * Brodzinsky, Sibylla (15 January 2016). "Venezuela president declares economic emergency as inflation hits 141%". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 27 February 2016. Retrieved 24 February 2016. * Worely, Will (18 March 2016). "Venezuela is going to shut down for a whole week because of an energy crisis". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2016. Washington, Richard (22 June 2016). "'The Maduro approach' to Venezuelan crisis deemed unsustainable by analysts". CNBC. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Lopez, Linette. "Why Venezuela is a nightmare right now". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Faria, Javier (25 February 2015). "Venezuelan teen dies after being shot at anti-Maduro protest". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015. * Usborne, David. "Dissent in Venezuela: Maduro regime looks on borrowed time as rising public anger meets political repression". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 26 February 2015. "A 2016 Presidential Recall Seems Less and Less Likely". Stratfor. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 23 June 2016. Sanchez, Fabiola and Joshua Goodman (15 April 2017). "Venezuela's top prosecutor Luisa Ortega Diaz rebukes Supreme Court power grab". The Globe and Mail. The Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Charner, Flora and Euan McKirdy and Steve Almasy (3 August 2017). "Controversial Venezuela vote to be investigated, attorney general says". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Casey, Nicholas (2 August 2017). "Venezuela Reported False Election Turnout, Voting Company Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Brodzinsky, Sibylla and Daniel Boffey (2 August 2019). "40 countries protest Venezuela's new assembly amid fraud accusations". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Phippen, J. Weston (31 July 2017). "Violence and Claims of Fraud in Venezuela's Controversial Vote". Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Venezuela opposition weighs election run". BBC News. 8 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2018. "CNE: El 22 de abril se realizarán las presidenciales". Globovision (in Spanish). 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2018. Redacción, Voz de América - (1 March 2018). "Postergan elecciones en Venezuela hasta mayo". Voice of America (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Venezuela Swears in an illegitimate President". Financial Times. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Herrero, Ana Vanessa; Specia, Megan (10 January 2019). "Venezuela Is in Crisis. So How Did Maduro Secure a Second Term?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Redacción (7 January 2019). "Christian Zerpa, el juez afín a Maduro que huyó a Estados Unidos y denuncia falta de independencia del poder judicial de Venezuela". BBC News Mundo. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Guaido vs Maduro: Who backs Venezuela's two presidents?". CNBC. Reuters. 24 January 2019. Archived from the original on 27 January 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2019. "Maduro faces off with U.S. over Venezuela rival's power claim". PBS. 24 January 2019. Archived from the original on 27 January 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2019. Applebaum, Anne (December 2021). "The Autocrats Are Winning," Archived 15 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine The Atlantic, pp. 48–49. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Corrales, Javier; Penfold, Michael (2014). Dragon in the tropics : Hugo Chavez and the political economy of revolution in Venezuela (Second ed.). [S.l.]: Brookings Institution Press. p. xii. ISBN 978-0815725930. "RSF 2013". rsf.org. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2022. Venezuela Events of 2022. Archived 3 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine Human Rights Watch. 2022. "Venezuelan 'death squads' killed thousands and covered it up, UN says". The Independent. 5 July 2019. Archived from the original on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Venezuela situation". United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Archived from the original on 24 August 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Venezuela's justice system aiding repression: Human rights probe". United Nations News. 16 September 2021. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Venezuela judicial independence deeply eroded: UN rights experts". Jurist.org. 20 September 2021. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Banwait, Harjyot (19 September 2021). "Venezuela's Justice System Perpetuating Human Rights Abuses". The Organization for World Peace. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. Nugent, Clara (16 April 2019). "Inside the Battle to Get News to Venezuelans". Time. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2019. "Sepa quiénes son los 11 venezolanos señalados por la OEA por supuestos crímenes de lesa humanidad – Efecto Cocuyo". Efecto Cocuyo (in Spanish). 30 May 2018. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "Venezuela faces landmark ICC investigation over alleged crimes against humanity". Associated Press. The Guardian. 4 November 2021. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Perfil | ¿Quién es Nicolás Maduro?". El Mundo (in Spanish). 27 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. "Profile: Nicolas Maduro – Americas". Al Jazeera. March 2013. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Lamb, Peter (17 December 2015). Historical Dictionary of Socialism. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 289. ISBN 978-1-442-25827-3. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2020. Turner, Barry (2013). The Statesman's Yearbook 2014: The Politics, Cultures and Economies of the World. Springer. p. 1486. ISBN 978-1-349-59643-0. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2020. Oropeza, Valentina (15 April 2013). "Perfil de Nicolás Maduro: El 'delfín' que conducirá la revolución bolivariana". El Tiempo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Lopez, Virginia; Watts, Jonathan (15 April 2013). "Who is Nicolás Maduro? Profile of Venezuela's new president". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "MinCI – Maduro: perfecto heredero de Chávez". MinCI. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Neuman, William (22 December 2012). "Waiting to See if a 'Yes Man' Picked to Succeed Chávez Might Say Something Else". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2013. Shmulovich, Michal (13 May 2013). "Venezuela's 'anti-Semitic' leader admits Jewish ancestry". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Venezuela's Chavez Says Cancer Back, Plans Surgery". USA Today. 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 12 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. Fermín, Daniel (12 January 2015). "La boleta de clase del hijo de Maduro". El Estímulo. Archived from the original on 5 September 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2018. "Venezuelan president's son, Nicolas Maduro Jr., showered in dollar bills as economy collapses". Fox News Latino. 19 March 2015. Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2015. Cawthorne, Andrew; Naranjo, Mario (9 December 2012). "Who is Nicolas Maduro, Possible Successor to Hugo Chávez?". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2012. Dreier, Hannah (12 November 2015). "US Court: Nephews of Venezuela First Lady Held Without Bail". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 14 November 2015. Guererro, Kay; Dominguez, Claudia; Shoichet, Catherine E. (12 November 2015). "Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's family members indicted in U.S. court". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 November 2015. Retrieved 14 November 2015. Meza, Alfredo (22 November 2015). "La generosa tía Cilia". El País. Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2018. Whole lotta love: Maduro 'the hippy' reared on Led Zeppelin and Lennon Archived 7 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine (Tue 8 April 2014) Lopez, Virginia (13 December 2012). "Nicolás Maduro: Hugo Chávez's incendiary heir". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Peñaloza, Carlos (2014). Chávez, el delfin de Fidel: la historia secreta del golpe del 4 de febrero. Miami: Alexandria Library. p. 184. ISBN 978-1505750331. OCLC 904959157. Among the escorts of Fidel who entered the country that night who entered camouflaged as Cuban, without being identified, Nicolás Maduro, the young man who was sought after for the kidnapping of William Niehaus since 1979. Vitello, Paul (22 October 2013). "William Niehous survived three years in captivity in Venezuela". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Nicolás Maduro a la cabeza de la revolución" Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish). Últimas Noticias. 9 December 2012. Peñaloza, Carlos (2014). Chávez, el delfin de Fidel : la historia secreta del golpe del 4 de febrero. Miami: Alexandria Library. p. 184. ISBN 978-1505750331. OCLC 904959157. Maduro had gone through a long process of formation in Cuba under the protection of Pedro Miret, the powerful Cuban commander and man very close to Fidel. Peñaloza, Carlos (2014). Chávez, el delfin de Fidel : la historia secreta del golpe del 4 de febrero. Miami: Alexandria Library. p. 184. ISBN 978-1505750331. OCLC 904959157. ... Maduro returned to Venezuela with the permission to approach Chávez acting as a mole of the G2. "Nicolás Maduro, el presidente de una nación dividida" [Nicolás Maduro, president of a divided nation] (in Spanish). BBC Mundo. 15 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 March 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. El Universal Taiwanese diplomats to leave Venezuela Archived 26 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (18 July 2007). Accessed 18 December 2007 El Universal Venezolanos residentes en Taiwán temerosos ante rupturas de lazos Archived 18 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine (30 July 2007). Accessed 19 December 2007(in Spanish) "Israel expels Venezuelan ambassador". CNN. 28 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Rasgon, Adam (24 January 2019). "Palestinian official slams US over its support for Venezuelan opposition leader". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 15 September 2019. Shoichet, Catherine E. (9 December 2012). "Venezuela: As Chavez Battles Cancer, Maduro Waits in the Wings". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2012. "Venezuela recognises rebel Georgian regions". ABC News. Moscow: Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 10 September 2009. Archived from the original on 13 September 2009. Retrieved 5 July 2010. Buitrago, Deisy and Andrew Cawthorne (1 October 2011). "Hugo Chavez sends solidarity to Gaddafi, Syria". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "Former chief of staff: Maduro is 'focused on consolidating his power'". Public Radio International. 4 March 2019. Archived from the original on 8 March 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2019. Carroll, Rory (2013). "5: Survival of the fittest". Comandante: Inside Hugo Chávez's Venezuela. Penguin Press. p. 120. ISBN 978-1-59420-457-9. LCCN 2012039514. "Venezuelan official briefly detained at New York airport". CNN. 24 September 2006. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "Venezuela official held at U.S. airport". United Press International. 24 September 2006. Archived from the original on 3 June 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "Chavez: U.S. detained Venezuelan official". NBC News. 24 September 2006. Archived from the original on 7 June 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "Publicista brasileña revela que en 2011 ya se sabía que Maduro sería el sucesor de Chávez". Diario Las Americas (in Spanish). 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. James, Ian (8 December 2012). "Venezuela's Chavez Says Cancer Back, Plans Surgery". USA Today. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2012. Crooks, Nathan (8 December 2012). "Venezuela's Chavez Says New Cancer Cells Detected in Cuba Exams". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2012. "Profile: Nicolas Maduro" Archived 21 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 13 December 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2012. Shoichet, Catherine E.; Ford, Dana (5 March 2013). "Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez dies" Archived 8 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine. CNN. CBS/AP (6 March 2013). "Hugo Chavez's handpicked successor at helm in Venezuela, for time being". CBS News. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2013. "Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2011. "Venezuela's foreign minister says VP Maduro is interim president" Archived 5 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Fox News Channel. 5 March 2013. Carroll, Rory; Lopez, Virginia (9 March 2013). "Venezuelan opposition challenges Nicolás Maduro's legitimacy". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 15 December 2016. "Constitución de la República de Venezuela" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2013. Corrales, Javier; Penfold, Michael (2 April 2015). Dragon in the Tropics: The Legacy of Hugo Chávez. Brookings Institution Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0815725930. Shoichet, Catherine (15 April 2013). "Chavez's Political Heir Declared Winner; Opponent Demands Recount". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 April 2013. Retrieved 15 April 2013. "Nicolas Maduro sworn in as new Venezuelan president" Archived 24 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 19 April 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Kroth, Olivia (18 April 2013). "Delegations from 15 countries to assist Maduro's inauguration in Venezuela" Archived 19 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Pravda.ru. Retrieved 18 April 2013. "Venezuela Fights Shortage Blues With New Happiness Agency". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 27 October 2013. "Venezuela starts validating recall referendum signatures". BBC. 21 June 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2016. Kurmanaev, Anatoly (6 July 2016). "Venezuela Detains Activists Calling for Maduro's Ouster". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 12 August 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2016. Sibylla Brodzinsky (27 July 2016). "Venezuela government stalling recall vote to keep power, opposition claims". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. Retrieved 31 July 2016. Cawthorne, Andrew (1 August 2016). "Venezuela election board okays opposition recall push first phase". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 November 2020. Retrieved 8 August 2016. "La lista de los 40 países democráticos que hasta el momento desconocieron la Asamblea Constituyente de Venezuela". Infobae (in Spanish). 31 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2017. "Fear spreads in Venezuela ahead of planned protest of controversial election". The Washington Post. 28 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Treasury Sanctions the President of Venezuela" (Press release). United States Department of the Treasury. 31 July 2017. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 1 August 2017. "China backs ally Venezuela, says Constituent Assembly vote..." Reuters. 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Comment by the Information and Press Department on the situation in Venezuela". www.mid.ru. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Robinson, Circles (August 2017). "Cuba Denounces US Campaign against Venezuela". Havana Times. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "CNE: El 22 de abril se realizarán las presidenciales". Globovision. 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2018. Sen, Ashish Kumar (18 May 2018). "Venezuela's Sham Election". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2018. Nicolás Maduro is expected to be re-elected president of Venezuela on May 20 in an election that most experts agree is a sham "Venezuela's sham presidential election". Financial Times. 16 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2018. The vote, of course, is a sham. Support is bought via ration cards issued to state workers with the implicit threat that both job and card are at risk if they vote against the government. Meanwhile, the country's highest profile opposition leaders are barred from running, in exile, or under arrest. "The Latest: Venezuela Opposition Calls Election a 'Farce'". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. 21 May 2018. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "Maduro gana con la abstención histórica más alta en comicios presidenciales". Efecto Cocuyo. 20 May 2018. Archived from the original on 21 December 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. Kraul, Chris (17 May 2017). "Human rights activists say many Venezuelan protesters face abusive government treatment". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 21 May 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2017. "Gobierno extiende por décima vez el decreto de emergencia económica". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 18 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017. * "Venezuela top court grants Maduro economic emergency powers,..." Reuters. 12 February 2016. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Venezuela's Supreme Court approved President Nicolas Maduro's "economic emergency" decree on Thursday, setting up a showdown after the Venezuelan Congress rejected the measure last month. Maduro's decree includes wider executive powers to control the budget, companies and the currency amid a severe economic crisis in the OPEC nation. Osmary Hernandez, Mariano Castillo and Deborah Bloom (21 February 2017). "Venezuelan food crisis reflected in skipped meals and weight loss". CNN. Archived from the original on 4 June 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. * Aslund, Anders (2 May 2017). "Venezuela Is Heading for a Soviet-Style Collapse". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 27 May 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. * Zanatta, Loris (30 May 2017). "Cuando el barco se hunde" [When the ship sinks]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 30 May 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. Scharfenberg, Ewald (1 February 2015). "Volver a ser pobre en Venezuela". El Pais. Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2015. "Mr. Maduro in His Labyrinth". The New York Times. 26 January 2015. Archived from the original on 26 January 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2015. * "Venezuela's government seizes electronic goods shops". BBC. 9 November 2013. Archived from the original on 29 September 2014. Retrieved 19 February 2014. * "Maduro anuncia que el martes arranca nueva "ofensiva económica"". La Patilla. 22 April 2014. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2014. * "Maduro insiste con una nueva "ofensiva económica"". La Nacion. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014. * "Decree powers widen Venezuelan president's economic war". CNN. 20 November 2013. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 21 February 2014. * Yapur, Nicolle (24 April 2014). "Primera ofensiva económica trajo más inflación y escasez". El Nacional. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014. "Amnesty Accuses Maduro Government of Executing Thousands". VOA news. 20 September 2018. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. "Venezuelan 'death squads' killed thousands and covered it up, UN says". The Independent. 5 July 2019. Archived from the original on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019. Pachico, Elyssa (27 March 2017). "Controversy Continues over Venezuela's New Security Operation". InSight Crime. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. "Six held over Venezuela 'drone attack'". BBC News. 5 August 2018. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 5 August 2018. Krygier, Rachelle; Faiola, Anthony (4 August 2018). "Maduro speech interrupted by explosions in what Venezuelan government calls a 'failed attack'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 5 August 2018. "Venezuelan President Unharmed After Assassination Attempt By Explosive Drones". Msn.com. 19 April 2017. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 5 August 2018. Cohen, Sandra (6 August 2018). "Por que há tanta desconfiança em torno da suposta tentativa de atentado contra Maduro?". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Venezuela, ¿vórtice de inestabilidad en el Caribe?". El Nuevo Herald. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. Lauer, Mirko (6 August 2018). "Maduro bajo fuego" [Maduro under fire]. La República (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "More dollars and fewer protests in Venezuela". The Economist. 18 December 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2019. Most Western and Latin American countries recognise Mr Guaidó's claim Hall, Louise (4 May 2020). "Former Green Beret claims to have led failed plot to overthrow Venezuelan president Maduro". The Independent. AP. Archived from the original on 7 May 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020. Phillips, Tom (4 May 2020). "Venezuela: anti-Maduro battle isn't over as ex-US soldier says he launched raid". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 May 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020. "Venezuela: Two US nationals arrested for plotting to overthrow Maduro regime". The Asian Age. AFP. 5 May 2020. Archived from the original on 8 May 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020. "Trump denies role in Venezuela incursion". BBC News. 8 May 2020. Archived from the original on 14 May 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2020. Faiola, Anthony. "From a Miami condo to the Venezuelan coast, how a plan to 'capture' Maduro went rogue". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 May 2020. Retrieved 11 May 2020. "Venezuela's Maduro breaks diplomatic links with Panama". BBC News. 6 March 2014. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Venezuela restores diplomatic ties with Panama". Reuters. 2 July 2014. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. Lee, Brianna (2 July 2014). "After President Varela's Inauguration, Panama and Venezuela Are Friends Again". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. "Trump won't 'rule out a military option' in Venezuela". The Washington Post. 11 August 2017. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2023. CNBC (23 January 2019). "Venezuela's Nicolas Maduro gives American diplomats 72 hours to leave". www.cnbc.com. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "'Bolsonaro is Hitler!' Venezuela's Maduro exclaims amid Brazil spat". Reuters. 14 January 2019. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Putin and Maduro discussed increasing partnership between Russia, Venezuela -IFX". Reuters. 1 March 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. Taylor, Luke (17 November 2022). "'Asking an arsonist to put out a fire': climate offender Maduro makes Cop27 comeback". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Maduro hails 'cordial' talks with US as west seeks new oil supplies". Financial Times. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Democrats embrace politically risky strategy on rising gas prices". The Washington Post. 6 March 2022. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Biden Team Open to Easing Economic Restrictions on Venezuela". Bloomberg. 10 March 2022. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Macron accused of 'U-turn' over Maduro encounter". France 24. 8 November 2022. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Experts react: As the US eases oil sanctions, is Venezuela coming in from the cold?". Atlantic Council. 27 November 2022. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Saudi Arabia welcomes Venezuelan leader Maduro, reaching out to yet another US foe". ABC News. 5 June 2023. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. Vasquez, Alex (10 September 2023). "Venezuela's Maduro Wants China's Support to Join the BRICS". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "La euforia del dictador Nicolás Maduro en China tras reunirse con Xi Jinping: "Vamos pa' la Luna"". Infobae (in Spanish). 14 September 2023. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Opposition to Israel's massacre in Gaza growing worldwide despite support by US, West". Anadolu Agency. 21 November 2023. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Las polémicas palabras de Nicolás Maduro: "Jesucristo fue un joven palestino crucificado injustamente por el Imperio español"". 20minutos (in Spanish). 12 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Venezuelans vote to claim sovereignty over a part of oil-rich nation Guyana". CNBC. 4 December 2023. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "La OEA aprobó la resolución que declara ilegítimo al nuevo gobierno de Nicolás Maduro". Infobae. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 24 December 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "National Assembly declares State of Emergency with the usurpation of Maduro as President". Asamblea Nacional. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Venezuela election: Fourteen ambassadors recalled after Maduro win". BBC. 22 May 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 3 March 2019. "Alemania apoya para que asuma poder" [Germany supports Assembly taking power off Maduro]. El Nacional. 9 January 2019. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Venezuela's Maduro starts new term, as US describes him as "usurper"". Reuters. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Peru, Paraguay, etc. recall diplomats after Maduro inauguration". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. Luhnow, David; Forero, Juan; Córdoba, José de (7 February 2019). "'What the Hell Is Going On?' How a Small Group Seized Control of Venezuela's Opposition". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 2 June 2019. Retrieved 2 June 2019. Zambrano, Diego A. (February 2019). "Guaidó, Not Maduro, Is the De Jure President of Venezuela". Stanford Law School. Archived from the original on 18 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. Tiempo, Casa Editorial El (4 January 2019). "Grupo de Lima insta a Maduro a no posesionarse el 10 de enero". El Tiempo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Es oficial: Maduro dictador". El Comercio. Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Maduro vs. Guaido: Who is backing whom?". France24. 28 January 2019. Archived from the original on 28 January 2019. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Altuve, Armando (15 April 2019). "Estados Unidos: Maduro viola sistemáticamente los derechos humanos y la dignidad de venezolanos" [United States: Maduro sistematically violates human rights and dignity of Venezuelans] (in Spanish). El Pitazo. Archived from the original on 27 December 2019. Retrieved 17 April 2019. Referencing "Nicolas Maduro: Corruption and chaos in Venezuela" (Press release). United States Department of State. 15 April 2019. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 17 April 2019. "US says it now backs Venezuela opposition". BBC News. 24 January 2019. Archived from the original on 24 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Canciller Arreaza advierte que objetivo de plan golpista es el petróleo venezolano" (in Spanish). presidencia.gob.ve. Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2019. "Maduro afirma que el petróleo es el principal motivo de la presión de EEUU contra Venezuela" (in Spanish). Europa Press. Archived from the original on 30 January 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2019. Casey, Nicholas and Patricia Torres (30 March 2017). "Venezuela muzzles legislature, moving closer to one-man rule". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2017. "Venezuela's Lame-Duck Congress Names New Supreme Court Justices". Bloomberg. 23 December 2015. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2017. Sabatini, Christopher (1 November 2016). "The final blow to Venezuela's democracy: What Latin America can do about it". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Corrales, Javier (24 October 2016). "Venezuela's Odd Transition to Dictatorship". Americas Quarterly. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "Almagro: Maduro se transforma en dictador por negarles a venezolanos derecho a decidir su futuro". CNN en Español (in Spanish). 24 August 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. Brodzinsky, Sibylla (21 October 2016). "Venezuelans warn of 'dictatorship' after officials block bid to recall Maduro". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 December 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. Loxton, James (20 April 2017). "Venezuelans are still demonstrating. What happens next for the dictatorship of President Nicolás Maduro?". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Goodman, Joshua and Fabiola Sanchez (8 August 2017). "New Venezuela assembly declares itself superior government branch". The Chicago Tribune. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Sebastián Piñera afirma que Nicolás Maduro se ha transformado en un dictador". Agencia EFE (in Spanish). 17 August 2017. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Venezuela's slide into dictatorship". Human Rights Watch. 7 December 2017. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Sending a message to Venezuela's dictatorship". Financial Times. 1 August 2017 – via ProQuest. Editorial Board (2 April 2017). "Editorial: Venezuela, a wannabe dictator and a dilemma for Trump". Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Aleem, Zeeshan (19 September 2017). "How Venezuela went from a rich democracy to a dictatorship on the brink of collapse". Vox. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Democracy Index 2017" (PDF). The Economist. 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 10 March 2019. Casey, Nicholas and Ana Vanessa Herrero (17 May 2018). "Critics Say He Can't Beat a dictator. This Venezuelan thinks he can". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 February 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Latouche, Miguel Angel (24 May 2018). "Venezuela is now a dictatorship". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Krieg, Gregory (16 August 2018). "Republicans compare Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to Venezuelan dictator". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Noriega, Roger (29 October 2018). "U.S., region can get tougher on the lawless Maduro regime". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Venezuela swears in an illegitimate President". Financial Times. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Herrero, Ana Vanessa and Megan Specia (10 January 2019). "Venezuela is in crisis. So how did Maduro secure a second term?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Hennigan, Tom (24 February 2019). "Venezuela: Guaidó turns to allies after Maduro blocks aid". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 25 February 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Gibbs, Stephen (11 January 2019). "World leaders shun Venezuela as 'dictator' Maduro sworn in". The Times. Archived from the original on 28 May 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Cara Labrador, Rocio (24 February 2019). "Venezuela: The Rise and Fall of a Petrostate". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Ross, Von Andreas (27 February 2019). "Der Diktator Maduro lässt Reporter festhalten, die ihn mit der blanken Not der Venezolaner konfrontieren". FAZ (in German). Archived from the original on 3 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Venezuela's dictator vows to block deliveries of American aid". The Economist. 16 February 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 26 February 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Perkel, Colin (15 January 2019). "Trudeau slams Venezuela's Maduro as an 'illegitimate dictator'". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Maduro's Venezuela a 'fully entrenched dictatorship': Canada". The Business Times. 11 January 2019. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Freeland says Venezuela's Maduro is now a dictator after illegitimate win". City News. The Canadian Press. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Argentina, Brazil leaders blast 'dictatorship' in Venezuela". France 24. 16 January 2019. Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "Jorge Ramos: The cictator of Venezuela earns his title". The New York Times. 27 February 2019. Archived from the original on 3 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "'He is not going to be the nominee': Dems slam Sanders over Maduro stance". Politico. 21 February 2019. Archived from the original on 7 May 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2023. ""Maduro es un dictador": Bernie Sanders dice que no apoya la dictadura | Noticias Telemundo". YouTube. 22 February 2020. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Rapoza, Kenneth (13 January 2019). "'Not My President': Basically everyone now knows Venezuela is a dictatorship". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. Delgado, Antonio María (20 March 2014). "Estudio concluye que Maduro nació en Bogotá". El Nuevo Herald. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "Afirman tener pruebas de que Maduro es colombiano". Noticias RCN. 29 July 2013. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "TSJ contradice a Maduro y resuelve el misterio de su nacionalidad". El Nacional. 28 October 2016. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "Machado: Ya van 4 parroquias donde nació Nicolás Maduro". Informe21. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "Vielma Mora dijo el 2 de abril: Nicolas Maduro nació en El Palotal, San Antonio del Táchira". Diario del Pueblo. Noticiero Digital. 18 June 2013. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "EN VIDEO: Los cuatro lugares de nacimiento de Nicolás Maduro ¡Escoja su favorito!". Maduradas. 31 December 2013. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Pineda Sleinan, Julett (29 October 2016). "El Valle, San Pedro o La Candelaria, ¿dónde nació el presidente Maduro?". Efecto Cocuyo. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "¿Maduro es colombiano?: polémica llega al parlamento venezolano". El Tiempo. 30 January 2016. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "¿Dónde nació Nicolás Maduro?". Diario Las Américas. 5 March 2016. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Peñaloza, Pedro Pablo (29 October 2016). "¿Dónde nació Nicolás Maduro? El Supremo de Venezuela contradice la autobiografía del mandatario". Univisión Noticias. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Delgado, Antonio María (18 March 2018). "Según Pastrana, nuevo documento prueba irrevocablemente la nacionalidad colombiana de Maduro". El Nuevo Herald. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. "TSJ en el exilio decreta nulidad de elección de Maduro como presidente". Diario las Américas. 11 January 2018. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 16 January 2018. Dreir, Hannah (23 July 2014). "Venezuelan Conspiracy Theories a Threat to Critics". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 27 July 2014. Lansberg-Rodríguez, Daniel (15 March 2015). "Coup Fatigue in Caracas". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 4 April 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2015. "Nicolas Maduro recebeu 13 milhões de ataques psicológicos – lainfo.es". Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Mogollon, Mery; Kraul, Chris (5 March 2015). "Venezuela commemorates Hugo Chavez amid economic and other woes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 18 March 2015. "Maduro dice que telenovelas generan delincuencia". Informe21.com. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Wallis, Daniel; Buitrago, Deisy (23 January 2013). "Venezuela's vice president says he's target of assassination plot". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Esteban Rojas (6 May 2017). "La guerra informativa invade las redes" [The informative war invades the networks]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. Lee, Brianna (25 March 2015). "Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's Approval Rating Gets A Tiny Bump Amid Tensions With US". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2015. "Woman who hit Venezuelan president with mango given new home". Special Broadcasting Service. 25 April 2015. Archived from the original on 25 April 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2015. "Letter of the OAS Secretary General to the President of Venezuela". Organization of American States. 12 January 2016. Archived from the original on 19 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "Venezuela: OAS Should Invoke Democratic Charter". Human Rights Watch. 16 May 2016. Archived from the original on 17 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "The Inter-American Democratic Charter and Mr. Insulza". Human Rights Foundation. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. Ordonez, Franco (4 May 2016). "Venezuela calls for extraordinary OAS meeting". The Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 24 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. Ordonez, Franco (5 May 2016). "Venezuela accuses U.S. of conspiring to topple Nicolás Maduro". The Kansas City Star. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "Maduro sobre Almagro: 'Es un traidor, algún día contaré su historia'". Noticias24. 17 May 2016. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "Message from the OAS Secretary General to the President of Venezuela". Organization of American States. 18 May 2016. Archived from the original on 19 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "Ditch Maduro or lose everything, Trump tells Venezuelan army". The Guardian. 18 February 2019. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 28 March 2019. Merica, Dan. "Trump says he won't rule out military option in Venezuela". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. Diamond, Jeremy (5 July 2018). "Trump asked advisers about invading Venezuela in 2017". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 July 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Uzcátegui, Ruth (12 August 2017). "Nicolás Maduro Guerra sobre intervención de Trump: Llegaríamos a tomar la Casa Blanca". Diario Panorama (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Pardo, Pablo (4 February 2019). "¿Cómo sería una invasión de Estados Unidos en Venezuela?". El Mundo. Archived from the original on 8 February 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2019. Hains, Tim (1 February 2019). "John Bolton: "All Options Are On The Table" For Venezuela; Hope For "Peaceful" Transfer Of Power". Real Clear Politics. Archived from the original on 5 February 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. "Durante el gobierno de Maduro se han cerrado 115 medios de comunicación, según el SNTP" (in Spanish). NTN24. Durante el gobierno de Maduro se han cerrado 115 medios de comunicación, según el SNTP. 2 November 2018. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2018. "Balance Semanal IPYSve | Hechos intimidatorios y limitaciones de acceso: el patrón de la censura en julio". IPYS (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "Venezuelan authorities restrict internet, block outlets amid unrest". CPJ. 1 May 2019. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2019. Escalona, José (13 March 2019). "173 agresiones a trabajadores de la prensa contabiliza Comisión de Medios de la Asamblea Nacional #13Mar". El Impulso (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Soldiers block press access to Venezuelan parliament". CPJ. 25 June 2019. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2019. "RSF 2022". rsf.org. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2022. "The Office of the Special Rapporteur condemns closure of Radio Caracas Radio 750 AM, the censorship of television channels, restrictions on the Internet, and the arrest of journalists in Venezuela". Organization of American States. 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2019. "CIDH condenó cierre de medios de comunicación y detenciones de periodistas". TalCual (in Spanish). 15 May 2019. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2019. Smith, Marie-Danielle (30 May 2018). "Canada introduces new sanctions on Venezuelan regime in wake of devastating report on crimes against humanity". National Post. Archived from the original on 17 October 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "ICC to open preliminary probes in Philippines, Venezuela". ABC News. 8 February 2018. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2018. "Venezuela". International Criminal Court. Archived from the original on 26 January 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2019. Luhnow, David (19 March 2019). "Maduro loses grip on Venezuela's poor, a vital source of his power". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. "On Venezuelan independence day, Maduro calls for dialogue as Guaido slams 'dictatorship'". Reuters. 5 July 2019. Archived from the original on 9 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2019. "UN report cites 'shockingly high' number of likely 'executions' in Venezuela". France 24. 5 July 2019. Archived from the original on 10 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2019. "UN human rights chief 'hopeful' Venezuelan authorities are ready to address violations, calls for dialogue". UN News. 4 July 2019. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2019. "Venezuela: Extrajudicial Killings in Poor Areas". Human Rights Watch. 18 September 2019. Archived from the original on 11 October 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "#TalCualVerifica las respuestas del gobierno de Maduro al #InformeBachelet" (in Spanish). Tal Cual. 12 July 2019. Archived from the original on 3 November 2019. Retrieved 3 November 2019. "ICC prosecutor sees 'reasonable basis' to believe Venezuela committed crimes against humanity". Reuters. 14 December 2020. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Venezuela faces landmark ICC investigation over alleged crimes against humanity". Associated Press. The Guardian. 4 November 2021. Archived from the original on 10 February 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Yagoub, Mimi (20 November 2015). "Venezuela Military Officials Piloted Drug Plane". InSight Crime. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2015. Blasco, Emili J. (19 November 2015). "La Casa Militar de Maduro custodió el traslado de droga de sus sobrinos". ABC. Archived from the original on 24 November 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2015. Raymond, Nate (19 November 2016). "Venezuelan first lady's nephews convicted in U.S. drug trial". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2016. "U.S. arrests Nicolas Maduro's family members". CNN. Archived from the original on 30 November 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2015. Kurmanaev, Anatoly. "Arrest of Nicolas Maduro Relatives a 'Kidnapping,' Venezuelan Official Says". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2015. "US indicts Nicolás Maduro and other top Venezuelan leaders for drug trafficking". The Guardian. 26 March 2020. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Benner, Katie; Rashbaum, William K.; Weiser, Benjamin (26 March 2020). "Venezuelan President Is Charged in the U.S. With Drug Trafficking". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Ewing, Philip (26 March 2020). "U.S. Unseals Drug Trafficking Charges Against Venezuela's President Maduro". NPR.org. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "US charges Venezuelan leader with 'narco-terrorism'". BBC News. 26 March 2020. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "US frees President Maduro's relatives in Venezuela prisoner swap". BBC News. 1 October 2022. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "Canciller Maduro llama "sifrinitos" y "fascistas" a dirigentes opositores". El Universal. 12 April 2012. Archived from the original on 2 July 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2015. Avery, Dan (13 April 2012). "Hugo Chavez's Foreign Minister Calls Opposition Party "Little Faggots"". Queerty. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2015. "Nicolás Maduro utiliza la homofobia para captar votos". Espiritu Gay. 15 March 2013. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Venezuela Says U.S. Plans To Kill Capriles, Maduro Accused Of Homophobic Slur". HuffPost. 13 March 2013. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015. Retrieved 30 May 2015. "Reuters: controversia sobre la sexualidad toma protagonismo en la carrera electoral de Venezuela". Noticias24. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Maduro podría ser dueño de empresa méxicana distribuidora de los CLAP". El Nacional (in Spanish). 23 August 2017. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Wyss, Jim (23 August 2017). "Venezuela's ex-prosecutor Luisa Ortega accuses Maduro of profiting from nation's hunger". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Prengaman, Peter (23 August 2017). "Venezuela's ousted prosecutor accuses Maduro of corruption". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Mexico prosecutors find fraud in Venezuela food aid program". ABC News. 18 October 2018. Archived from the original on 21 October 2018. Retrieved 21 October 2018. "Juan Guaidó denunció que el régimen de Nicolás Maduro quiere transferir 1.200 millones de dólares a Uruguay". InfoBAE (in Spanish). 4 February 2019. Archived from the original on 4 February 2019. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Guaidó no dio más detalles de su denuncia pero sí agregó que, además, el chavismo "planea robar" la ayuda humanitaria que está recolectando con colaboración de la comunidad internacional. "De banquete en banquete: Los "rojitos" que no escatiman a la hora de comer pese a la crisis". El Cooperate (in European Spanish). 22 September 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2018. Retrieved 24 September 2018. Hayes, Christal (3 November 2017). "Venezuelan President Eats Empanada on Live TV While Addressing Starving Nation". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "As his people starve, Venezuelan President munches on empanada while addressing the nation on live TV". Newsweek. 3 November 2017. Archived from the original on 27 May 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2018. "Venezuelans outraged by Maduro's steak feast at Salt Bae restaurant". Reuters. Reuters Editorial. 18 September 2018. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 18 September 2018. "La ostentosa fiesta navideña del TSJ en medio de la crisis más grande del país". NTN24. 15 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2019. "Ousted Venezuelan prosecutor leaks Odebrecht bribe video". Washington Post. 12 October 2017. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2017. "Américo Mata habría recibido pagos de Odebrecht para campaña de Maduro | El Cooperante". El Cooperante (in European Spanish). 25 August 2017. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2017. "TSJ en el exilio sentenció a Nicolás Maduro a 18 años y 3 meses de cárcel por corrupción - LaPatilla.com". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 15 August 2018. Archived from the original on 16 August 2018. Retrieved 16 August 2018. "Almagro solicita al presidente de la AN que acate la sentencia emitida por el TSJ en el exilio contra Maduro (Carta)". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 20 August 2018. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "Venezuela-related Designations". United States Department of Treasury. 26 July 2017. Archived from the original on 27 September 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2017. "Venezuela sanctions". Government of Canada. 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "Canada sanctions 40 Venezuelans with links to political, economic crisis". The Globe and Mail. 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 22 September 2017. Mazzei, Patricia (31 July 2017). "U.S. slaps sanctions on Maduro and labels him a 'dictator'". Miami Herald. Retrieved 22 June 2019. "Estos son los 55 "rojitos" que Panamá puso en la mira por fondos dudosos | El Cooperante". El Cooperante (in European Spanish). 29 March 2018. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 1 April 2018. "Primera parte de lista de colaboradores de Maduro que no pueden ingresar a Colombia" [First part of list of Maduro collaborators who can not enter Colombia] (in Spanish). RCN Radio. 31 January 2019. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2019. "Maduro encabeza lista de 200 venezolanos que no pueden entrar al país" [Maduro tops list of 200 Venezuelans who can not enter the country]. El Tiempo (in Spanish). 30 January 2019. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2019. "Venezuela: Sanctions Actions and Supporting Democracy". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "US threatens to reimpose sanctions on Venezuelan oil sector". 30 January 2024. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "US reimposes some sanctions after Venezuela bans presidential hopeful". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Wyss, Jim (4 March 2019). "'The chain of command is broken,' Guaidó tells supporters upon his return to Venezuela". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. According to a recent Datanalisis poll, Guaidó has an approval rating of 61 percent while Maduro's has hit an all-time low of 14 percent. citing Francisco Monaldi Tweet Archived 6 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine of 2 March, "Maduro cae a su mínimo histórico de aprobación con 14%. Guaidó logra 61% de aprobación y arrasaría en una elección con 77% vs. 23% Maduro." Cawthorne, Andrew (4 October 2013). "Venezuela's Maduro stuck in shadow of 'El Comandante' Chavez". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Para el 85,7% de los venezolanos la situación del país es mala (encuesta Datanalisis)". La Patilla. 1 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 December 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2014. "Venezuela Is On Borrowed Time". Business Insider. 29 November 2014. Archived from the original on 30 November 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2014. Sibylla Brodzinsky (27 July 2016). "Venezuela government stalling recall vote to keep power, opposition claims". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. Retrieved 31 July 2016. "Encuestadora Hercon: 81,3% revocaría al gobierno de Nicolás Maduro". Analitica (in Spanish). 13 October 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Al menos 78,3% de los venezolanos se niega a que Maduro continúe en el poder (Encuesta) - LaPatilla.com". La Patilla (in Spanish). 29 June 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Datanálisis: Popularidad de Maduro es la más baja en los últimos nueve meses". El Impulso (in Spanish). 17 August 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "El 84,6% de los venezolanos quieren que Maduro y el chavismo se vayan ya del poder (encuesta Meganálisis) - LaPatilla.com". La Patilla. 17 September 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "El diálogo le pasó factura a la oposición y recuperó al chavismo". El Estímulo. 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "ESTUDIO | El legado de Chávez se diluye y sube la impopularidad de Maduro". El Estímulo (in Spanish). 9 December 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Amaya, Víctor (10 May 2018). "La necesidad de una candidatura única y el inesperado Javier Bertucci (II)". Tal Cual (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Solo 4.1 % de venezolanos reconocen a Maduro como presidente: Guaidó se alza con 84.6 % de apoyo popular (Flash Meganálisis)". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 2 February 2019. Archived from the original on 4 February 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. "Hinterlaces: 57 % reconoce legitimidad del presidente Nicolás Maduro". Globovision (in Spanish). 10 February 2019. Archived from the original on 10 February 2019. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Datincorp – Informe del estudio – Cohesión – Política – 5 de febrero del 2023" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Maduro y su pajarito llegan a "La Isla Presidencial"" [Maduro and his bird arrive on "La Isla Presidencial"] (in Spanish). Clarín. 20 August 2013. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 3 February 2014. "'Animaniacs' versión 2020 se burló de Nicolás Maduro y Johnny Depp". Shock (in Spanish). 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. "Maduro y la hiperinflación protagonizan un episodio de Animaniacs". El Nacional (in Spanish). 21 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. "World Premiere: In the Shadow of the Revolution". Caracas Chronicles. 8 October 2017. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. ""Chavismo: la peste del siglo XXI" es premiado como mejor documental en Nueva York" (in Spanish). El Nuevo País. Archived from the original on 2 November 2018. Retrieved 11 December 2018. Sánchez Amaya, Humberto. "El pueblo soy yo, un documental para evitar la indiferencia" (in Spanish). El Nacional. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2019. "Doc Corner: 'A la calle'". The Film Experience. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Nicolás Maduro asume Presidencia en Venezuela". El Economista. 19 April 2013. Archived from the original on 4 May 2014. Retrieved 4 May 2014. "Decreto Nacional 481/2013". Boletín Oficial. SAIJ. 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2016. "Por decreto, el Gobierno le retiró a Nicolás Maduro la condecoración que le había otorgado Cristina en 2013" [By decree, the Government retired to Nicolás Maduro the decoration that had granted him Cristina in 2013]. La Nación (in Spanish). 11 August 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2017. "Otorgan Orden Bicentenaria de Campaña Admirable a Maduro". El Universal. 15 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 May 2014. Retrieved 4 May 2014. "Presidente Maduro fue condecorado con orden Augusto Sandino (+Comunicado), por reencarnar y encarnar "ideales de vida y obra de todos los maestros, guías, próceres, y héroes de la Patria Grande como combatiente martiano, bolivariano, sandinista, chavista, antiimperialista, y como irreductible defensor del derecho de su pueblo, y de Nuestra América-Caribeña toda, a la autodeterminación, la soberanía, la unidad, en respeto, reconocimiento y equidad"". Gobierno Bolivariano de Venezuela. Ministerio del Poder Popular para la Comunicación y la Información. 17 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2015. "Condecorado Nicolás Maduro con la Orden José Martí (+ Fotos y Videos)". CubaDebate. 18 March 2016. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. Kumar, Nikhil (23 April 2014). "The man who holds Venezuela's future". Time. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014. "Portrait of Nicolás Maduro | Reporters without borders". Reporters Without Borders (in French). 31 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 November 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "RSF issues new list of press freedom predators". Reporters Without Borders. 28 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 November 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "Venezuelan president wins OCCRP person of the year for 2016". OCCRP. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2017. Carroll, Rory; Lopez, Virginia (9 March 2013). "Venezuelan opposition challenges Nicolás Maduro's legitimacy". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 15 December 2016. "Colombia desconocerá resultado de elecciones en Venezuela, dice Santos - LaPatilla.com". 25 January 2018. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2018. Charner, Flora; Newton, Paula; Gallón, Natalie (21 May 2018). "Opponents slam Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro's election victory as a sham". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 November 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2018. An alliance of 14 Latin American nations and Canada, known as the Lima Group, released a statement Monday calling the vote illegitimate ... The alliance includes Argentina, Mexico, Canada, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Panama, Paraguay, St. Lucia, Guyana, Peru, Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica. "Parlamento Europeo rechaza las elecciones presidenciales por considerarlas "fraudulentas"". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 8 February 2018. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 10 February 2018. "Eurocámara pide la suspensión inmediata del proceso ilegítimo del #20May en Venezuela". La Patilla (in European Spanish). 3 May 2018. Archived from the original on 4 May 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2018. "Mexico backs Maduro as Venezuela president amid crisis". France 24. 23 January 2019. Archived from the original on 24 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Ayma, Evo Morales (28 February 2018). "Saludamos al Hno. Pdte. Maduro, por su candidatura a la reelección democrática y constitucional en Venezuela. Estamos seguros que con la verdad y apoyo del soberano venezolano, el Hno. Maduro tiene el triunfo seguro sobre el golpismo de Trump y sus agentes Almagro y Tuto Quiroga.pic.twitter.com/CoumwP8rB7". @evoespueblo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 28 February 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Washington and Cuba butt heads over Venezuela at heated Americas summit". miamiherald. Archived from the original on 15 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Special Meeting of the Permanent Council Thursday January 24, 2019". Organization of American States. 24 January 2019. Archived from the original on 2 June 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Trujillo, Carlos (10 January 2019). "Permanent Council Approves Resolution to Not Recognize the Legitimacy of the Maduro Regime". U.S. Mission to the Organization of American States. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2021. "PM Skerrit says Dominica has no choice but to recognize Venezuela election – Dominica News Online". dominicanewsonline.com. 24 May 2018. Archived from the original on 16 January 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. Brown, Desmond (21 June 2017). "Antigua and Barbuda prepared to draw the line on Venezuela if . . . | Caribbean News Service". caribbeannewsservice.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "South Africa congratulates Maduro on second term". African Daily Voice. 11 January 2019. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Latin American Herald Tribune – China Calls on Venezuela to Respect Maduro's Re-election". www.laht.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Russia's Putin Congratulates Venezuela's Maduro on his Re-Election". laht.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2020. "Congratulations to Venezuelan President". oananews.org. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2019. "Turkey will attend the inauguration of President Maduro". Ministerio del Poder Popular para Relaciones Exteriores. 7 January 2019. Archived from the original on 12 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Nicolás Maduro at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Ministerio del Poder Popular para Relaciones Exteriores (Venezuelan Foreign Ministry) (in Spanish) Biography by CIDOB (in Spanish)