The Trenčín Region (Slovak: Trenčiansky kraj, pronounced [ˈtrentʂɪɐnski ˈkraj]; Czech: Trenčínský kraj; Hungarian: Trencséni kerület) is one of the eight Slovak administrative regions. It consists of nine districts (okresy). The region was established in 1996: previously it had been a part of the West Slovak Region (Západoslovenský kraj) and partly the Central Slovak Region (Stredoslovenský kraj). Industry is a major sector of the region's economy. It is located in north-western Slovakia, has an area of 4,502 km² and a population of 600,386 (2005). The Danubian Lowland reaches the region to Nové Mesto nad Váhom and Partizánske areas. There are several mountain ranges in the region: a small part of the Little Carpathians in the south-west, White Carpathians in the north-west, Maple Mountains in the north, Strážov Mountains in the centre, Považský Inovec in the south, Vtáčnik in the south-east and Žiar in the east. Small parts of Lesser Fatra and of the Kremnica Mountains also stretch to the region. Major rivers are the Váh in the western part of the region, creating the so-called Váh Basin and Nitra in the south-east and east, creating the Upper Nitra Basin. The Myjava River springs in the west, but flows into the Trnava Region. The region borders Žilina Region in the north-east and east, Banská Bystrica Region in the south-east, Nitra Region in the south, Trnava Region in the south and south-west, Czech South Moravian Region in the west and the Zlín Region in the north-west and north. The population density is 129/km2 (330/sq mi) (2020-06-30/-07-01), which is more than Slovak average (110 per km²), and the second highest after the Bratislava Region. The largest towns are Trenčín, Prievidza, Považská Bystrica, Dubnica nad Váhom and Partizánske. According to the 2001 census, the region had 605,583 inhabitants, with Slovaks forming a relatively homogeneous majority (97.3%), with a small minority of Czechs (1%) and others. Current governor of Trenčín region is Jaroslav Baška (Smer-SD). He won with 67.25 %. In election 2022 was elected also regional parliament : The Trenčín Region consists of 9 districts: Bánovce nad Bebravou, Ilava, Myjava, Nové Mesto nad Váhom, Partizánske, Považská Bystrica, Prievidza, Púchov, and Trenčín. There are 275 municipalities (obce), including 18 towns, where about 58% of the region's population live. Slovak bandy has its base in the region. Trenčianske Teplice is the seat of Slovak Bandy Association and rink bandy sessions have been organised in for example Púchov and Nové Mesto nad Váhom. Trenčín with Trenčín Castle, City Gate, Trenčín Synagogue, Roman inscription on the castle rock in Trenčín, etc. The Tomb of Milan Rastislav Štefánik on the Bradlo above Brezová pod Bradlom Beckov Castle Trenčianske Teplice - a historical spa town Skalka pri Trenčíne monastery Castles in Šimonovany, Brodzany and Veľké Uherce Bojnice with Bojnice Castle, Bojnice Zoo, etc. Lednica Castle Manínska Gorge Little Carpathians Protected Landscape Area White Carpathians Protected Landscape Area Ponitrie Protected Landscape Area Strážov Mountains Protected Landscape Area Beckov Castle Trenčín Trenčin Castle above the Hotel Tatra (Elisabeth) Lower Gate, Trenčín Trenčín Synagogue, Trenčín Roman inscription on the castle rock in Trenčín Trenčianske Teplice Hamman in Trenčianske Teplice Skalka pri Trenčíne monastery Šimonovany Castle, Partizánske Veké Uherce Castle, Veľké Uherce Handlová Bojnice Bojnice Castle, Bojnice Bojnice Zoo, Bojnice Lednica Castle, Lednica Milan Rastislav Štefánik tomb on the Bradlo, Brezová pod Bradlom Čachtice Castle, Čachtice Little Carpathians Protected Landscape Area White Carpathians Protected Landscape Area Ponitrie Protected Landscape Area Manínska Gorge Strážov Mountains Protected Landscape Area Trencsén County of the Kingdom of Hungary Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional GDP per Capita, OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. "Statistic of Slovak places by Dušan Kreheľ – Export". Retrieved 2021-07-05. POPULATION AND HOUSING CENSUS 2001 - Tab. 3a "Statistic of Slovak places by Dušan Kreheľ – Export". Retrieved 2021-06-27. Direction, SNS, Voice, SR SaS, Together, Chance, ODS, DS, KDH, OKS, DVaU   STANK (1) "Google Translate". Poster for a rink bandy session in Púchov Poster for a rink bandy session in Nové Mesto nad Váhom[permanent dead link] Kopa, Ľudovít; et al. (2006). The Encyclopaedia of Slovakia and the Slovaks. Bratislava, Slovakia: Encyclopaedic Institute of the Slovak Academy of Sciences. ISBN 80-224-0925-1. Official website of the region Official website of the regional metropolis