The Teniente Rodolfo Marsh Martin Airport (IATA: TNM, ICAO: SCRM) is on King George Island, part of Chile's Antártica commune in Antarctica, and is the northernmost airport in the continent. The airport serves the nearby village of Villa Las Estrellas and the Base Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva. The airport has five small buildings (hangar, control tower) and a small apron area for parking aircraft. The Isla Rey Jorge non-directional beacon Punta Arenas(Ident: IRJ) is located 0.46 nautical miles (0.9 km) off the approach threshold of Runway 30. The Isla Rey Jorge VOR-DME (Ident: IRJ) is located on the field. The airport uses the GMT -4:00 time zone. There is no regular scheduled public service to the airport, although Aerovías DAP has some charter flights from Punta Arenas. The airport is named in memory of Lieutenant Rodolfo Marsh, who in the 1930s helped pioneer air routes to the Magallanes Region of Chile, mainly using Sikorsky S43 flying boats. He was killed when his plane, the S43 "Chiloé", crashed on 2 June 1937 flying from Puerto Montt to Punta Arenas. The crash occurred during bad weather killing all four crew and five passengers. 25 February 1992 – Ejército de Chile (Chile) CASA 235M-100 with 11 on board crashed at the airport. No deaths or injuries were reported. The aircraft was written off. Transport in Chile List of airports in Chile List of airports in Antarctica Airport information for Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Martin Airport at Great Circle Mapper. Airport record for Aeropuerto de Teniente Rodolfo Marsh Martin at Landings.com Google Maps - Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Martin [1] at aipchile.gob.cl Isla Rey Jorge VOR, NDB IRJ VOR "CATASTROFES Y TRAGEDIAS DE CHILE" (in Spanish). Retrieved 2019-06-15. OpenStreetMap - Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Airport OurAirports - Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Martin Airport SkyVector - Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Airport Simtours - Anatarctica Accident history for Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Martin Airport at Aviation Safety Network Current weather for Ten. Rodolfo Marsh Airport at NOAA/NWS Portals:  Aviation  Transport  Geography  Chile v t e v t e v t e