Frýdek-Místek District (Czech: okres Frýdek-Místek) is a district in the Moravian-Silesian Region of the Czech Republic. Its capital is the city of Frýdek-Místek. Frýdek-Místek District is divided into four administrative districts of municipalities with extended competence: Frýdek-Místek, Frýdlant nad Ostravicí, Jablunkov and Třinec. Cities and towns are marked in bold: Baška – Bílá – Bocanovice – Brušperk – Bruzovice – Bukovec – Bystřice – Čeladná – Dobrá – Dobratice – Dolní Domaslavice – Dolní Lomná – Dolní Tošanovice – Fryčovice – Frýdek-Místek – Frýdlant nad Ostravicí – Hnojník – Horní Domaslavice – Horní Lomná – Horní Tošanovice – Hrádek – Hrčava – Hukvaldy – Jablunkov – Janovice – Kaňovice – Komorní Lhotka – Košařiska – Kozlovice – Krásná – Krmelín – Kunčice pod Ondřejníkem – Lhotka – Lučina – Malenovice – Metylovice – Milíkov – Morávka – Mosty u Jablunkova – Návsí – Nižní Lhoty – Nošovice – Nýdek – Ostravice – Palkovice – Paskov – Pazderna – Písečná – Písek – Pražmo – Pržno – Pstruží – Raškovice – Řeka – Řepiště – Ropice – Sedliště – Smilovice – Soběšovice – Staré Hamry – Staré Město – Staříč – Střítež – Sviadnov – Třanovice – Třinec – Vělopolí – Vendryně – Vojkovice – Vyšní Lhoty – Žabeň – Žermanice Frýdek-Místek District is the easternmost district of the Czech Republic, bordering Slovakia in the south and Poland in the east. Part of the historic Trans-Olza region lies within the district. The terrain is very fragmented. The majority of the territory is hilly or mountainous, only in the north it turns into a depression. The territory extends into seven geomorphological mesoregions: Moravian-Silesian Beskids (south and centre), Moravian-Silesian Foothills (northwest and northeast), Ostrava Basin (north), Silesian Beskids (east), Jablunkov Furrow (east), Jablunkov Intermontane (southeast), and Moravian Gate (small part in the north). The highest point of the district is the mountain Lysá hora in Krásná with an elevation of 1,324 m (4,344 ft). The lowest point of the district is the river bed of the Ostravice in Paskov and Řepiště at 245 m (804 ft). From the total district area of 1,208.5 km2 (466.6 sq mi), agricultural land occupies 451.9 km2 (174.5 sq mi), forests occupy 617.5 km2 (238.4 sq mi), and water area occupies 23.7 km2 (9.2 sq mi). Forests cover 51.1% of the district's area. The territory is rich in rivers. The longest rivers are the Olza in the eastern part of the district and the Ostravice in the western part of the district. Other notable rivers are the Morávka and Ondřejnice. The Stonávka and Lučina originate here, but soon leave the district. The largest bodies of water are the Šance and Žermanice reservoirs. The southern part of the territory is protected as the Beskydy Protected Landscape Area. The largest employers with headquarters in Frýdek-Místek District and at least 1,000 employees are: The D48 motorway (part of the European route E462) from Nový Jičín to the Czech-Polish border pass through the district. The D56 motorway separates from it in Frýdek-Místek and continues to Ostrava. A notable road is also the R/11 expressway (partly as the I/11 road) from Český Těšín to the Czech-Slovak border, which is part of the European route E75. The most important monuments in the district, protected as national cultural monuments, are: Pilgrimage area with the Basilica of the Visitation of Our Lady in Frýdek-Místek Noční přechod, the monument to the partisan movement in Morávka The best-preserved settlements, protected as monument zones, are: Brušperk Frýdek Místek Komorní Lhotka The most visited tourist destinations are the Velká Čantoryje observation tower and Hukvaldy Castle. Český Těšín District "Land use (as at 31 December)". Public database. Czech Statistical Office. Retrieved 2023-05-19. "Population of Municipalities – 1 January 2023". Czech Statistical Office. 2023-05-23. "Historický lexikon obcí České republiky 1869–2011 – Okres Frýdek-Místek" (in Czech). Czech Statistical Office. 2015-12-21. pp. 1–2. "Population Census 2021: Population by sex". Public Database. Czech Statistical Office. 2021-03-27. "Registr ekonomických subjektů". Business Register (in Czech). Czech Statistical Office. Retrieved 2023-04-17. "Výsledky vyhledávání: Národní kulturní památky, okres Frýdek-Místek". Ústřední seznam kulturních památek (in Czech). National Heritage Institute. Retrieved 2023-04-14. "Výsledky vyhledávání: Památkové rezervace, Památkové zóny, okres Frýdek-Místek". Ústřední seznam kulturních památek (in Czech). National Heritage Institute. Retrieved 2023-04-14. "Turisté mají v České republice nejraději zoologické zahrady, technické památky, koupání a Pražský hrad" (in Czech). CzechTourism. 2022-06-24. Retrieved 2023-04-14. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Frýdek-Místek District. Frýdek-Místek District – profile on the Czech Statistical Office website