Sergei Yuryevich Svetlakov (Russian: Серге́й Ю́рьевич Светлако́в; born 12 December 1977) is a Russian comedian, film and television actor, TV host, producer, screenwriter. Member of the KVN team "Ural pelmeni" (2000–09). He is best known for appearing in the sketch-show Nasha Russia and his role as Evgeniy Pavlovich in the Yolki franchise. Svetlakov was born in Sverdlovsk, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union (now Yekaterinburg, Russia). To Galina Grigorevna Galushko, a freight engineer on the Sverdlovsk Railway, and Yuri Venediktovich Svetlakov, assistant to the machinist, who worked at a milling plant. He graduated from school number 2 in Yekaterinburg (now gymnasium number 155). In addition to studying, Svetlakov was engaged in football and basketball, later became a candidate for master of sports in handball. Such successes made him see his future only as related to sports. However, Sergei's parents insisted instead that he follow them in their professional activities.[citation needed] In 2000 he graduated from the Urals State University of Railway Transport (Ural State Railway University) in Yekaterinburg, specializing in Economics of Railway Transport. In the university, a KVN team was organized in which Sergei became a captain due to the fact that he won in the "Knight of the Institute" competition. In the team, Sergei Svetlakov played for about two years - during this time the KVN became for him an occupation of utmost importance. Because of this, he had serious problems with his studies, but he did not receive expulsion form the university. While Svetlakov was finishing his studies at the university, he collaborated as a writer with the popular team "Ural pelmeni". Later he joined the team, already in 2000 his team became the champion of the Major League of KVN.[citation needed] Sergei Svetlakov was invited to the jury for the second 1/8 finals in 2004 of the KVN Major League. Although, he did not manage to make any assessments: at the end of the greeting of the "Dobryanka" team Sergei Svetlakov, following the calls of the actors who were playing on stage, began to dance, including at the judges' table, after which the guards withdrew him from the hall. As it later became known, this act, which looked like improvisation, was a pre-prepared part of the "Dobryanka" performance and was approved by the leader Alexander Maslyakov. Having moved to Moscow, Svetlakov did not complete his cooperation with the KVN. Together with Garik Martirosyan, Semyon Slepakov, Arthur Tumasyan and Sergei Ershov, he wrote scripts for KVN teams. This creative team laid the foundation for the Comedy Club in Russia. Later Sergei took part in Nasha Russia which was released under the Comedy Club brand. A great success for Svetlakov was the appearance in the program Prozhektorperiskhilton in 2008, along with other hosts - Ivan Urgant, Alexander Tsekalo and Garik Martirosyan (the program was one of the successful projects of the First Channel and received four TEFI awards). In 2009, he left the team "Ural pelmeni" because he wanted to focus on his own projects. In 2009-2010 Sergei was one of the main characters of the program "South Butovo". Starting from 2010, Sergei appeared as Evgeniy Pavlovich in every film of the Yolki franchise. In 2016 he starred as Tolya in The Groom, of which he was also the writer and producer. In November 2012, Sergei Svetlakov received a residence permit in Latvia and became the owner of a two-story house in Jurmala. "Сергей Светлаков". Cosmopolitan. "Сергей Светлаков". Russia-1. "Сергей Светлаков: биография и творческий путь". kvn-liga. "Сергей Светлаков". Forbes. "Сергей Светлаков". VokrugTV. Lidia Pavlenko-Bakhtina. "Сергей Светлаков переехал в "Южное Бутово"?". Komsomolskaya Pravda. "Гарик Мартиросян хочет переехать в Латвию к Сергею Светлакову". NEWSru. 22 July 2013. Sergei Svetlakov at IMDb