Year 984 (CMLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Spring – German boy-king Otto III (4 years old) is seized by the deposed Henry II, Duke of Bavaria ("the Wrangler"), who has recovered his duchy and claims the regency as a member of the Ottonian Dynasty. But Henry is forced to hand over Otto to his mother, empress consort Theophanu. King Ramiro III of León loses his throne to Bermudo II (the rival king of Galicia), who also becomes ruler of the entire Kingdom of León (modern-day Spain). Fall – Emperor En'yū abdicates the throne in favor of his 16-year-old son Kazan after a 15-year reign. En'yū retires and becomes a Buddhist priest. Qiao Weiyue, a Chinese engineer, innovates the first known use of the double-gated canal pound lock during the Song dynasty, for adjusting different water levels in segments of the Grand Canal in China. August 20 – Pope John XIV dies a prisoner in the Castel Sant'Angelo at Rome after a 1-year reign, having either been murdered or starved to death. Anti-Pope Boniface VII returns from Constantinople and gains support from the powerful Roman Crescentii family. He takes hold of the papal throne. Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad, founder of the Abbadid dynasty (d. 1042) Choe Chung, Korean Confucian scholar and poet (d. 1068) Emma of Normandy, noblewoman, queen consort of England (twice), Denmark and Norway (d. 1052; approximate date) July 7 – Crescentius the Elder, Roman politician and aristocrat July 18 – Dietrich I, bishop of Metz August 1 – Æthelwold, bishop of Winchester August 20 – John XIV, pope of the Catholic Church September 9 – Warin, archbishop of Cologne Buluggin ibn Ziri, ruler (emir) of the Zirid Dynasty Domnall Claen, king of Leinster (Ireland) Edith of Wilton, English princess and abbess Eochaid Ua Floinn, Irish poet (approximate date) Gerberga, Frankish queen (approximate date) Jordan, bishop of Poland (or 982) Miró III, count of Cerdanya and Besalú (b. 920) Ragnhild Eriksdotter, Norse Viking noblewoman Shi Shouxin, Chinese general (b. 928) Reuter, Timothy (1999). The New Cambridge Medieval History, Volume III, p. 256. ISBN 978-0-521-36447-8. Eleanor Shipley Duckett, Death and life in the Tenth Century, (University of Michigan Press, 1967), p. 110.