Melbourne (/ˈmɛlbərn/ MEL-bərn; Boonwurrung/Woiwurrung: Narrm or Naarm) is the capital of the Australian state of Victoria and the second-most populous city in Australia (behind Sydney), although the most populous by contiguous urban area. Its name generally refers to a 9,993 km2 (3,858 sq mi) metropolitan area also known as Greater Melbourne, comprising an urban agglomeration of 31 local municipalities, although the name is also used specifically for the local municipality of City of Melbourne based around its central business area. The metropolis occupies much of the northern and eastern coastlines of Port Phillip Bay and spreads into the Mornington Peninsula, part of West Gippsland, as well as the hinterlands towards the Yarra Valley, the Dandenong Ranges, and the Macedon Ranges. Melbourne has a population over 5 million (19% of the population of Australia, as of the 2021 census), mostly residing to the east of the city centre, and its inhabitants are commonly referred to as "Melburnians". The area of Melbourne has been home to Aboriginal Victorians for over 40,000 years and serves as an important meeting place for local Kulin nation clans. Of the five peoples of the Kulin nation, the traditional custodians of the land encompassing Melbourne are the Boonwurrung, Wathaurong and the Wurundjeri peoples. A short-lived penal settlement was built in 1803 at Port Phillip, then part of the British colony of New South Wales. However, it was not until 1835, with the arrival of free settlers from Van Diemen's Land (modern-day Tasmania), that Melbourne was founded. It was incorporated as a Crown settlement in 1837, and named after William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne, who was then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. In 1851, four years after Queen Victoria declared it a city, Melbourne became the capital of the new colony of Victoria. During the 1850s Victorian gold rush, the city entered a lengthy boom period that, by the late 1880s, had transformed it into one of the world's largest and wealthiest metropolises. After the federation of Australia in 1901, Melbourne served as the interim seat of government of the new nation until Canberra became the permanent capital in 1927. Today, it is a leading financial centre in the Asia-Pacific region and ranked 32nd globally in the March 2022 Global Financial Centres Index. Melbourne is home of many of Australia's best-known landmarks, such as the Melbourne Cricket Ground, the National Gallery of Victoria and the World Heritage-listed Royal Exhibition Building. Noted for its cultural heritage, the city gave rise to Australian rules football, Australian impressionism and Australian cinema, and has more recently been recognised as a UNESCO City of Literature and a global centre for street art, live music and theatre. It hosts major annual international events, such as the Australian Grand Prix and the Australian Open, and also hosted the 1956 Summer Olympics. Melbourne consistently ranked as the world's most liveable city for much of the 2010s. Melbourne Airport, also known as the Tullamarine Airport, is the second-busiest airport in Australia, and the Port of Melbourne is the nation's busiest seaport. Its main metropolitan rail terminus is Flinders Street station and its main regional rail and road coach terminus is Southern Cross station. It also has Australia's most extensive freeway network and the largest urban tram network in the world. Aboriginal Australians have lived in the Melbourne area for at least 40,000 years. When European colonisers arrived in the 19th century, at least 20,000 Kulin people from three distinct language groups – the Wurundjeri, Bunurong and Wathaurong – resided in the area. It was an important meeting place for the clans of the Kulin nation alliance and a vital source of food and water. In June 2021, the boundaries between the land of two of the traditional owner groups, the Wurundjeri and Bunurong, were agreed after being drawn up by the Victorian Aboriginal Heritage Council. The borderline runs across the city from west to east, with the CBD, Richmond and Hawthorn included in Wurundjeri land, and Albert Park, St Kilda and Caulfield on Bunurong land. However, this change in boundaries is still disputed by people on both sides of the dispute including N'arweet Carolyn Briggs. The name Narrm is commonly used by the broader Aboriginal community to refer to the city, stemming from the traditional name recorded for the area on which the Melbourne city centre is built. The word is closely related to Narm-narm, being the Boonwurrung word for Port Phillip Bay. Narrm means scrub in Eastern Kulin languages which reflects the Creation Story of how the Bay was filled by the creation of the Birrarung (Yarra River). Before this, the dry Melbourne region extended out into the Bay and the Bay was filled with teatree scrub where boordmul (emu) and marram (kangaroo) were hunted. The first British settlement in Victoria, then part of the penal colony of New South Wales, was established by Colonel David Collins in October 1803, at Sullivan Bay, near present-day Sorrento. The following year, due to a perceived lack of resources, these settlers relocated to Van Diemen's Land (present-day Tasmania) and founded the city of Hobart. It would be 30 years before another settlement was attempted. In May and June 1835, John Batman, a leading member of the Port Phillip Association in Van Diemen's Land, explored the Melbourne area, and later claimed to have negotiated a purchase of 2,400 km2 (600,000 acres) with eight Wurundjeri elders. However, the nature of the treaty has been heavily disputed, as none of the parties spoke the same language, and the elders likely perceived it as part of the gift exchanges which had taken place over the previous few days amounting to a tanderrum ceremony which allows temporary, not permanent, access to and use of the land. Batman selected a site on the northern bank of the Yarra River, declaring that "this will be the place for a village" before returning to Van Diemen's Land. In August 1835, another group of Vandemonian settlers arrived in the area and established a settlement at the site of the current Melbourne Immigration Museum. Batman and his group arrived the following month and the two groups ultimately agreed to share the settlement, initially known by the native name of Dootigala. Batman's Treaty with the Aboriginal elders was annulled by Richard Bourke, the Governor of New South Wales (who at the time governed all of eastern mainland Australia), with compensation paid to members of the association. In 1836, Bourke declared the city the administrative capital of the Port Phillip District of New South Wales, and commissioned the first plan for its urban layout, the Hoddle Grid, in 1837. Known briefly as Batmania, the settlement was named Melbourne on 10 April 1837 by Governor Richard Bourke after the British Prime Minister, William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne, whose seat was Melbourne Hall in the market town of Melbourne, Derbyshire. That year, the settlement's general post office officially opened with that name. Between 1836 and 1842, Victorian Aboriginal groups were largely dispossessed of their land by European settlers. By January 1844, there were said to be 675 Aboriginal people resident in squalid camps in Melbourne. The British Colonial Office appointed five Aboriginal Protectors for the Aboriginal people of Victoria, in 1839, however, their work was nullified by a land policy that favoured squatters who took possession of Aboriginal lands. By 1845, fewer than 240 wealthy Europeans held all the pastoral licences then issued in Victoria and became a powerful political and economic force in Victoria for generations to come. Letters patent of Queen Victoria, issued on 25 June 1847, declared Melbourne a city. On 1 July 1851, the Port Phillip District separated from New South Wales to become the Colony of Victoria, with Melbourne as its capital. The discovery of gold in Victoria in mid-1851 sparked a gold rush, and Melbourne, the colony's major port, experienced rapid growth. Within months, the city's population had nearly doubled from 25,000 to 40,000 inhabitants. Exponential growth ensued, and by 1865 Melbourne had overtaken Sydney as Australia's most populous city. An influx of intercolonial and international migrants, particularly from Europe and China, saw the establishment of slums, including Chinatown and a temporary "tent city" on the southern banks of the Yarra. In the aftermath of the 1854 Eureka Rebellion, mass public support for the plight of the miners resulted in major political changes to the colony, including improvements in working conditions across mining, agriculture, manufacturing and other local industries. At least twenty nationalities took part in the rebellion, giving some indication of immigration flows at the time. With the wealth brought in from the gold rush and the subsequent need for public buildings, a program of grand civic construction soon began. The 1850s and 1860s saw the commencement of Parliament House, the Treasury Building, the Old Melbourne Gaol, Victoria Barracks, the State Library, University of Melbourne, General Post Office, Customs House, the Melbourne Town Hall, St Patrick's cathedral, though many remained incomplete for decades, with some still not finished as of 2018[update].[citation needed] The layout of the inner suburbs on a largely one-mile grid pattern, cut through by wide radial boulevards and parklands surrounding the central city, was largely established in the 1850s and 1860s. These areas rapidly filled with the ubiquitous terrace houses, as well as with detached houses and grand mansions, while some of the major roads developed as shopping streets. Melbourne quickly became a major finance centre, home to several banks, the Royal Mint, and (in 1861) Australia's first stock exchange. In 1855, the Melbourne Cricket Club secured possession of its now famous ground, the MCG. Members of the Melbourne Football Club codified Australian football in 1859, and in 1861, the first Melbourne Cup race was held. Melbourne acquired its first public monument, the Burke and Wills statue, in 1864. With the gold rush largely over by 1860, Melbourne continued to grow on the back of continuing gold-mining, as the major port for exporting the agricultural products of Victoria (especially wool) and with a developing manufacturing sector protected by high tariffs. An extensive radial railway network spread into the countryside from the late 1850s. Construction started on further major public buildings in the 1860s and 1870s, such as the Supreme Court, Government House, and the Queen Victoria Market. The central city filled up with shops and offices, workshops, and warehouses. Large banks and hotels faced the main streets, with fine townhouses in the east end of Collins Street, contrasting with tiny cottages down laneways within the blocks. The Aboriginal population continued to decline, with an estimated 80% total decrease by 1863, due primarily to introduced diseases (particularly smallpox), frontier violence and dispossession of their lands. The 1880s saw extraordinary growth: consumer confidence, easy access to credit, and steep increases in land prices led to an enormous amount of construction. During this "land boom", Melbourne reputedly became the richest city in the world, and the second-largest (after London) in the British Empire. The decade began with the Melbourne International Exhibition in 1880, held in the large purpose-built Exhibition Building. A telephone exchange was established that year, and the foundations of St Paul's were laid. In 1881, electric light was installed in the Eastern Market, and a generating station capable of supplying 2,000 incandescent lamps was in operation by 1882. The Melbourne cable tramway system opened in 1885 and became one of the world's most extensive systems by 1890. In 1885, visiting English journalist George Augustus Henry Sala coined the phrase "Marvellous Melbourne", which stuck long into the twentieth century and has come to refer to the opulence and energy of the 1880s, during which time large commercial buildings, grand hotels, banks, coffee palaces, terrace housing and palatial mansions proliferated in the city. The establishment of the Melbourne Hydraulic Power Company in 1886 led to the availability of high-pressure piped water, allowing for the installation of hydraulically powered elevators, which led to the construction of the first high-rise buildings in the city. The period also saw the huge expansion of a significant radial rail-based transport network throughout the city and suburbs. Melbourne's land-boom peaked in 1888, the year it hosted the Centennial Exhibition. The brash boosterism that had typified Melbourne during that time ended in the early 1890s. The bubble supporting the local finance and property industries burst, resulting in a severe economic depression. Sixteen small "land banks" and building societies collapsed, and 133 limited companies went into liquidation. The Melbourne financial crisis was a contributing factor to the Australian economic depression of the 1890s and the Australian banking crisis of 1893. The effects of the depression on the city were profound, with virtually no significant construction until the late 1890s. At the time of Australia's federation on 1 January 1901 Melbourne became the seat of government of the federated Commonwealth of Australia. The first federal parliament convened on 9 May 1901 in the Royal Exhibition Building, subsequently moving to the Victorian Parliament House, where it sat until it moved to Canberra in 1927. The Governor-General of Australia resided at Government House in Melbourne until 1930, and many major national institutions remained in Melbourne well into the twentieth century.[need quotation to verify] During World War II the city hosted American military forces who were fighting the Empire of Japan, and the government requisitioned the Melbourne Cricket Ground for military use. In the immediate years after World War II, Melbourne expanded rapidly, its growth boosted by post-war immigration to Australia, primarily from Southern Europe and the Mediterranean. While the "Paris End" of Collins Street began Melbourne's boutique shopping and open air cafe cultures, the city centre was seen by many as stale—the dreary domain of office workers—something expressed by John Brack in his famous painting Collins St., 5 pm (1955). Up until the 21st century, Melbourne was considered Australia's "industrial heartland". Height limits in the CBD were lifted in 1958, after the construction of ICI House, transforming the city's skyline with the introduction of skyscrapers. Suburban expansion then intensified, served by new indoor malls beginning with Chadstone Shopping Centre. The post-war period also saw a major renewal of the CBD and St Kilda Road which significantly modernised the city. New fire regulations and redevelopment saw most of the taller pre-war CBD buildings either demolished or partially retained through a policy of facadism. Many of the larger suburban mansions from the boom era were also either demolished or subdivided. To counter the trend towards low-density suburban residential growth, the government began a series of controversial public housing projects in the inner city by the Housing Commission of Victoria, which resulted in the demolition of many neighbourhoods and a proliferation of high-rise towers. In later years, with the rapid rise of motor vehicle ownership, the investment in freeway and highway developments greatly accelerated the outward suburban sprawl and declining inner-city population. The Bolte government sought to rapidly accelerate the modernisation of Melbourne. Major road projects including the remodelling of St Kilda Junction, the widening of Hoddle Street and then the extensive 1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan changed the face of the city into a car-dominated environment. Australia's financial and mining booms during 1969 and 1970 resulted in establishment of the headquarters of many major companies (BHP and Rio Tinto, among others) in the city. Nauru's then booming economy resulted in several ambitious investments in Melbourne, such as Nauru House. Melbourne remained Australia's main business and financial centre until the late 1970s, when it began to lose this primacy to Sydney. Melbourne experienced an economic downturn between 1989 and 1992, following the collapse of several local financial institutions. In 1992, the newly elected Kennett government began a campaign to revive the economy with an aggressive development campaign of public works coupled with the promotion of the city as a tourist destination with a focus on major events and sports tourism. During this period the Australian Grand Prix moved to Melbourne from Adelaide. Major projects included the construction of a new facility for the Melbourne Museum, Federation Square, the Melbourne Convention & Exhibition Centre, Crown Casino and the CityLink tollway. Other strategies included the privatisation of some of Melbourne's services, including power and public transport, and a reduction in funding to public services such as health, education and public transport infrastructure. Since the mid-1990s, Melbourne has maintained significant population and employment growth. There has been substantial international investment in the city's industries and property market. Major inner-city urban renewal has occurred in areas such as Southbank, Port Melbourne, Melbourne Docklands and South Wharf. Melbourne sustained the highest population increase and economic growth rate of any Australian capital city from 2001 to 2004. From 2006, the growth of the city extended into "green wedges" and beyond the city's urban growth boundary. Predictions of the city's population reaching 5 million people pushed the state government to review the growth boundary in 2008 as part of its Melbourne @ Five Million strategy. In 2009, Melbourne was less affected by the late-2000s financial crisis in comparison to other Australian cities. At this time, more new jobs were created in Melbourne than any other Australian city—almost as many as the next two fastest growing cities, Brisbane and Perth, combined, and Melbourne's property market remained highly priced, resulting in historically high property prices and widespread rent increases. Beginning in the 2010s the State Government of Victoria initiated a number of major infrastructure projects designed to reduce congestion in Melbourne and encourage economic growth, including the Metro Tunnel, the West Gate Tunnel, the Level Crossing Removal Project and the Suburban Rail Loop. New urban renewal zones were initiated in inner-city areas like Fisherman's Bend and Arden, while suburban growth continued on the urban periphery in Melbourne's outer west and east in suburbs like Wyndham Vale and Cranbourne. Middle suburbs like Box Hill became denser as a greater proportion of Melburnians began living in apartments. A construction boom resulted in 34 new skyscrapers being built in the central business district between 2010 and 2020. In 2020, Melbourne was classified as an Alpha city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Out of all major Australian cities, Melbourne was the worst affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and spent a long time under lockdown restrictions, with Melbourne experiencing six lockdowns totalling 262 days. While this contributed to a net outflow of migration causing a slight reduction in Melbourne's population over the course of 2020 to 2022, Melbourne is projected to be the fastest growing capital city in Australia from 2023–24 onwards, overtaking Sydney as the nation's largest city in 2029–30 at just over 5.9 million, exceeding 6 million people the following year. Melbourne is in the southeastern part of mainland Australia, within the state of Victoria. Geologically, it is built on the confluence of Quaternary lava flows to the west, Silurian mudstones to the east, and Holocene sand accumulation to the southeast along Port Phillip. The southeastern suburbs are situated on the Selwyn fault, which transects Mount Martha and Cranbourne. The western portion of the metropolitan area lies within the Victorian Volcanic Plain grasslands vegetation community, and the southeast falls in the Gippsland Plains Grassy Woodland zone. Melbourne extends along the Yarra River towards the Yarra Valley and the Dandenong Ranges to the east. It extends northward through the undulating bushland valleys of the Yarra's tributaries—Moonee Ponds Creek (toward Tullamarine Airport), Merri Creek, Darebin Creek and Plenty River—to the outer suburban growth corridors of Craigieburn and Whittlesea. The city reaches southeast through Dandenong to the growth corridor of Pakenham towards West Gippsland, and southward through the Dandenong Creek valley and the city of Frankston. In the west, it extends along the Maribyrnong River and its tributaries north towards Sunbury and the foothills of the Macedon Ranges, and along the flat volcanic plain country towards Melton in the west, Werribee at the foothills of the You Yangs granite ridge southwest of the CBD. The Little River, and the township of the same name, marks the border between Melbourne and neighbouring Geelong city. Melbourne's major bayside beaches are in the various suburbs along the shores of Port Phillip Bay, in areas like Port Melbourne, Albert Park, St Kilda, Elwood, Brighton, Sandringham, Mentone, Frankston, Altona, Williamstown and Werribee South. The nearest surf beaches are 85 km (53 mi) south of the Melbourne CBD in the back-beaches of Rye, Sorrento and Portsea. Melbourne has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb) with warm summers and cool winters. Melbourne is well known for its changeable weather conditions, mainly due to it being located on the boundary of hot inland areas and the cool southern ocean. This temperature differential is most pronounced in the spring and summer months and can cause strong cold fronts to form. These cold fronts can be responsible for varied forms of severe weather from gales to thunderstorms and hail, large temperature drops and heavy rain. Winters, while exceptionally dry by south central Victorian standards, are nonetheless drizzly and overcast. The lack of winter rainfall is owed to Melbourne's rain shadowed location between the Otway and Macedon Ranges, which block much of the rainfall arriving from the north and west. Port Phillip is often warmer than the surrounding oceans and/or the land mass, particularly in spring and autumn; this can set up a "bay effect", similar to the "lake effect" seen in colder climates, where showers are intensified leeward of the bay. Relatively narrow streams of heavy showers can often affect the same places (usually the eastern suburbs) for an extended period, while the rest of Melbourne and surrounds stays dry. Overall, the area around Melbourne is, owing to its rain shadow, nonetheless significantly drier than average for southern Victoria. Within the city and surrounds, rainfall varies widely, from around 425 mm (17 in) at Little River to 1,250 mm (49 in) on the eastern fringe at Gembrook. Melbourne receives 48.6 clear days annually. Dewpoint temperatures in the summer range from 9.5 to 11.7 °C (49.1 to 53.1 °F). Melbourne is also prone to isolated convective showers forming when a cold pool crosses the state, especially if there is considerable daytime heating. These showers are often heavy and can include hail, squalls, and significant drops in temperature, but they often pass through very quickly with a rapid clearing trend to sunny and relatively calm weather and the temperature rising back to what it was before the shower. This can occur in the space of minutes and can be repeated many times a day, giving Melbourne a reputation for having "four seasons in one day", a phrase that is part of local popular culture. The lowest temperature on record is −2.8 °C (27.0 °F), on 21 July 1869. The highest temperature recorded in Melbourne city was 46.4 °C (115.5 °F), on 7 February 2009. While snow is occasionally seen at higher elevations in the outskirts of the city, and dustings were observed in 2020, it has not been recorded in the Central Business District since 1986. The average temperature of the sea ranges from 14.6 °C (58.3 °F) in September to 18.8 °C (65.8 °F) in February; at Port Melbourne, the average sea temperature range is the same. Melbourne's urban area is approximately 2,704 km2, the largest in Australia and the 33rd largest in the world. The Hoddle Grid, a grid of streets measuring approximately 1 by 1⁄2 mi (1.61 by 0.80 km), forms the nucleus of Melbourne's central business district (CBD). The grid's southern edge fronts onto the Yarra River. More recent office, commercial and public developments in the adjoining districts of Southbank and Docklands have made these areas into extensions of the CBD in all but name. A byproduct of the CBD's layout is its network of lanes and arcades, such as Block Arcade and Royal Arcade. Melbourne's CBD has become Australia's most densely populated area, with approximately 19,500 residents per square kilometre, and is home to more skyscrapers than any other Australian city, the tallest being Australia 108, situated in Southbank. Melbourne's newest planned skyscraper, Southbank By Beulah (also known as "Green Spine"), has recently been approved for construction and will be the tallest structure in Australia by 2025. The CBD and surrounds also contain many significant historic buildings such as the Royal Exhibition Building, the Melbourne Town Hall and Parliament House. Although the area is described as the centre, it is not actually the demographic centre of Melbourne at all, due to an urban sprawl to the southeast, the demographic centre being located at Glen Iris. Melbourne is typical of Australian capital cities in that after the turn of the 20th century, it expanded with the underlying notion of a 'quarter acre home and garden' for every family, often referred to locally as the Australian Dream. This, coupled with the popularity of the private automobile after 1945, led to the auto-centric urban structure now present today in the middle and outer suburbs. Much of metropolitan Melbourne is accordingly characterised by low-density sprawl, whilst its inner-city areas feature predominantly medium-density, transit-oriented urban forms. The city centre, Docklands, St. Kilda Road and Southbank areas feature high-density forms. Melbourne is often referred to as Australia's garden city, and the state of Victoria is known as the garden state. There is an abundance of parks and gardens in Melbourne, many close to the CBD with a variety of common and rare plant species amid landscaped vistas, pedestrian pathways and tree-lined avenues. Melbourne's parks are often considered the best public parks in all of Australia's major cities. There are also many parks in the surrounding suburbs of Melbourne, such as in the municipalities of Stonnington, Boroondara and Port Phillip, southeast of the central business district. Several national parks have been designated around the urban area of Melbourne, including the Mornington Peninsula National Park, Port Phillip Heads Marine National Park and Point Nepean National Park in the southeast, Organ Pipes National Park to the north and Dandenong Ranges National Park to the east. There are also a number of significant state parks just outside Melbourne. The extensive area covered by urban Melbourne is formally divided into hundreds of suburbs (for addressing and postal purposes), and administered as local government areas, 31 of which are located within the metropolitan area. Melbourne has minimal public housing and high demand for rental housing, which is becoming unaffordable for some. Public housing is managed and provided by the Victorian Government's Department of Families, Fairness and Housing, and operates within the framework of the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement, by which both federal and state governments provide funding for housing. Melbourne is experiencing high population growth, generating high demand for housing. This housing boom has increased house prices and rents, as well as the availability of all types of housing. Subdivision regularly occurs in the outer areas of Melbourne, with numerous developers offering house and land packages. However, since the release of Melbourne 2030 in 2002, planning policies have encouraged medium-density and high-density development in existing areas with good access to public transport and other services. As a result of this, Melbourne's middle and outer-ring suburbs have seen significant brownfields redevelopment. On the back of the 1850s gold rush and 1880s land boom, Melbourne became renowned as one of the world's great Victorian-era cities, a reputation that persists due to its diverse range of Victorian architecture. High concentrations of well-preserved Victorian-era buildings can be found in the inner suburbs, such as Carlton, East Melbourne and South Melbourne. Outstanding examples of Melbourne's built Victorian heritage include the World Heritage-listed Royal Exhibition Building (1880), the General Post Office (1867), Hotel Windsor (1884) and the Block Arcade (1891). Comparatively little remains of Melbourne's pre-gold rush architecture; St James Old Cathedral (1839) and St Francis' Church (1845) are among the few examples left in the CBD. Many of the CBD's Victorian boom-time landmarks were also demolished in the decades after World War II, including the Federal Coffee Palace (1888) and the APA Building (1889), one of the tallest early skyscrapers upon completion. Heritage listings and heritage overlays have since been introduced in an effort to prevent further losses of the city's historic fabric. In line with the city's expansion during the early 20th century, suburbs such as Hawthorn and Camberwell are defined largely by Federation and Edwardian architectural styles. The City Baths, built in 1903, are a prominent example of the latter style in the CBD. The 1926 Nicholas Building is the city's grandest example of the Chicago School style, while the influence of Art Deco is apparent in the Manchester Unity Building, completed in 1932. The city also features the Shrine of Remembrance, which was built as a memorial to the men and women of Victoria who served in World War I and is now a memorial to all Australians who have served in war. Residential architecture is not defined by a single architectural style, but rather an eclectic mix of large McMansion-style houses (particularly in areas of urban sprawl), apartment buildings, condominiums, and townhouses which generally characterise the medium-density inner-city neighbourhoods. Freestanding dwellings with relatively large gardens are perhaps the most common type of housing outside inner city Melbourne. Victorian terrace housing, townhouses and historic Italianate, Tudor revival and Neo-Georgian mansions are all common in inner-city neighbourhoods such as Carlton, Fitzroy and further into suburban enclaves like Toorak. Often referred to as Australia's cultural capital, Melbourne is recognised globally as a centre of sport, music, theatre, comedy, art, literature, film and television. For much of the 2010s, it held the top position in The Economist Intelligence Unit's list of the world's most liveable cities, partly due to its cultural attributes. The city celebrates a wide variety of annual cultural events and festivals of all types, including the Melbourne International Arts Festival, Melbourne International Comedy Festival, Melbourne Fringe Festival and Moomba, Australia's largest free community festival. State Library Victoria, founded in 1854, is one of the world's oldest free public libraries and, as of 2018, the fourth most-visited library globally. Between the gold rush and the crash of 1890, Melbourne was Australia's literary capital, famously referred to by Henry Kendall as "that wild bleak Bohemia south of the Murray". At this time, Melbourne-based writers and poets Marcus Clarke, Adam Lindsay Gordon and Rolf Boldrewood produced classic visions of colonial life. Fergus Hume's The Mystery of a Hansom Cab (1886), the fastest-selling crime novel of the era, is set in Melbourne, as is Australia's best-selling book of poetry, The Songs of a Sentimental Bloke (1915) by C. J. Dennis. Contemporary Melbourne authors who have written award-winning books set in the city include Peter Carey, Helen Garner and Gerald Murnane. Melbourne has Australia's widest range of bookstores, as well as the nation's largest publishing sector. The city is also home to the Melbourne Writers Festival and hosts the Victorian Premier's Literary Awards. In 2008, it became the second city to be named a UNESCO City of Literature. Ray Lawler's play Summer of the Seventeenth Doll is set in Carlton and debuted in 1955, the same year that Edna Everage, Barry Humphries' Moonee Ponds housewife character, first appeared on stage, both sparking international interest in Australian theatre. Melbourne's East End Theatre District is known for its Victorian era theatres, such as the Athenaeum, Her Majesty's and the Princess, as well as the Forum and the Regent. Other heritage-listed theatres include the art deco landmarks The Capitol and St Kilda's Palais Theatre, Australia's largest seated theatre with a capacity of 3,000 people. The Arts Precinct in Southbank is home to Arts Centre Melbourne (which includes the State Theatre and Hamer Hall), as well as the Melbourne Recital Centre and Southbank Theatre, home of the Melbourne Theatre Company, Australia's oldest professional theatre company. The Australian Ballet, Opera Australia and Melbourne Symphony Orchestra are also based in the precinct. Melbourne has been called "the live music capital of the world"; one study found it has more music venues per capita than any other world city sampled, with 17.5 million patron visits to 553 venues in 2016. The Sidney Myer Music Bowl in Kings Domain hosted the largest crowd ever for a music concert in Australia when an estimated 200,000 attendees saw Melbourne band The Seekers in 1967. Airing between 1974 and 1987, Melbourne's Countdown helped launch the careers of AC/DC, Men at Work and Kylie Minogue, among other local acts. Several distinct post-punk scenes flourished in Melbourne during the late 1970s and early 1980s, including the Little Band scene and St Kilda's Crystal Ballroom scene, which gave rise to Dead Can Dance and Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds. More recent independent acts from Melbourne to achieve global recognition include The Avalanches, Gotye and King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard. Melbourne is also regarded as a centre of EDM, and lends its name to the Melbourne Bounce genre and the Melbourne Shuffle dance style, both of which emerged from the city's underground rave scene. Established in 1861, the National Gallery of Victoria is Australia's oldest and largest art museum, and houses its collection across two sites: NGV International on St Kilda Road and NGV Australia at Federation Square. Several art movements originated in Melbourne, most famously the Heidelberg School of impressionists, named after a suburb where they camped to paint en plein air in the 1880s. The Australian tonalists followed in the 1910s, some of whom went on to found Montsalvat in Eltham, Australia's oldest surviving art colony. During World War II, the Angry Penguins, a group of avant-garde artists, convened at a Bulleen dairy farm, now the Heide Museum of Modern Art. The city is also home to the Australian Centre for Contemporary Art, as well as numerous independent galleries and artist-run spaces. In the 2000s, Melbourne street art became globally renowned and a major tourist drawcard, with "laneway galleries" such as Hosier Lane attracting more Instagram hashtags than some of the city's traditional attractions, such as the Melbourne Zoo. Melbourne is also home to many examples of public art, ranging from the Burke and Wills monument (1865) to the abstract sculpture Vault (1978). A quarter century after bushranger Ned Kelly's execution at Old Melbourne Gaol, the Melbourne-produced The Story of the Kelly Gang (1906), the world's first feature-length narrative film, premiered at the above-named Athenaeum, spurring Australia's first cinematic boom. Melbourne remained a world leader in filmmaking until the mid-1910s, when several factors, including a ban on bushranger films, contributed to a decades-long decline of the industry. A notable film shot and set in Melbourne during this lull was On the Beach (1959). Melbourne filmmakers led the Australian Film Revival with ocker comedies such as Stork (1971) and Alvin Purple (1973). Other films shot and set in Melbourne include Mad Max (1979), Romper Stomper (1992), Chopper (2000) and Animal Kingdom (2010). The Melbourne International Film Festival began in 1952 and is one of the world's oldest film festivals. The AACTA Awards, Australia's top screen awards, were inaugurated by the festival in 1958. Melbourne is also home to Docklands Studios Melbourne (the city's largest film and television studio complex), the Australian Centre for the Moving Image and the headquarters of Village Roadshow Pictures, Australia's largest film production company. Melbourne has long been regarded as Australia's sporting capital due to the role it has played in the development of Australian sport, the range and quality of its sporting events and venues, and its high rates of spectatorship and participation. The city is also home to 27 professional sports teams competing at the national level, the most of any Australian city. Melbourne's sporting reputation was recognised in 2016 when, after being ranked as the world's top sports city three times biennially, the Ultimate Sports City Awards in Switzerland named it 'Sports City of the Decade'. The city has hosted a number of major international sporting events, most notably the 1956 Summer Olympics, the first Olympic Games held outside Europe and the United States. Melbourne also hosted the 2006 Commonwealth Games, and is home to several major annual international events, including the Australian Open, the first of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments. First held in 1861 and declared a public holiday for all Melburnians in 1873, the Melbourne Cup is the world's richest handicap horse race, and is known as "the race that stops a nation". The Formula One Australian Grand Prix has been held at the Albert Park Circuit since 1996. Cricket was one of the first sports to become organised in Melbourne with the Melbourne Cricket Club forming within three years of settlement. The club manages one of the world's largest stadiums, the 100,000 capacity Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG). Established in 1853, the MCG is notable for hosting the first Test match and the first One Day International, played between Australia and England in 1877 and 1971, respectively. It is also the home of the National Sports Museum, and serves as the home ground of the Victoria cricket team. At Twenty20 level, the Melbourne Stars and Melbourne Renegades compete in the Big Bash League. Australian rules football, Australia's most popular spectator sport, traces its origins to matches played in parklands next to the MCG in 1858. Its first laws were codified the following year by the Melbourne Football Club, also a founding member, in 1896, of the Australian Football League (AFL), the sport's elite professional competition. Headquartered at Docklands Stadium, the AFL fields a further eight Melbourne-based clubs: Carlton, Collingwood, Essendon, Hawthorn, North Melbourne, Richmond, St Kilda, and the Western Bulldogs. The city hosts up to five AFL matches per round during the home and away season, attracting an average of 40,000 spectators per game. The AFL Grand Final, traditionally held at the MCG, is the highest attended club championship event in the world. In soccer, Melbourne is represented in the A-League by Melbourne Victory, Melbourne City FC and Western United FC. The rugby league team Melbourne Storm plays in the National Rugby League, and in rugby union, the Melbourne Rebels and Melbourne Rising compete in the Super Rugby and National Rugby Championship competitions, respectively. North American sports have also gained popularity in Melbourne: basketball sides South East Melbourne Phoenix and Melbourne United play in the NBL; Melbourne Ice and Melbourne Mustangs play in the Australian Ice Hockey League; and Melbourne Aces plays in the Australian Baseball League. Rowing also forms part of Melbourne's sporting identity, with a number of clubs located on the Yarra River, out of which many Australian Olympians trained. Melbourne has a highly diversified economy with particular strengths in finance, manufacturing, research, IT, education, logistics, transportation and tourism. Melbourne houses the headquarters of many of Australia's largest corporations, including five of the ten largest in the country (based on revenue), and five of the largest seven in the country (based on market capitalisation); ANZ, BHP, the National Australia Bank, CSL and Telstra, as well as such representative bodies and think tanks as the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Melbourne's suburbs also have the head offices of Coles Group (owner of Coles Supermarkets) and Wesfarmers companies Bunnings, Target, K-Mart and Officeworks. The city is home to Australia's second busiest seaport, after Port Botany in Sydney. Melbourne Airport provides an entry point for national and international visitors, and is Australia's second busiest airport. Melbourne is also an important financial centre. In the 2022 Global Financial Centres Index, Melbourne was ranked as having the 32nd most competitive financial centre in the world. Two of the big four banks, the ANZ and National Australia Bank, are headquartered in Melbourne. The city has carved out a niche as Australia's leading centre for superannuation (pension) funds, with 40% of the total, and 65% of industry super-funds including the AU$109 billion-dollar Federal Government Future Fund. The city was rated 41st within the top 50 financial cities as surveyed by the MasterCard Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index (2008), second only to Sydney (12th) in Australia. Melbourne is Australia's second-largest industrial centre. It is the Australian base for a number of significant manufacturers including Boeing Australia, truck-makers Kenworth and Iveco, Cadbury as well as Alstom and Jayco, among others. It is also home to a wide variety of other manufacturers, ranging from petrochemicals and pharmaceuticals to fashion garments, paper manufacturing and food processing. The south-eastern suburb of Scoresby is home to Nintendo's Australian headquarters. The city also has a research and development hub for Ford Australia, as well as a global design studio and technical centre for General Motors and Toyota Australia respectively. CSL, one of the world's top five biotech companies, and Sigma Pharmaceuticals have their headquarters in Melbourne. The two are the largest listed Australian pharmaceutical companies. Melbourne has an important ICT industry, home to more than half of Australia's top 20 technology companies, and employs over 91,000 people (one third of Australia's ICT workforce), with a turnover of AU$34 billion and export revenues of AU$2.5 billion in 2018. In addition, tourism also plays an important role in Melbourne's economy, with 10.8 million domestic overnight tourists and 2.9 million international overnight tourists in 2018. Melbourne has been attracting an increasing share of domestic and international conference markets. Construction began in February 2006 of an AU$1 billion 5000-seat international convention centre, Hilton Hotel and commercial precinct adjacent to the Melbourne Convention & Exhibition Centre to link development along the Yarra River with the Southbank precinct and multibillion-dollar Docklands redevelopment. The Economist Intelligence Unit ranks Melbourne as the fourth most expensive city in the world to live in according to its worldwide cost of living index in 2013. Melbourne is the second most visited city in Australia and the seventy-third most visited city in the world. In 2018, 10.8 million domestic overnight tourists and 2.9 million international overnight tourists visited Melbourne. The most visited attractions are Federation Square, Queen Victoria Market, Crown Casino, Southbank, Melbourne Zoo, Melbourne Aquarium, Docklands, National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne Museum, Melbourne Observation Deck, Arts Centre Melbourne, and the Melbourne Cricket Ground. The State Library of Victoria is the fourth most visited in the world. Luna Park, a theme park modelled on New York's Coney Island and Seattle's Luna Park, is also a popular destination for visitors. In its annual survey of readers, the Condé Nast Traveler magazine found that both Melbourne and Auckland were considered the world's friendliest cities in 2014. Melbourne's laneways and arcades are of particular importance for the city's tourism–Hosier Lane attracted one million visitors in each year prior to the COVID pandemic. The laneways of Melbourne have been gentrified and now include prominent displays of street art, which attracts international tourists. Melbourne is considered one of the safest world cities for travellers. Melbourne has a renowned culinary scene that attracts international tourists. Lygon Street, which runs through the inner-northern suburbs of Melbourne, is a popular dining destination with an abundance of Italian and Greek restaurants that date back to earlier European immigration of the city. Food festivals are of particular popularity in Melbourne, many of which are held during early autumn, earning this period the nickname "mad March". The most well-known of these events, the Melbourne Food and Wine Festival, takes place over the course of ten days and began in 1993. Melbourne is home to many annual events and festivals. The Melbourne International Comedy Festival is held every year in March through to April. Established in 1987, it is one of the three largest international comedy festivals in the world. Other notable festivals and events include the Melbourne Flower and Garden Show, the Melbourne International Jazz Festival, the Melbourne Royal Show and the Midsumma Festival. According to the 2022 Australian Census, the population of the Greater Melbourne area was 5,031,195. Although Victoria's net interstate migration has fluctuated, the population of the Melbourne statistical division has grown by about 70,000 people a year since 2005. Melbourne has now attracted the largest proportion of international overseas immigrants (48,000) finding it outpacing Sydney's international migrant intake on percentage, as well as having strong interstate migration from Sydney and other capitals due to more affordable housing and cost of living. In recent years, Melton, Wyndham and Casey, part of the Melbourne statistical division, have recorded the highest growth rate of all local government areas in Australia. Melbourne is on track to overtake Sydney in population between 2028 and 2030. After a trend of declining population density since World War II, the city has seen increased density in the inner and western suburbs, aided in part by Victorian Government planning, such as Postcode 3000 and Melbourne 2030, which have aimed to curtail urban sprawl. As of 2018[update], the CBD is the most densely populated area in Australia with more than 19,000 residents per square kilometre, and the inner city suburbs of Carlton, South Yarra, Fitzroy and Collingwood make up Victoria's top five. At the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: English (24.8%) Australian (22.5%) Chinese (8.8%) Irish (8.2%) Scottish (6.9%) Italian (6.7%) Indian (5.5%) Greek (3.6%) German (2.8%) Vietnamese (2.5%) Filipino (1.7%) Dutch (1.4%) Maltese (1.3%) Polish (1.1%) Sri Lankan (1%) Lebanese (1%) At the 2021 census, 0.7% of Melbourne's population identified as being Indigenous — Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders. In Greater Melbourne at the 2021 census, 59.9% of residents were born in Australia. The other most common countries of birth were India (4.9%), Mainland China (3.4%), England (2.7%), Vietnam (1.8%) and New Zealand (1.7%). At the time of the 2021 census, 61.1% of Melburnians speak only English at home. Mandarin (4.3%), Vietnamese (2.3%), Greek (2.1%), Punjabi (2%), and Arabic (1.8%) were the most common foreign languages spoken at home by residents of Melbourne. Melbourne has a wide range of religious faiths, the most widely held of which is Christianity. This is signified by the city's two large cathedrals—St Patrick's (Roman Catholic), and St Paul's (Anglican). Both were built in the Victorian era and are of considerable heritage significance as major landmarks of the city. In recent years, Greater Melbourne's irreligious community has grown to be one of the largest in Australia. According to the 2021 Census, persons stating that they had no religion constituted 36.9% of the population. Christianity was the most popular religious affiliation at 40.1%. The largest Christian denominations were Catholicism (20.8%) and Anglicanism (5.5%). The most popular non-Christian religious affiliations were Islam (5.3%), Hinduism (4.1%), Buddhism (3.9%), Sikhism (1.7%) and Judaism (0.9%). Over 180,000 Muslims live in Melbourne. Muslim religious life in Melbourne is centred on about 25 mosques and a number of prayer rooms at university campuses, workplaces and other venues. As of 2000[update], Melbourne had the largest population of Polish Jews and Holocaust survivors in Australia, and the largest number of Jewish institutions. Of the top twenty high schools in Australia according to the My Choice Schools Ranking, five are in Melbourne. There has also been a rapid increase in the number of International students studying in the city, with Melbourne considered the 4th best city in the world for studying abroad in the 2024 Best Student Cities ranking by QS, and voted the world's fourth top university city in 2008 after London, Boston and Tokyo in a poll commissioned by the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology. Eight public universities operate in Melbourne: the University of Melbourne, Monash University, Swinburne University of Technology, Deakin University, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT University), La Trobe University, Australian Catholic University (ACU) and Victoria University (VU). Melbourne universities have campuses all over Australia and some internationally. Swinburne University and Monash University have campuses in Malaysia, RMIT in Vietnam, with Monash also having research centres in Prato, Italy, and a joint partnership research academy with IIT Bombay in Mumbai, India. The University of Melbourne, the second oldest university in Australia, is the highest ranked university in Australia across the three major global rankings – QS (14th), THES (34th) and the Academic Ranking of World Universities (32nd), with Monash University also ranking within the top 50 – QS (42nd) and THES (44th). Both are members of the Group of Eight, a coalition of leading Australian tertiary institutions offering comprehensive and leading education. As of 2017 RMIT University is ranked 17th in the world in art & design, and 28th in architecture. The Swinburne University of Technology, based in the inner-city Melbourne suburb of Hawthorn, was as of 2014 ranked 76th–100th in the world for physics by the Academic Ranking of World Universities. Deakin University maintains two major campuses in Melbourne and Geelong, and is the third largest university in Victoria. In recent years, the number of international students at Melbourne's universities has risen rapidly, a result of an increasing number of places being made available for them. Education in Melbourne is overseen by the Victorian Department of Education (DET), whose role is to 'provide policy and planning advice for the delivery of education'. Three daily newspapers serve Melbourne: the Herald Sun (tabloid), The Age (compact) and The Australian (national broadsheet). There are six primary free-to-air digital television stations operating in Greater Melbourne and Geelong: ABC Victoria, (ABV), SBS Victoria (SBS), Seven Melbourne (HSV), Nine Melbourne (GTV), Ten Melbourne (ATV), C31 Melbourne (MGV) – community television. Each station (excluding C31) broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels. Some digital media companies such as Broadsheet are based in and primarily serve Melbourne. Many AM and FM radio stations broadcast to greater Melbourne. These include public (i.e., state-owned ABC and SBS) and community stations. Many commercial stations are networked-owned: Nova Entertainment owns Nova 100 and Smooth; ARN controls Gold 104.3 and KIIS 101.1; and Southern Cross Austereo runs both Fox and Triple M. Youth stations include ABC Triple J and youth-run SYN. Triple J, and community stations PBS and Triple R, strive to play under represented music. JOY 94.9 caters for gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender audiences. 3MBS and ABC Classic FM play classical music. Light FM is a contemporary Christian station. AM stations include ABC: ABC Radio Melbourne, Radio National, and News Radio; also Nine Entertainment affiliates 3AW (talk) and Magic (easy listening). SEN 1116 broadcasts sports coverage. Melbourne has many community run stations that serve alternative interests, such as 3CR and 3KND (Indigenous). Many suburbs have low powered community run stations serving local audiences. The governance of Melbourne is split between the government of Victoria and the 27 cities and four shires that make up the metropolitan area. There is no ceremonial or political head of Melbourne, but the Lord Mayor of the City of Melbourne often fulfils such a role as a first among equals. The local councils are responsible for providing the functions set out in the Local Government Act 1989 such as urban planning and waste management. Most other government services are provided or regulated by the Victorian state government, which governs from Parliament House in Spring Street. These include services associated with local government in other countries and include public transport, main roads, traffic control, policing, education above preschool level, health and planning of major infrastructure projects. The Victorian Government's Department of Health oversees about 30 public hospitals in the Melbourne metropolitan region and 13 health services organisations. Major medical, neuroscience and biotechnology research institutions located in Melbourne include the St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, Australian Stem Cell Centre, the Burnet Institute, the Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Victorian Institute of Chemical Sciences, Brain Research Institute, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, and the Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre. The headquarters of Australian pharmaceutical company CSL Limited is located in the Melbourne Biomedical Precinct in Parkville, which contains over 40 biomedical and research institutions. It was announced in 2021 that a new Australian Institute for Infectious Disease would also be built in Parkville. Other institutions include the Howard Florey Institute, the Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Baker Heart and Diabetes Institute, and the Australian Synchrotron. Many of these institutions are associated with and located near to universities. Melbourne is also home to the Royal Children's Hospital and the Monash Children's Hospital. Among Australian capital cities, Melbourne ties with Canberra in first place for the highest male life expectancy (80.0 years) and ranks second behind Perth in female life expectancy (84.1 years). Like many Australian cities, Melbourne has a high dependency on the automobile for transport, particularly in the outer suburban areas where the largest number of cars are bought, with a total of 3.6 million private vehicles using 22,320 km (13,870 mi) of road, and one of the highest lengths of road per capita in the world. The early 20th century saw an increase in popularity of automobiles, resulting in large-scale suburban expansion and a tendency towards the development of urban sprawl—like all Australian cities, inhabitants would live in the suburbs and commute to the city for work. By the mid-1950s, there were just under 200 passenger vehicles per 1000 people, and by 2013, there were 600 passenger vehicles per 1000 people. The road network in Victoria is managed by Vicroads, as part of the Department of Transport, who oversee the planning and integration. Maintenance of roads is undertaken by different bodies, depending on the road. Local roads are maintained by local councils, while secondary and main roads are the responsibility of Vicroads. Major national freeways and roads integral to national trade are overseen by the Federal Government. Today, Melbourne has an extensive network of freeways and arterial roadways. These are used by private vehicles, including road freight vehicles, as well as road-based public transport modes like buses and taxis. Major highways feeding into the city include the Eastern Freeway, Monash Freeway and West Gate Freeway (which spans the large West Gate Bridge). Other freeways include the Calder Freeway, Tullamarine Freeway, which is the main airport link, and the Hume Freeway, which connects Melbourne to Canberra and Sydney. Melbourne's middle suburbs are connected via an orbital freeway, the M80 Ring Road, which will be completed when the North East Link opens. Out of Melbourne's 20 declared freeways open or under construction, 6 are electronic toll roads. This includes the M1 and M2 CityLink (which includes the large Bolte Bridge), Eastlink, North East Link, and the West Gate Tunnel. Apart from Eastlink which is owned and operated by ConnectEast, the toll roads in Melbourne are run by Transurban. In Melbourne, tollways have blue and yellow signage compared to the green signs used for free roads. Melbourne has an integrated public transport system based around extensive train, tram, bus and taxi systems. Flinders Street station was the world's busiest passenger station in 1927 and Melbourne's tram network overtook Sydney's to become the world's largest in the 1940s. From the 1940s, public transport use in Melbourne declined due to a rapid expansion of the road and freeway network, with the largest declines in tram and bus usage. This decline quickened in the early 1990s due to large public transport service cuts. The operations of Melbourne's public transport system was privatised in 1999 through a franchising model, with operational responsibilities for the train, tram and bus networks licensed to private companies. After 1996 there was a rapid increase in public transport patronage due to growth in employment in central Melbourne, with the mode share for commuters increasing to 14.8% and 8.4% of all trips. A target of 20% public transport mode share for Melbourne by 2020 was set by the state government in 2006. Since 2006 public transport patronage has grown by over 20% and a number of projects have commenced aimed at expanding public transport usage. The Melbourne metropolitan rail network dates back to the 1850s gold rush era, and today consists of 222 suburban stations on 16 lines which radiate from the City Loop, a mostly-underground subway system around the CBD. Flinders Street station, one of Australia's busiest rail hubs, serves the entire network, and remains a prominent Melbourne landmark and meeting place. The city has rail connections with regional Victorian cities run by V/Line, as well as direct interstate rail services which depart from Melbourne's other major rail terminus, Southern Cross station, in Docklands. The Overland to Adelaide departs twice a week, while the XPT to Sydney departs twice daily. In the 2017–2018 financial year, the Melbourne metropolitan rail network recorded 240.9 million passenger trips, the highest ridership in its history. Many rail lines, along with dedicated lines and rail yards, are also used for freight. An assortment of new railways are under construction in Melbourne. A new heavy rail corridor through the inner city, the Metro Tunnel, is set to open by 2025, and will reduce congestion on the City Loop. The ongoing Level Crossing Removal Project is grade separating much of the network, and rebuilding many older stations. In June 2022, early works commenced on the Suburban Rail Loop, a 90-kilometre underground automated orbital line through Melbourne's middle suburbs around 12–18 km (7.5–11.2 mi) from the CBD. An airport rail connection has commenced with early works in Keilor East. Melbourne's tram network dates from the 1880s land boom and, as of 2021, consists of 250 km (155.3 mi) of double track, 475 trams, 25 routes, and 1,763 tram stops, making it the largest in the world. In 2017–2018, 206.3 million passenger trips were made by tram. Around 75 per cent of Melbourne's tram network shares road space with other vehicles, while the rest of the network is separated or are light rail routes. Melbourne's trams are recognised as iconic cultural assets and a tourist attraction. Heritage trams operate on the free City Circle route around the CBD. Trams are free within the central city Free Tram Zone and run 24-hours on weekends. Melbourne's bus network consists of more than 400 routes which mainly service the outer suburbs and fill the gaps in the network between rail and tram services. 127.6 million passenger trips were recorded on Melbourne's buses in 2013–2014, an increase of 10.2 percent on the previous year. Melbourne has four airports. Melbourne Airport, at Tullamarine, is the city's main international and domestic gateway and second busiest in Australia, with a traffic of over 37 million passengers in 2018–19. The airport, which comprises four terminals, is home base for passenger airline Jetstar and cargo airlines Australian airExpress and Toll Priority, and is a major hub for Qantas and Virgin Australia. Avalon Airport, located between Melbourne and Geelong, is a secondary hub of Jetstar. It is also used as a freight and maintenance facility. Buses and taxis are the only forms of public transport to and from the city's main airports. A rail link to Tullamarine is planned to open by 2029. Air Ambulance facilities are available for domestic and international transportation of patients. Melbourne also has a significant general aviation airport, Moorabbin Airport in the city's southeast that also handles a small number of passenger flights. Essendon Airport, which was once the city's main airport, also handles passenger flights, general aviation and some cargo flights. Ship transport is an important component of Melbourne's transport system. The Port of Melbourne is Australia's largest container and general cargo port and also its busiest. The port handled two million shipping containers in a 12-month period during 2007, making it one of the top five ports in the Southern Hemisphere. Station Pier on Port Phillip Bay is the main passenger ship terminal with cruise ships docking there. Ferries and water taxis run from berths along the Yarra River as far upstream as South Yarra and across Port Phillip Bay. Water storage and supply for Melbourne is managed by Melbourne Water, which is owned by the Victorian Government. The organisation is also responsible for management of sewerage and the major water catchments in the region as well as the Wonthaggi desalination plant and North–South Pipeline. Water is stored in a series of reservoirs located within and outside the Greater Melbourne area. The largest dam, the Thomson River Dam, located in the Victorian Alps, is capable of holding around 60% of Melbourne's water capacity, while smaller dams such as the Upper Yarra Dam, Yan Yean Reservoir, and the Cardinia Reservoir carry secondary supplies. Gas is provided by three distribution companies: AusNet Services, which provides gas from Melbourne's inner western suburbs to southwestern Victoria. Multinet Gas, which provides gas from Melbourne's inner eastern suburbs to eastern Victoria. (owned by SP AusNet after acquisition, but continuing to trade under the brand name Multinet Gas) Australian Gas Networks, which provides gas from Melbourne's inner northern suburbs to northern Victoria, as well as the majority of southeastern Victoria. Electricity is provided by five distribution companies: Citipower, which provides power to Melbourne's CBD, and some inner suburbs Powercor, which provides power to the outer western suburbs, as well as all of western Victoria (Citipower and Powercor are owned by the same entity) Jemena, which provides power to the northern and inner western suburbs United Energy, which provides power to the inner eastern and southeastern suburbs, and the Mornington Peninsula AusNet Services, which provides power to the outer eastern suburbs and all of the north and east of Victoria. Numerous telecommunications companies provide Melbourne with terrestrial and mobile telecommunications services and wireless internet services and at least since 2016 Melbourne offers a free public WiFi which allows for up to 250 MB per device in some areas of the city. Victoria portal Australia portal Cities portal Naval Base Melbourne Regions of Victoria Environmental issues in Melbourne Outline of Melbourne List of Melbourne suburbs List of museums in Melbourne List of people from Melbourne List of songs about Melbourne Local government in Victoria The spelling pronunciation /ˈmɛlbɔːrn/ MEL-born is also accepted within British Received Pronunciation and General American English. In Australian English, ⟨our⟩ in the second syllable always stands for the reduced /ər/ as in "labour". The use of the term Melburnian can be traced back to 1876 where the case for Melburnian over Melbournian was made in the Melbourne Grammar School publication, the Melburnian. "The diphthong, 'ou' is not a Latin diphthong: hence, we argued this way, Melburnia would be [the] Latin form of name, and from it comes Melburnian." In accordance with the Australian Bureau of Statistics source, England, Scotland, Mainland China and the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau are listed separately. Indigenous identification is separate to the ancestry question on the Australian Census and persons identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander may identify any ancestry. "Greater Melbourne". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 28 March 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) "2016 Census of Population and Housing: General Community Profile". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2017. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2021. "Great Circle Distance between MELBOURNE and CANBERRA". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2016. "Great Circle Distance between MELBOURNE and ADELAIDE". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2016. "Great Circle Distance between MELBOURNE and SYDNEY". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. "Great Circle Distance between MELBOURNE and BRISBANE". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. "Great Circle Distance between MELBOURNE and PERTH". Geoscience Australia. March 2004. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN 9781405881180; Butler, S., ed. (2013). "Melbourne". Macquarie Dictionary (6th ed.). Sydney: Macmillan Publishers. ISBN 978-18-7642-966-9. Clark, Ian D. (2002). Dictionary of Aboriginal placenames of Melbourne and Central Victoria. Melbourne: Victorian Aboriginal Corp. for Languages. p. 62. ISBN 0957936052. Nicholson, Mandy; Jones, David (2020). "Wurundjeri-al Narrm-u (Wurundjeri's Melbourne): Aboriginal living heritage in Australia's urban landscapes". The Routledge Handbook on Historic Urban Landscapes in the Asia-Pacific. Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780429486470-30. ISBN 978-0-429-48647-0. S2CID 213567108. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Regional population". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 20 April 2023. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2023. "2016 Census of Population and Housing". Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "Victorian Local Government Directory" (PDF). Department of Planning and Community Development, Government of Victoria. p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2009. Retrieved 11 September 2009. Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series, iii, s.v. "Melburnian Archived 26 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine". Macquarie Dictionary, Fourth Edition (2005). Or less commonly Melbournites. Melbourne, The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd. ISBN 1-876429-14-3. "History of the City of Melbourne" (PDF). City of Melbourne. November 1997. pp. 8–10. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 28 January 2018. Isabel Ellender and Peter Christiansen, People of the Merri Merri. The Wurundjeri in Colonial Days, Merri Creek Management Committee, 2001 ISBN 0-9577728-0-7 Lewis, Miles (1995). Melbourne: the city's history and development (2nd ed.). Melbourne: City of Melbourne. p. 25. ISBN 0-949624-71-3. Cervero, Robert B. (1998). The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry. Chicago: Island Press. p. 320. ISBN 1-55963-591-6. Davidson, Jim (2 August 2014). "Rise and fall of British empire viewed through its cities". The Australian. Archived from the original on 14 January 2018. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act" (PDF). Department of the Attorney-General, Government of Australia. p. 45 (Section 125). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 11 September 2009. "The Global Financial Centres Index 31" (PDF). Long Finance. March 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. Stephanie Chalkley-Rhoden (16 August 2017). "World's most liveable city: Melbourne takes top spot for seventh year running". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2017. "Government outlines vision for Port of Melbourne Freight Hub" (Press release). 2006. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2007. "Investing in Transport Chapter 3 – East/West, Section 3.1.2 – Tram Network" (PDF). Department of Transport, Government of Victoria. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 July 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2009. Gary Presland, The First Residents of Melbourne's Western Region, (revised edition), Harriland Press, 1997. ISBN 0-646-33150-7 "Indigenous connections to the site" (PDF). rbg.vic.gov.au. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2008. Retrieved 28 April 2021. Gary Presland, Aboriginal Melbourne: The Lost Land of the Kulin People, Harriland Press (1985), Second edition 1994, ISBN 0-9577004-2-3 "Foundation of the Settlement". History of the City of Melbourne. City of Melbourne. 1997. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2010. Dunstan, Joseph (26 June 2021). "Melbourne's birth destroyed Bunurong and Wurundjeri boundaries. 185 years on, they've been redrawn". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2021. Eddie, Rachel (1 July 2021). "Traditional owners formalised in new boundaries covering central Melbourne". The Age. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022. Smyth, Robert Brough (1878). Aborigines of Victoria: With Notes Relating to the Habits of the Natives of Other Parts of Australia and Tasmania Compiled from Various Sources for the Government of Victoria. Volume 2. Cambridge University Press. p. 188. ISBN 9781108006569. Clark, Ian D. (2002). Dictionary of Aboriginal placenames of Melbourne and Central Victoria. Melbourne: Victorian Aboriginal Corp. for Languages. p. 76. ISBN 0957936052. Nicholson, Bill and Mandy (2016). Wurundjeri's Cultural Heritage of the Melton Area (PDF). Melbourne: Melton City Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "Boon Wurrung: The Filling of the Bay – The Time of Chaos – Nyernila". Culture Victoria. Archived from the original on 3 July 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. Button, James (4 October 2003). "Secrets of a forgotten settlement". The Age. Melbourne: Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 19 October 2008. Kenny, Robert (2008). "Tricks or Treats?". History Australia. 5 (2): 38.1–38.14. doi:10.2104/ha080038. S2CID 143485675.[permanent dead link] Annear, Robyn (2005). Bearbrass: Imagining Early Melbourne. Melbourne, Victoria: Black Inc. p. 6. ISBN 1863953973. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Melbourne" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 18 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 91. "Melbourne's Godfather". The West Australian. Vol. 50, no. 14, 996. Western Australia. 14 July 1934. p. 6. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2017 – via National Library of Australia. "Roads". City of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 29 September 2008. Kenyon, A. S. (29 January 1938). "They Called Melbourne Barebrass". The Argus Weekend Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022 – via Trove. "New South Wales Government Gazette (Sydney, NSW)". Trove. National Library of Australia. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "History of Melbourne". Onlymelbourne.com.au. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. Phoenix Auctions History. "Post Office List". Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2021. Boyce, James (2011). 1835: The Founding of Melbourne and the Conquest of Australia. Black Inc. p. 151, citing Richard Broome, "Victoria" in Ann McGrath (ed.), Contested Ground: 129 Boyce 2011, p. 186. Boyce 2011, p. 199. Boyce 2011, p. 163. "Separation". EMelbourne-Encyclopedia of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 6 July 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2015. Hoban, Suzie. "Gold". Victorian Cultural Collaboration. Special Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "The Snowy Mountains Scheme and Multicultural Australia". ATSE. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Hagan, Kate (3 December 2006). "Eureka: where multiculturalism was born". The Age. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2018. "Media Business Communication time line since 1861". Caslon. Archived from the original on 6 December 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2008. Pennings, Mark (2012). Origins of Australian Football: Victoria's Early History: Volume 1: Amateur Heroes and the Rise of Clubs, 1858 to 1876. Connor Court Publishing Pty Ltd. ISBN 9781921421471, p. 11 Goodman, Robin; Buxton, Michael; Moloney, Susie (2016). "The early development of Melbourne". Planning Melbourne: Lessons for a Sustainable City. CSIRO Publishing. ISBN 9780643104747. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 16 June 2019. By 1890, Melbourne was the second-largest city in the British Empire and one of the world's richest. "The Story of Melbourne". The Argus. Melbourne: National Library of Australia. 9 September 1926. p. 8 Supplement: An Historic Souvenir. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2012. Button, James (10 January 2004). "He came, he saw, he marvelled". The Age. Fairfax. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2012. Cannon, Michael (1966). The Land Boomers. Melbourne University Press; Cambridge University Press. "Marvellous Melbourne – Introduction of the Hydraulic Lift". Museum Victoria. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 21 June 2010. "Melbourne Hydraulic Power Company". Fading Victoria. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 30 April 2023. Miles, Lewis (1995). Melbourne the city's history and development. City of Melbourne. p. 47. Lambert, Tim. "A Brief History of Melbourne". Local Histories. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Melbourne (Victoria) – growth of the city". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Fast Facts on Melbourne History". We Love Melbourne. Archived from the original on 18 October 2013. Retrieved 29 September 2008. Lewis, Miles Bannatyne (1995). Melbourne: the city's history and development. City of Melbourne. pp. 113–114. ISBN 0949624888. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Melbourne Cricket Ground – US Marines at the MCG". Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "1961 – the Impact of Post-War Immigration". Museum Victoria. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Ketchel, Misha (29 May 2003). "Boutique battle at Paris end of town". The Age. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2010. Wilson, Tim. "The art of the forgotten people". Institute of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Wade, Matt (2014). "Sydney takes manufacturing capital crown from Melbourne". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Sorry, we can't find the content you're looking for". State Library Victoria. 5 August 2012. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Judith Raphael Buckrich (1996) Melbourne's Grand Boulevard: the Story of St Kilda Road. Published State Library of Victoria Logan, William (1985). The Gentrification of inner Melbourne: a political geography of inner-city housing. Brisbane, Australia: University of Queensland Press. pp. 148–160. ISBN 0-7022-1729-8. Millar, Royce (7 November 2005). "Road to ... where?". The Age. Fairfax. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012. Shepherd, Dick (4 February 1972). "Hotel men expected to press for Govt. aid". Age. Fairfax. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2011. "Tell Melbourne it's over, we won". The Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. 31 December 2003. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. Saward, Joe (1 February 1996). "Interview – Judith Griggs". Grandprix. Inside F1. Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2010. Miles Lewis. Melbourne the city's history and development. p. 203,205–206. Marino, Melissa; Colebatch, Tim (24 March 2005). "Melbourne's population booms". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "Delivering Melbourne's newest sustainable communities". Victoria Online. State of Victoria. 21 September 2006. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. The Age, 12 February 2010[full citation needed] Ormonde, Tom (14 November 2009). "Housing the bubble that no one dares burst". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 2 February 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Dowling, Jason (16 February 2008). "Rent crisis forces urgent action". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 17 February 2008. Retrieved 21 June 2010. "What is Victoria's Big Build?". Time Out Melbourne. 21 May 2018. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. Woodcock, Ian (January 2020). "On track: Level Crossing Removal Project". Architecture Australia. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Stanley, Janet; Stanley, John; Brain, Peter (19 May 2019). "Rapid growth is widening Melbourne's social and economic divide". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "'It's not what we bought into': How high density living is changing the face of Australia's suburbs". ABC News. 16 November 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Remarkable 10-year change to city skyline". Herald Sun. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC – Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020. Liu, Donna (28 May 2021). "Bad luck or bad management: why has Victoria had so many Covid outbreaks?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 May 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2021. Boaz, Judd (3 October 2021). "Melbourne passes Buenos Aires' world record for time spent in COVID-19 lockdown". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 October 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2022. "2021 Population Statement". Centre For Population, Australian Government. 21 December 2021. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023. Melbourne to become Australia's biggest city, ABC News, 5 January 2023, archived from the original on 5 January 2023, retrieved 5 January 2023 "Australia for Everyone". Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Thomas A. Darragh. "Geology". The Encyclopedia of Melbourne Online. School of Historical & Philosophical Studies, University of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. Victorian Volcanic Plains Archived 3 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine by Greening Australia. Retrieved 3 September 2022. Biodiversity of the Western Volcanic Plains – The Western Volcanic Plains Archived 3 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine State of Victoria (Department of Education). Retrieved 3 September 2022. Gippsland Red Gum Grassy Woodland and Associated Native Grassland Archived 1 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. Retrieved 6 September 2022. Russell, Mark (2 January 2006). "Life's a beach in Melbourne". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Beach Report 2007–08" (PDF). EPA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. Tapper, Andrew; Tapper, Nigel (1996). Gray, Kathleen (ed.). The weather and climate of Australia and New Zealand (First ed.). Melbourne, Australia: Oxford University Press. p. 300. ISBN 0-19-553393-3. Linacre, Edward; Geerts, Bart (1997). Climates and Weather Explained. London: Routledge. p. 379. ISBN 0-415-12519-7. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Rainfall". State of Victoria (Agriculture Victoria). 22 February 2021. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Melbourne Regional Office". Climate statistics for Australian locations. Bureau of Meteorology. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Welcome to Melbourne". City of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "Monthly climate statistics". Bureau of Meteorology. Archived from the original on 31 October 2019. Retrieved 30 March 2012. "BOM – Australian Climate Extremes". webarchive.nla.gov.au. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. "Melbourne Sea Temperature". World Sea Temperatures. Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "Port Melbourne Sea Temperature". World Sea Temperatures. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "Melbourne Airport". BOM. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Melbourne Airport monthly highest temperature". BOM. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Melbourne Airport monthly lowest temperature". BOM. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Demographia World Urban Areas" (PDF). Demographia. July 2022. p. 39. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2023. Freeman-Greene, Suzy (1 January 2005). "Melbourne's love affair with lanes". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2008. Weston Bate (1994). Essential but unplanned: the story of Melbourne's lanes. City of Melbourne. Carey, Adam (17 June 2018). "Population pressure a fast-growing concern for Victorian voters". The Age. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018. "Australia 108". The Skyscraper Center. Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. Archived from the original on 20 February 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "A Mini Metropolis for the Garden State". Southbank by Beulah. Beulah. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Walking Melbourne, Heritage, Architecture, Skyscraper and Buildings Database". Walking Melbourne. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008. "Melbourne Architecture". Melbourne Travel Guide. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008. Millar, Royce; Tomazin, Farrah (5 August 2002). "Glen Iris still the heart of city's sprawl". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "The death of the great Australian dream". The Guardian. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 18 February 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Timms, Peter (2006). Australia's quarter acre : the story of the ordinary suburban garden. Miegunyah Press. ISBN 978-0-522-85185-4. Lucas, Clay; Millar, Royce (11 March 2008). "Victoria: the garden state or greenhouse capital?". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 20 September 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Victoria". wilmap.com.au. Archived from the original on 12 November 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Victoria Australia, aka "The Garden State"". goway.com. Archived from the original on 1 May 2009. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "City of Melbourne – Parks and Gardens". City of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 30 August 2004. Retrieved 28 September 2008. "Melbourne's Best Gardens". weekendnotes.com. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 20 February 2015. "About Parks Victoria". Parks Victoria. Archived from the original on 25 July 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. R Taylor (January 1999). Wild Places of Greater Melbourne. CSIRO Publishing. p. 224. ISBN 9780957747104. "Vicnet Directory – Local Government". Vicnet. Archived from the original on 28 September 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Metropolitan Melbourne – Live in Victoria". Liveinvictoria.vic.gov.au. 12 August 2009. Archived from the original on 24 January 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Wilson, Andrew (17 April 2011). "City shortage pushes up rents". Domain. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 14 May 2012. Retrieved 7 July 2012. Cooke, Dewi (3 April 2010). "The rental pressure cooker". The Age. Australia: Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 8 July 2010. Retrieved 27 April 2011. Zappone, Chris (24 January 2011). "Melbourne housing now 'severely unaffordable'". The Age. Melbourne: Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 30 January 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2011. "Project Database". Urban Melbourne. Archived from the original on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2013. Dovey, Kim (2013). Fluid City: Transforming Melbourne's Urban Waterfront. Routledge. p. 1. ISBN 9781135159719. Murray, John; Armstrong, Mark (1999). Victoria: From High Country to High Culture. Lonely Planet. p. 39. ISBN 9780864427342. Peregoy, Beau (20 March 2017). "7 Examples to Prove Melbourne Has Stunning Victorian Architecture". Architectural Digest. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Annear, Robyn (2014). A City Lost and Found: Whelan the Wrecker's Melbourne. Black Inc. ISBN 9-78-192223141-3. "Walking Melbourne". Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 9 January 2012. Cole, David B. (1985). "Gentrification, Social Character, and Personal Identity". Geographical Review. 75 (2): 142–155. Bibcode:1985GeoRv..75..142C. doi:10.2307/214465. ISSN 0016-7428. JSTOR 214465. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "What makes Melbourne the cultural capital of Australia?". Meld Magazine. 12 July 2016. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2018. Temple, Emily (10 May 2018). "The 12 Most Popular Libraries in the World". Literary Hub. Archived from the original on 20 May 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2020. Ackland, Michael (1993). Henry Kendall: Poetry, Prose and Selected Correspondence. University of Queensland Press, ISBN 9780702223082, p. 140. Bellanta, Melissa (2014). "A Masculine Romance: The Sentimental Bloke and Australian Culture in the War- and Early Interwar Years" (PDF). Journal of Popular Romance Studies. 4 (2). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 August 2020. "Cities of Literature". cityofliterature.com. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2015. Sadler, Denham (14 August 2015). "Live music in Melbourne: four of the best places to see a gig". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2018. "Southbank Theatre". Melbourne Theatre Company. 2014. Archived from the original on 12 July 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2014. Donoughue, Paul (12 April 2018). "Melbourne is the live music capital of the world, study says". ABC News. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2018. Music Victoria (2017). "Melbourne Live Music Census 2017 Report" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "National Heritage Places – Sidney Myer Music Bowl". dcceew.gov.au. Australian Government (Department of Environment and Energy). Archived from the original on 1 May 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2018.. Huxley, Martin (2015). AC/DC: The World's Heaviest Rock. St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 9781250096524. p. 49, 57, 59 Delaney, Cornelius (2020). "We're the Most Fabulous People Australia Has Ever Known". In Nichols, David; Perillo, Sophie (ed.). Urban Australia and Post-Punk: Exploring Dogs in Space. Springer Nature. pp. 73–80. ISBN 9789813297029. Van Maas, Sander (2015). Thresholds of Listening: Sound, Technics, Space. Fordham Univ Press, ISBN 9780823264391, pp. 223–224. Sayers, Andrew (2001). Australian Art. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780192842145, pp. 79–80. Lock-Weir, Tracy (2009). "Misty moderns: Australian Tonalists 1915–1950". NGA.gov.au. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Scopelianos, Sarah (5 April 2020). "Melbourne is famous for its laneway street art. But artists work in a 'grey area' – and worry about the future". ABC News. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Jopp, Ryan (8 June 2017). "Melbourne's love-hate relationship with being Australia's 'street art capital'". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 26 May 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Routt, William D. "More Australian than Aristotelian: The Australian Bushranger Film, 1904–1914". archive.sensesofcinema.com. Archived from the original on 24 December 2010. Retrieved 28 April 2021. Davey, Philip (17 December 2009). "When Hollywood Came To Melbourne". ACMI. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 23 May 2020. Grant, Barry Keith (2007). Schirmer Encyclopedia of Film, Volume 1. Schirmer Reference, ISBN 9780028657912, p. 136. "Docklands Studios – Bringing Screen Ideas to Life". Docklands Studios. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 21 October 2010. Hess, Rob; Symons, Caroline; Hemphill, Dennis. "Sporting Culture". eMelbourne. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "Melbourne crowned 'sports city of the decade'". Business Standard India. 21 April 2016. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "1956 Melbourne". athletesedge.info. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 2 May 2013. Santlani, Amrit (20 February 2020). "10 Largest Cricket Stadiums In The World". Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2020. Strong, Geoff (6 March 2008). "Australian sports museum opens at MCG". The Age. Melbourne: Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. Nauright, John (ed.) (2012). Sports around the World: History, Culture, and Practice, ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781598843019, pp. 350–351. Wilson, John K.; Promfet, Richard (ed.) (2019). Historical Perspectives on Sports Economics: Lessons from the Field, Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN 9781788977845, p. 25. Smith, Patrick (1 August 2008). "AFL blueprint for third stadium". The Australian. Archived from the original on 9 August 2008. Retrieved 22 October 2008. "Rich List". Australian Financial Review. Archived from the original on 29 August 2007. "Port Botany: Australia's biggest container port". Portauthoritynsw.com.au. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018. "The economic and social contribution of Australia's airports" (PDF). Australian Airports Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2016. "Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index" (PDF). 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 May 2012. Retrieved 10 October 2008. Matt Wade (8 February 2014). "Sydney takes manufacturing capital crown from Melbourne". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "Crown casino records profit growth, up 130%". Business Day. 26 August 2010. Archived from the original on 7 March 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Business Victoria – Manufacturing". State of Victoria, Australia. 26 May 2008. Archived from the original on 3 November 2013. Retrieved 22 October 2008. "Invest Victoria – Biotechnology and Life Sciences". Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Why Melbourne, Australia (PDF) (Report). Victorian State Government. 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Australian Tourism Statistics 2019". Budget Direct. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Kleinman, Rachel (1 May 2006). "Councillors furious about convention centre deal". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 1 October 2007. "What are the most expensive cities to live in?". Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 16 February 2014. Ireland, Sophie (5 December 2020). "These Are The World's Most Visited Cities Among International Travelers, 2019". CEO World. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Australian Tourism Statistics 2019". Budget Direct. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Victoria's Top 20 Attractions". Only Melbourne. 27 September 2013. Archived from the original on 9 April 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "Luna Park, St Kilda". Malvern Standard. Vol. 9, no. 507. Victoria, Australia. 21 December 1912. p. 3. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 18 May 2016 – via National Library of Australia. Dee, Siobhan (2012). "100 years of fun at Luna Park". National Film and Sound Archive. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Kylie McLaughlin (18 August 2014). "Melbourne named the world's friendliest city, Sydney fifth". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Conde Nast Traveler The 2014 Friendliest and Unfriendliest Cities in the World". Condé Nast Traveler. 5 August 2014. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Melbourne is famous for its laneway street art. But artists work in a 'grey area' — and worry about the future". ABC Australia. April 2020. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Safe cities index 2019" (PDF). Safe Cities Index. The Economist. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Khoury, Matt; Prendergarst, Luke (18 November 2018). "Melbourne fans: 50 ways our city is the best". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 May 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Melbourne's food and drink scene has been voted one of the best in the world". Time Out Magazine. 14 September 2021. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "How Melbourne Landed the World's 50 Best Restaurants Awards". The New York Times. 5 April 2017. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "What makes Melbourne's food scene so iconic?". The Singleton Argus. 17 October 2022. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Goodman, Sanam (16 June 2022). "Melbourne Food & Wine Festival 30 Under 30". Time Out. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Penman, Jasmine (21 February 2023). "Melbourne Food and Wine Festival: Why Melbourne's hospitality culture 'makes the city so exciting'". Beat Magazine. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Regional population, 2021-22 financial year". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 28 April 2023. O'Leary, John. "The Resurgence of Marvellous Melbourne — Trends in Population Distribution in Victoria, 1991 to 1996" (PDF). People and Place. 7, 1. Monash University: 38. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2006. Colebatch, Tim (1 August 2012). "Growth pains on the city's fringe". The Age. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "Melbourne 2030 – in summary". Victorian Government, Department of Sustainability and Environment. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "City of Melbourne: Strategic Planning – Postcode 3000". City of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 12 September 2008. Retrieved 5 October 2008. Smith, Rohan (5 October 2018). "There's a reason Melbourne feels so crowded – it's the most densely populated area in Australia". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Chinatown, Melbourne: Dining, entertainment, shopping, accommodation & more". Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2022. "2021 Greater Melbourne, Census Community Profiles". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "2021 Greater Melbourne, Census All persons QuickStats". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 29 June 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Victorian Architectural Period – Melbourne". Walking Melbourne. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "Census 2016: Why Australians are Losing their Religion". ABC Religion and Ethics. 9 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 27 March 2018. "2016 Census Community Profiles – Greater Melbourne". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 27 March 2018. Retrieved 27 March 2018. Saeed, Abdullah. "Islam". The Encyclopedia of Melbourne Online. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2013. Freiberg, Freda (2001). "Judith Berman, Holocaust Remembrance in Australian Jewish Communities, 1945–2000". UWA Press. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2008. "School Ranking". Mychoiceschools.com.au/. Archived from the original on 20 April 2020. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "QS Best Student Cities 2024". QS. 19 July 2023. Archived from the original on 19 July 2023. Retrieved 19 July 2023. "World's top university cities revealed". RMIT News. RMIT University. 30 May 2008. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "WEHI: Our research partners". Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research. University of Melbourne. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2011. Cassidy, Caitlin (27 June 2023). "Three Aus Universities place in top 20". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Monash University". Times Higher Education (THE). Archived from the original on 21 March 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Group of Eight Australia". go8.edu.au. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2015. "RMIT University Rankings". Top Universities. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Excellence in Research Australia 2015: Physics research strongly recognised". Swindon University. 4 December 2015. Archived from the original on 12 January 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2020. "University of Melbourne's international student offers rise as its demand leaps". University of Melbourne. 12 January 2007. Archived from the original on 30 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "Department of Education and Early Childhood Development: About Us". Education Victoria. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Television – Communications – Travel Victoria: accommodation & visitor guide". Travelvictoria.com.au. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 21 January 2022. "Melbourne TV Guide – All TV Show times, All Channels – 9Entertainment". Yourtv.com.au. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 21 January 2022. "Victoria Members – Community Broadcasting Association of Australia". CBAA. Archived from the original on 19 February 2011. Retrieved 28 August 2010. Dunstan, David (12 November 2004). "The evolution of 'Clown Hall'". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2010. "Local Government Act 1989" (PDF). Pub Law Today. 1 July 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 November 2006. "Melbourne public hospitals and Metropolitan Health Services". health.vic.gov.au. Victorian State Government, Department of Health. 29 December 2006. Archived from the original on 21 November 2015. "The Precinct". Melbourne Biomedical Precinct. Archived from the original on 15 June 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Kevey, Donna (23 February 2022). "Australian Institute for Infectious Disease coming to world-leading Melbourne Biomedical Precinct". Newsroom. Archived from the original on 4 June 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Victorian Government Health Information Web site". health services, Victoria. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "Sunshine Coast and WA Country and Perth Women among Longest Life Expectancy in the World". health.gov.au. Department of Health and Ageing. 3 July 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2010. Jan Scheurer; Jeff Kenworthy; Peter Newman. "Most Liveable and Best Connected? The Economic Benefits of Investing in Public Transport in Melbourne" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2006. "Still addicted to cars". Herald Sun. Melbourne. 10 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "The cars that ate Melbourne". The Age. Melbourne. 14 February 2004. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "Australian Social Trends". abs.gov.au. 5 March 2014. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. "Road Management Act, regulations & codes". Vicroads. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Victoria's Road Network". VicRoads. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 5 October 2008. Mees, Paul; Groenhart, Lucy (2 January 2014). "Travel to work in Australian cities: 1976–2011". Australian Planner. 51 (1): 66–75. doi:10.1080/07293682.2013.795179. ISSN 0729-3682. S2CID 110693311. Mees, Paul (1 July 2005). "Privatization of Rail and Tram Services in Melbourne: What Went Wrong?". Transport Reviews. 25 (4): 433–449. doi:10.1080/0144164042000335779. ISSN 0144-1647. S2CID 59046845. "Parliament of Australia, Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Committee; Investment of Commonwealth and State funds in public passenger transport infrastructure". Australian Senate. Archived from the original on 6 October 2009. Lucas, Clay (14 January 2008). "Public transport makes inroads, but not beyond the fringe". The Age. Melbourne: Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 8 October 2010. "'Under the clocks' Melbourne's favourite meeting place in the 50s and 60s at Flinders Street Station, ca.1956 [picture]". Trove. "2017–18 PTV Annual Report" (PDF). Public Transport Victoria. 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Build, Victoria's Big (6 June 2022). "Construction starts on SRL East". Victoria's Big Build. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022. Build, Victoria's Big (15 December 2022). "Start of works, Sunshine Masterplan and Contract announcements". Victoria's Big Build. Archived from the original on 4 January 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Facts & figures – Yarra Trams". Yarra Trams. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2019. "Melbourne's Tram History". railpage.org.au. Archived from the original on 9 November 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008. "Metlink – Your guide to public transport in Melbourne and Victoria". Metlink. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "Visiting Melbourne and Victoria". Public Transport Victoria. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Victoria's Bus Plan (Report). Department of Transport Victoria State Government. 2021. "Melbourne Buses". getting-around-melbourne.com.au. Archived from the original on 17 September 2008. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "PTV Annual Report 2013-2014" (PDF). Public Transport Victoria. 11 September 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2015. Retrieved 8 November 2015. "Airport Traffic Data" (XLS). Bureau of Infrastructure & Transport Research Economics. 2022. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "Melbourne Airport – Maps of Melbourne Airport". Melbourneairport.com.au. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 21 January 2022. Build, Victoria's Big (31 August 2021). "Melbourne Airport Rail". Victoria's Big Build. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "Air Ambulance". Ambulance Victoria. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "Essendon Airport". Essendon Airport. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "Port of Melbourne Sets Shipping Record". Bernama. 13 June 2007. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 18 July 2008. "Dam Water Storage Levels". Melbourne Water. Archived from the original on 18 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2008. Bell, Agnes Paton (1965). Melbourne: John Batman's Village. Melbourne, Vic: Cassell Australia. Boldrewood, Rolf (1896). Old Melbourne Memories. Macmillan and Co. Borthwick, John Stephen; McGonigal, David (1990). Insight Guide: Melbourne. Prentice Hall Travel. ISBN 978-0-13-467713-2. Briggs, John Joseph (1852). The History of Melbourne, in the County of Derby: Including Biographical Notices of the Coke, Melbourne, and Hardinge Families. Bemrose & Son. Brown-May, Andrew; Swain, Shurlee (2005). The Encyclopedia of Melbourne. Melbourne, Vic: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521842341. Carroll, Brian (1972). Melbourne: An Illustrated History. Lansdowne. ISBN 978-0-7018-0195-3. Cecil, David (1954). Melbourne. Grosset's universal library. Bobbs-Merrill. LCCN 54009486.[permanent dead link] Cervero, Robert (1998). The Transit Metropolis: A Global Inquiry. Washington: Island Press. ISBN 9781559635912. Collins, Jock; Mondello, Letizia; Breheney, John; Childs, Tim (1990). Cosmopolitan Melbourne. Explore the world in one city. Rhodes, New South Wales: Big Box Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9579624-0-8. Coote, Maree (2003). The Melbourne Book: A History of Now (2009 ed.). Melbournestyle Books. ISBN 978-0-9757047-4-5. Jim Davidson, ed. (1986). The Sydney-Melbourne Book. North Sydney, New South Wales: Allen and Unwin. ISBN 978-0-86861-819-7. Lewis, Miles Bannatyne; Goad, Philip; Mayne, Alan (1994). Melbourne: The City's History and Development (2nd ed.). City of Melbourne. ISBN 978-0-949624-71-0. McClymont, David; Armstrong, Mark (2000). Lonely Planet Melbourne. Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-86450-124-7. Newnham, William Henry (1956). Melbourne: The Biography of a City. F. W. Cheshire. ISBN 9780855721442. LCCN 57032585. O'Hanlon, Seamus; Luckins, Tanja, eds. (2005). Go! Melbourne. Melbourne in the Sixties. Beaconsfield, Victoria: Melbourne Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-9757802-0-6. Priestley, Susan (1995). South Melbourne: A History. Melbourne University Press. ISBN 978-0-522-84664-5. Tout-Smith, Deborah, ed. (2009). Melbourne: A city of stories. Museum Victoria. ISBN 978-0-9803813-7-5. Melbourne at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Travel Official website of Tourism Victoria Guide to Melbourne from Tourism Australia General information About Melbourne from the Victorian Government site About Melbourne from the city centre local government site Melbourne Encyclopædia Britannica entry Greater Melbourne at Curlie Geographic data related to Melbourne at OpenStreetMap