Olomouc District (Czech: okres Olomouc) is a district in the Olomouc Region of the Czech Republic. Its capital is the city of Olomouc. Olomouc District is divided into four administrative districts of municipalities with extended competence: Olomouc, Litovel, Šternberk and Uničov. Cities and towns are marked in bold and market towns in italics: Babice - Bělkovice-Lašťany - Bílá Lhota - Bílsko - Blatec - Bohuňovice - Bouzov - Bukovany - Bystročice - Bystrovany - Červenka - Charváty - Cholina - Daskabát - Dlouhá Loučka - Dolany - Doloplazy - Domašov nad Bystřicí - Domašov u Šternberka - Drahanovice - Dub nad Moravou - Dubčany - Grygov - Haňovice - Hlásnice - Hlubočky - Hlušovice - Hněvotín - Hnojice - Horka nad Moravou - Horní Loděnice - Hraničné Petrovice - Huzová - Jívová - Komárov - Kožušany-Tážaly - Krčmaň - Křelov-Břuchotín - Liboš - Lipina - Lipinka - Litovel - Loučany - Loučka - Luběnice - Luká - Lutín - Lužice - Majetín - Medlov - Měrotín - Mladeč - Mladějovice - Moravský Beroun - Mrsklesy - Mutkov - Náklo - Náměšť na Hané - Norberčany - Nová Hradečná - Olbramice - Olomouc - Paseka - Pňovice - Přáslavice - Příkazy - Řídeč - Samotišky - Senice na Hané - Senička - Skrbeň - Slatinice - Slavětín - Štěpánov - Šternberk - Strukov - Střeň - Suchonice - Svésedlice - Štarnov - Šumvald - Těšetice - Tovéř - Troubelice - Tršice - Újezd - Uničov - Ústín - Velká Bystřice - Velký Týnec - Velký Újezd - Věrovany - Vilémov - Želechovice - Žerotín Part of the district area belongs to Libavá Military Training Area. The landscape is varied and rugged. The terrain is flat in the west and hilly in the east. The territory extends into five geomorphological mesoregions: Nízký Jeseník (east), Upper Morava Valley (centre), Zábřeh Highlands (west), Hanušovice Highlands (a small part in the north), and Mohelnice Depression (a negligible area in the north). The highest point of the district is the hill Fidlův kopec in Libavá Military Training Area with an elevation of 680 m (2,230 ft), the lowest point is the river bed of the Morava in Věrovany at 194 m (636 ft). From the total district area of 1,608.0 km2 (620.9 sq mi), agricultural land occupies 857.9 km2 (331.2 sq mi), forests occupy 499.0 km2 (192.7 sq mi), and water area occupies 17.3 km2 (6.7 sq mi). Forests cover 31.0% of the district's area. The most important river is the Morava, which flows through the territory from north to south. Is largest tributary in the district is the Bystřice. The Oder originates here and flows through the uninhabited part of the district to the east. Bodies of water are concentrated along the Morava, otherwise there are not many of them here. The largest body of water is Náklo; an artificial lake created by flooding a gravel quarry with an area of about 100 ha (250 acres). Almost the entire Litovelské Pomoraví Protected Landscape Area lies within the district. The largest employers with headquarters in Olomouc District and at least 1,000 employees are: The D35 motorway (part of the European route E442) runs across the district. The D46 motorway (European route E462) separates from it in Olomouc and leads to Vyškov. The Holy Trinity Column in Olomouc was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000 because it is the most outstanding example of a type of monument specific to central Europe. The most important monuments in the district, protected as national cultural monuments, are: Olomouc Castle Memorial to the victims of the World War II in Javoříčko Hradisko Monastery Church of Saint Maurice in Olomouc Set of baroque fountains and columns in Olomouc Bouzov Castle Šternberk Castle Villa Primavesi Basilica of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary in Olomouc-Svatý kopeček The best-preserved settlements, protected as monument reservations and monument zones, are: Olomouc (monument reservation) Příkazy (monument reservation) Litovel Šternberk Uničov Rataje Senička Five of the ten most visited tourist destinations of the Olomouc Region are located in Olomouc District, and four of them directly in the city of Olomouc. The most visited tourist destinations are the Olomouc Zoo, Collection greenhouses, botanical garden and rosarium in Olomouc, Olomouc Aquapark, Bouzov Castle, and Regional Museum in Olomouc. "Land use (as at 31 December)". Public database. Czech Statistical Office. Retrieved 2023-05-18. "Population of Municipalities – 1 January 2023". Czech Statistical Office. 2023-05-23. "Pískovna Náklo u Litovle" (in Czech). CzechTourism. Retrieved 2023-05-23. "Historický lexikon obcí České republiky 1869–2011 – Okres Olomouc" (in Czech). Czech Statistical Office. 2015-12-21. pp. 1–2. "Population Census 2021: Population by sex". Public Database. Czech Statistical Office. 2021-03-27. "Registr ekonomických subjektů". Business Register (in Czech). Czech Statistical Office. Retrieved 2023-05-23. "Holy Trinity Column in Olomouc". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. UNESCO. Retrieved 2023-07-02. "Výsledky vyhledávání: Národní kulturní památky, okres Olomouc". Ústřední seznam kulturních památek (in Czech). National Heritage Institute. Retrieved 2023-05-23. "Výsledky vyhledávání: Památkové rezervace, Památkové zóny, okres Olomouc". Ústřední seznam kulturních památek (in Czech). National Heritage Institute. Retrieved 2023-05-23. "Turisté mají v České republice nejraději zoologické zahrady, technické památky, koupání a Pražský hrad" (in Czech). CzechTourism. 2022-06-24. Retrieved 2023-05-23. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Olomouc District. Olomouc District – profile on the Czech Statistical Office website