Russian is an East Slavic language, spoken primarily in Russia. It is the native language of the Russians and belongs to the Indo-European language family. It is one of four living East Slavic languages, and is also a part of the larger Balto-Slavic languages. It was the de facto and de jure official language of the former Soviet Union. Russian has remained an official language in independent Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, and is still commonly used as a lingua franca in Ukraine, Moldova, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and to a lesser extent in the Baltic states and Israel. Russian has over 258 million total speakers worldwide. It is the most spoken Slavic language, and the most spoken native language in Europe, as well as the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia. It is the world's seventh-most spoken language by number of native speakers, and the world's ninth-most spoken language by total number of speakers. Russian is one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station, as well as one of the six official languages of the United Nations. Russian is written using the Russian alphabet of the Cyrillic script; it distinguishes between consonant phonemes with palatal secondary articulation and those without—the so-called "soft" and "hard" sounds. Almost every consonant has a hard or soft counterpart, and the distinction is a prominent feature of the language. Another important aspect is the reduction of unstressed vowels. Stress, which is often unpredictable, is not normally indicated orthographically, though an optional acute accent may be used to mark stress – such as to distinguish between homographic words (e.g. замо́к [zamók, 'lock'] and за́мок [zámok, 'castle']), or to indicate the proper pronunciation of uncommon words or names. Russian is an East Slavic language of the wider Indo-European family. It is a descendant of Old East Slavic, a language used in Kievan Rus', which was a loose conglomerate of East Slavic tribes from the late 9th to the mid-13th centuries. From the point of view of spoken language, its closest relatives are Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Rusyn, the other three languages in the East Slavic branch. In many places in eastern and southern Ukraine and throughout Belarus, these languages are spoken interchangeably, and in certain areas traditional bilingualism resulted in language mixtures such as Surzhyk in eastern Ukraine and Trasianka in Belarus. An East Slavic Old Novgorod dialect, although it vanished during the 15th or 16th century, is sometimes considered to have played a significant role in the formation of modern Russian. Also, Russian has notable lexical similarities with Bulgarian due to a common Church Slavonic influence on both languages, but because of later interaction in the 19th and 20th centuries, Bulgarian grammar differs markedly from Russian. In the 19th century (in Russia until 1917), the language was often called "Great Russian" to distinguish it from Belarusian, which was then called "White Russian", and Ukrainian, then called "Little Russian" in the Russian Empire.[citation needed] The vocabulary (mainly abstract and literary words), principles of word formations, and, to some extent, inflections and literary style of Russian have been also influenced by Church Slavonic, a developed and partly Russified form of the South Slavic Old Church Slavonic language used by the Russian Orthodox Church. However, the East Slavic forms have tended to be used exclusively in the various dialects that are experiencing a rapid decline. In some cases, both the East Slavic and the Church Slavonic forms are in use, with many different meanings.[citation needed] Over the course of centuries, the vocabulary and literary style of Russian have also been influenced by Western and Central European languages such as Greek, Latin, Polish, Dutch, German, French, Italian, and English, and to a lesser extent the languages to the south and the east: Uralic, Turkic, Persian, Arabic, and Hebrew. According to the Defense Language Institute in Monterey, California, Russian is classified as a level III language in terms of learning difficulty for native English speakers, requiring approximately 1,100 hours of immersion instruction to achieve intermediate fluency. It is also regarded by the United States Intelligence Community as a "hard target" language, due to both its difficulty to master for English speakers and its critical role in U.S. world policy.[citation needed] Feudal divisions and conflicts created obstacles between the Russian principalities before and especially during Mongol rule. This strengthened dialectal differences, and for a while, prevented the emergence of a standardized national language. The formation of the unified and centralized Russian state in the 15th and 16th centuries, and the gradual re-emergence of a common political, economic, and cultural space created the need for a common standard language. The initial impulse for standardization came from the government bureaucracy for the lack of a reliable tool of communication in administrative, legal, and judicial affairs became an obvious practical problem. The earliest attempts at standardizing Russian were made based on the so-called Moscow official or chancery language, during the 15th to 17th centuries. Since then, the trend of language policy in Russia has been standardization in both the restricted sense of reducing dialectical barriers between ethnic Russians, and the broader sense of expanding the use of Russian alongside or in favour of other languages. The current standard form of Russian is generally regarded as the modern Russian literary language (современный русский литературный язык – "sovremenny russky literaturny yazyk"). It arose at the beginning of the 18th century with the modernization reforms of the Russian state under the rule of Peter the Great and developed from the Moscow (Middle or Central Russian) dialect substratum under the influence of some of the previous century's Russian chancery language. Mikhail Lomonosov compiled the first book of Russian grammar aimed at standardization in 1755. The Russian Academy's first explanatory Russian dictionary appeared in 1783. In the 18th and late 19th centuries, a period known as the "Golden Age" of Russian Literature, the grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation of the Russian language in a standardized literary form emerged.[citation needed] Prior to the Bolshevik Revolution, the spoken form of the Russian language was that of the nobility and the urban bourgeoisie. Russian peasants, the great majority of the population, continued to speak in their own dialects. However, the peasants' speech was never systematically studied, as it was generally regarded by philologists as simply a source of folklore and an object of curiosity. This was acknowledged by the noted Russian dialectologist Nikolai Karinsky, who toward the end of his life wrote: "Scholars of Russian dialects mostly studied phonetics and morphology. Some scholars and collectors compiled local dictionaries. We have almost no studies of lexical material or the syntax of Russian dialects." After 1917, Marxist linguists had no interest in the multiplicity of peasant dialects and regarded their language as a relic of the rapidly disappearing past that was not worthy of scholarly attention. Nakhimovsky quotes the Soviet academicians A.M Ivanov and L.P Yakubinsky, writing in 1930: The language of peasants has a motley diversity inherited from feudalism. On its way to becoming proletariat peasantry brings to the factory and the industrial plant their local peasant dialects with their phonetics, grammar, and vocabulary, and the very process of recruiting workers from peasants and the mobility of the worker population generate another process: the liquidation of peasant inheritance by way of leveling the particulars of local dialects. On the ruins of peasant multilingual, in the context of developing heavy industry, a qualitatively new entity can be said to emerge—the general language of the working class... capitalism has the tendency of creating the general urban language of a given society. By the mid-20th century, such dialects were forced out with the introduction of the compulsory education system that was established by the Soviet government.[citation needed] Despite the formalization of Standard Russian, some nonstandard dialectal features (such as fricative [ɣ] in Southern Russian dialects) are still observed in colloquial speech.[citation needed] In 2010, there were 259.8 million speakers of Russian in the world: in Russia – 137.5 million, in the CIS and Baltic countries – 93.7 million, in Eastern Europe – 12.9 million, Western Europe – 7.3 million, Asia – 2.7 million, in the Middle East and North Africa – 1.3 million, Sub-Saharan Africa – 0.1 million, Latin America – 0.2 million, U.S., Canada, Australia, and New Zealand – 4.1 million speakers. Therefore, the Russian language is the seventh-largest in the world by the number of speakers, after English, Mandarin, Hindi-Urdu, Spanish, French, Arabic, and Portuguese. Russian is one of the six official languages of the United Nations. Education in Russian is still a popular choice for both Russian as a second language (RSL) and native speakers in Russia, and in many former Soviet republics. Russian is still seen as an important language for children to learn in most of the former Soviet republics. In Belarus, Russian is a second state language alongside Belarusian per the Constitution of Belarus. 77% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 67% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. According to the 2019 Belarusian census, out of 9,413,446 inhabitants of the country, 5,094,928 (54.1% of the total population) named Belarusian as their native language, with 61.2% of ethnic Belarusians and 54.5% of ethnic Poles declaring Belarusian as their native language. In everyday life in the Belarusian society the Russian language prevails, so according to the 2019 census 6,718,557 people (71.4% of the total population) stated that they speak Russian at home, for ethnic Belarusians this share is 61.4%, for Russians — 97.2%, for Ukrainians — 89.0%, for Poles — 52.4%, and for Jews — 96.6%; 2,447,764 people (26.0% of the total population) stated that the language they usually speak at home is Belarusian, among ethnic Belarusians this share is 28.5%; the highest share of those who speak Belarusian at home is among ethnic Poles — 46.0%. In Estonia Russian is spoken by 29.6% of the population according to a 2011 estimate from the World Factbook, and is officially considered a foreign language. School education in the Russian language is a very contentious point in Estonian politics and as of 2022 the parliament has approved to close up all Russian language schools and kindergartens by the school year. The transition to only Estonian language schools/kindergartens will start in the school year. In Latvia, Russian is officially considered a foreign language. 55% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 26% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. On February 18, 2012, Latvia held a constitutional referendum on whether to adopt Russian as a second official language. According to the Central Election Commission, 74.8% voted against, 24.9% voted for and the voter turnout was 71.1%. Starting in 2019, instruction in Russian will be gradually discontinued in private colleges and universities in Latvia, and in general instruction in Latvian public high schools. On 29 September 2022, Saeima passed in the final reading amendments that state that all schools and kindergartens in the country are to transition to education in Latvian. From 2025, all children will be taught in Latvian only. On 28 September 2023, Latvian deputies approved The National Security Concept, according to which from January 1, 2026, all content created by Latvian public media (including LSM) should be only in Latvian or a language that "belongs to the European cultural space". The financing of Russian-language content by the state will cease, which the concept says create a "unified information space". However, one inevitable consequence would be the closure of public media broadcasts in Russian on LTV and Latvian Radio, as well as the closure of LSM's Russian-language service. In Lithuania, Russian has no official or legal status, but the use of the language has some presence in certain areas. A large part of the population, especially the older generations, can speak Russian as a foreign language. However, English has replaced Russian as lingua franca in Lithuania and around 80% of young people speak English as their first foreign language. In contrast to the other two Baltic states, Lithuania has a relatively small Russian-speaking minority (5.0% as of 2008). According to the 2011 Lithuanian census, Russian was the native language for 7.2% of the population. In Moldova, Russian was considered to be the language of interethnic communication under a Soviet-era law. On 21 January 2021, the Constitutional Court of Moldova declared the law unconstitutional and deprived Russian of the status of the language of interethnic communication. 50% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 19% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. According to the 2014 Moldovan census, Russians accounted for 4.1% of Moldova's population, 9.4% of the population declared Russian as their native language, and 14.5% said they usually spoke Russian. According to the 2010 census in Russia, Russian language skills were indicated by 138 million people (99.4% of the respondents), while according to the 2002 census – 142.6 million people (99.2% of the respondents). In Ukraine, Russian is a significant minority language. According to estimates from Demoskop Weekly, in 2004 there were 14,400,000 native speakers of Russian in the country, and 29 million active speakers. 65% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 38% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. On September 5, 2017, Ukraine's Parliament passed a new education law which requires all schools to teach at least partially in Ukrainian, with provisions while allow indigenous languages and languages of national minorities to be used alongside the national language. The law faced criticism from officials in Russia and Hungary. The 2019 Law of Ukraine "On protecting the functioning of the Ukrainian language as the state language" gives priority to the Ukrainian language in more than 30 spheres of public life: in particular in public administration, media, education, science, culture, advertising, services. The law does not regulate private communication. A poll conducted in March 2022 by RATING in the territory controlled by Ukraine found that 83% of the respondents believe that Ukrainian should be the only state language of Ukraine. This opinion dominates in all macro-regions, age and language groups. On the other hand, before the war, almost a quarter of Ukrainians were in favour of granting Russian the status of the state language, while after the beginning of Russia's invasion the support for the idea dropped to just 7%. In peacetime, the idea of raising the status of Russian was traditionally supported by residents of the south and east. But even in these regions, only a third of the respondents were in favour, and after Russia's full-scale invasion, their number dropped by almost half. According to the survey carried out by RATING in August 2023 in the territory controlled by Ukraine and among the refugees, almost 60% of the polled usually speak Ukrainian at home, about 30% – Ukrainian and Russian, only 9% – Russian. Since March 2022, the use of Russian in everyday life has been noticeably decreasing. For 82% of respondents, Ukrainian is their mother tongue, and for 16%, Russian is their mother tongue. IDPs and refugees living abroad are more likely to use both languages for communication or speak Russian. Nevertheless, more than 70% of IDPs and refugees consider Ukrainian to be their native language. In the 20th century, Russian was a mandatory language taught in the schools of the members of the old Warsaw Pact and in other countries that used to be satellites of the USSR. According to the Eurobarometer 2005 survey, fluency in Russian remains fairly high (20–40%) in some countries, in particular former Warsaw Pact countries. Significant Russian-speaking groups also exist in Western Europe. These have been fed by several waves of immigrants since the beginning of the 20th century, each with its own flavor of language. The United Kingdom, Germany, Finland, Spain, Portugal, France, Italy, Belgium, Greece, Norway, and Austria have significant Russian-speaking communities.[citation needed] In Armenia, Russian has no official status, but it is recognized as a minority language under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. 30% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 2% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. In Azerbaijan, Russian has no official status, but is a lingua franca of the country. 26% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 5% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. In China, Russian has no official status, but it is spoken by the small Russian communities in the northeastern Heilongjiang and the northwestern Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. Russian was also the main foreign language taught in school in China between 1949 and 1964. In Georgia, Russian has no official status, but it is recognized as a minority language under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Russian is the language of 9% of the population according to the World Factbook. Ethnologue cites Russian as the country's de facto working language. In Kazakhstan, Russian is not a state language, but according to article 7 of the Constitution of Kazakhstan its usage enjoys equal status to that of the Kazakh language in state and local administration. The 2009 census reported that 10,309,500 people, or 84.8% of the population aged 15 and above, could read and write well in Russian, and understand the spoken language. In October 2023, Kazakhstan drafted a media law aimed at increasing the use of the Kazakh language over Russian, the law stipulates that the share of the state language on television and radio should increase from 50% to 70%, at a rate of 5% per year, starting in 2025. In Kyrgyzstan, Russian is a co-official language per article 5 of the Constitution of Kyrgyzstan. The 2009 census states that 482,200 people speak Russian as a native language, or 8.99% of the population. Additionally, 1,854,700 residents of Kyrgyzstan aged 15 and above fluently speak Russian as a second language, or 49.6% of the population in the age group. In Tajikistan, Russian is the language of inter-ethnic communication under the Constitution of Tajikistan and is permitted in official documentation. 28% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 7% used it as the main language with family, friends or at work. The World Factbook notes that Russian is widely used in government and business. In Turkmenistan, Russian lost its status as the official lingua franca in 1996. Among 12% of the population who grew up in the Soviet era can speak Russian, other generations of citizens that do not have any knowledge of Russian. Primary and secondary education by Russian is almost non-existent. Nevertheless, the Turkmen state press and newspaper Neytralny Turkmenistan regularly publish material version in Russian-language, and there are schools like Joint Turkmen-Russian Secondary School.[citation needed] In Uzbekistan, Russian is the language of inter-ethnic communication. It has some official roles, being permitted in official documentation and is the lingua franca of the country and the language of the elite. Russian is spoken by 14.2% of the population according to an undated estimate from the World Factbook. In 2005, Russian was the most widely taught foreign language in Mongolia, and was compulsory in Year 7 onward as a second foreign language in 2006. Around 1.5 million Israelis spoke Russian as of 2017. The Israeli press and websites regularly publish material in Russian and there are Russian newspapers, television stations, schools, and social media outlets based in the country. There is an Israeli TV channel mainly broadcasting in Russian with Israel Plus. See also Russian language in Israel. Russian is also spoken as a second language by a small number of people in Afghanistan. In Vietnam, Russian has been added in the elementary curriculum along with Chinese and Japanese and were named as "first foreign languages" for Vietnamese students to learn, on equal footing with English. The Russian language was first introduced in North America when Russian explorers voyaged into Alaska and claimed it for Russia during the 18th century. Although most Russian colonists left after the United States bought the land in 1867, a handful stayed and preserved the Russian language in this region to this day, although only a few elderly speakers of this unique dialect are left. In Nikolaevsk, Alaska, Russian is more spoken than English. Sizable Russian-speaking communities also exist in North America, especially in large urban centers of the US and Canada, such as New York City, Philadelphia, Boston, Los Angeles, Nashville, San Francisco, Seattle, Spokane, Toronto, Calgary, Baltimore, Miami, Chicago, Denver, and Cleveland. In a number of locations they issue their own newspapers, and live in ethnic enclaves (especially the generation of immigrants who started arriving in the early 1960s). Only about 25% of them are ethnic Russians, however. Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the overwhelming majority of Russophones in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn in New York City were Russian-speaking Jews. Afterward, the influx from the countries of the former Soviet Union changed the statistics somewhat, with ethnic Russians and Ukrainians immigrating along with some more Russian Jews and Central Asians. According to the United States Census, in 2007 Russian was the primary language spoken in the homes of over 850,000 individuals living in the United States. In the second half of the 20th century, Russian was the most popular foreign language in Cuba. Besides being taught at universities and schools, there were also educational programs on the radio and TV. An estimated 200,000 people speak the Russian language in Cuba, on the account that more than 23,000 Cubans who took higher studies in the former Soviet Union and later in Russia, and another important group of people who studied at military schools and technologists.[citation needed] Russian is one of the official languages (or has similar status and interpretation must be provided into Russian) of the following: United Nations International Atomic Energy Agency World Health Organization International Civil Aviation Organization UNESCO World Intellectual Property Organization International Telecommunication Union World Meteorological Organization Food and Agriculture Organization International Fund for Agricultural Development International Criminal Court International Olympic Committee Universal Postal Union World Bank Commonwealth of Independent States Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Eurasian Economic Community Collective Security Treaty Organization Antarctic Treaty Secretariat International Organization for Standardization International Mathematical Olympiad The Russian language is also one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station – NASA astronauts who serve alongside Russian cosmonauts usually take Russian language courses. This practice goes back to the Apollo–Soyuz mission, which first flew in 1975.[citation needed] In March 2013, Russian was found to be the second-most used language on websites after English. Russian was the language of 5.9% of all websites, slightly ahead of German and far behind English (54.7%). Russian was used not only on 89.8% of .ru sites, but also on 88.7% of sites with the former Soviet Union domain .su. Websites in former Soviet Union member states also used high levels of Russian: 79.0% in Ukraine, 86.9% in Belarus, 84.0% in Kazakhstan, 79.6% in Uzbekistan, 75.9% in Kyrgyzstan and 81.8% in Tajikistan. However, Russian was the sixth-most used language on the top 1,000 sites, behind English, Chinese, French, German, and Japanese. Russian is a rather homogeneous language, in dialectal variation, due to the early political centralization under Moscow's rule, compulsory education, mass migration from rural to urban areas in the 20th century, and other factors. The standard language is used in written and spoken form almost everywhere in the country, from Kaliningrad and Saint Petersburg in the West to Vladivostok and Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky in the East, the enormous distance between notwithstanding.[citation needed] Despite leveling after 1900, especially in matters of vocabulary and phonetics, a number of dialects still exist in Russia. Some linguists divide the dialects of Russian into two primary regional groupings, "Northern" and "Southern", with Moscow lying on the zone of transition between the two. Others divide the language into three groupings, Northern, Central (or Middle), and Southern, with Moscow lying in the Central region. All dialects are also divided into two main chronological categories: the dialects of primary formation (the territory of the Grand Duchy of Moscow roughly consists of the modern Central and Northwestern Federal districts) and secondary formation (other territories where Russian was brought by migrants from primary formation territories or adopted by the local population). Dialectology within Russia recognizes dozens of smaller-scale variants. The dialects often show distinct and non-standard features of pronunciation and intonation, vocabulary, and grammar. Some of these are relics of ancient usage now completely discarded by the standard language.[citation needed] The Northern Russian dialects and those spoken along the Volga River typically pronounce unstressed /o/ clearly, a phenomenon called okanye (оканье). Besides the absence of vowel reduction, some dialects have high or diphthongal /e⁓i̯ɛ/ in place of Proto-Slavic *ě and /o⁓u̯ɔ/ in stressed closed syllables (as in Ukrainian) instead of Standard Russian /e/ and /o/. Another Northern dialectal morphological feature is a post-posed definite article -to, -ta, -te similarly to that existing in Bulgarian and Macedonian. In the Southern Russian dialects, instances of unstressed /e/ and /a/ following palatalized consonants and preceding a stressed syllable are not reduced to [ɪ] (as occurs in the Moscow dialect), being instead pronounced [a] in such positions (e.g. несли is pronounced [nʲaˈslʲi], not [nʲɪsˈlʲi]) – this is called yakanye (яканье). Consonants include a fricative /ɣ/, a semivowel /w⁓u̯/ and /x⁓xv⁓xw/, whereas the Standard and Northern dialects have the consonants /ɡ/, /v/, and final /l/ and /f/, respectively. The morphology features a palatalized final /tʲ/ in 3rd person forms of verbs (this is unpalatalized in the Standard and Northern dialects). Some of these features such as akanye and yakanye, a debuccalized or lenited /ɡ/, a semivowel /w⁓u̯/ and palatalized final /tʲ/ in 3rd person forms of verbs are also present in modern Belarusian and some dialects of Ukrainian (Eastern Polesian), indicating a linguistic continuum.[citation needed] The city of Veliky Novgorod has historically displayed a feature called chokanye or tsokanye (чоканье or цоканье), in which /tɕ/ and /ts/ were switched or merged. So, цапля (tsaplya, 'heron') has been recorded as чапля (chaplya). Also, the second palatalization of velars did not occur there, so the so-called ě² (from the Proto-Slavic diphthong *ai) did not cause /k, ɡ, x/ to shift to /ts, dz, s/; therefore, where Standard Russian has цепь ('chain'), the form кепь [kʲepʲ] is attested in earlier texts.[citation needed] Among the first to study Russian dialects was Lomonosov in the 18th century. In the 19th, Vladimir Dal compiled the first dictionary that included dialectal vocabulary. Detailed mapping of Russian dialects began at the turn of the 20th century. In modern times, the monumental Dialectological Atlas of the Russian Language (Диалектологический атлас русского языка – Dialektologichesky atlas russkogo yazyka), was published in three folio volumes 1986–1989, after four decades of preparatory work.[citation needed] During the Proto-Slavic (Common Slavic) times all Slavs spoke one mutually intelligible language or group of dialects. There is a high degree of mutual intelligibility between Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian, and a moderate degree of it in all modern Slavic languages, at least at the conversational level. Balachka, a Ukrainian dialect spoken in Krasnodar region, Don, Kuban, and Terek, brought by relocated Cossacks in 1793 and is based on the so-called "southwest Russian" dialect (Ukrainian dialect). During the Russification of the aforementioned regions in the 1920s to 1950s, it was replaced by the Russian language. Esperanto has some words of Russian and Slavic origin and some features of its grammar could be derived from Russian. Fenya, a criminal argot of ancient origin, with Russian grammar, but with distinct vocabulary Lojban, Russian is one of its six source languages, weighed for the number of Russian speakers in 1985. Medny Aleut language, an extinct mixed language that was spoken on Bering Island and is characterized by its Aleut nouns and Russian verbs Padonkaffsky jargon, a slang language developed by padonki of Runet Quelia, a macaronic language with Russian-derived basic structure and part of the lexicon (mainly nouns and verbs) borrowed from German Runglish, a Russian-English pidgin. This word is also used by English speakers to describe the way in which Russians attempt to speak English using Russian morphology or syntax. Russenorsk, an extinct pidgin language with mostly Russian vocabulary and mostly Norwegian grammar, used for communication between Russians and Norwegian traders in the Pomor trade in Finnmark and the Kola Peninsula Surzhyk, a range of mixed (macaronic) sociolects of Ukrainian and Russian languages used in certain regions of Ukraine and adjacent lands. Trasianka, a heavily russified variety of Belarusian used by a large portion of the rural population in Belarus Taimyr Pidgin Russian, spoken by the Nganasan on the Taimyr Peninsula Russian is written using a Cyrillic alphabet. The Russian alphabet consists of 33 letters. The following table gives their forms, along with IPA values for each letter's typical sound: Older letters of the Russian alphabet include ⟨ѣ⟩, which merged to ⟨е⟩ (/je/ or /ʲe/); ⟨і⟩ and ⟨ѵ⟩, which both merged to ⟨и⟩ (/i/); ⟨ѳ⟩, which merged to ⟨ф⟩ (/f/); ⟨ѫ⟩, which merged to ⟨у⟩ (/u/); ⟨ѭ⟩, which merged to ⟨ю⟩ (/ju/ or /ʲu/); and ⟨ѧ⟩ and ⟨ѩ⟩, which later were graphically reshaped into ⟨я⟩ and merged phonetically to /ja/ or /ʲa/. While these older letters have been abandoned at one time or another, they may be used in this and related articles. The yers ⟨ъ⟩ and ⟨ь⟩ originally indicated the pronunciation of ultra-short or reduced /ŭ/, /ĭ/. Because of many technical restrictions in computing and also because of the unavailability of Cyrillic keyboards abroad, Russian is often transliterated using the Latin alphabet. For example, мороз ('frost') is transliterated moroz, and мышь ('mouse'), mysh or myš'. Once commonly used by the majority of those living outside Russia, transliteration is being used less frequently by Russian-speaking typists in favor of the extension of Unicode character encoding, which fully incorporates the Russian alphabet. Free programs are available offering this Unicode extension, which allow users to type Russian characters, even on Western 'QWERTY' keyboards. The Russian alphabet has many systems of character encoding. KOI8-R was designed by the Soviet government and was intended to serve as the standard encoding. This encoding was and still is widely used in UNIX-like operating systems. Nevertheless, the spread of MS-DOS and OS/2 (IBM866), Classic Mac OS (ISO/IEC 8859-5) and Microsoft Windows (CP1251) meant the proliferation of many different encodings as de facto standards, with Windows-1251 becoming a de facto standard in Russian Internet and e-mail communication during the period of roughly 1995–2005.[citation needed] All the obsolete 8-bit encodings are rarely used in the communication protocols and text-exchange data formats, having been mostly replaced with UTF-8. A number of encoding conversion applications were developed. "iconv" is an example that is supported by most versions of Linux, macOS and some other operating systems; but converters are rarely needed unless accessing texts created more than a few years ago.[citation needed] In addition to the modern Russian alphabet, Unicode (and thus UTF-8) encodes the Early Cyrillic alphabet (which is very similar to the Greek alphabet), and all other Slavic and non-Slavic but Cyrillic-based alphabets.[citation needed] The current spelling follows the major reform of 1918, and the final codification of 1956. An update proposed in the late 1990s has met a hostile reception, and has not been formally adopted. The punctuation, originally based on Byzantine Greek, was in the 17th and 18th centuries reformulated on the French and German models.[citation needed] According to the Institute of Russian Language of the Russian Academy of Sciences, an optional acute accent (знак ударения) may, and sometimes should, be used to mark stress. For example, it is used to distinguish between otherwise identical words, especially when context does not make it obvious: замо́к (zamók – "lock") – за́мок (zámok – "castle"), сто́ящий (stóyashchy – "worthwhile") – стоя́щий (stoyáshchy – "standing"), чудно́ (chudnó – "this is odd") – чу́дно (chúdno – "this is marvellous"), молоде́ц (molodéts – "well done!") – мо́лодец (mólodets – "fine young man"), узна́ю (uznáyu – "I shall learn it") – узнаю́ (uznayú – "I recognize it"), отреза́ть (otrezát – "to be cutting") – отре́зать (otrézat – "to have cut"); to indicate the proper pronunciation of uncommon words, especially personal and family names, like афе́ра (aféra, "scandal, affair"), гу́ру (gúru, "guru"), Гарси́я (García), Оле́ша (Olésha), Фе́рми (Fermi), and to show which is the stressed word in a sentence, for example Ты́ съел печенье? (Tý syel pechenye? – "Was it you who ate the cookie?") – Ты съе́л печенье? (Ty syél pechenye? – "Did you eat the cookie?) – Ты съел пече́нье? (Ty syel pechénye? "Was it the cookie you ate?"). Stress marks are mandatory in lexical dictionaries and books for children or Russian learners.[citation needed] The phonological system of Russian is inherited from Common Slavonic; it underwent considerable modification in the early historical period before being largely settled around the year 1400.[citation needed] The language possesses five vowels (or six, under the St. Petersburg Phonological School), which are written with different letters depending on whether the preceding consonant is palatalized. The consonants typically come in plain vs. palatalized pairs, which are traditionally called hard and soft. The hard consonants are often velarized, especially before front vowels, as in Irish and Marshallese. The standard language, based on the Moscow dialect, possesses heavy stress and moderate variation in pitch. Stressed vowels are somewhat lengthened, while unstressed vowels tend to be reduced to near-close vowels or an unclear schwa.[citation needed] The Russian syllable structure can be quite complex, with both initial and final consonant clusters of up to four consecutive sounds. Using a formula with V standing for the nucleus (vowel) and C for each consonant, the maximal structure can be described as follows: (C)(C)(C)(C)V(C)(C)(C)(C) However, Russian has a constraint on syllabification such that syllables cannot span multiple morphemes.[citation needed] Clusters of four consonants are not very common, especially within a morpheme. Some examples are: взгляд ([vzglʲat] vzglyad, 'glance'), государств ([gəsʊˈdarstf] gosudarstv, 'of the states'), строительств ([strɐˈitʲɪlʲstf] stroitelstv, 'of the constructions').[citation needed] Russian is notable for its distinction based on palatalization of most of its consonants. The phoneme /ts/ is generally considered to be always hard; however, loan words such as Цюрих and some other neologisms contain /tsʲ/ through the word-building processes (e.g. фрицёнок, шпицята). Palatalization means that the center of the tongue is raised during and after the articulation of the consonant. In the case of /tʲ/ and /dʲ/, the tongue is raised enough to produce slight frication (affricate sounds; cf. Belarusian ць, дзь, or Polish ć, dź). The sounds /t, d, ts, s, z, n, rʲ/ are dental, that is, pronounced with the tip of the tongue against the teeth rather than against the alveolar ridge. According to some linguists, the "plain" consonants are velarized as in Irish, something which is most noticeable when it involves a labial before a hard vowel, such as мы, /mˠiː/, "we" , or бэ, /bˠɛ/, "the letter Б". Russian has five or six vowels in stressed syllables, /i, u, e, o, a/, and in some analyses /ɨ/, but in most cases these vowels have merged to only two to four vowels when unstressed: /i, u, a/ (or /ɨ, u, a/) after hard consonants and /i, u/ after soft ones. These vowels have several allophones, which are displayed on the diagram to the right. Russian has preserved an Indo-European synthetic-inflectional structure, although considerable leveling has occurred. Russian grammar encompasses: a highly fusional morphology a syntax that, for the literary language, is the conscious fusion of three elements: a polished vernacular foundation;[clarification needed] a Church Slavonic inheritance; a Western European style.[clarification needed] The spoken language has been influenced by the literary one but continues to preserve characteristic forms. The dialects show various non-standard grammatical features, some of which are archaisms or descendants of old forms since discarded by the literary language.[citation needed] In terms of actual grammar, there are three tenses in Russian – past, present, and future – and each verb has two aspects (perfective and imperfective). Russian nouns each have a gender – either feminine, masculine, or neuter, chiefly indicated by spelling at the end of the word. Words change depending on both their gender and function in the sentence. Russian has six cases: Nominative (for the grammatical subject), Accusative (for direct objects), Dative (for indirect objects), Genitive (to indicate possession or relation), Instrumental (to indicate 'with' or 'by means of'), and Prepositional (used after the locative prepositions в "in", на "on", о "about", при "in the presence of"). Verbs of motion in Russian – such as 'go', 'walk', 'run', 'swim', and 'fly' – use the imperfective or perfective form to indicate a single or return trip, and also use a multitude of prefixes to add shades of meaning to the verb. Such verbs also take on different forms to distinguish between concrete and abstract motion. The number of listed words or entries in some of the major dictionaries published during the past two centuries, are as follows: No single periodization is universally accepted, but the history of the Russian language is sometimes divided into the following periods: Old Russian or Old East Slavic (until the 14th or 15th century) Middle Russian (14th or 15th century until the 17th or 18th century) Modern Russian (17th century or 18th century to the present) The history of the Russian language is also divided into Old Russian from the 11th to 17th centuries, followed by Modern Russian. Judging by the historical records, by approximately 1000 AD the predominant ethnic group over much of modern European Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus was the Eastern branch of the Slavs, speaking a closely related group of dialects. The political unification of this region into Kievan Rus' in about 880, from which modern Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus trace their origins, established Old East Slavic as a literary and commercial language. It was soon followed by the adoption of Christianity in 988 and the introduction of the South Slavic Old Church Slavonic as the liturgical and official language. Borrowings and calques from Byzantine Greek began to enter the Old East Slavic and spoken dialects at this time, which in their turn modified the Old Church Slavonic as well.[citation needed] Dialectal differentiation accelerated after the breakup of Kievan Rus' in approximately 1100. On the territories of modern Belarus and Ukraine emerged Ruthenian and in modern Russia medieval Russian. They became distinct since the 13th century, i.e. following the division of the land between the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Poland in the west and independent Novgorod and Pskov feudal republics plus numerous small duchies (which came to be vassals of the Tatars) in the east.[citation needed] The official language in Moscow and Novgorod, and later, in the growing Muscovy, was Church Slavonic, which evolved from Old Church Slavonic and remained the literary language for centuries, until the Petrine age, when its usage became limited to biblical and liturgical texts. Russian developed under a strong influence of Church Slavonic until the close of the 17th century; afterward the influence reversed, leading to corruption of liturgical texts.[citation needed] The political reforms of Peter the Great (Пётр Вели́кий, Pyótr Velíky) were accompanied by a reform of the alphabet, and achieved their goal of secularization and Westernization. Blocks of specialized vocabulary were adopted from the languages of Western Europe. By 1800, a significant portion of the gentry spoke French daily, and German sometimes. Many Russian novels of the 19th century, e.g. Leo Tolstoy's (Лев Толсто́й) War and Peace, contain entire paragraphs and even pages in French with no translation given, with an assumption that educated readers would not need one.[citation needed] The modern literary language is usually considered to date from the time of Alexander Pushkin (Алекса́ндр Пу́шкин) in the first third of the 19th century. Pushkin revolutionized Russian literature by rejecting archaic grammar and vocabulary (so-called высо́кий стиль — "high style") in favor of grammar and vocabulary found in the spoken language of the time. Even modern readers of younger age may only experience slight difficulties understanding some words in Pushkin's texts, since relatively few words used by Pushkin have become archaic or changed meaning. In fact, many expressions used by Russian writers of the early 19th century, in particular Pushkin, Mikhail Lermontov (Михаи́л Ле́рмонтов), Nikolai Gogol (Никола́й Го́голь), Aleksander Griboyedov (Алекса́ндр Грибое́дов), became proverbs or sayings which can be frequently found even in modern Russian colloquial speech.[citation needed] Winter Evening Reading of excerpt of Pushkin's "Winter Evening" (Зимний вечер), 1825. Problems playing this file? See media help. The political upheavals of the early 20th century and the wholesale changes of political ideology gave written Russian its modern appearance after the spelling reform of 1918. Political circumstances and Soviet accomplishments in military, scientific, and technological matters (especially cosmonautics), gave Russian a worldwide prestige, especially during the mid-20th century.[citation needed] During the Soviet period, the policy toward the languages of the various other ethnic groups fluctuated in practice. Though each of the constituent republics had its own official language, the unifying role and superior status was reserved for Russian, although it was declared the official language only in 1990. Following the break-up of the USSR in 1991, several of the newly independent states have encouraged their native languages, which has partly reversed the privileged status of Russian, though its role as the language of post-Soviet national discourse throughout the region has continued.[citation needed] The Russian language in the world declined after 1991 due to the collapse of the Soviet Union and decrease in the number of Russians in the world and diminution of the total population in Russia (where Russian is an official language), however this[clarification needed] has since been reversed. According to figures published in 2006 in the journal "Demoskop Weekly" research deputy director of Research Center for Sociological Research of the Ministry of Education and Science (Russia) Arefyev A. L., the Russian language is gradually losing its position in the world in general, and in Russia in particular. In 2012, A. L. Arefyev published a new study "Russian language at the turn of the 20th–21st centuries", in which he confirmed his conclusion about the trend of weakening of the Russian language after the Soviet Union's collapse in various regions of the world (findings published in 2013 in the journal "Demoskop Weekly"). In the countries of the former Soviet Union the Russian language was being replaced or used in conjunction with local languages. Currently, the number of speakers of Russian in the world depends on the number of Russians in the world and total population in Russia. Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Russian: Все люди рождаются свободными и равными в своем достоинстве и правах. Они наделены разумом и совестью и должны поступать в отношении друг друга в духе братства. The romanization of the text into Latin alphabet: Vse lyudi rozhdayutsya svobodnymi i ravnymi v svoyem dostoinstve i pravakh. Oni nadeleny razumom i sovest'yu i dolzhny postupat' v otnoshenii drug druga v dukhe bratstva. Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in English: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. Russia portal Soviet Union portal Language portal List of English words of Russian origin List of Russian language topics List of countries and territories where Russian is an official language Computer Russification On the history of using "русский" ("russkiy") and "российский" ("rossiyskiy") as the Russian adjectives denoting "Russian", see: Oleg Trubachyov. 2005. Русский – Российский. История, динамика, идеология двух атрибутов нации (pp. 216–227). В поисках единства. Взгляд филолога на проблему истоков Руси., 2005. РУССКИЙ – РОССИЙСКИЙ (in Russian). Archived from the original on February 18, 2014. Retrieved January 25, 2014.. On the 1830s change in the Russian name of the Russian language and its causes, see: Tomasz Kamusella. 2012. The Change of the Name of the Russian Language in Russian from Rossiiskii to Russkii: Did Politics Have Anything to Do with It? (pp. 73–96). Acta Slavica Iaponica. Vol 32, "The Change of the Name of the Russian Language in Russian from Rossiiskii to Russkii: Did Politics Have Anything to Do with It?" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 18, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2013. Under the laws of the Republic of Uzbekistan, Russian language is not offered any status in terms of official language. The provisions only state that "Under request of citizens the text of document compiled by state notary or person acting as a notary shall be issued on Russian and if possible on other acceptable language" "Uzbekistan: Law "On Official Language"". Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2021. The status of Crimea and of the city of Sevastopol is under dispute between Russia and Ukraine since March 2014; Ukraine and the majority of the international community consider Crimea to be an autonomous republic of Ukraine and Sevastopol to be one of Ukraine's cities with special status, whereas Russia, on the other hand, considers Crimea to be a federal subject of Russia and Sevastopol to be one of Russia's three federal cities Abkhazia and South Ossetia are only partially recognized countries. Russian: Русский язык, romanized: Russkiy yazyk, pronounced [ˈruskʲɪj jɪˈzɨk] Including Rusyn, which is sometimes classified as a dialect of Ukrainian in Ukraine. Russian at Ethnologue (26th ed., 2023) "Article 68. Constitution of the Russian Federation". Constitution.ru. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Article 17. Constitution of the Republic of Belarus". President.gov.by. May 11, 1998. Archived from the original on May 2, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Nazarbaev, N. (December 4, 2005). "Article 7. Constitution of the Republic of Kazakhstan". Constcouncil.kz. Archived from the original on October 20, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Официальный сайт Правительства КР". Gov.kg. Archived from the original on December 22, 2012. Retrieved February 16, 2020. "КОНСТИТУЦИЯ РЕСПУБЛИКИ ТАДЖИКИСТАН". prokuratura.tj. Parliament of Tajikistan. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Юрий Подпоренко (2001). "Бесправен, но востребован. Русский язык в Узбекистане". Дружба Народов. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. Шухрат Хуррамов (September 11, 2015). "Почему русский язык нужен узбекам?". 365info.kz. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. Евгений Абдуллаев (2009). "Русский язык: жизнь после смерти. Язык, политика и общество в современном Узбекистане". Неприкосновенный запас. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. "Article 16. Legal code of Gagauzia (Gagauz-Yeri)". Gagauzia.md. August 5, 2008. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Конституция Республики Абхазия". January 18, 2009. Archived from the original on January 18, 2009. Retrieved February 16, 2020. "КОНСТИТУЦИЯ РЕСПУБЛИКИ ЮЖНАЯ ОСЕТИЯ" [Constitution of the Republic of South Ossetia]. August 11, 2009. Archived from the original on August 11, 2009. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Law of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic on the Functioning of Languages on the Territory of the Moldavian SSR". U.S. English Foundation Research. 2016. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. "Romania : Languages of Romania". Ethnologue.com. February 19, 1999. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 28, 2016. "List of declarations made with respect to treaty No. 148 (Status as of: 21/9/2011)". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2012. "National Minorities Policy of the Government of the Czech Republic". Vlada.cz. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2012. "Președintele CCM: Constituția nu conferă limbii ruse un statut deosebit de cel al altor limbi minoritare". Deschide.md. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Article 10 Archived May 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine of the Constitution says: "The state language of Ukraine is the Ukrainian language. The State ensures the comprehensive development and functioning of the Ukrainian language in all spheres of social life throughout the entire territory of Ukraine. In Ukraine, the free development, use and protection of Russian, and other languages of national minorities of Ukraine, is guaranteed." Ethnic Groups and Religious department, Fujian Provincial Government (September 13, 2022). "少数民族的语言文字有哪些？". fujian.gov.cn (in Chinese). Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. 我国已正式使用和经国家批准推行的少数民族文字有19种，它们是...俄罗斯文... Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China (August 27, 2021). "中国语言文字概况（2021年版）". moe.gov.cn (in Chinese). Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved December 18, 2023. ...属于印欧语系的是属斯拉夫语族的俄语... "Russian Language Institute". Ruslang.ru. Archived from the original on July 19, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2010. Magocsi, Paul Robert (1996). "Language and National Survival". Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas. 44 (1). Franz Steiner Verlag: 83–85. JSTOR 41049661. Since 1990 Constitution and Fundamental Law of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 1977: Section II, Chapter 6, Article 36 "Russian Language Enjoying a Boost in Post-Soviet States". Gallup. August 1, 2008. Archived from the original on May 18, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2010. Арефьев, Александр (2006). Падение статуса русского языка на постсоветском пространстве. Демоскоп Weekly (in Russian) (251). Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Spolsky & Shohamy 1999, p. 236. Isurin 2011, p. 13. "Russian". Ethnologue. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "Russian". University of Toronto. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Russian is the most widespread of the Slavic languages and the largest native language in Europe. Of great political importance, it is one of the official languages of the United Nations – making it a natural area of study for those interested in geopolitics. "The 10 Most Spoken Languages in Europe". Tandem. September 12, 2019. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. "The World's Most Widely Spoken Languages". Saint Ignatius High School. Cleveland, Ohio. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved February 17, 2012. Wakata, Koichi. "My Long Mission in Space". JAXA. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2021. The official languages on the ISS are English and Russian, and when I was speaking with the Flight Control Room at JAXA's Tsukuba Space Center during ISS systems and payload operations, I was required to speak in either English or Russian. "Official Languages". United Nations. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. There are six official languages of the UN. These are Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. The correct interpretation and translation of these six languages, in both spoken and written form, is very important to the work of the Organization, because this enables clear and concise communication on issues of global importance. Timberlake 2004, p. 17. "Most similar languages to Russian". Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Sussex & Cubberley 2006, pp. 477–478, 480. Minns, Ellis Hovell (1911). "Russian Language" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.). Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 912–914. Waterson, Natalie (1955). "The Turkic Languages of Central Asia: Problems of Planned Culture Contact by Stefan Wurm". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. 17 (2): 392–394. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00111954. JSTOR 610442. "Falling Sonoroty Onsets, Loanwords, and Syllable contact" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Aliyeh Kord Zafaranlu Kambuziya; Eftekhar Sadat Hashemi (2010). "Russian Loanword Adoptation in Persian; Optimal Approach" (PDF). roa.rutgers.edu. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Iraj Bashiri (1990). "Russian Loanwords in Persian and Tajiki Language". academia.edu. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Colin Baker, Sylvia Prys Jones Encyclopedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual Education Archived March 20, 2018, at the Wayback Machine pp 219 Multilingual Matters, 1998 ISBN 1-85359-362-1 Thompson, Irene. "Language Learning Difficulty". mustgo. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014. Kadochnikov, Denis V. (2016), Ginsburgh, Victor; Weber, Shlomo (eds.), "Languages, Regional Conflicts and Economic Development: Russia", The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 538–580, doi:10.1007/978-1-137-32505-1_20, ISBN 978-1-349-67307-0, archived from the original on January 22, 2024, retrieved February 16, 2021 Nakhimovsky, A. D. (2019). The Language of Russian Peasants in the Twentieth Century: A Linguistic Analysis and Oral History. United Kingdom: Lexington Books. (Chapter 1) Nakhimovsky, A. D. (2019). The Language of Russian Peasants in the Twentieth Century: A Linguistic Analysis and Oral History. United Kingdom: Lexington Books. (p.2) Ibid.(p.3) "Демографические изменения – не на пользу русскому языку" (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. Lewis, M. Paul; Gary F. Simons; Charles D. Fennig, eds. (February 21, 2018). "Statistical Summaries. Summary by language size. Language size". Ethnologue: Languages of the World (21st ed.). Dallas: SIL International. Archived from the original on December 26, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Арефьев А. Л. (October 31, 2013). "Сжимающееся русскоязычие. Демографические изменения — не на пользу русскому языку". Демоскоп Weekly (in Russian). Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. "Russia's Language Could Be Ticket in for Migrants". Gallup. November 28, 2008. Archived from the original on September 28, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2010. "Введение" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2015. "Русскоязычие распространено не только там, где живут русские". demoscope.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. "Общая численность населения, численность населения по возрасту и полу, состоянию в браке, уровню образования, национальностям, языку, источникам средств к существованию по Республике Беларусь" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 4, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. "Languages". The World Factbook. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2015. ERR (December 12, 2022). "Riigikogu kiitis heaks eestikeelsele õppele ülemineku". Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. "Referendum on the Draft Law 'Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Latvia'". Central Election Commission of Latvia. 2012. Archived from the original on May 2, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2012. "Results of the referendum on the Draft Law 'Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Latvia'" (in Latvian). Central Election Commission of Latvia. 2012. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2012. "Latvia pushes majority language in schools, leaving parents miffed". Deutsche Welle. September 8, 2018. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Moscow threatens sanctions against Latvia over removal of Russian from secondary schools". The Daily Telegraph. April 3, 2018. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. "Latvia to gradually transition to education only in official language". September 29, 2022. Archived from the original on December 5, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Sheremet, Anhelina (May 13, 2022). "In Latvia, from 2025, all children will be taught in Latvian only". Бабель. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. "Saeima approves updated National Security concept for Latvia". Eng.LSM.lv. September 28, 2023. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. "Statistics Lithuania: 78.5% of Lithuanians speak at least one foreign language | News". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. September 27, 2013. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2020. Labalaukytė, Rūta (September 26, 2018). "Employees fluent in three languages – it's the norm in Lithuania". Invest Lithuania. Outsourcing&More. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Andrlík, Jan. "Ethnic and Language Policy of the Republic of Lithuania: Basis and Practice" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2016. Statistics Lithuania census 2011: "Gyventojai pagal tautybę, gimtąją kalbą ir tikybą" (PDF). Oficialiosios statistikos portalas. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 4, 2023. "The Court examined the constitutionality of the Law on the Usage of Languages Spoken on the Territory of the Republic of Moldova". Constitutional Court of the Republic of Moldova. January 1, 2021. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Tanas, Alexander (January 21, 2021). "Moldovan court overturns special status for Russian language". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. "The Population of the Republic of Moldova at the time of the Census was 2 998 235". National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova. March 31, 2017. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. "Демоскоп Weekly. Об итогах Всероссийской переписи населения 2010 года. Сообщение Росстата" (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. November 8, 2011. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "Падение статуса русского языка на постсоветском пространстве". demoscope.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on October 25, 2016. "New education law becomes effective in Ukraine". www.unian.info. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Ukraine defends education reform as Hungary promises 'pain'". The Irish Times. September 27, 2017. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Ukrainian Language Bill Facing Barrage Of Criticism From Minorities, Foreign Capitals". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. September 24, 2017. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Про забезпечення функціонування української мови як державної". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "Кому варто боятися закону про мову?". Портал мовної політики (in Ukrainian). May 16, 2019. Archived from the original on May 18, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2022. "Шосте загальнонаціональне опитування: мовне питання в Україні (19 березня 2022)" (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on August 24, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "Соціологічне дослідження до Дня Незалежності УЯВЛЕННЯ ПРО ПАТРІОТИЗМ ТА МАЙБУТНЄ УКРАЇНИ" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "Europeans and their Languages" (PDF). europa.eu. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 21, 2009. Georgia Archived February 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Russian at Ethnologue (21st ed., 2018) "Results of the 2009 National Population Census of the Republic of Kazakhstan" (PDF). Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit. Retrieved October 31, 2015.[permanent dead link] "Kazakhstan drafts media law to increase use of Kazakh language over Russian". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. October 6, 2023. 0261-3077. Archived from the original on October 28, 2023. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Population And Housing Census Of The Kyrgyz Republic Of 2009" (PDF). UN Stats. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 10, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2015. Bekmurzaev, Nurbek (February 28, 2019). "Russian Language Status in Central Asian Countries". Central Asian Bureau for Analytical Reporting. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Law on Official Language" (PDF). Government of Uzbekistan. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2016. Brooke, James (February 15, 2005). "For Mongolians, E Is for English, F Is for Future". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 14, 2011. Retrieved May 16, 2009. Русский язык в Монголии стал обязательным [Russian language has become compulsory in Mongolia] (in Russian). New Region. September 21, 2006. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2009. К визиту Нетаньяху: что Россия может получить от экономики Израиля Archived March 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Алексей Голубович, Forbes Russia, March 9, 2017 "Russians in Israel". Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved July 11, 2019. Awde and Sarwan, 2003 "Vietnam to add Chinese, Russian to elementary school curriculum". September 20, 2016. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. "Ninilchik". languagehat.com. January 1, 2009. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Language Use in the United States: 2007, census.gov" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 14, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Matthias Gelbmann (March 19, 2013). "Russian is now the second most used language on the web". W3Techs. Q-Success. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved June 17, 2013. David Dalby. 1999–2000. The Linguasphere Register of the World's Languages and Speech Communities. Linguasphere Press. Pg. 442. Sussex & Cubberley 2006, pp. 521–526. "The Language of the Russian Village" (in Russian). Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "The Language of the Russian Village" (in Russian). Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Context and the Lexicon in the Development of Russian Aspect, By Neil Bermel, p 16 Sussex & Cubberley, p. 3. Similar languages to Russian Archived February 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, EZ Glot Christer Kiselman (2008). Andrzej Pelczar (ed.). "Esperanto: its origins and early history" (PDF). Prace Komisji Spraw Europejskich PAU. II. Krakow: Polska Akademia Umieje ̨tno ́sci: 39–56. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Cowan, John Woldemar (1997). The Shape Of Words To Come: Lojban Morphology - The Lojban Reference Grammar. Logical Language. ISBN 0-9660283-0-9. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved October 4, 2022 – via lojban.github.io. Caloni, Wanderley (February 15, 2007). "RusKey: mapping the Russian keyboard layout into the Latin alphabets". The Code Project. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved January 28, 2011. "Russian Vowels: All the Rules You Need to Know | FluentU Russian Blog". FluentU Russian. January 27, 2020. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved November 28, 2023. Ordin, Mikhail. (2011). Palatalization and Intrinsic Prosodic Vowel Features in Russian. Language and speech. 54. 547-68. 10.1177/0023830911404962. "Can Russians from different parts of the country understand each other?". www.rbth.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2020. Nesset, Tore (2008). "Path and Manner: An Image-Schematic Approach to Russian Verbs of Motion". Scando-Slavica. 54 (1): 135–158. doi:10.1080/00806760802494232. S2CID 123427088. What types of dictionaries exist? Archived January 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine from www.gramota.ru (in Russian) "{section.caption}". yarus.asu.edu.ru. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved February 16, 2020. Лопатин В. В., Улуханов И. С. (2005). "Восточнославянские языки. Русский язык". Языки мира. Славянские языки. М.: Academia. pp. 448–450. ISBN 978-5-87444-216-3. Development of Tense and Aspect Systems. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 2022. p. 12. ISBN 9789027257444. Matthews, W. K. (2013). The structure and development of Russian (First paperback ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 112–113. ISBN 9781107619395. "Закон СССР от 24 April 1990 О языках народов СССР" Archived May 8, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (The 1990 USSR Law about the Languages of the USSR) (in Russian) Арефьев, А. Меньше россиян — меньше русскоговорящих (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "журнал "Демоскоп". Где есть потребность в изучении русского языка". Mof.gov.cy (in Russian). May 23, 2012. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Арефьев, А. Л. Сведения об авторе (in Russian). Socioprognoz.ru. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Арефьев, А. В странах Азии, Африки и Латинской Америки наш язык стремительно утрачивает свою роль (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Арефьев, А. Будет ли русский в числе мировых языков в будущем? (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Арефьев, А. Падение статуса русского языка на постсоветском пространстве (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Все меньше школьников обучаются на русском языке (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. Русский Язык На Рубеже Xx-Ххi Веков (in Russian). Demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. Русский язык на рубеже XX-XXI веков Archived June 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine — М.: Центр социального прогнозирования и маркетинга, 2012. — 482 стр. журнал "Демоскоп". Русский язык — советский язык?. Demoscope.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Universal Declaration of Human Rights - Russian (Russky)". Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Nations, United. "Universal Declaration of Human Rights". United Nations. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Yanushevskaya, Irena; Bunčić, Daniel (2015). "Russian". Illustrations of the IPA. Journal of the International Phonetic Association. 45 (2): 221–228. doi:10.1017/S0025100314000395, with supplementary sound recordings. Look up Appendix:Russian Swadesh list in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Russian Enthusiast - Prominent Russian language resource for English speakers Национальный корпус русского языка National Corpus of the Russian Language (in Russian) Russian Language Institute Language regulator of the Russian language (in Russian) Russian language at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Phrasebook from Wikivoyage Russian edition of Wikipedia