Game of Thrones is an American fantasy drama television series created by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for HBO. It is an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire, a series of fantasy novels by George R. R. Martin, the first of which is A Game of Thrones. The show premiered on HBO in the United States on April 17, 2011, and concluded on May 19, 2019, with 73 episodes broadcast over eight seasons. Set on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos, Game of Thrones has a large ensemble cast and follows several story arcs throughout the course of the show. The first major arc concerns the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros through a web of political conflicts among the noble families either vying to claim the throne or fighting for independence from whoever sits on it. The second focuses on the last descendant of the realm's deposed ruling dynasty, who has been exiled to Essos and is plotting to return and reclaim the throne. The third follows the Night's Watch, a military order defending the realm against threats from beyond Westeros' northern border. Game of Thrones attracted a record viewership on HBO and has a broad, active, and international fan base. Critics have praised the series for its acting, complex characters, story, scope, and production values, although its frequent use of nudity and violence (including sexual violence) generated controversy. The final season received significant criticism for its reduced length and creative decisions, with many considering it a disappointing conclusion. The series received 59 Primetime Emmy Awards, the most by a drama series, including Outstanding Drama Series in 2015, 2016, 2018 and 2019. Its other awards and nominations include three Hugo Awards for Best Dramatic Presentation, a Peabody Award, and five nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama. A prequel series, House of the Dragon, premiered on HBO in 2022. Game of Thrones is roughly based on the storylines of the A Song of Ice and Fire book series by George R. R. Martin, set in the fictional Seven Kingdoms of Westeros and the continent of Essos. The series follows several simultaneous plot lines. The first story arc follows a war of succession among competing claimants for control of the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms, with other noble families fighting for independence from the throne. The second concerns the exiled scion's actions to reclaim the throne; the third chronicles the threat of the impending winter, as well as the legendary creatures and fierce peoples of the North. Game of Thrones has an ensemble cast which has been estimated to be the largest on television. In 2014, several actors' contracts were renegotiated to include a seventh-season option. By the final season, five of the main cast members made $1 million per episode, making them among the highest paid television performers. Eddard "Ned" Stark (Sean Bean) is the head of House Stark. He and his wife, Catelyn (Michelle Fairley), have five children: Robb (Richard Madden), Sansa (Sophie Turner), Arya (Maisie Williams), Bran (Isaac Hempstead-Wright), and Rickon (Art Parkinson). Ned also has an illegitimate son, Jon Snow (Kit Harington), who, along with his scholarly friend, Samwell Tarly (John Bradley), serve in the Night's Watch under Lord Commander Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo). The Wildlings living north of the Wall include Gilly (Hannah Murray) and the warriors Tormund Giantsbane (Kristofer Hivju) and Ygritte (Rose Leslie). Others associated with House Stark include Ned's ward Theon Greyjoy (Alfie Allen), Ned's vassal Roose Bolton (Michael McElhatton), and Roose's illegitimate son, Ramsay Snow (Iwan Rheon). Robb accepts help from the healer Talisa Maegyr (Oona Chaplin), while elsewhere, Arya befriends blacksmith's apprentice Gendry Rivers (Joe Dempsie) and assassin Jaqen H'ghar (Tom Wlaschiha). In the Stormlands, the tall warrior Brienne of Tarth (Gwendoline Christie) is introduced to Catelyn. In King's Landing, Ned's best friend, King Robert I Baratheon (Mark Addy), shares a loveless political marriage with Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey). Her younger twin brother, Ser Jaime (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau), serves on the Kingsguard while their younger brother Tyrion (Peter Dinklage) is attended by his mistress Shae (Sibel Kekilli) and mercenary Bronn (Jerome Flynn). Cersei's father is Tywin (Charles Dance), head of House Lannister and the richest man in Westeros. Cersei has two sons: Joffrey (Jack Gleeson) and Tommen (Dean-Charles Chapman). Joffrey is guarded by the scar-faced warrior Sandor "The Hound" Clegane (Rory McCann). The king's Small Council includes his treasurer, Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish (Aidan Gillen), and his spymaster, Varys (Conleth Hill). In Dragonstone, Robert's younger brother, Stannis (Stephen Dillane), is advised by foreign priestess Melisandre (Carice van Houten) and former smuggler Ser Davos Seaworth (Liam Cunningham). In the Reach, the Tyrell family is led by matriarch Olenna (Diana Rigg) and represented at court by her granddaughter Margaery (Natalie Dormer). The High Sparrow (Jonathan Pryce) is given power as a religious leader, while, in Dorne, the warrior Ellaria Sand (Indira Varma) seeks vengeance against the Lannisters. Across the Narrow Sea in Pentos, siblings Viserys Targaryen (Harry Lloyd) and Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia Clarke) (colloquially referred to as "Dany") are in exile, with the former plotting to reclaim his father's throne. Daenerys is forced into marrying Khal Drogo (Jason Momoa), a leader of the nomadic Dothraki. Her retinue eventually comes to include the exiled knight Ser Jorah Mormont (Iain Glen), her aide Missandei (Nathalie Emmanuel), mercenary Daario Naharis (Michiel Huisman), and elite soldier Grey Worm (Jacob Anderson). The series has been praised by both television critics and historians for what was perceived as a sort of medieval realism. George R. R. Martin set out to make the story feel more like historical fiction than contemporary fantasy, with less emphasis on magic and sorcery and more on battles, political intrigue, and the characters, believing that magic should be used moderately in the epic fantasy genre. Martin has said that, "the true horrors of human history derive not from orcs and Dark Lords, but from ourselves". Academics have classified the series as neo-medieval which focuses on the overlapping of medieval history and popular fantasy. A common theme in the fantasy genre is the battle between good and evil, which Martin says does not mirror the real world. In the series, political leaders have mostly been portrayed negatively, as they usually disregard the well-being of the common people and are guided in their decisions by selfish reasons. Few possible exceptions include Daenerys Targaryen, Jon Snow and Tyrion Lannister, who have shown concern about the populace, but their methods or commitment to the cause have been criticized. Martin explores the relationship between good and evil through the questions of redemption and character change. The series allows the audience to view different characters from their perspective, unlike in many other fantasies. In early seasons, under the influence of the A Song of Ice and Fire books, main characters were regularly killed off, and this was credited with developing tension among viewers. Martin stated in an interview that he wanted to depict war and violence in a realistic way, which sometimes mean the hero or main characters could be injured or killed. In later seasons, critics pointed out that certain characters had developed "plot armor" to survive in unlikely circumstances and attributed this to Game of Thrones deviating from the novels to become more of a traditional television series. In a 2012 study, out of 40 recent television drama shows, Game of Thrones ranked second in deaths per episode, averaging 14. A scientific study conducted in 2018 stated that about 60% of the major characters died as a result of violence and war. Although the series's first season closely follows the events of the first novel, there were significant changes made for later seasons. According to Benioff, the TV adaptation is "about adapting the series as a whole and following the map George laid out for us and hitting the major milestones, but not necessarily each of the stops along the way". Aspects of the novels' plots and their adaptations are based upon settings, characters, and events in European history. Most of Westeros is reminiscent of high medieval Europe, from its geography and castles to its cultures, the feudal system, palace intrigues, and the knights' tournaments. Like medieval Europe, most of the houses in the series use the patriarchal system of power. The series also includes elements of gothic fiction, including torture tropes. A principal inspiration for the novels is the English Wars of the Roses (1455–1485) between the houses of Lancaster and York, reflected in Martin's houses of Lannister and Stark. The scheming Cersei Lannister evokes Isabella, the "She-Wolf of France" (1295–1358). She and her family, as portrayed in Maurice Druon's historical novel series, The Accursed Kings, were a main inspiration of Martin's. Other historical antecedents of series elements include: Hadrian's Wall (which becomes Martin's Wall), the Roman Empire, and the legend of Atlantis (ancient Valyria), Byzantine Greek fire ("wildfire"), Icelandic sagas of the Viking Age (the Ironborn), the Mongol hordes (the Dothraki), the Hundred Years' War, and the Italian Renaissance. The series's popularity has been attributed, in part, to Martin's skill at fusing these elements into a seamless, credible version of alternate history. The A Song of Ice and Fire series of novels was popular before Game of Thrones. The series has sold more than 90 million copies worldwide with the novels being translated into 45 different languages. George R. R. Martin received multiple fantasy writing awards and nominations, including a World Fantasy Award and multiple Locus Awards, for the series. Writing for Time magazine in 2005 after the release of A Feast for Crows, journalist Lev Grossman called Martin the "American Tolkien", stating he is a "major force for evolution in fantasy". In January 2006, David Benioff had a telephone conversation with Martin's literary agent about the books he represented. Having been a fan of fantasy fiction when he was younger, he became interested in A Song of Ice and Fire, which he had not read. The literary agent sent Benioff the series's first four books. Benioff read a few hundred pages of the first novel, A Game of Thrones, shared his enthusiasm with D. B. Weiss, and suggested that they adapt Martin's novels into a television series; Weiss finished the first novel in "maybe 36 hours". They pitched the series to HBO after a five-hour meeting with Martin (himself a veteran screenwriter) in a restaurant on Santa Monica Boulevard. According to Benioff, they won Martin over by knowing the answer to his question, "Who is Jon Snow's mother?" I had worked in Hollywood myself for about 10 years, from the late '80s to the '90s. I'd been on the staff of The Twilight Zone and Beauty and the Beast. All of my first drafts tended to be too big or too expensive. I always hated the process of having to cut. I said, 'I'm sick of this, I'm going to write something that's as big as I want it to be, and it's going to have a cast of characters that go into the thousands, and I'm going to have huge castles, and battles, and dragons.' — George R. R. Martin, author Before being approached by Benioff and Weiss, Martin had had meetings with other scriptwriters, most of whom wanted to adapt the series as a feature film. Martin, however, deemed it "unfilmable", saying that the size of one of his novels is as long as The Lord of the Rings, which had been adapted as three feature films. Benioff agreed it would be impossible to turn the novels into a feature film as their scale is too big for a feature film, and dozens of characters would have to be discarded. Benioff added, "a fantasy movie of this scope, financed by a major studio, would almost certainly need a PG-13 rating. That means no sex, no blood, no profanity. Fuck that." Martin was pleased with the suggestion that they adapt it as an HBO series, saying that he "never imagined it anywhere else". The series began development in January 2007. HBO acquired the television rights to the novels, with Benioff and Weiss as the series' executive producers and Martin as a co-executive producer. The intention was for each novel to yield a season's worth of episodes. Initially, Martin would write one episode per season while Benioff and Weiss would write the rest. Jane Espenson and Bryan Cogman were added later to write one episode each for the first season. The first and second drafts of the pilot script by Benioff and Weiss were submitted in August 2007 and June 2008, respectively. Although HBO liked both drafts, a pilot was not ordered until November 2008. The pilot episode, "Winter Is Coming", was shot in 2009; after its poor reception following a private viewing, HBO demanded an extensive re-shoot (about 90 percent of the episode, with cast and directorial changes). The pilot reportedly cost HBO $5–10 million to produce, while the first season's budget was estimated at $50–60 million. For the second season, the series received a 15-percent budget increase for the climactic battle in "Blackwater" (which had an $8 million budget). Between 2012 and 2015, the average budget per episode increased from $6 million to "at least" $8 million. The sixth-season budget was over $10 million per episode, for a season total of over $100 million, a record for a series's production cost. By the final season, the production budget per episode was estimated to be $15 million. Nina Gold and Robert Sterne were the series' primary casting directors. Through a process of auditions and readings, the main cast was assembled. The only exceptions were Peter Dinklage and Sean Bean, whom the writers wanted from the start; they were announced as joining the pilot in 2009. Other actors signed for the pilot were Kit Harington as Jon Snow, Jack Gleeson as Joffrey Baratheon, Harry Lloyd as Viserys Targaryen, and Mark Addy as Robert Baratheon. According to Benioff and Weiss, Addy was the easiest actor to cast for the series because of his audition performance. Some characters in the pilot were recast for the first season. The role of Catelyn Stark was played initially by Jennifer Ehle, but the role was recast with Michelle Fairley. The character of Daenerys Targaryen was also recast, with Emilia Clarke replacing Tamzin Merchant. The rest of the first season's cast was selected in the second half of 2009. Although many of the cast returned after the first season, the producers had many new characters to cast in each of the following seasons. Because of the large number of new characters, Benioff and Weiss postponed introducing several key characters in the second season and merged several characters into one, or assigned plot functions to different characters. Some recurring characters were recast over the years; for example, Gregor Clegane was played by three different actors, while Dean-Charles Chapman played both Tommen Baratheon and a minor Lannister character. Game of Thrones used seven writers over its six seasons. Benioff and Weiss wrote most of each season's episodes. A Song of Ice and Fire author George R. R. Martin wrote one episode in each of the first four seasons. Martin did not write an episode for the later seasons, since he wanted to focus on completing the sixth novel (The Winds of Winter). Jane Espenson co-wrote one first-season episode as a freelance writer. Cogman, initially a script coordinator for the series, was promoted to producer for the fifth season. Cogman, who wrote at least one episode for the first five seasons, was the only other writer in the writers' room with Benioff and Weiss. Before Cogman's promotion, Vanessa Taylor—a writer during the second and third seasons—worked closely with Benioff and Weiss. Dave Hill joined the writing staff for the fifth season after working as an assistant to Benioff and Weiss. Although Martin was not in the writers' room, he read the script outlines and made comments. Benioff and Weiss sometimes assigned characters to particular writers; for example, Cogman was assigned to Arya Stark for the fourth season. The writers spent several weeks writing a character outline, including what material from the novels to use and the overarching themes. After these individual outlines were completed, they spent another two to three weeks discussing each main character's individual arc and arranging them episode by episode. A detailed outline was created, with each of the writers working on part of it to create a script for each episode. Cogman, who wrote two episodes for the fifth season, took a month and a half to complete both scripts. They were then read by Benioff and Weiss, who made notes, and parts of the script were rewritten. All ten episodes were written before filming began since they were shot out of order by two units in different countries. Benioff and Weiss wrote their episodes together; one wrote the first half of the script with the other writing the second half. They then passed the drafts back and forth to make notes and do rewrites. After Game of Thrones story line began outpacing the published novels in the sixth season, the series was based on a plot outline of the future novels provided by Martin along with original content. Before season four, Martin stated there was an issue with the television series being released before the source material could be written. According to Benioff, Martin gave the showrunners an outline on the final two books of the series. In April 2016, the showrunners' plan was to shoot 13 more episodes after the sixth season: seven episodes in the seventh season and six episodes in the eighth. Later that month, the series was renewed for a seventh season with a seven-episode order. HBO announced in June 2016 that the eighth season would be the final for the series. The first two seasons adapted one novel each. For the later seasons, its creators saw Game of Thrones as an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire as a whole rather than the individual novels, enabling them to move events across novels as the screen adaptation required. The show was shot in the United Kingdom, Canada, Croatia, Iceland, Malta, Morocco, and Spain. Principal photography for the first season was scheduled to begin on July 26, 2010; the primary location was the Paint Hall Studios in Belfast, Northern Ireland. Exterior scenes in Northern Ireland were filmed at Sandy Brae in the Mourne Mountains (standing in for Vaes Dothrak); Castle Ward (Winterfell); Saintfield Estates (the Winterfell godswood); Tollymore Forest (outdoor scenes); Cairncastle (the execution site); the Magheramorne quarry (Castle Black); and Shane's Castle (the tourney grounds). Doune Castle in Stirling, Scotland, was also used in the original pilot episode for scenes at Winterfell. The producers initially considered filming the entire series in Scotland, but decided on Northern Ireland because of the availability of studio space and tax credits. The first season's southern scenes were filmed in Malta, a change in location from the pilot episode's Moroccan sets. The city of Mdina was used for King's Landing. Filming also took place at Fort Manoel (representing the Sept of Baelor); at the Azure Window on the island of Gozo (the Dothraki wedding site); and at San Anton Palace, Fort Ricasoli, Fort St. Angelo and St. Dominic monastery (all used for scenes in the Red Keep). Filming of the second season's southern scenes shifted from Malta to Croatia, where the city of Dubrovnik and nearby locations allowed exterior shots of a walled, coastal medieval city. The Walls of Dubrovnik and Fort Lovrijenac were used for scenes in King's Landing, though exteriors of some local buildings in the series, for example, the Red Keep and the Sept of Baelor, are computer generated. The island of Lokrum, the St. Dominic monastery in the coastal town of Trogir, the Rector's Palace in Dubrovnik, and the Dubac quarry (a few kilometers east) were used for scenes set in Qarth. Scenes set north of the Wall, in the Frostfangs, and at the Fist of the First Men, were filmed in November 2011 in Iceland on the Vatnajökull glacier near Smyrlabjörg, the Svínafellsjökull glacier near Skaftafell, and the Mýrdalsjökull glacier near Vik on Höfðabrekkuheiði. Filming also occurred at the harbor in Ballintoy, Northern Ireland. Third-season production returned to Dubrovnik, with the Walls of Dubrovnik, Fort Lovrijenac, and nearby locations again used for scenes in King's Landing and the Red Keep. Trsteno Arboretum, a new location, is the garden of the Tyrells in King's Landing. The third season also returned to Morocco (including the city of Essaouira) to film Daenerys's scenes in Essos. Dimmuborgir and the Grjótagjá cave in Iceland were used as well. One scene, with a live bear, was filmed in Los Angeles. The production used three units (Dragon, Wolf and Raven) filming in parallel, six directing teams, 257 cast members and 703 crew members. The fourth season returned to Dubrovnik and included new locations, including Diocletian's Palace in Split, Klis Fortress north of Split, Perun quarry east of Split, the Mosor mountain range and Baška Voda farther south. Thingvellir National Park in Iceland was used for the fight between Brienne and the Hound. The fifth season added Seville, Spain, used for scenes of Dorne, and Córdoba. The sixth season, which began filming in July 2015, returned to Spain and filmed in Navarra, Guadalajara, Seville, Almeria, Girona and Peniscola. Filming also returned to Dubrovnik, Croatia. The filming of the seven episodes of season seven began on August 31, 2016, at Titanic Studios in Belfast, with other filming in Iceland, Northern Ireland and many locations in Spain, including Seville, Cáceres, Almodovar del Rio, Santiponce, Zumaia and Bermeo. Filming continued until the end of February 2017, as necessary, to ensure winter weather in some European locations. Filming for season eight began in October 2017 and concluded in July 2018. New filming locations included Moneyglass and Saintfield in Northern Ireland for "The Long Night" battle scenes. Northern Ireland Screen, a UK government agency financed by Invest NI and the European Regional Development Fund, helped fund Game of Thrones. Tourism Ireland has a Game of Thrones-themed marketing campaign similar to New Zealand's Tolkien-related advertising. According to First Minister Arlene Foster, the series has given Northern Ireland the most publicity in its history apart from The Troubles. The production of Game of Thrones and other TV series boosted Northern Ireland's creative industries, contributing to an estimated 12.4 percent growth in arts, entertainment and recreation jobs between 2008 and 2013 (compared with 4.3 percent in the rest of the UK during the same period). After filming had finished, HBO converted its filming locations in Northern Ireland into tourist attractions to be opened in 2019. By 2019, 350,000 visitors, or one sixth of all tourists, came to Northern Ireland annually because of Game of Thrones. Tourism organizations elsewhere reported increases in bookings after their locations appeared in Game of Thrones. Between 2014 and 2016, Hotels.com reported hotel bookings increased by 285 percent in Iceland and 120 percent in Dubrovnik. In 2016, bookings doubled in Ouarzazate, Morocco, the location of Daenerys' season three scenes. Dubrovnik also saw an increase in overnight tourist stays after episodes aired. However, the increase in tourism driven by the series—estimated to be responsible for half of its annual increase over many years—led to concerns about "over-tourism" and its mayor imposing limits on tourist numbers in the city. Following the series finale, HBO announced in April 2019 a new exhibition and tourist attraction containing show props and set pieces. The attraction, titled Game of Thrones Studio Tour, will be located at former show filming location Linen Mill Studios outside Belfast. Studies showed that the series had an overall positive economic impacts for both Northern Ireland and Dubrovnik. Despite the positive economic results, some academics note the impact and damage from Game of Thrones–related tourist activities could have on historical sites and other locations of cultural value. Each ten-episode season of Game of Thrones had four to six directors, who usually directed back-to-back episodes. Alan Taylor directed seven episodes, the most of any director. Alex Graves, David Nutter, Mark Mylod, and Jeremy Podeswa directed six episodes each. Daniel Minahan directed five episodes, and Michelle MacLaren, Alik Sakharov, and Miguel Sapochnik directed four each; MacLaren is the only female director of the entire series's run. Brian Kirk directed three episodes during the first season, and Tim Van Patten directed the series's first two episodes. Neil Marshall directed two episodes, both with large battle scenes: "Blackwater" and "The Watchers on the Wall". Other directors include Jack Bender, David Petrarca, Daniel Sackheim, Michael Slovis and Matt Shakman. David Benioff and D. B. Weiss have directed two episodes together but were credited with only one each, which was determined after a coin toss. For season eight, David Nutter and Miguel Sapochnik, who worked on previous episodes, directed the first five episodes. Benioff and Weiss were credited as both the writers and directors of the show finale "The Iron Throne". Michele Clapton was the costume designer for Game of Thrones' first five seasons before she was replaced by April Ferry. Clapton returned to the series as its costume designer for the seventh season. For the first three seasons, Paul Engelen was Game of Thrones' main makeup designer and prosthetic makeup artist with Melissa Lackersteen, Conor O'Sullivan, and Rob Trenton. At the beginning of the fourth season, Engelen's team was replaced by Jane Walker and her crew, composed of Ann McEwan and Barrie and Sarah Gower. Over 130 makeup artists and prosthetic designers worked on the show. The designs for the series's costumes were inspired by several sources, such as Japanese and Persian armor. Dothraki dress resembles that of the Bedouin (one was made of fish skins to resemble dragon scales), and the Wildlings wear animal skins like the Inuit. Wildling bone armor is made from molds of actual bones and is assembled with string and latex resembling catgut. Although the extras who played Wildlings and the Night's Watch often wore hats (normal in a cold climate), members of the principal cast usually did not so viewers could recognize them. Björk's Alexander McQueen high-neckline dresses inspired Margaery Tyrell's funnel-neck outfit, and prostitutes' dresses were designed for easy removal. All the clothing used during the production was aged for two weeks, so it had a realistic appearance on high-definition television. About two dozen wigs were used by the actresses. Made of human hair and up to 61 centimetres (2 ft) in length, they cost up to $7,000 each and were washed and styled like real hair. Applying the wigs was time-consuming; Emilia Clarke, for example, required about two hours to style her brunette hair with a platinum-blonde wig and braids. Other actors, such as Jack Gleeson and Sophie Turner, received frequent hair coloring. For characters such as Daenerys (Clarke) and her Dothraki, their hair, wigs and costumes were processed to appear as if they had not been washed for weeks. For the large number of visual effects used in the series, HBO hired British-based BlueBolt and Irish-based Screen Scene for season one. Most of the environment builds were done as 2.5D projections, giving viewers perspective while keeping the programming from being overwhelming. In 2011, the season one finale, "Fire and Blood", was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Visual Effects. The visual effects crew consisted of both on-set VFX supervisors and concept artists along with visual effect editors in post-production. Because the effects became more complex in subsequent seasons (including CGI creatures, fire, and water), German-based Pixomondo became the lead visual effects producer; nine of its twelve facilities contributed to the project for season two, with Stuttgart the lead studio. Scenes were also produced by British-based Peanut FX, Canadian-based Spin VFX, and US-based Gradient Effects. "Valar Morghulis" and "Valar Dohaeris" earned Pixomondo Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Special Visual Effects in 2012 and 2013, respectively. HBO added German-based Mackevision to the project in season four. The season four finale, "The Children", won the 2014 Emmy Award for Visual Effects. Additional producers for season four included Canadian-based Rodeo FX, German-based Scanline VFX and US-based BAKED FX. The muscle and wing movements of the adolescent dragons in seasons four and five were based largely on those of a chicken. Pixomondo retained a team of 22 to 30 people focused solely on visualizing Daenerys Targaryen's dragons, with the average production time per season of 20 to 22 weeks. For the fifth season, HBO added Canadian-based Image Engine and US-based Crazy Horse Effects to its list of main visual-effects producers. Visual effect supervisor Joe Bauer said that the VFX team worked on more than "10,000 shots of visual effects" throughout all eight seasons. More than 300 artists worked on the show's visual effects team. The show won eight Creative Arts Emmy Awards for visual effects, winning for Outstanding Special Visual Effects in seven consecutive seasons. The series's title sequence was created for HBO by production studio Elastic. Creative director Angus Wall and his collaborators received the 2011 Primetime Emmy Award for Main Title Design for the sequence, which depicts a three-dimensional map of the series's fictional world. The map is projected on the inside of a sphere which is centrally lit by a small sun in an armillary sphere. As the camera moves across the map, focusing on the locations of the episode's events, clockwork mechanisms intertwine and allow buildings and other structures to emerge from the map. Accompanied by the title music, the names of the principal cast and creative staff appear. The sequence concludes after about 90 seconds with the title card and brief opening credits detailing the episode's writer(s) and director. Its composition changes as the story progresses, with new locations replacing those featuring less prominently or not at all. Entertainment Weekly named the title sequence one of the best on television, calling it an "all-inclusive cruise of Westeros". Ramin Djawadi composed the series's music. The first season's soundtrack, written about ten weeks before the series's premiere, was published by Varèse Sarabande in June 2011. Soundtrack albums for subsequent seasons have been released, with tracks by the National, the Hold Steady and Sigur Rós. Djawadi composed reoccurring themes for each of the major houses and some main characters. Some themes evolved over time. Daenerys Targaryen's theme was simple and became more complex after each season. At first, her theme was played by a single instrument, a cello, and Djawadi later incorporated more instruments into it. Djawadi was nominated twice for a Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media for his work on the show. In addition to the originally scored music, Columbia Records released the For the Throne: Music Inspired by the HBO Series Game of Thrones companion album on April 26, 2019. The Westerosi characters of Game of Thrones speak British-accented English, often (but not consistently) with the accent of the English region corresponding to the character's Westerosi region. The Northerner Eddard Stark speaks in actor Sean Bean's native northern accent, and the southern lord Tywin Lannister speaks with a southern accent, while characters from Dorne speak English with a Spanish accent. Characters foreign to Westeros often have a non-British accent. Although the common language of Westeros is represented as English, the producers charged linguist David J. Peterson with constructing Dothraki and Valyrian languages based on the few words in the novels. Before production, Peterson wrote 300 pages of Dothraki language material, including translation and word function. Dothraki and Valyrian dialogue is often subtitled in English. Language-learning company Duolingo began offering courses in High Valyrian in 2017, of which 1.2 million people signed up for between 2017 and 2020. Game of Thrones was broadcast by HBO in the United States and by its local subsidiaries or other pay television services in other countries, at the same time as in the US or weeks (or months) later. Broadcasters carrying Game of Thrones included Fox Showcase in Australia; HBO Canada, Super Écran, and Showcase in Canada; HBO Latin America in Latin America; Sky Television Network's SoHo and Neon in New Zealand; and Sky Atlantic in the United Kingdom and Ireland. In India, two versions of the series were aired; Star World aired a censored version of the series on television at the same time as the US, while an uncensored version was made available for live viewing on the Hotstar app. On January 23, 2015, the last two episodes of season four were shown in 205 IMAX theaters across the United States, the first television series to be shown in this format. The show earned $686,000 at the box office on its opening day and $1.5 million during its opening weekend; the week-long release grossed $1,896,092. Before the season eight premiere, HBO screened "The Spoils of War" episode from season seven in movie theaters in New York, Los Angeles, and "Chicago". The ten episodes of the first season of Game of Thrones were released as a DVD and Blu-ray box set on March 6, 2012. The box set includes extra background and behind-the-scenes material but no deleted scenes, since nearly all the footage shot for the first season was used. The box set sold over 350,000 copies in the week following its release, the largest first-week DVD sales ever for an HBO series. The series also set an HBO-series record for digital-download sales. A collector's-edition box set was released in November 2012, combining the DVD and Blu-ray versions of the first season with the first episode of season two. A paperweight in the shape of a dragon egg is included in the set. DVD-Blu-ray box sets and digital downloads of the second season became available on February 19, 2013. First-day sales broke HBO records, with 241,000 box sets sold and 355,000 episodes downloaded. The third season was made available for purchase as a digital download on the Australian iTunes Store, parallel to the US premiere, and was released on DVD and Blu-ray in region 1 on February 18, 2014. The fourth season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on February 17, 2015, and the fifth season on March 15, 2016. Blu-ray and DVD versions of the sixth season were released on November 15, 2016. Beginning in 2016, HBO began issuing Steelbook Blu-ray sets, which include both Dolby TrueHD 7.1 and Dolby Atmos audio options. In 2018, the first season was released in 4K HDR on Ultra HD Blu-ray. Blu-ray and DVD versions of the seventh season were released on December 12, 2017. The final season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December 3, 2019. The home release also included behind-the-scenes footage and cast commentary. A box set containing all eight seasons, including a cast reunion hosted by Conan O'Brien, was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December 3, 2019, and was also released on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on November 3, 2020. In August 2022, the complete series was released in 4K, Dolby Vision HDR and Dolby Atmos on HBO Max. Game of Thrones has been widely pirated, primarily outside the US. According to the file-sharing news website TorrentFreak, it was the most pirated television series from 2012 to 2019 (except 2018, when no new episodes were broadcast), and Guinness World Records named it the most-pirated television program in 2015. Illegal downloads increased to about seven million in the first quarter of 2015, up 45 percent from 2014. An unnamed episode was downloaded about 4.28 million times through public BitTorrent trackers in 2012, roughly equal to its number of broadcast viewers. Piracy rates were particularly high in Australia prompting the US Ambassador to Australia, Jeff Bleich, to issue a statement in 2013 condemning the practice there. Delays in availability by non-HBO broadcasters before 2015 and the cost of subscriptions to their services have been cited as causes for the series's illegal distribution. According to TorrentFreak, a subscription to a service broadcasting Game of Thrones cost up to $25 per month in the United States, up to £26 per episode in the UK and up to $52 per episode in Australia. In 2013, to combat unauthorized downloads, HBO said it intended to make its content more widely available within a week of the US premiere (including HBO Go). In 2015, the fifth season was simulcast to 170 countries and to HBO Now users. On April 11, the day before the season premiere, screener copies of the first four episodes of the fifth season leaked to a number of file-sharing websites. Within a day of the leak, the files were downloaded over 800,000 times; in one week the illegal downloads reached 32 million, with the season five premiere—"The Wars to Come"— pirated 13 million times. The season five finale ("Mother's Mercy") was the most simultaneously shared file in the history of the BitTorrent file sharing protocol, with over 250,000 sharers and over 1.5 million downloads in eight hours. HBO did not send screeners to the press for the sixth season to prevent the spread of unlicensed copies and spoilers. Season seven was either illegally streamed or downloaded over 1 billion times, with the season averaging 14.7 billion illegal views, and the season finale garnering over 120 million illegal views within its first 72 hours. According to anti-piracy company MUSO, the eighth season was illegally downloaded or viewed most in India and China. Illegal viewership for the final season was double the number of legal viewers, with 55 million illegal downloads for the season eight premiere "Winterfell", compared to 17.4 million who watched on HBO platforms. Observers, including series director David Petrarca and Time Warner CEO Jeff Bewkes, said that illegal downloads did not hurt the series's prospects; it benefited from "buzz" and social commentary, and the high piracy rate did not significantly translate into lost subscriptions. According to Polygon, HBO's relaxed attitude towards piracy and the sharing of login credentials amounted to a premium-television "free-to-play" model. At a 2015 Oxford Union panel discussion, series co-creator David Benioff said that he was just glad that people watched the series; illegally downloaded episodes sometimes interested viewers enough to buy a copy, especially in countries where Game of Thrones was not televised. Series co-creator D. B. Weiss had mixed feelings, saying that the series was expensive to produce and "if it doesn't make the money back, then it ceases to exist". However, he was pleased that so many people "enjoy the show so much they can't wait to get their hands on it." Game of Thrones, particularly the first six seasons, received critical acclaim, although the series's frequent use of nudity and violence has been criticized. The series has an overall rating of 89% on Rotten Tomatoes and a score of 86 on Metacritic. Some critics and publications have called the show among the best HBO series of all time. The series was highly anticipated by fans before its premiere. James Poniewozik said the pilot episode set "a very large table", while Ti Singh of Den of Geek said the show "is here to stay". First-season reviewers said the series had high production values, a fully realized world and compelling characters. According to Variety, "There may be no show more profitable to its network than 'Game of Thrones' is to HBO. Fully produced by the pay cabler and already a global phenomenon after only one season, the fantasy skein was a gamble that has paid off handsomely." The second season was also well received. Entertainment Weekly praised its "vivid, vital, and just plain fun" storytelling and, according to The Hollywood Reporter, the series made a "strong case for being one of TV's best series"; its seriousness made it the only drama comparable to Mad Men or Breaking Bad. The critical response for the middle seasons were also positive. Matt Fowler of IGN said the series was "still quite marvelous" praising the character development. TV Guide named the third season's penultimate episode "The Rains of Castamere" as number three on their 65 Best Episodes of the 21st Century. The critical acclaim continued into season four, with Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly calling the season " the height of the show's icon-generating powers". The Independent stated that the show deviated significantly from the novels however the "changes benefited the show and condensed the substantial source text admirably well". The critical response to season five was again positive, however, some commentators criticized the sexual assault in the "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken" episode. Season six also received favorable reviews. Time criticized the repetitive story lines early in the season, however, its reviewer praised the "Battle of the Bastards" episode as "one of the show's very best". One reviewer also said there were "more woman-friendly" themes throughout the season, with another singling out Arya Stark's story arc. As the seasons progressed, due to lack of new material from the books the show became less character driven and more reliant on big twists and spectacle. The show's final two seasons, especially season eight, received more criticism. Season seven was praised for its action sequences and focused central characters, but received criticism for its pace and plot developments that were said to have "defied logic". Writing for Vox, Emily VanDerWerff cited the departure from the source material as a reason for the "circular storytelling". Critical reception for season eight was mixed. The Guardian said there was the "rushed business" of the plot which "failed to do justice to its characters or its actors". Writing for The Hollywood Reporter, Maureen Ryan condemned the season's reductive treatment of women, and "decisions set up and executed with little or no foresight or thoughtfulness", declaring the penultimate episode as "Game of Thrones at its worst". Fan reaction was mixed for the final season. A petition on Change.org started by some fans requested that the final season be remade with different writers. Casey Bloys, HBO's president of programming, said at a Television Critics Association event "the petition shows a lot of enthusiasm and passion for the show but it wasn't something we seriously considered". Despite the criticism of the writing, the music and visual effects were praised. In 2023, Game of Thrones was included on The Guardian's list of worst TV endings of all time. The cast performances were praised throughout the show's run. Peter Dinklage's "charming, morally ambiguous, and self-aware" portrayal of Tyrion, which earned him Emmy and Golden Globe awards, was acclaimed. "In many ways, Game of Thrones belongs to Dinklage", wrote Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times before Tyrion became the series's central figure in season two. Several critics highlighted performances by actresses and children. Lena Headey's portrayal of the "riveting" Cersei Lannister also received praise. Maisie Williams was singled out as well and her season two work with veteran actor Charles Dance (Tywin Lannister). Stephen Dillane received positive reviews for his performance as Stannis Baratheon, especially in the fifth season, with one critic noting "Whether you like Stannis or not, you have to admit that Stephen Dillane delivered a monumental performance this season." The series was also praised for the portrayal of handicapped and disabled characters. One commentator stated that Tyrion Lannister is a "departure from the archetypal dwarf" often found in other fantasy stories like The Lord of the Rings. Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly gave the series a 'B' rating, saying that it was ultimately "okay". With both "transcendent moments" and "miserable phases", it was "beloved enough to be criticized by everyone for something". Franich described seasons three and four as "relentless", seasons six's ending having a "killer one-two punch", while seasons seven and eight were "indifferent". The New York Times gave the series a mixed review after the season three finale, criticizing the number of characters, their lack of complexity and a meandering plot. The show, however, appeared on many "best of" lists for the end of the 2010s. Alan Sepinwall, writing for Rolling Stone, placed the series on his "50 Best TV Shows of the 2010s" list, saying its "ability to most of the time keep all of its disparate threads feeling vital and tied to one another, remains a staggering achievement". Despite its otherwise enthusiastic reception by critics, Game of Thrones has been criticized for the amount of female nudity, violence, and sexual violence it depicts, and for the manner in which it depicts these themes. George R. R. Martin responded that he felt obliged to be truthful about history and human nature, and that rape and sexual violence are common in war; and that omitting them from the narrative would have rung false and undermined one of his novels' themes, its historical realism. HBO said that they "fully support the vision and artistry of Dan and David's exceptional work and we feel this work speaks for itself". The show has reportedly been censored or banned for sexual or violent content in countries like China, India, Iran, Jordan, Singapore, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and Vietnam. The amount of sex and nudity in the series, especially in scenes incidental to the plot, was the focus of much of the criticism aimed at it in its first and second seasons. Stephen Dillane, who portrays Stannis Baratheon, likened the series's frequent explicit scenes to "German porn from the 1970s". The series's use of "sexposition", plot delivery accompanied by sex or nudity, was criticized as distracting. Saturday Night Live parodied this aspect of the adaptation in a sketch that portrayed a 13-year-old boy as a Game of Thrones consultant, whose main concern was showing as many breasts as possible. The episode "The Bear and the Maiden Fair" in the third season featured the lengthy torture and eventual emasculation of Theon Greyjoy, which prompted criticism. New York magazine called the scene "torture porn". According to one commentator, although the series' violence tended to serve a narrative purpose, Theon's torture in the episode was excessive as well. One commentator noted that Greyjoy's emasculation was one of the few sexual assault scenes where a male was the victim. A scene in the fourth season's episode "Breaker of Chains", in which Jaime Lannister rapes his sister and lover Cersei in the tomb of their dead son, triggered a broad public discussion about the series' depiction of sexual violence against women. According to Dave Itzkoff of The New York Times, the scene caused outrage, in part because of comments by director Alex Graves that the scene became "consensual by the end". Game of Thrones has been criticized for adding scenes of rape that were not included in the novels, such as the rape of Craster's daughters by the mutinous members of the Night's Watch. Sonia Saraiya of The A.V. Club wrote that the series's choice to portray this sexual act, and a similar one between Daenerys Targaryen and Khal Drogo in the first season—both described as consensual in the source novels—as a rape appeared to be an act of "exploitation for shock value". In the fifth season's episode "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken", Sansa Stark is raped by Ramsay Bolton. Most reviewers and publications found the scene gratuitous and artistically unnecessary. In response to the scene, pop culture website The Mary Sue announced that it would cease coverage of the series because of the repeated use of rape as a plot device, and US Senator Claire McCaskill said that she would no longer watch it. The episode was the lowest rated on Rotten Tomatoes until the season eight episode "The Bells". As the later seasons saw Daenerys, Sansa, and Cersei assume ruling positions, Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post noted that the series could be seen as a "long-arc revenge fantasy about what happens when women who have been brutalized and raped gain power". Much of the criticism after the series finale was centered around the handling of the female character storylines. One commentator cited the male gaze as one of main sources of the "romanticized female rape" and general nudity throughout the series. Another commentator stated the use of both sex and violence helps perpetuate misogyny within the Game of Thrones universe. Sophie Turner, who portrayed Sansa Stark, has spoken about the long-term impact she believed filming the "heavy" scenes would have on her and revealed that she developed coping mechanisms to help her through filming. The lighting, or lack of light, in darker scenes has been a recurring point of criticism since season six of the series. In 2016, Bustle's Caitlyn Callegari listed 31 examples of scenes where the lighting caused viewers problems ranging from not being able to tell a character's hair color to being unable to see what was going on. Some reviewers have noted this is part of a wider trend among shows that are made by people who have experience working primarily on films, suggesting they "haven't grasped the nuances (or lack thereof)" of television as a medium, especially the differences between watching a scene on a television screen versus watching it on the big screen in a movie theater. In a 2017 interview, Robert McLachlan, a cinematographer working on the show, explained the lack of lighting as an artistic choice saying "we're trying to be as naturalistic as possible". The criticism reached a high point during "The Long Night", the third episode of season eight. Barely minutes into the episode, viewers took to social media sites such as Twitter to express their discontent over the fact that they were having severe difficulties watching the battle and trying to figure out what was going on. Although Game of Thrones was initially dismissed by some critics, its success has been credited with an increase in the fantasy genre's popularity. The series's popularity led to increased sales of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels (republished in tie-in editions), which remained at the top of bestseller lists for months. On the eve of the second season's premiere, CNN said, "after this weekend, you may be hard pressed to find someone who isn't a fan of some form of epic fantasy" and cited Ian Bogost as saying that the series continues a trend of successful screen adaptations beginning with Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy (2001–2003) and the Harry Potter films (2001–2011) establishing fantasy as a mass-market genre; they are "gateway drugs to fantasy fan culture". The show's success led to the commissioning of several fantasy television series, including The Wheel of Time and The Lord of the Rings: The Rings of Power by Amazon Studios. According to Neil Gaiman, whose novels Good Omens and American Gods were adapted for television, Game of Thrones helped to change attitudes towards fantasy on television, but mainly it made big budgets for fantasy series more acceptable. The success of the genre has been attributed by writers to a longing for escapism in popular culture, frequent female nudity and a skill in balancing lighthearted and serious topics (dragons and politics, for example) which provided it with a prestige enjoyed by conventional, top-tier drama series. According to The Daily Beast, Game of Thrones was a favorite of sitcom writers and the series has been referred to in other television series. With other fantasy series, it has been cited as a reason for an increase in the purchase (and abandonment) of huskies and other wolf-like dogs. Game of Thrones has added to the popular vocabulary. A first-season scene in which Petyr Baelish explains his motives (or background) while prostitutes have sex in the background gave rise to the word "sexposition" for providing exposition with sex and nudity. Dothraki, the series's nomadic horsemen, was ranked fourth in a September 2012 Global Language Monitor list of words from television most used on the internet. The series and its characters have also been referenced by politicians and academics to commentate on modern-day geopolitics, economic inequality, and climate change. In 2019, singer-songwriter Taylor Swift told Entertainment Weekly that several songs on her 2017 album Reputation were inspired by Game of Thrones characters and plots. "Khaleesi" became more popular as a name for baby girls in the United States. In the novels and the TV series, "khaleesi" is not a name, but the title of the wife of a "khal" (warlord) in the Dothraki language, held by Daenerys Targaryen. Other names from characters in the series, like Daenerys, also became popular baby names. Game of Thrones has also become a subject of both academic and scientific inquiry. In 2016, researchers published a paper analyzing emotional sentiment in online public discourse associated with the unfolding storyline during the fourth season. The Mathematical Association of America published a journal in 2016 that applied the multidisciplinary field of network science to create a social network for the show's characters and their relationships. The analysis purported to be able to distinguish discussions about an episode's storyline from media critiques or assessments of a specific actor's performance. In 2018, Australian scientists conducted a survival analysis and examined the mortality among 330 important characters during the first seven seasons of Game of Thrones. In 2019, the Australian Red Cross conducted a study using international humanitarian law to determine which of the Game of Thrones' characters had committed the most war crimes during the first seven seasons of the show. Animals have also been named after the show. Three species of mud dragons; Echinoderes daenerysae, Echinoderes rhaegal and Echinoderes drogoni, a bee fly; Paramonovius nightking, three species of scarab beetles; Gymnetis drogoni, Gymnetis rhaegali and Gymnetis viserioni, and a brittle star, Ophiohamus georgemartini, due to its sharp thorns resembling those depicted on the Game of Thrones crown. A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones have a broad, active international fan base. In 2012 Vulture ranked the series's fans as the most devoted in popular culture, more so than those of Lady Gaga, Justin Bieber, Harry Potter or Star Wars. Fans include political leaders such as former US president Barack Obama, former British prime minister David Cameron, former Australian prime minister Julia Gillard and Dutch foreign minister Frans Timmermans, who framed European politics using quotes from Martin's novels in a 2013 speech. BBC News said in 2013 that "the passion and the extreme devotion of fans" had created a phenomenon, unlike anything related to other popular TV series, manifesting itself in fan fiction, Game of Thrones-themed burlesque routines and parents naming their children after series characters; writers quoted attributed this success to the rich detail, moral ambiguity, sexual explicitness and epic scale of the series and novels. The previous year, "Arya" was the fastest-rising girl's name in the US after it had jumped in popularity from 711th to 413th place. As of 2013[update], about 58 percent of series viewers were male and 42 percent female, and the average male viewer was 41 years old. According to SBS Broadcasting Group marketing director Helen Kellie, Game of Thrones has a high fan-engagement rate; 5.5 percent of the series's 2.9 million Facebook fans talked online about the series in 2012, compared to 1.8 percent of the over ten million fans of True Blood (HBO's other fantasy series). Vulture.com cited Westeros.org and WinterIsComing.net (news and discussion forums), ToweroftheHand.com (which organizes communal readings of the novels) and Podcastoficeandfire.com as fan sites dedicated to the TV and novel series; and podcasts cover Game of Thrones. Game of Thrones has won numerous awards throughout its run, including 59 Emmy Awards, eight Screen Actors Guild Awards and a Peabody Award. It holds the record for total Emmy Award wins for a scripted television series (surpassing the record of 37 wins held by Frasier since 2004) and for most Emmy nominations for a drama series, with 161. In 2019, the show's final season established a new record for most Emmy nominations received in a year with 32, breaking the 25-year-long record of 26 nominations established by NYPD Blue in 1994. In 2013, the Writers Guild of America listed Game of Thrones as the 40th best written series in television history. Also in 2013, at the Media Access Awards, George R. R. Martin accepted the Visionary Award from the Writers With Disabilities committee of the Writers Guild of America, for its positive portrayal of character with disabilities. In 2015, The Hollywood Reporter placed it at number four on their best TV shows ever list, while in 2016 the series was placed seventh on Empire's "The 50 best TV shows ever". The same year, Rolling Stone named it the twelfth "greatest TV Show of all time". In 2023, Variety ranked Game of Thrones #21 on its list of the 100 greatest TV shows of all time. Game of Thrones was considered a ratings success for HBO throughout all eight seasons. The show premiere was watched by 2.2 million, and the first season averaged 2.5 million viewers per episode. For its second season, the series had an average gross audience of 11.6 million viewers. The third season was seen by 14.2 million viewers, making Game of Thrones the second-most-viewed HBO series (after The Sopranos). HBO said that Game of Thrones' average gross audience of 18.4 million viewers (later adjusted to 18.6 million) had passed The Sopranos for the viewership record. The season five episode "The House of Black and White" was simulcasted in 173 countries, becoming the "largest TV drama telecast" according to Guinness World Records. By the sixth season the average per-episode gross viewing figure had increased to over 25 million, with nearly 40 percent of viewers watching on HBO digital platforms. In 2016, a New York Times study of the 50 TV shows with the most Facebook likes found that Game of Thrones was "much more popular in cities than in the countryside, probably the only show involving zombies that is". By season seven, the average viewer numbers had grown to 32.8 million per episode across all platforms. The series finale was viewed by 19.3 million people across HBO's platforms, becoming the network's most watched episode. The lead-out show also benefited from the finale's record viewership. Game of Thrones also set viewership records outside the United States on pay-television channels in the United Kingdom (with a 2016 average audience of more than five million on all platforms) and Australia (with a cumulative average audience of 1.2 million). Video streaming research company Parrot Analytics stated that after the US, the season eight premiere demand was "particularly strong in the United Kingdom and France". Nielsen Media Research noted the show was popular among 18 to 49 key demographic with strong female viewership for a fantasy series. The show also benefited from time shifting viewership. Between season one and season seven, 7-day viewers, the number of both DVR and video on demand views during the week after the episode broadcast, grew from 3.3 million to 13.7 million. Following the show finale, commentators said many viewers might cancel their premium television and streaming subscriptions. HBO parent company WarnerMedia reported that subscription revenue declined only 0.9 percent between April and June 2019. Game of Thrones : U.S. viewers per episode (millions) Audience measurement performed by Nielsen Media Research The series and the novels have inspired several video games. HBO has licensed a variety of merchandise based on Game of Thrones, including games, replica weapons and armor, jewelry, bobblehead dolls by Funko, beer by Ommegang and apparel. High-end merchandise includes a $10,500 Ulysse Nardin wristwatch and a $30,000 resin replica of the Iron Throne. In 2013 and 2014, a traveling exhibition of costumes, props, armor and weapons from the series visited major cities in Europe and the Americas. Starting 2018, Diageo released several Game of Thrones themed whiskies. Thronecast: The Official Guide to Game of Thrones, a series of podcasts presented by Geoff Lloyd and produced by Koink, were released on the Sky Atlantic website and the UK iTunes store during the series's run; a new podcast, with analysis and cast interviews, was released after each episode. In 2014 and 2015, HBO commissioned Catch the Throne, two rap albums about the series. A companion book, Inside HBO's Game of Thrones by series writer Bryan Cogman, was published on September 27, 2012. The 192-page book, illustrated with concept art and behind-the-scenes photographs, covers the creation of the series's first two seasons and its principal characters and families. After the Thrones was a live aftershow during which hosts Andy Greenwald and Chris Ryan discussed episodes of the series. It aired on HBO Now, the Monday following each season six episode. The Game of Thrones Live Concert Experience, a North American 28-city orchestral tour which performed the series's soundtrack with composer Ramin Djawadi, began in February 2017 and concluded in April 2017. A second tour followed in 2018 across cities in Europe and North America. Each season's Blu-ray and DVD set contains several short still motion animated sequences titled Histories and Lore, narrated by the cast, in character, as they detail events in the history of Westeros. For the seventh season, this was to include the animated prequel series Game of Thrones: Conquest & Rebellion, illustrated in a different animation style than previous videos. The series focuses on Aegon Targaryen's conquest of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros. A week after the series finale, HBO released a behind-the-scenes documentary entitled Game of Thrones: The Last Watch. The program documented the production of season 8 along with read-throughs and interviews with the cast. In May 2017, after years of speculation about possible successor series, HBO commissioned Max Borenstein, Jane Goldman, Brian Helgeland, Carly Wray, and Bryan Cogman to develop five individual Game of Thrones successor series; the writers were to be working individually with George R. R. Martin, who also co-wrote two of the scripts. D. B. Weiss and David Benioff said that they would not be involved with any of the projects. Martin said that all the concepts under discussion were prequels, although he believes the term "successor show" applies better to these projects, as they are not Game of Thrones spin-offs in the traditional sense. He ruled out Robert's Rebellion (the overthrow of Daenerys's father by Robert Baratheon) as a possible idea and revealed that some may be set outside Westeros. In September 2018, speaking about the four projects (i.e. not about the Goldman's project), HBO president of programming Casey Bloys said that some of them had been abandoned completely, while others remained as possibilities for the future; Martin said that: "at least two of them are solidly based on material in Fire and Blood". In May 2019, Martin stated that two of the projects were still in the script stage, but were "edging closer". In April 2019, Cogman confirmed his prequel would not be moving forward. In January 2021, an adult animated spin-off series was announced to be in development at HBO Max. In July 2021, two more animated series were in development at HBO Max, with one being set in Yi Ti, a nation in Essos loosely based on Imperial China. The working title is The Golden Empire. In March 2021, it was reported that three Game of Thrones spin-offs were in development at HBO; they include 10,000 Ships (from Amanda Segal), a reference to the voyages made by warrior queen Princess Nymeria, who later founds Dorne; 9 Voyages aka The Sea Snake (from Bruno Heller), about the voyages of Corlys Velaryon on his vessal the Sea Snake; and a project based on Flea Bottom, the poorest slum in King's Landing. In June 2022, it was reported that a Jon Snow sequel series with Kit Harington to reprise his role was in early development at HBO. The working title is Snow and Martin confirmed his involvement with the project and that Harington initiated the idea. In April 2023, it was reported that a series based on Aegon Targaryen's conquest of Westeros was in development. In December 2023, it was announced that The Sea Snake is being developed as an animated series, having been previously announced as a live action series. On June 8, 2018, HBO commissioned a pilot to a Game of Thrones prequel series from Goldman as showrunner and Martin as co-creator. The prequel was to take place in the Age of Heroes, a period that begins roughly 10,000 years before the events of Game of Thrones. Notable events of that period include the foundation of powerful Houses, the Long Night when the White Walkers first descended upon Westeros, and the Andal Invasion when the Andals invaded from Essos and conquered most of Westeros. Martin suggested The Long Night as a title for the series. S. J. Clarkson was announced to direct and executive produce the pilot, while Naomi Watts was cast as the female lead playing "a charismatic socialite hiding a dark secret". Other series regulars were to include: Josh Whitehouse, Toby Regbo, Ivanno Jeremiah, Georgie Henley, Naomi Ackie, Denise Gough, Jamie Campbell Bower, Sheila Atim, Alex Sharp, Miranda Richardson, Marquis Rodriguez, John Simm, Richard McCabe, John Heffernan, and Dixie Egerickx. In September 2019, Martin claimed the pilot was in post-production but in October 2019, it was announced that HBO had decided not to move forward with the series. In September 2019, Deadline Hollywood reported that a second prequel from Martin and Ryan Condal that "tracks the beginning of the end for House Targaryen" was close to receiving a pilot order from HBO; the project is not considered an original sixth script, as it builds upon Cogman's idea from 2017. This prequel, titled House of the Dragon, was commissioned as a complete series on October 29, 2019. The 10-episode series is to be based on material from Fire and Blood, executive produced by Martin, Vince Gerardis, Condal, and Miguel Sapochnik; the latter two are to be its showrunners as well. In January 2020, HBO stated that the series is scheduled for a 2022 release and that the writing process has begun. Casting for the series started in July 2020. In October 2020, it was revealed that Paddy Considine was cast as King Viserys I Targaryen. In December 2020, three more castings were announced: Olivia Cooke as Alicent Hightower, Emma D'Arcy as Rhaenyra Targaryen, and Matt Smith as Daemon Targaryen. In February 2021, HBO chief content officer Casey Bloys stated that the show would start production in April, with filming occurring in England. In February 2021, Steve Toussaint, Eve Best, Rhys Ifans, and Sonoya Mizuno were confirmed to also be starring in the series. In March 2022, HBO announced a series premiere date of August 21, 2022, followed by the release of the official teaser trailer. In January 2021, it was revealed that HBO were developing another prequel series to be based on Martin's novella series Tales of Dunk and Egg. Steven Conrad was attached as writer and executive producer of the Tales of Dunk and Egg series in November 2021. In April 2023, HBO ordered A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms: The Hedge Knight to series. Noah Harari, Yuval (May 24, 2019). "Game of Thrones: A Battle of Reality Versus Fantasy". Wired. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Alsop, Elizabeth (July 8, 2015). "The Unbearable Darkness of Prestige Television". The Atlantic. Emerson Collective. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2020. From the bro-style bloviating (or, broviating) of True Detective's first season, to the ominous proclaiming that punctuates the general whoring and slaying of Game of Thrones, to the unceasing climatological and psychological punishments meted out to the cast of The Killing, it seems as though some of the most celebrated recent examples of serial drama have elected self-seriousness as their default tone. Arp, Robert (2017). J. Silverman, Eric (ed.). The Ultimate Game of Thrones and Philosophy. Open Court Publishing Company. ISBN 9780812699555. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Like Game of Thrones, the action in those ancient tragedies centered on the stories of four ruling dynasties: House Atreus of Mycenae, House Cadmus in Thebes, House Erichthonius in Athens, and House Minos in Crete. Marcotte, Amanda (June 9, 2015). "Don't Be So Shocked by the Deaths on Game of Thrones: The Show Is a Classical Tragedy". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2020. But while Game of Thrones is in part a rebuttal to traditional fantasy fiction, I'd argue that it's become clear—after five books in A Song of Ice and Fire and five seasons of the TV series—that Martin and showrunners D.B. Weiss and David Benioff are actually playing with a format that isn't so revolutionary at all: They're reviving and updating the classical tragedy as a narrative form. Fleming, Michael (January 16, 2007). "HBO turns 'Fire' into fantasy series". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved March 2, 2010. Cogman, Bryan (November 6, 2014). Inside HBO's Game of Thrones. Orion. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-4732-1040-0. Archived from the original on November 6, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2016. Ordoña, Michael (May 16, 2019). "'Game of Thrones': Second chances and second lives for key characters". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 5, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Fowler, Matt (April 8, 2011). "Game of Thrones: "Winter is Coming" Review". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on August 17, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, James (May 29, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' scoop: Season 3 character list revealed – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Belloni, Matthew; Goldberg, Lesley (October 30, 2014). "'Game of Thrones' Cast Signs for Season 7 with Big Raises". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Gonzales, Erica; Jones, Alexis (April 1, 2019). "Game of Thrones Stars Could Be Making Millions Per Episode in the Final Season". Harper's Bazaar. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Back, Grace (May 15, 2019). "Here's How Much Money The 'Game of Thrones' Cast Makes Per Episode". Marie Claire Australia. Pacific Magazines. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Power, Ed (May 22, 2019). "Game of Thrones main characters and cast – a complete list of those alive and dead at the end of the finale". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. Archived from the original on May 24, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Alter, Rebecca; Polk, Milan (May 22, 2019). "The First and Last Appearances of Game of Thrones' Most Memorable Characters". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Hughes, Sarah (March 22, 2014). "'Sopranos meets Middle-earth': how Game of Thrones took over our world". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Holland, Tom (March 24, 2013). "Game of Thrones is more brutally realistic than most historical novels". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 25, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Katz, Brandon (April 11, 2019). "How Much Is 'Game of Thrones' Inspired by Real-Life Battles? An Expert Weighs In". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Richards, Linda (January 2001). "January interview: George R.R. Martin". January Magazine. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Itzkoff, Dave (April 1, 2011). "His Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy: George R. R. Martin Talks 'Game of Thrones'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2012. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Cogman, Bryan (November 6, 2014). Inside HBO's Game of Thrones. Orion. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-4732-1040-0. Archived from the original on November 6, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2016. Itzkoff, Dave (May 2, 2014). "For 'Game of Thrones,' Rising Unease Over Rape's Recurring Role". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Fitzpatrick, Kellyann (2019). Neomedievalism, Popular Culture, and the Academy. Vol. 30. Boydell & Brewer. pp. 124–125. doi:10.2307/j.ctvktrx88. ISBN 9781843845416. JSTOR j.ctvktrx88. S2CID 241392823. Archived from the original on April 24, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Young, Joseph (2018). "Review of Medievalism in a Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones". Mythlore. 37 (1 (133)): 248–251. ISSN 0146-9339. JSTOR 26809343. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Larsson, Simon; Lundström, Markus (June 2020). "Anarchy in the Game of Thrones". Neohelicon. 47 (1): 117–129. doi:10.1007/s11059-020-00522-5. S2CID 216189073. Gevers, Nick (December 2000). "Sunsets of High Renown – An Interview with George R. R. Martin". Infinity Plus. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Somin, Ilya (July 16, 2017). "The politics of "Game of Thrones"". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 29, 2024. "The battle between good and evil reigns – Martin talks about new series Game of Thrones". The Guardian. June 11, 2011. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Baum, Michele Dula (April 11, 2001). "A Song of Ice and Fire – Author George R.R. Martin's fantastic kingdoms". CNN. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2016. Fowler, Matt (August 27, 2017). "Game of Thrones: 'The Dragon and the Wolf' Review". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2017. McCluskey, Megan (May 17, 2016). "George R.R. Martin Explains Why He Kills Off Your Favorite Game of Thrones Characters". Time. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2020. O'Connell, Michael (May 22, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' Topped by 'Spartacus: Vengeance' as TV's Deadliest Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2012. Lystad, Reidar P.; Brown, Benjamin T. (December 2018). ""Death is certain, the time is not": mortality and survival in Game of Thrones". Injury Epidemiology. 5 (1). BioMed Central: 44. doi:10.1186/s40621-018-0174-7. PMC 6286904. PMID 30535868. Hibberd, James (March 17, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' showrunners answer burning season 5 questions". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Holland, Tom (March 24, 2013). "Game of Thrones is more brutally realistic than most historical novels". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Mund, Lucas (March 27, 2013). "Are the Lands of Westeros Inspired by Real-Life Countries?". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2022. DeVries, Kelly (March 29, 2012). "Game of Thrones as History". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2020. May Fathallah, Judith (2017). "Fanfiction and the Author". Amsterdam University Press: 102. ISBN 978-90-485-2908-7. JSTOR j.ctt1v2xsp4. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2020 – via JSTOR. Young, Joseph (2017). ""Enough About Whores": Sexual Characterization in A Song of Ice and Fire". Mythlore. 2 (130). Mythopoeic Society: 45–61. JSTOR 26816084. Archived from the original on April 24, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2020 – via JSTOR. Orr, David (August 12, 2011). "Dragons Ascendant: George R. R. Martin and the Rise of Fantasy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Martin's books are essentially the War of the Roses with magic Milne, Ben (April 4, 2014). "Game of Thrones: The cult French novel that inspired George RR Martin". BBC News Online. BBC News. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2014. Kustritz, Anne (June 9, 2016). ""They All Lived Happily Ever After. Obviously.": Realism and Utopia in Game of Thrones-Based Alternate Universe Fairy Tale Fan Fiction". Humanities. 5 (2). MDPI: 7. doi:10.3390/h5020043. Game of Thrones fairy tale AUs perfectly exemplify this principle, as these fan works reconceptualize the HBO show, the books the show is based on, and the fairy tale genre, as well as other fan-specific genre conventions, while the books themselves also draw heavily on numerous layers of fairy tale, alternate history, and fantasy novels, films, and stories as intertexts. Miller, Laura (April 4, 2011). "Just Write It!". The New Yorker. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on June 30, 2019. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Barnett, David (April 15, 2019). "How Game of Thrones achieved world domination... 15 years before the TV show even aired". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Flood, Alison (April 10, 2015). "George RR Martin revolutionised how people think about fantasy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. A Song of Ice and Fire awards "1997 World Fantasy Award Winners and Nominees". World Fantasy Award. World Fantasy Convention. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2020. "Locus Awards Nominees List". Locus Awards. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Grossman, Lev (November 13, 2005). "The American Tolkien". Time. Archived from the original on December 29, 2008. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Cogman, Bryan (2014). Inside HBO's Game of Thrones. Orion Publishing Group. p. 6. ISBN 978-1473210400. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Mitchell, Elvis (May 8, 2013). "UpClose: Game of Thrones with David Benioff and D. B. Weiss (Full Length)". KCRW. National Public Radio. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2013. At about 2:50. Birnbaum, Debra (April 15, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' Creators: We Know How It's Going to End". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Armstrong, Jennifer (April 4, 2011). "'Game of Thrones': George R. R. Martin talks HBO show". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Game of Thrones: Long Story Short (HBO) (YouTube). HBO. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Shannon Miller, Liz (August 27, 2017). "'Game of Thrones': Only 1 Out of 19 Directors Have Been Women — Why the Final Season Should Change That". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved May 17, 2020. Hudson, Laura (August 14, 2007). "Talking with George R. R. Martin Part 2". Publishers Weekly. PWxyz. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Howden, Martin (2012). Games of Thrones A-Z: An Unofficial Guide to Accompany the Hit TV Series. Kings Road Publishing. p. 3. ISBN 978-1782190929. Kirschling, Gregory (November 27, 2007). "George R.R. Martin answers your questions". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, Jame (November 11, 2008). "HBO orders fantasy pilot Thrones". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Robinson, Joanna (February 3, 2016). "Game of Thrones Show-Runners Get Extremely Candid About Their Original "Piece of Sh—t" Pilot". Vanity Fair. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Hibberd, James (January 14, 2010). "HBO: 'Game of Thrones' dailies 'look fantastic'". The Hollywood Reporter. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on June 2, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Goldberg, Lesley (April 14, 2011). "'Game of Thrones' by The Numbers". The Hollywood Reporter. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Pallotta, Frank (April 7, 2012). "How HBO Let Game of Thrones Make an $8 Million Episode". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. "This Week's Cover: 'Game of Thrones,' the battle to make season 2 epic". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. March 14, 2012. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2012. Gornstein, Leslie (May 28, 2012). "Holy Flaming Warships! How Expensive Is Game of Thrones, Anyway?". E!. NBCUniversal Television Group. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2015. Hibberd, James (March 2015). "'Game of Thrones': EW spends 240 hours in Westeros". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Lee, Ben (March 30, 2016). "Game of Thrones season 6 costs A LOT per episode: The HBO fantasy epic's massive budget is revealed". Digital Spy. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Martin, Emmie (April 14, 2019). "Here's how much it costs to produce one episode of 'Game of Thrones'". CNBC. NBCUniversal Television Group. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Barraclough, Leo (April 15, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Casting Director Nina Gold to Receive BAFTA Award". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved March 18, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (May 5, 2009). "Two will play HBO's 'Game'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2009. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Kit, Borys; Andreeva, Nellie (July 19, 2009). "Sean Bean ascends to 'Game of Thrones'". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2009. Walsh, Michael (March 12, 2017). "What We Learned From Game Of Thrones' SXSW Panel, and What It Might Mean". Nerdist Industries. Legendary Entertainment. Archived from the original on April 2, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Sepinwall, Alan (March 19, 2010). "'Game of Thrones' recasting: Ehle out, Fairley in". HitFix. Uproxx Media Group. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2013. Ryan, Maureen (May 21, 2010). "Exclusive: 'Game of Thrones' recasts noble role". Chicago Tribune. Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved February 24, 2013. Ryan, Maureen (October 13, 2009). "The 'Games' afoot: HBO's 'Game of Thrones' gears up". Chicago Tribune. Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Roberts, Kayleigh (December 26, 2017). "9 Times 'Game of Thrones' Recast Characters". Harper's Bazaar. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Collins, Sean T. (April 2, 2015). "Blood Caffeine Sex Magic: How 'Game of Thrones' Gets Written". The New York Observer. Observer Media. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2015. Karmali, Luke (March 30, 2015). "George R. R. Martin Not Writing Game of Thrones Season 6 Episode". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2015. Ryan, Maureen (March 16, 2010). "HBO's 'Game of Thrones': The 'Buffy' and 'Battlestar' connection". Chicago Tribune. Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2015. "The Surprising Connection Between Game of Thrones and Monty Python". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. March 24, 2014. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2014. Robinson, Joanna (March 22, 2015). "Game of Thrones Creators Confirm the Show Will Spoil the Books". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on June 21, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2015. Bruner, Raisa (April 14, 2019). "Here's Why the Game of Thrones Show Is Better Than the Books". Time. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Gartenberg, Chaim (May 21, 2019). "An apology to George R.R. Martin: ending Game of Thrones is really hard". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Bruney, Gabrielle (August 18, 2019). "Game of Thrones Author George R.R. Martin Says the Show's Ending Won't Change His Books". Esquire. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Birnbaum, Debra (April 14, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Creators Mull Shorter Final Seasons". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016. Hibberd, James (July 18, 2016). "Game of Thrones: HBO announces summer return, 7 episodes". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (April 21, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Picked Up For Season 7, 'Veep' & 'Silicon Valley' Also Renewed By HBO". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Gonzales, Erica (April 12, 2019). "Game of Thrones Season 8: Everything We Know". Harper's Bazaar. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Ryan, Maureen (March 2, 2010). "HBO picks up 'Game of Thrones'; first picture, cast list". Chicago Tribune. Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2012. Season 2 filming schedule and novel adaptations Hibberd, James (April 19, 2011). "HBO renews 'Game of Thrones' for second season!". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Anders, Charlie Jane (June 5, 2012). "10 Best Changes Game of Thrones Made to A Clash of Kings". Gizmodo. G/O Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2016. Season 3 filming schedule and novel adaptations O'Connell, Michael (April 10, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' Renewed for Season 3". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, James (March 30, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' showrunners on season 2, splitting Book 3 and their hope for a 70-hour epic". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. p. 3. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2012. Schwartz, Terri (May 12, 2014). "'Game of Thrones' Season 4: Writer Bryan Cogman breaks down Tyrion's trial, book deviations and that White Walker scene". Zap2it. Nexstar Media Group. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Season 4 filming schedule and novel adaptations Hibberd, James (April 2, 2013). "'Game of Thrones' renewed for season 4". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 9, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Vineyard, Jennifer (June 11, 2013). "What Will Happen in Season 4 of Game of Thrones?". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Season 5 filming schedule and novel adaptations Goldman, Eric (April 8, 2014). "Game of Thrones Renewed for Season 5 and Season 6". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 8, 2014. "Game of Thrones Season 5: Inside the Episode #9 (HBO)". HBO. June 7, 2015. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015 – via YouTube. Grubbs, Jefferson (June 18, 2014). "Which Book Will 'Game Of Thrones' Season 5 Be Based On? It's Covering a Lot of Territory". Bustle. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Season 6 filming schedule and novel adaptations Hibberd, James (May 24, 2016). "George R. R. Martin revealed 3 huge shocks to Game of Thrones producers". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Vineyard, Jennifer (May 5, 2016). "Why It's a Misconception That Game of Thrones Has Gone 'Off-Book'". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Season 7 filming schedule and novel adaptations Birnbaum, Debra (April 14, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Creators Mull Shorter Final Seasons (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016. Hibberd, James (July 18, 2016). "Game of Thrones: HBO announces summer return, 7 episodes". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Andreeva, Nellie (April 21, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Picked Up For Season 7, 'Veep' & 'Silicon Valley' Also Renewed By HBO". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Hibberd, James (May 24, 2016). "George R. R. Martin revealed 3 huge shocks to Game of Thrones producers". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Season 8 filming schedule and novel adaptations Hibberd, James (July 30, 2016). "Game of Thrones: HBO confirms season 8 will be last". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2017. Hibberd, James (July 30, 2016). "Game of Thrones: HBO confirms season 8 will be last". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2017. Shepherd, Jack (October 23, 2017). "Game of Thrones season 8 filming looks to be underway as cast members spotted in Belfast". The Independent. Independent Digital News & Media. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2017. Patten, Dominic (January 13, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' Final Season Debut Date Revealed By HBO With New Tease". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2019. Roots, Kimberly (November 13, 2018). "'Game of Thrones' Season 8 to Premiere in April 2019". TVLine. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Collins, Sean T. (March 20, 2013). "Q&A: 'Game of Thrones' Insider Bryan Cogman on the Biggest Season Yet". Rolling Stone. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Hibberd, James (March 30, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' showrunners on season 2, splitting Book 3 and their hope for a 70-hour epic". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. p. 3. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2012. Martin, George R. R. (July 16, 2010). "From HBO". Not a Blog. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Grubbs, Jefferson (August 9, 2015). "Which 'Game Of Thrones' Locations Film In Belfast? Kit Harington's Trip Gave Fans Hope". Bustle. Bustle Digital Group. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Roberts, Josh (April 1, 2012). "Where HBO's hit 'Game of Thrones' was filmed". USA Today. Gannett. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved March 8, 2013. "Medieval keep becomes film set". BBC News. BBC. October 23, 2009. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2012. Celik Rappas, Ipek A (January 21, 2019). "From Titanic to Game of Thrones : Promoting Belfast as a Global Media Capital". Media, Culture & Society. 41 (4): 550. doi:10.1177/0163443718823148. S2CID 150442108. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020. "30 incredible Game of Thrones filming locations you must visit in your lifetime". The Daily Telegraph. March 24, 2019. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Denham, Jess (July 16, 2015). "Game of Thrones: Stunning visual effects reel separates the real from the fake in season five". The Independent. Independent Digital News & Media. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Smith, Oliver (June 7, 2016). "Iceland's most spectacular Game of Thrones filming locations". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. "30 incredible Game of Thrones filming locations you must visit in your lifetime". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. August 14, 2017. Archived from the original on July 31, 2018. Retrieved July 11, 2020. Taylor, Elise (August 13, 2017). "Set-Jetting: A Game of Thrones Travel Guide to Dubrovnik, Croatia (aka King's Landing)". Vogue. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Phelan, Jessica (April 29, 2014). "The 7 kingdoms in 'Game of Thrones' are actually these 5 real-world places". Salon. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2014. Hibberd, James (January 28, 2013). "'Game of Thrones' add 5th country, casts bear". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 31, 2018. Retrieved May 20, 2020. "Season 3: by the Numbers". Making Game of Thrones. November 2, 2012. Archived from the original on March 6, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2012. "10 best Game of Thrones filming locations to visit in Croatia". Radio Times. Immediate Media Company. February 1, 2018. Archived from the original on November 29, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Burgen, Stephen (July 6, 2014). "Game of Thrones fifth series: more than 10,000 Spaniards apply to be extras". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2014. Hibberd, James (June 3, 2015). "Game of Thrones returning to Spain for season 6". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2015. Del Valle, Gaby (April 4, 2019). "Game of Thrones tourism is wildly popular — and not just because the show is a hit". Vox. Vox Media. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Smith, Oliver (September 23, 2016). "The incredible locations that will star in Game of Thrones season 7". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 2, 2017. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Mellin, Joshua (January 15, 2019). "Spain's most pivotal 'Game of Thrones' filming locations". CNN. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Swift, Andy (July 6, 2016). "Game of Thrones Season 7 Production Delayed". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. Shepherd, Jack (October 24, 2017). "Game of Thrones season 8 filming looks to be underway as cast members spotted in Belfast". The Independent. Independent Digital News & Media. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Kelleher, Kevin (July 9, 2018). "'Game of Thrones' Season 8 Has Ended Filming. Now a Winter of Waiting Begins". Fortune. Fortune Media Group Holdings. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Medd, James. "'Game of Thrones' Filming Locations Around the World". Condé Nast Traveler. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on April 11, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "Game of Thrones season 3 to film in Northern Ireland". Northern Ireland Screen. April 12, 2012. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2012. "New advertising campaign to showcase Northern Ireland to millions of Game of Thrones® fans worldwide". Tourism Ireland. April 26, 2016. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017. McHugh, Robert (December 14, 2015). "Tourism Ireland wins top marketing award for Game of Thrones campaign". Business World. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved June 17, 2017. McAdam, Noel (May 16, 2012). "Game of Thrones pumped £43m into Northern Ireland's economy, and more could be on the way". The Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2012. Pym, Hugh (May 11, 2014). "Game of Thrones boost to economy in Northern Ireland". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2014. Spangler, Todd (September 24, 2018). "'Game of Thrones' Filming Locations in Northern Ireland to Open as Tourist Attractions". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved November 28, 2018. Girvin, Sara (May 21, 2019). "Game of Thrones a 'game changer' for NI". BBC News. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved May 12, 2020. Biesiada, Jamie (July 16, 2017). "'Game of Thrones' impacts hotel searches". Travel Weekly. Northstar Travel Group. Archived from the original on March 10, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Adam, Shabana (April 17, 2013). "Travel News: Game of Thrones Sparks Big Boosts in Hotel Bookings to Filming Locations". Female First. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Depken, Craig A.; Globan, Tomislav; Kožić, Ivan (June 2020). "Television-Induced Tourism: Evidence from Croatia". Atlantic Economic Journal. 48 (2): 253–262. doi:10.1007/s11293-020-09673-3. ISSN 0197-4254. S2CID 225854935. Although Dubrovnik had long been a popular tourism destination on the Adriatic Sea, a difference-in-differences estimation suggests that the Game of Thrones episodes corresponded with an approximate increase of 5000 overnight stays per month, or approximately 59,000 additional overnights in a calendar year. Santora, Marc (August 19, 2018). "Throngs Enticed by 'Game of Thrones' Threaten a Magical City". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 1, 2020. Retrieved November 28, 2018. Egner, Jeremy (April 3, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Studio Tour to Debut in 2020". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Elderkin, Beth (April 3, 2020). "You'll Soon Be Able to Actually Visit the World of Game of Thrones". Gizmodo. G/O Media. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Peaslee, Robert Moses; Rosalynn, Vasquez (May 16, 2020). "Game of Thrones, Tourism, and the Ethics of Adaptation". Adaptation. 14 (2). Oxford University Press: 221–242. doi:10.1093/adaptation/apaa012. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2020 – via ProQuest. Tkalec, Marina; Zilic, Ivan; Recher, Vedran (2017). "The effect of film industry on tourism: Game of Thrones and Dubrovnik". The International Journal of Tourism Research. 19 (6). Wiley Periodicals: 705–714. doi:10.1002/jtr.2142. ISSN 1099-2340. ProQuest 1959070703. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Bowyer, Emily (September 19, 2017). "The Influence of Heritage Sites as Filming Locations on Tourists' Decisions to Visit Sites and Their Perceptions of Them. Case Study: Game of Thrones". Coactivity: Philosophy, Communication. 25 (1). Santalka: Filosofija, Komunikacija: 110–122. doi:10.3846/cpc.2017.286 (inactive January 31, 2024). ISSN 2029-6320. ProQuest 2071221188. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved May 10, 2022.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of January 2024 (link) Madden Toby, Mekeisha; Rodriguez, Briana (May 13, 2019). "Every 'Game of Thrones' Episode, Ranked". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 22, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Pulver, Andrew. "A Director's Education". Directors Guild of America. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "All 73 'Game of Thrones' Episodes, Ranked". Thrillist. Group Nine Media. May 24, 2019. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Moreau, Jordan (May 7, 2019). "Jessica Chastain, Ava DuVernay Call Out 'Game of Thrones' for Treatment of Women". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2019. Kinane, Ruth (March 25, 2019). "Game of Thrones: Catch up with EW's season 1 episode guide". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Edwards, Chris (October 13, 2019). "Game Of Thrones director admits series finale was "really rushed"". Digital Spy. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "Game of Thrones season 7: US and UK air date, teaser trailer, official poster, cast, rumors, and everything you need to know". GamesRadar+. Future US. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved April 4, 2017. Jones, Nate (September 26, 2017). "Game of Thrones' Season 8 Directors List Hints at Massive Ice Battles to Come". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 1, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Wigler, Josh (May 19, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Creators End the HBO Epic With a Mixed Message About Power". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on May 29, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Ginsberg, Merle (June 19, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' Season 6 Adds New Costume Designer". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, James (June 29, 2016). "Game of Thrones season 7 directors revealed". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. "Game of Thrones". Emmys.com. Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Elio (September 16, 2012). "Game of Thrones Wins Big at Creative Arts Emmys". Westeros.org. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Calfas, Jennifer (April 21, 2019). "Meet the 'Game of Thrones' Prosthetics Wizard Who Makes the Night King Come Alive". Money. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. O'Boyle, Claire (September 21, 2016). "Game of Thrones make up artist Pamela Smyth reveals her secrets to cracking the industry". Belfast Live. Reach plc. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Moore, Rose (December 31, 2019). "Game of Thrones' Original Lannisters Were Samurai Warriors". Screen Rant. Valnet. Archived from the original on January 1, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Cogman, Bryan (September 26, 2012). Inside HBO's Game of Thrones. Chronicle Books. p. 70. ISBN 978-1452110103. Wischhover, Cheryl (June 4, 2012). "Game of Thrones' Hair and Wardrobe Secrets Revealed". Fashionista. Breaking Media. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2012. Snead, Elizabeth (June 11, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' Designer Michelle Clapton's Secret Source for Wildling Bones: eBay". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Elio (June 22, 2011). "Interview with VFX Producer Lucy Ainsworth-Taylor". Westeros.org. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2014. Inside Game of Thrones: A Story in Visual Effects – BTS (HBO) (YouTube). HBO. April 1, 2019. Event occurs at 0:53. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "Game of Thrones: Season 2". Pixomondo. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2014. "Game of Thrones: Season 3". Pixomondo. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2014. "Mackevision erhält Emmy-Nominierung für visuelle Effekte in "Game of Thrones" – Pressemeldung" (PDF) (in German). Mackevision. July 10, 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014. Johnson, Thomas (March 19, 2015). "How 'Game of Thrones' creates its dragons". The Washington Post. Jeff Bezos. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Game of Thrones". Image Engine. Archived from the original on July 9, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2015. "Current Projects". Crazy Horse Effects. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved May 18, 2015. Price, Joe (April 1, 2019). "HBO Shares Video Detailing the Visual Effects in 'Game of Thrones'". Complex. Verizon Communications/Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Fashingbauer Cooper, Gael (May 13, 2019). "Game of Thrones dragons fired up season 8: How Drogon and friends were made". CNET. ViacomCBS. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Sanchez, Chelsey (September 22, 2019). "Every Emmy Award Game of Thrones Has Ever Won". Harper's Bazaar. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Desowitz, Bill (September 15, 2019). "'Game of Thrones': Creative Arts Dominance Predicts Primetime Emmy Coronation". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on February 4, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Gonzales, Erica (April 14, 2019). "The Game of Thrones Season 8 Title Sequence Is Completely Different". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Fernandez, Sofia M. (September 10, 2011). "Emmys 2011: 'Game of Thrones' Title Sequence Gives Series Its First Emmy". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Perkins, Will (May 11, 2011). "Game of Thrones (2011)". Art of the Title. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2013. Re, Valentina (July 11, 2016). "From Saul Bass to participatory culture: Opening title sequences in contemporary television series". NECSUS. 5 (1). Amsterdam University Press: 149–175. doi:10.25969/mediarep/3352. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved November 1, 2020 – via Directory of Open Access Journals. In the second case the title sequence changes (to varying extents) from one season to another or even from one episode to the subsequent (Game of Thrones, HBO 2011–present), explicitly challenging the viewer to modify his/her interpretation and expectations. "25 of TV's best opening credit sequences". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. April 11, 2019. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Ryan, Maureen (February 2, 2011). "'Game of Thrones' Changes Its Tune, Hires New Composer". AOL TV. Archived from the original on February 2, 2011. Retrieved July 20, 2011. "Game of Thrones Soundtrack Details". Film Music Reporter. May 31, 2011. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2011. "Ramin Djawadi Biography". AllMusic. RhythmOne. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Vineyard, Jennifer (July 21, 2016). "Game of Thrones Composer Ramin Djawadi on the Show's Key Musical Elements, and That Godfather-esque Finale Tune". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2016. "Ramin Djawadi". Grammy Awards. The Recording Academy. November 26, 2019. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Young, Alex (April 9, 2019). "HBO announces Game of Thrones-inspired album For the Throne". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Chivers, Tom (April 28, 2019). "What do the regional accents mean in Game of Thrones?". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2020. McNeil, Colin (June 24, 2016). "Dissecting the real-world accents in Game of Thrones | Metro News". Metro Toronto. Toronto: Free Daily News Group Inc. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. Epstein, Adam (June 27, 2016). "With a wink to its audience, "Game of Thrones" told its most annoying characters to shut up". Quartz. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. Taylor, Chris (November 29, 2017). "The 7 accents of 'Game of Thrones' explained for non-Brits". Mashable. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on March 8, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Martin, Denise (April 23, 2013). "Learn to Speak Dothraki and Valyrian From the Man Who Invented Them for Game of Thrones". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2013. Tharoor, Ishaan (May 3, 2013). "Tongues of Ice and Fire: Creating the Languages in Game of Thrones". Time. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Blake, Meredith (April 9, 2019). "How 'Game of Thrones' linguist David J. Peterson became Hollywood's go-to language guy". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 24, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. "Game of Thrones: Can you speak Dothraki?". BBC Radio 4. BBC. May 9, 2013. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Epstein, Adam (July 12, 2017). "An app can now teach you High Valyrian from "Game of Thrones"". Quartz. Uzabase. Archived from the original on October 29, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Higgins-Dunn, Noah (April 14, 2019). "If you are a 'Game of Thrones' fan, this app will teach you how to speak in High Valyrian". CNBC. NBCUniversal Television and Streaming. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Lotz, Amanda (July 11, 2017). "How 'Game of Thrones' became TV's first global blockbuster". The Conversation. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. "Final Game of Thrones season to screen in NZ at the same time as the US". Stuff. Nine Entertainment Co. January 14, 2019. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Downes, Siobhan (July 7, 2020). "The new Neon is here: What does the Neon-Lightbox merger look like?". Stuff. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. White, Peter (May 21, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' Scores 3.8M Viewers On UK's Sky Atlantic; Finale Was Second Highest Sky Drama Ever". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. "Game of Thrones Season 8: When and Where to Watch GoT on HBO, Hotstar; How to Watch the first episode in India". India TV. April 14, 2019. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved June 20, 2020. Hibberd, James (January 6, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' coming to IMAX: First TV series released in format". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Khatchatourian, Maane (January 31, 2015). "Box Office: 'Game of Thrones' Eyes $2 Million in Imax Debut". Variety. Valence Media. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved February 1, 2015. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 1, 2015). "'Game Of Thrones' Grabs $1.5M At The B.O.: IMAX As TV's Next Great Revolution". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on January 17, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Game of Thrones (IMAX) (2015)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. February 6, 2015. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Prudom, Laura (December 6, 2017). "'Game of Thrones' comes to theaters to distract you from the long wait for Season 8". Mashable. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Hibberd, James (November 30, 2011). "'Game of Thrones' scoop: DVD release date, details, photos". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2011. Richwine, Lisa (March 16, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' rules HBO's DVD sales". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Game of Thrones: The Complete First Season Premium Edition Gift Box [8 Discs] [Blu-ray/DVD] (Blu-ray Disc)". Best Buy. November 20, 2012. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Hibberd, James (November 19, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' season 2 DVD date and extras revealed – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on July 4, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, James (February 22, 2013). "'Game of Thrones' early DVD sales breaking HBO records". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. "Game of Thrones season 3 on iTunes Australian Store". iTunes Store. Apple, Inc. April 17, 2011. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved March 31, 2013. Lambert, David (June 24, 2013). "Game of Thrones – 2014 Release Date, Package Art for 'The Complete 3rd Season', on DVD, Blu". TVShowsOnDVD.com. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Lambert, David (July 16, 2014). "Game of Thrones – 'The Complete 4th Season' Press Release: Date, Art, Cost, Extras". TVShowsOnDVD.com. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Romano, Nick (January 20, 2016). "'Game of Thrones' Season 5 Blu-ray Coming in March". Collider. Archived from the original on January 9, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Fowler, Matt (November 14, 2016). "Game of Thrones: Big Interactive Fan Event Tied to Season 6 Blu-ray Release". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Vaughn, David (January 29, 2016). "Game of Thrones: Winter Is Coming—In Atmos". Sound & Vision. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved May 28, 2017. "Game of Thrones 4K: The Complete First Season Blu-ray". Blu-ray. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Dornbush, Jonathon (September 14, 2017). "Game of Thrones: Season 7 Blu-Ray, DVD, Digital Download Release Dates, Bonus Features Announced". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on January 1, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Hibberd, James (November 28, 2019). "8 revelations from the Game of Thrones series finale DVD commentary". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Kooser, Amada (June 26, 2019). "Game of Thrones Blu-ray box set lets you hate-watch season 8 all over again". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Petite, Steve (July 20, 2020). "Game Of Thrones 4K Blu-Ray Box Set Pre-Orders Up Now". GameSpot. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Roth, Emma (July 23, 2022). "Now you can rewatch Game of Thrones in 4K on HBO Max". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Jarvey, Natalie (April 9, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' Piracy Soars Ahead of Season 5 Premiere". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Brockwell, Holly (January 2, 2020). "Game of Thrones Takes Most-Torrented TV for 7th Year Running". Gizmodo. G/O Media. Archived from the original on January 11, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Morris, Chris (January 2, 2019). "Game of Thrones Is No Longer the Most Pirated TV Show". Yahoo! Finance. Verizon Media. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Lynch, Kevin (August 31, 2015). "Maisie Williams overjoyed as Game of Thrones marches into Guinness World Records 2016". Guinness World Records. Jim Pattison Group. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2015. "Game of Thrones tops TV show internet piracy chart". BBC News. BBC. December 24, 2012. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2013. "Game of Thrones Most Pirated TV-Show of 2012". TorrentFreak. December 23, 2012. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved December 23, 2012. "Who's Pirating Game of Thrones, And Why?". TorrentFreak. May 20, 2012. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2013. Piotrowski, Daniel (April 25, 2013). "US ambassador Jeffrey Bleich pleads: Australia, stop pirating Game of Thrones". The Age. News Corp Australia. Archived from the original on January 25, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2013. Isidore, Chris (April 2, 2013). "Game of Thrones premiere sets piracy record". CNN. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2020. "Why People Pirate Game of Thrones, a Global Cost Breakdown". TorrentFreak. April 13, 2014. Archived from the original on July 10, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2014. Hibberd, James (March 31, 2013). "HBO: 'Game of Thrones' piracy is a compliment". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. "Nearly Half of Game of Thrones Season 5 Just Leaked". Gizmodo. G/O Media. April 12, 2015. Archived from the original on June 26, 2016. Jarvey, Natalie (April 9, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' Piracy Soars Ahead of Season 5 Premiere". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 10, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Denham, Jess (April 23, 2015). "Game of Thrones season 5 breaks piracy record with 32m illegal downloads". The Independent. Independent Digital News & Media. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2015. "Game of Thrones Season Finale breaks Piracy Records". TorrentFreak. June 15, 2015. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2015. Timmer, Joel (April 1, 2020). "Jon Snow Lives! Glenn Dies! When Revealing Plot Twists Constitutes Copyright Infringement". Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment & Technology Law. 22 (3): 590. ISSN 1942-678X. To help keep plot twists from becoming public, the network discontinued its previous practice of providing preview screeners to TV critics and others. Holloway, Daniel (September 7, 2017). "'Game of Thrones' Season 7 Pirated More Than 1 Billion Times". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Gartenberg, Chaim (April 17, 2019). "Game of Thrones' season 8 premiere was pirated almost 55 million times in the first 24 hours". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2020. Brockwell, Holly (April 18, 2019). "More Than Twice as Many People Pirated Game of Thrones Than Watched It". Gizmodo. G/O Media. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2020. "Downloads don't matter". The Sydney Morning Herald. Nine Entertainment Co. February 26, 2013. Archived from the original on March 18, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2013. Spangler, Todd (August 7, 2013). "Time Warner's Bewkes: Piracy of HBO 'Game of Thrones' Is 'Better Than an Emmy'". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Kuchera, Ben (April 21, 2014). "Game of Thrones is the first 'free-to-play' TV show, and gaming is racing to catch up". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 8, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2014. "Game of Thrones at the Oxford Union – Full Address". Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015 – via YouTube. "Game of Thrones: Season 1 (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 23, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2020. "Game of Thrones: Season 1". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2017. "Game of Thrones: Season 2 (2012)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "Game of Thrones: Season 2". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2017. "Game of Thrones: Season 3 (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on January 1, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2019. "Game of Thrones: Season 3". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Game of Thrones: Season 4 (2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2017. "Game of Thrones: Season 4". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved April 8, 2014. "Game of Thrones: Season 5 (2015)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 26, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2020. "Game of Thrones: Season 5". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015. "Game of Thrones: Season 6 (2016)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Game of Thrones: Season 6". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016. "Game of Thrones: Season 7". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "Game of Thrones: Season 7". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved July 18, 2017. "Game of Thrones: Season 8 (2019)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020. "Game of Thrones – Season 8 Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2019. "Game of Thrones". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2022. "Game of Thrones". Metacritic. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2022. "HBO: 20 Best Original Series". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. September 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Kirkland, Justin (March 12, 2020). "The 25 Best HBO Series of All Time, Ranked". Esquire. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Gregory, Mathilda (July 23, 2010). "Is A Game of Thrones the most eagerly anticipated TV show ever?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Colins, Scott (August 8, 2010). "With 'Game of Thrones,' HBO is playing for another 'True Blood'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Poniewozik, James (April 18, 2011). "Game of Thrones Watch: It's All in the Execution". Time. Archived from the original on November 23, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Singh, Ti (April 18, 2011). "Game Of Thrones episode 1 review: Winter Is Coming". Den of Geek. Dennis Publishing. Archived from the original on May 24, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Tucker, Ken (April 14, 2011). "Game of Thrones (2011)". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Levine, Stuart (December 27, 2011). "Cablers hit highs, lows, PR hurdles in 2011". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2011. Tucker, Ken (March 21, 2012). "TV Review: Game Of Thrones (2012)". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Goodman, Tim (March 27, 2012). "'Game of Thrones' Season 2: TV Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on January 25, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2012. Fowler, Matt (June 17, 2013). "Game of Thrones: Season 3 Review". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Fell, Michael (April 2–15, 2018). "The 65 Best Episodes of the 21st Century – Editor's Letter". TV Guide. No. #3429–3440. p. 1. Franich, Darren (May 20, 2019). "All the Game of Thrones seasons, ranked". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 20, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Debnath, Neela (June 16, 2014). "Game of Thrones season 4 finale review: 'The Children' is a fitting end to the most tumultuous season to date". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 18, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Malitz, David (May 18, 2015). "'Game of Thrones' recap, season 5, episode 6: 'Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken' — but plenty disgusted and disappointed". The Washington Post. Nash Holdings. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2020. D'Addario, Daniel (June 19, 2016). "Review: 'Battle of the Bastards' Is One of Game of Thrones's Best Episodes Ever". Time. PLC. Archived from the original on May 23, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Zoller Seitz, Matt (April 25, 2016). "Game of Thrones Feels Warmer in Its Sixth Season". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Liz, Shannon Miller (April 24, 2016). "Review: 'Game of Thrones' Season 6 Episode 1, 'The Red Woman,' Finds New Sparks In Familiar Territory". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Hughes, Sarah (December 30, 2019). "Game of Thrones: how it dominated the decade – then lost its way". The Guardian. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Farokhmanesh, Megan (August 14, 2017). "Game of Thrones' current breakneck pace is gutting its most anticipated reunions". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 24, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2017. VanDerWerff, Emily (August 30, 2017). "How Game of Thrones season 7 went awry". Vox. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Shepherd, Jack (May 17, 2019). "More than a million people sign petition asking HBO to remake Game of Thrones season 8". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 22, 2019. Retrieved June 22, 2019. The final season of Game of Thrones has been met by mixed reviews from critics. Mangan, Lucy (May 20, 2019). "Game of Thrones review – epic final episode corrects some major wrongs". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 1, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Ryan, Maureen (May 13, 2019). "Critic's Notebook: In the End, 'Game of Thrones' Finds a Way to Make Its Woman Problem Worse". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. O'Connor, Roisin (July 25, 2019). "Game of Thrones: HBO boss responds to fans demanding remake of season 8". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. McCluskey, Megan (July 24, 2019). "HBO Rejects Petition to Remake Game of Thrones Season 8 Once and for All". Time. Archived from the original on July 25, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Kornhaber, Spencer (April 18, 2019). "Game of Thrones Turned Its Composer Into a Rock Star". The Atlantic. Emerson Collective. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Burton, Bonnie (August 7, 2019). "Game of Thrones: The CGI magic of the fiery finale". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Ramaswamy, Chitra; Bryan, Scott; Harrison, Phil; Abbott, Kate; Heritage, Stuart; Duggins, Alexi; Nicholson, Rebecca; Lawson, Mark; Hogan, Michael; Frazer-Carroll, Micha; Mangan, Lucy (February 7, 2023). "'I've never forgotten it': the very best (and very worst) TV endings of all time". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Gilbert, Matthew (April 15, 2011). "Fantasy comes true with HBO's 'Game of Thrones'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2013. McNamara, Mary (April 15, 2011). "Swords, sex and struggles". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Paskin, Willa (March 29, 2012). "Bloody, bloody "Game of Thrones"". Salon. Archived from the original on March 29, 2012. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Roush, Matt (April 15, 2011). "Roush Review: Grim Thrones Is a Crowning Achievement". TV Guide. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Hibberd, James (May 12, 2015). "Game of Thrones: Lena Headey reacts to that King's Landing battle ending". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved December 30, 2019. "The Tywin and Arya Show". Rolling Stone. Penske Media Corporation. May 15, 2012. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2013. O'Keefe, Meghan (June 15, 2015). "Death! Despair! Dragons! How The 'Game of Thrones' Finale Changed The Game For Everyone". Decider. News Corp. Archived from the original on March 24, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2017. Ellis, Katie M (October 25, 2014). "Cripples, Bastards and Broken Things: Disability in Game of Thrones". M/C Journal. 17 (5). doi:10.5204/mcj.895. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Donnelly, Colleen Elaine (December 2, 2016). "Re-visioning Negative Archetypes of Disability and Deformity in Fantasy: Wicked, Maleficent, and Game of Thrones". Disability Studies Quarterly. 36 (4). doi:10.18061/dsq.v36i4.5313. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Franich, Darren (May 20, 2019). "Game of Thrones was… okay: EW review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 23, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2019. Genzlinger, Neil (March 29, 2012). "Uneasy Lies the Head That Steals a Crown: 'Game of Thrones' on HBO". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2012. Sepinwall, Alan (December 4, 2019). "50 Best TV Shows of the 2010s". Rolling Stone. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Sandra, Laugier (2018). "Spoilers, Twists, and Dragons". In Christie, Ian; Van den Oever, Annie (eds.). Stories. Amsterdam University Press. p. 147. doi:10.2307/j.ctv5rf6vf.13. ISBN 9789462985841. JSTOR j.ctv5rf6vf.13. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2020 – via JSTOR. Marques, Diana (March 25, 2019). "Power and the Denial of Femininity in Game of Thrones". Canadian Review of American Studies. 49 (1). Toronto: University of Toronto Press: 46–65. doi:10.3138/cras.49.1.004. S2CID 166795717. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2022 – via EBSCO. Flood, Alison (May 6, 2014). "George RR Martin defends Game of Thrones' sexual violence". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. "China: Game of Thrones 'heavily edited', fans say". BBC News. BBC. May 1, 2014. Archived from the original on August 18, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Blum, Jeremy (April 30, 2014). "Game of Thrones premieres on CCTV, viewers call it an edited 'mess'". South China Morning Post. SCMP Publishers. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Chari, Mridula (July 6, 2017). "Why the censored 'Game of Thrones' on Indian television is so much better than you think". Scroll.in. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Sharma, Supriya (March 10, 2017). "What it is like to watch the Game of Thrones on Indian TV". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Moore, Jack (July 14, 2017). "Game of Thrones Season 7: Iran Goes Crazy For Show Ahead of Premiere". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Al-Masri, Reem (March 3, 2016). "Banned: Film and television censorship in Jordan". Freemuse. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Frater, Patrick (July 20, 2016). "Singapore Relaxes Censorship for OTT Platforms". Variety. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Lucinda Smith, Hannah (April 6, 2019). "Game of Thrones star helps young Turks evade censorship". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Tharoor, Ishaan (November 11, 2014). "Why Turkey's military wants to ban 'Game of Thrones'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Flanagan, Ben (April 10, 2012). "Game of Thrones taken off air due to nudity". The National. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Matthew Clayfield (July 3, 2015). "How exactly do you sanitise Game of Thrones? Find out in Vietnam". The Drum. ABC News. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Caron, Nathalie (January 16, 2014). "Why Stephen Dillane is not Crazy About All That Game of Thrones Nudity". Syfy. NBCUniversal Television and Streaming. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Hann, Michael (March 11, 2012). "How 'sexposition' fleshes out the story". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Bernardin, Marc (December 17, 2012). "SNL Reveals the Real Reason There's So Much Game of Thrones Nudity". Syfy. NBCUniversal Television and Streaming. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Orr, Christopher (May 13, 2013). "Game of Thrones' Worst Scene Yet?". The Atlantic. Emerson Collective. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2013. David, Allison P. (May 12, 2014). "Game of Thrones Couple of the Week: Tyrion and Shae Are Never Getting Back Together". New York. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2015. Davis, Madeleine (May 13, 2013). "Game of Boners: This Is Torture Porn". Jezebel. G/O Media. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Kathryn Needham, Jessica (2017). "Visual Misogyny: An Analysis of Female Sexual Objectification in Game of Thrones". Femspec. 17 (2): 10. ISSN 1523-4002. ProQuest 1907748277. Retrieved November 3, 2020. Henderson, Danielle (April 29, 2014). "Game of Thrones: too much racism and sexism – so I stopped watching". The Guardian. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Saraiya, Sonia (April 20, 2014). "Rape of Thrones". The A.V. Club. G/O Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. Silman, Anna (May 18, 2015). "Here's why people are so upset about the latest "Game of Thrones" rape: "So cheap, such an obvious choice, I felt offended as a fan"". Salon. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2015. Runcie, Charlotte (May 17, 2015). "Game of Thrones: Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken, season 5 episode 6, review: 'raw emotion'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2015. Leon, Melissa (May 19, 2015). "The Rape of Sansa Stark: 'Game of Thrones' Goes Off-Book and Enrages Its Female Fans". The Daily Beast. IAC. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2015. Pantozzi, Jill (May 18, 2015). "We Will No Longer Be Promoting HBO's Game of Thrones". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2015. Cillizza, Chris (May 19, 2015). "Claire McCaskill is done with 'Game of Thrones' after Sunday's rape scene. She's got a point". The Washington Post. Nash Holdings. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved August 9, 2017. Cashin, Rory (May 15, 2019). "'The Bells' Episode of Game of Thrones is the Worst Reviewed in the Show's Entire History". Joe.co.uk. Archived from the original on May 23, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Rosenberg, Alyssa (August 9, 2017). "The arguments about women and power in 'Game of Thrones' have never been more unsettling". The Washington Post. Nash Holdings. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved August 9, 2017. Allaire, Christian (May 20, 2019). "Why the Women of Game of Thrones Deserved Better". Vogue. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Borowska-Szerszun, Sylwia (April 2019). "Representation of Rape in George R. R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire and Robin Hobb's Liveship Traders". Extrapolation. 60 (1): 1–22. doi:10.3828/extr.2019.2. ISSN 0014-5483. S2CID 166766551. ProQuest 2222490097. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Soteriou, Stephanie (May 11, 2022). "Sophie Turner Revealed She'll "Probably Exhibit Some Signs Of Trauma" In The Future After Filming "Heavy" "Game Of Thrones" Scenes As A Child Star". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Flint, Hanna (April 29, 2019). "This is why the lighting is so bad in 'Game of Thrones'". Yahoo. Verizon Media. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Every week, social media is filled with complaints about how dark the scenes looks and more importantly how it affects their ability to see the action. Lallo, Michael (September 9, 2016). "Will someone please turn on the lights: Why have TV dramas literally become so dark?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Nine Entertainment Co. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. To many fans, Game of Thrones is too dark. Not figuratively – they literally can't perceive what's happening on screen. Sharf, Zack (April 17, 2019). "Does 'Game of Thrones' Have an 'Ozark' Problem? Season 8 Is So Dark It's Hard to See". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Fear's jokey comment encapsulated one of the biggest fan criticisms about the "Game of Thrones" premiere: The show is so visually dark that viewers can't even see what's happening on screen. Many fans took to social media during the episode to complain about the color palette, with some wondering if it was their TV brightness setting that was the issue. Warner, Sam (April 16, 2019). "Game of Thrones viewers have one big complaint about season 8, episode 1". Digital Spy. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Yep, many complained that parts of the episode were too dark – and we don't mean just twisted dark after seeing the Night King's artistic flair. Callegari, Caitlyn (May 29, 2016). "31 Times 'Game of Thrones' Needed To Lighten Up, Literally". Bustle. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Game of Thrones needs to turn on the lights, or else I am sending them my ophthalmologist bill. For real, GoT powers that be, it's super hard to squint for a straight hour every week because your episodes are so freakin' dark. Dessem, Matthew (June 29, 2016). "Why TV Shows Are Darker Than They've Ever Been". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Watching Game of Thrones this season, you may have asked yourself: Is something wrong with my television? Surely there is some other setting that would brighten up the inside of Bran Stark's cave, or heighten the contrast between Cersei Lannister's robes and the shadowy chambers of her prison cell. But no, that's just the way the show is supposed to look. And Game of Thrones is not alone: HBO has made a cottage industry of dimly-lit hourlong dramas. Burgess, Genevieve (March 19, 2016). "Why is TV, Literally, So Dark?". Pajiba. Retrieved May 7, 2019. A lot of these shows are also made by people who have experience working primarily on films, and film aesthetic has always been visually darker than TV. Because films are meant to be watched on very large screens in very dark rooms, while most TV is watched on smaller screens in brightly lit rooms. It seems the people making these shows aren't evaluating the lighting for the proper venue. Paine, Hannah (April 29, 2019). "Game of Thrones fans fume over 'too dark' episode". News.com.au. News Corp Australia. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. It's not the first time Game of Thrones has come under fire for its shots being too dark, however. According to one of the show's cinematographers, it's a very deliberate choice. Serrels, Mark (April 28, 2019). "Game of Thrones battle was the biggest ever, but way too dark to see". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Lam, Katherine (April 29, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' fans complain about 'too dark' lighting in Battle of Winterfell". Fox News. Fox Corporation. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Nyren, Erin (April 28, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Fans Complain About Battle of Winterfell's Dark Cinematography". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Dessem, Matthew (April 29, 2019). "Why You Couldn't See a Damn Thing on This Week's Game of Thrones". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. On Sunday night, Twitter was full of viewers complaining about the show's cinematography, which has often been dark, but never quite so consistently stygian. "Game of Thrones guide: What to watch now that it's all over". The Globe and Mail. May 13, 2019. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Yu, Charles (October 15, 2018). "George R. R. Martin, Fantasy's Reigning King". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Goodman, Tim (April 5, 2011). "'Game of Thrones'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Williams, Joel (March 30, 2012). "Mainstream finally believes fantasy fans". CNN. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Gilkeson, Austin (March 11, 2019). "Amazon's Lord of the Rings Series: What Is the Second Age?". Vulture. Archived from the original on March 1, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2019. Hughes, Sarah (April 1, 2019). "What's the next Game of Thrones? All the contenders for fantasy TV's crown". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 18, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2019. Lacob, Jace (September 21, 2012). "'Game of Thrones': 'Modern Family,' 'Parks and Rec' Writers on Why They Love the HBO Drama". The Daily Beast. IAC. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2012. O'Brian, Liam (December 26, 2012). "Game of Thrones inspired Huskie craze goes cold as owners give up on dogs". The Independent. London: Alexander Lebedev. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2013. Hann, Michael (March 11, 2012). "How 'sexposition' fleshes out the story". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2012. Steinmetz, Kate (September 25, 2012). "And the Top TV Words of the Year Are ..." Time. Time USA, LLC. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Kurtz, Judy (May 19, 2019). "Winter is here: How 'Game of Thrones' took over American politics". The Hill. Archived from the original on May 26, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2020. Chau, Jonathan; Vanderwees, Chris (March 25, 2019). "Introduction—High Fantasy, Political Dreams, and the Mainstream: Reflections on Game of Thrones". Canadian Review of American Studies. 49 (1): 1–6. doi:10.3138/cras.49.1.001. ISSN 0007-7720. S2CID 195518457. Nevertheless, building from Martin's own association of Joffrey with Trump, it may not be difficult to see the fictive Wall that defends the northern borders of the Seven Kingdoms as a model for the proposed wall that will purportedly defend the southern borders of the United States of America from Mexico. Milkoreit, Manjana (March 2019). "Pop-cultural Mobilization: Deploying Game of Thrones to Shift US Climate Change Politics". International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society. 32 (1): 61–82. doi:10.1007/s10767-017-9273-7. ISSN 0891-4486. S2CID 148611193. ProQuest 2171135503. Suskind, Alex (May 9, 2019). "Taylor Swift reveals how Game of Thrones (and Arya's kill list) inspired reputation". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2019. O'Neil, Lauren (April 11, 2014). "There are now more babies named 'Khaleesi' than 'Betsy' or 'Nadine' in the U.S." CBC News. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Safronova, Valeriya (April 29, 2019). "Hello, Arya! 'Game of Thrones' Baby Names Are for Girls". The New York Times. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Murphy, Joe (May 10, 2019). "Name of Thrones: Parents are naming their kids after favorite 'Game of Thrones' characters". NBC News. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Scharl A, Hubmann-Haidvogel A, Jones A, Fischl D, Kamolov R, Weichselbraun A, Rafelsberger W (2016). "Analyzing the public discourse on works of fiction – Detection and visualization of emotion in online coverage about HBO's Game of Thrones". Information Processing and Management. 52 (1): 129–138. doi:10.1016/j.ipm.2015.02.003. PMC 4804387. PMID 27065510. Lipoff JB (2016). "Greyscale-A Mystery Dermatologic Disease on HBO's Game of Thrones". JAMA Dermatology. 152 (8): 904. doi:10.1001/jamadermatol.2015.5793. PMID 27532353. Beveridge, Andrew; Shan, Jie (April 2016). "Network of Thrones". Math Horizons. 23 (4). Taylor & Francis: 18–22. doi:10.4169/mathhorizons.23.4.18. JSTOR 10.4169/mathhorizons.23.4.18. S2CID 123727484. Retrieved November 3, 2020 – via JSTOR. Simkins, J.D. (April 11, 2019). "The worst war criminals in 'Game of Thrones' ranked". Military Times. Sightline Media Group. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019. "Who is Game of Thrones worst war criminal?". Australian Red Cross. Retrieved October 21, 2020. Brix, Lise (April 21, 2018). "Meet the mud dragon: The tiny animal that lives on the beach". ScienceNordic. Retrieved November 26, 2021. M. Johnson, Lauren (July 1, 2019). "New species of bee fly named after 'Game of Thrones' character". CNN. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Solly, Meilan (December 31, 2018). "These New Beetle Species Are Named After the 'Game of Thrones' Dragons". Smithsonian. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Simon-Lewis, Alexandra (June 19, 2017). "Dredge up your nightmares with these scary deep-sea creatures from the Australian Abyss". Wired. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Adalian, Josef; Bernardin, Marc; Buchanan, Kyle; Chianca, Pete; Dobbins, Amanda; David Fox, Jesse; Lyons, Margaret; Martin, Denise; Vineyard, Jennifer; Ruediger, Ross (October 15, 2012). "The 25 Most Devoted Fan Bases". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2012. Shear, Michael (December 29, 2013). "Obama's TV Picks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2013. Ghahremani, Tanya (December 30, 2013). "President Obama 'Really Likes' Game of Thrones, In Case You Were Wondering". Complex. Verizon Communications/Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on January 5, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2013. Campbell, Scott (June 10, 2014). "David Cameron: 'I'm a Game of Thrones fan'". The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group Limited 2020. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2015. Taylor, Lenore (May 30, 2013). "Julia Gillard reveals Game of Thrones addiction". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2013. Luoma, Sarah (May 31, 2013). "Dutch foreign minister uses 'Game of Thrones' as political analogy". Digital Spy. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on December 17, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Templeton, Molly (June 16, 2013). "The best (and the weirdest) of "Game of Thrones" fanfiction". Salon. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2013. de Castella, Tom (March 22, 2013). "Game of Thrones: Why does it inspire such devotion among fans?". BBC News Magazine. BBC. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2013. Carlson, Adam (May 10, 2013). "Game of Thrones baby names on the march". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Watercutter, Angela (June 3, 2013). "Yes, Women Really Do Like Game of Thrones (We Have Proof)". Wired. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Kellie, Helen (October 26, 2012). "Social is coming of age in the marketing mix – a TV perspective". Marketing. Niche Media. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2012. Quah, Nicholas; Alter, Rebecca (April 15, 2019). "In the Game of Thrones, These Podcasts Play to Win". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on April 20, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Dockterman, Eliana (September 18, 2016). "Game of Thrones Now Has the Most Emmy Wins Ever". Time. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2016. "Complete List of Recipients of the 71st Annual Peabody Awards". Peabody Awards. Henry W. Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication. April 4, 2012. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Day, Debbie (July 16, 2019). "2019 Emmy Nominayion Snubs & Surprises: Game of Thrones Make History, Schitt's Creek Pops". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Stedman, Alex (July 16, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Breaks Emmys Record for Most Nominations in a Single Season". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. "'101 Best Written TV Series Of All Time' From WGA/TV Guide: Complete List". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. June 2, 2013. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Cronin, Kevin (November 1, 2013). "'Game of Thrones' Wins Disability Awareness Award". Irish Film & Television Network. Retrieved May 28, 2022. "Hollywood's 100 Favorite TV Shows". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. "The 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time". Empire. Bauer Media Group. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. Sheffield, Rob (September 21, 2016). "100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time". Rolling Stone. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. "The 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time". Variety. December 20, 2023. Retrieved December 24, 2023. Hersko, Tyler (June 6, 2019). "HBO Faces Hard Questions in Post-'Game of Thrones' Streaming Market". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Katz, Brandon (May 20, 2019). "It's Official: The 'Game of Thrones' Series Finale Has Set a New HBO Ratings Record". Observer Media. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Thomas, June (March 29, 2012). "How Much Gold Is Game of Thrones Worth". Slate. The Slate Group. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2022. "HBO Renews 'Game of Thrones' for Fourth Season" (Press release). HBO. April 2, 2013. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2014. Adalian, Josef (June 8, 2013). "For HBO, Game of Thrones Ratings Second Only to The Sopranos". Vulture. Vox Media. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Fienberg, Daniel (June 5, 2014). "'Game of Thrones' has become more popular than 'The Sopranos' sorta kinda". HitFix. Uproxx Media Group. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved June 5, 2014. Sinha-Roy, Piya (June 16, 2014). "'Game of Thrones' draws 7.1 million viewers for blood-filled finale". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 20, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2014. Wyatt, Daisy (September 1, 2015). "Game of Thrones breaks Guinness World Record for largest TV drama simulcast". The Independent. Alexander Lebedev. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Shepherd, Jack (July 19, 2016). "Game of Thrones season 6 ratings: Show brought in 25.1 million viewers on average per episode". The Independent. Alexander Lebedev. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Katz, Josh (December 27, 2016). "'Duck Dynasty' vs. 'Modern Family': 50 Maps of the U.S. Cultural Divide". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 5, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Koblin, John (August 28, 2017). "'Game of Thrones' Finale Sets Ratings Record". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. "'Game of Thrones' Season 8 Debut Breaks HBO Rating Records". Time. April 15, 2019. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Otterson, Joe (May 20, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Finale Sets New Series High With Staggering 19.3 Million Viewers". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Gartenberg, Chaim (May 20, 2019). "The Game of Thrones finale was the most watched HBO show of all time". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Porter, Rick (May 20, 2019). "'Game of Thrones' Series Finale Sets All-Time HBO Ratings Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Plunkett, John (July 6, 2016). "Game of Thrones most popular Sky series ever with 5m viewers". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. Idato, Michael (June 29, 2016). "Game of Thrones season six finale sets Australian audience record for Foxtel". The Sydney Morning Herald. Nine Entertainment Co. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. Katz, Brandon (May 3, 2019). "The 'Game of Thrones' Season 8 Premiere Just Set a Guinness World Record". Observer Media. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2020. Welch, Alex (May 21, 2019). "Sunday cable ratings: 'Game of Thrones' series finale sets new records". TV by the Numbers. Nexstar Media Group. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Watercutter, Angela (June 3, 2013). "Yes, Women Really Do Like Game of Thrones (We Have Proof)". Wired. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Maglio, Tony; Maas, Jennifer (April 12, 2019). "Inside the Mountain-Size 'Game of Thrones' Ratings Growth From Seasons 1–7". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Keshner, Andrew (May 20, 2019). "After the finale, 'Game of Thrones' fans could give HBO a rude awakening". MarketWatch. Dow Jones & Company. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Spangler, Todd (July 24, 2019). "WarnerMedia Drives AT&T Growth in Q2, as HBO and DirecTV Lose Subscribers". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2020. For the first season (excluding the average ratings), see "Updated: 'Game of Thrones' Ratings: Season One". TV by the Numbers. June 19, 2011. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2017. For the second season and the average ratings of the first season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Two Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 11, 2012. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. For the third season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Three Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 12, 2013. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. For the fourth season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Four Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 18, 2014. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. For the fifth season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Five Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 16, 2015. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. For the sixth season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Six Ratings". TV Series Finale. June 28, 2016. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved April 24, 2016. For the seventh season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Seven Ratings". TV Series Finale. August 29, 2017. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. For the eighth season, see "Game of Thrones: Season Eight Ratings". TV Series Finale. April 16, 2019. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Fahey, Mike (April 22, 2013). "Game of Thrones: Ascent is More Up-to-Date With the Show Than You Are". Kotaku. G/O Media. Archived from the original on August 24, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2013. Shea, Brian (June 26, 2019). "Assemble Your Own Night's Watch In Game Of Thrones Beyond The Wall". Game Informer. GameStop. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. McCluskey, Megan (August 23, 2018). "Ascend the Iron Throne in New Game of Thrones Video Game". Time. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2018. "The Best Game of Thrones Gifts for Newbies and Diehard Fans". Harper's Bazaar. Hearst Communications. November 22, 2019. Archived from the original on May 6, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Miller, Julie (May 9, 2013). ""Is the $10,500 Game of Thrones Watch Blood-Resistant?" and Our Other Most Pressing Concerns About the Official "Night's" Timepiece". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Miller, Julie (June 5, 2012). "The Pros and Cons of Owning a $30,000 Game of Thrones Replica Throne". Vanity Fair. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2013. "Exhibition". HBO. WarnerMedia. Archived from the original on February 22, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2013. Hallinan, Bridget (November 5, 2019). "Winter Is Coming, and So Is the Final 'Game of Thrones' Whisky". Food & Wine. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Fullerton, Huw. "Thronecast: Gameshow of Thrones". RadioTimes. Immediate Media Company. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Whelan, Robbie (March 4, 2014). "Unlikely Mix: Rappers, Dragons and Fantasy: HBO Hires Hip-Hop, Latin-Music Artists to Promote 'Game of Thrones'". The Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones & Company. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved March 7, 2014. Joyce, Colin (March 7, 2015). "Snoop Dogg, Talib Kweli, Mastodon, More To Appear On 'Game of Thrones' Mixtape". Spin. NEXT Management. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved April 4, 2015. Edwards, Richard (September 21, 2012). "Inside HBO's Game Of Thrones by Bryan Cogman REVIEW". SFX. Future plc. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2012. Snierson, Dan (April 4, 2016). "HBO orders Game of Thrones weekly after-show from Bill Simmons". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016. "Game of Thrones concert experience hits the road in 2017". The Guardian. August 8, 2016. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 9, 2016. "Have you experienced 'Game Of Thrones' live in concert?". Grammy.com. May 15, 2017. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Hertweck, Nate (September 26, 2017). ""Game Of Thrones" Live Experience Is Coming To A Town Near You". Grammy Awards. The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2019. Walsh, Michael (November 11, 2016). "New Game of Thrones History Tells Us a Few Things About the Future". Nerdist. Legendary Entertainment. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved September 16, 2017. Lutes, Alicia (September 14, 2017). "Explore the Targaryen Conquest of Westeros in New Game of Thrones Animated Short". Nerdist. Legendary Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Wigley, Josh (May 27, 2019). "'Game of Thrones: The Last Watch' Delivers Emotional Farewell to Westeros". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on June 2, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Kram, Zach (May 27, 2019). "Seven Takeaways From the Behind-the-Scenes Documentary 'Game of Thrones: The Last Watch'". The Ringer. Spotify. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Hibberd, James (September 20, 2017). "Game of Thrones writer Bryan Cogman developing a 5th prequel series". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2017. Goldberg, Lesley (May 14, 2017). "'Game of Thrones': Fifth "Successor Show" in the Works at HBO, George R.R. Martin Says". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on May 15, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2017. Hibberd, James (June 2, 2017). "Game of Thrones: HBO clarifies prequels, final seasons plan". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017. Martin, George R.R. (May 14, 2017). "About Those Spinoffs...". Not A Blog. Archived from the original on August 14, 2017. Retrieved August 6, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 25, 2018). "'Game Of Thrones': HBO Boss On Finale Season Premiere, Prequel – TCA". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Cain, Sian (November 10, 2018). "I've been struggling with it': George RR Martin on The Winds of Winter". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Romano, Nick (May 4, 2019). "George R.R. Martin says three Game of Thrones spin-offs still in the works". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Roots, Kimberly (April 24, 2019). "Game of Thrones Producer Bryan Cogman's Spinoff Series Dead at HBO: 'I Am Done With Westeros'". TVLine. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2019. Goldberg, Lesley (January 27, 2021). "'Game of Thrones' Animated Drama Eyed at HBO Max (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Hibberd, James (July 16, 2021). "HBO Max Developing 2 More 'Game of Thrones' Animated Shows (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 8, 2021. Llewellyn, Tom (November 1, 2022). "George RR Martin claims visuals in Game of Thrones animated spin-off are stunning". HITC. Retrieved March 3, 2023. White, Peter; Andreeva, Nellie (March 18, 2021). "'Game Of Thrones': Sea Snake's 9 Voyages Among Three More Spinoffs In Consideration At HBO". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 22, 2021. Patten, Dominic (June 23, 2022). "'Game Of Thrones' Creator George R.R. Martin Reveals Jon Snow Sequel's "Working Title", Showrunners On Board". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Hibberd, James (June 16, 2022). "'Game of Thrones' Jon Snow Sequel Series in Development at HBO (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Otterson, Joe (April 3, 2023). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel About Aegon's Conquest Eyed at HBO". Variety. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Patches, Matt (January 2, 2024). "New Game of Thrones show pivoting to animation, says George R.R. Martin". Polygon. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Hibberd, James (June 8, 2018). "Breaking: 'Game of Thrones' prequel pilot ordered by HBO. Full details ..." Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Schedeen, Jesse (June 16, 2018). "Game of Thrones Spinoff: What is The Age of Heroes?". IGN. Ziff Davis. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Hibberd, James (October 29, 2019). "HBO cancels Game of Thrones prequel starring Naomi Watts". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Patten, Dominic (February 8, 2019). ""Crazy" Not To Consider More 'Game Of Thrones' Spinoffs, HBO Chief Says – TCA". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Kroll, Justin; Otterson, Joe (October 30, 2018). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel Casts Naomi Watts in Lead Role". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved October 31, 2018. Petski, Denise (March 27, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' Prequel HBO Pilot Adds Five Series Regulars To Cast". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2019. Martin, George R.R. (September 16, 2019). "I Could Tell You…". Not a Blog. Archived from the original on April 16, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Wigler, Josh; Lesley, Goldberg (October 29, 2019). "'Game of Thrones': Naomi Watts-Led Prequel Dead at HBO". The Hollywood Reporter. Valence Media. Archived from the original on May 20, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (September 12, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' House Targaryen Prequel From George R.R. Martin & Ryan Condal Nears HBO Pilot Order". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 13, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2019. Patten, Dominic; Andreeva, Nellie (October 29, 2019). "'Game Of Thrones' Prequel 'House Of The Dragon' Gets Straight To Series Order From HBO". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (January 15, 2020). "'Game Of Thrones' Prequel 'House Of The Dragon' To Launch In 2022; HBO Boss On More 'GOT' & Pilot That Didn't Go – TCA". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. McLennan, Patrick (July 20, 2020). "Game of Thrones prequel House of the Dragon begins its cast search". Radio Times. Immediate Media Company. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2020. Otterson, Joe (October 5, 2020). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel Series 'House of the Dragon' Casts Paddy Considine". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Dow, Elaine (December 11, 2020). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel 'House of the Dragon' Adds Matt Smith, Olivia Cooke, Emma D'Arcy". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (February 10, 2021). "'Game Of Thrones': Casey Bloys On Expanding Franchise With More Series On HBO & HBO Max As 'House Of the Dragon' Heads To Production". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 22, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Hibberd, James (October 14, 2020). "House of the Dragon to film in a different country than Game of Thrones". Entertainment Weekly. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (February 11, 2021). "'House Of the Dragon': Rhys Ifans, Steve Toussaint, Eve Best & Sonoya Mizuno Join HBO's 'Game of Thrones' Prequel". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on March 22, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Hatchett, Keisha; Moon, Kat (May 5, 2022). "House of the Dragon: Trailer, Release Date, Cast, and Everything to Know About the Game of Thrones Prequel". TV Guide. Red Ventures. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Otterson, Joe (January 21, 2021). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel 'Tales of Dunk and Egg' in Early Development at HBO (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (November 30, 2021). "'Dunk & Egg': Steve Conrad To Write 'Game Of Thrones' Prequel Series In Works At HBO". Deadline. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Otterson, Joe (April 12, 2023). "'Game of Thrones' Prequel Series 'A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms: The Hedge Knight' Ordered at HBO". Variety. Retrieved November 4, 2023. Official website Game of Thrones at IMDb Game of Thrones at Rotten Tomatoes Game of Thrones on Twitter Game of Thrones Viewer's Guide Making Game of Thrones Portals:  Speculative fiction  Television  United States  2010s Game of Thrones at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata