The province of Salerno (Italian: provincia di Salerno) is a province in the Campania region of Italy. The largest towns in the province are: Salerno, the capital, which has a population of 131,950; Cava de' Tirreni, Battipaglia and Nocera Inferiore, all having around 50,000 inhabitants. The province has an area of 4,923 km2 (1,901 sq mi), and a total population of about 1.1 million. There are 158 comuni (sg.: comune), the one with the largest area being Eboli. The Amalfi Coast—a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997—is located within the province, attracting tens of thousands of tourists from all around the world every year. The province also comprises the Cilento coast, whose sea quality is considered among the best in Italy. Formerly a notable center of Magna Graecia, Paestum houses a wide complex of well-preserved ancient Greek temples.[citation needed] One of the features of the rugged country-side is Gole del Calore di Felitto, an area of gorges between Felitto and Magliano Vetere formed by the Calore Lucano river. This area is of great geological interest and is rich in flora and fauna.[citation needed] One of the many historical buildings in the province is the chapter house belonging to the Certosa di Padula (or Carthreuse of Padula or of San Lorenzo in Padula), a Carthusian monastery in the town of Padula. The building has evolved over centuries; the earliest parts were constructed in the early 14th century. A mannerist cloister leads to the church, and a later 17th-century cloister has loggias supported by rusticated columns. These features add to the general baroque character of the building.[citation needed] The chapter house has been adapted for the Museo Archeologico della Lucania Occidentale, which has many ancient artifacts dating from Roman times.[citation needed] The Monti Picentini area is home to the eponymous regional park, which is home to several natural preserves.[citation needed] Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional Gross Domestic Product (Small regions TL3), OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. Sardinia, Cilento and Tuscany top Italian seaside awards Official website (in Italian)