Expressway S1 or express road S1 is a Polish highway under construction with a planned length of 130 km (81 mi), in the Silesian and Lesser Poland voivodeships. Upon completion, it will connect the A1 motorway near the Katowice International Airport in Pyrzowice, with the border of Slovakia in Zwardoń, where it will connect to the D3 Motorway. A major part of the route is the Eastern beltway of the Upper Silesian Industrial Region between the A1 and A4 motorway. The S1 originally was routed from Bielsko-Biała via Cieszyn to the Czech border. This section was renumbered to Expressway S52 in 2016 and the S1 was rerouted over the former Expressway S69. The route is expected to be completed by 2025. === Pyrzowice-Tychy === As of the end of May 2016 six options for the route were proposed, five of which were already available by June 2008. At first option IV(D) was preferable. It would have gone parallel to Brzeszcze – Oświęcim railway tracks (PKP rail line 93). However, UNESCO protested against the choice, as, in their opinion, the traffic would have disrupted the zone of silence around the former German concentration camp Auschwitz-Birkenau, and, as the result, UNESCO would have put the camp onto the endangered list. At the beginning of August 2009, the head of Miedźna county has announced to the media his option of the S1 (option VI), that would have gone through a forest on the borders of the Miedźna and Bojszowy county. In November 2009, it was accepted by all the local counties. However, GDDKiA turned down this option due to environmental issues. The road would have passed through the "Stawy w Brzeszczach" reserve for birds conservation, which was not acceptable. Mysłowice (Kosztowy) Lędziny Bieruń Oświęcim (Stare Stawy) Brzeszcze Dankowice Stara Wieś Bielsko-Biała (Hałcnów) In 2013 the Economical, Technical and Environmental Institution has proposed 4 choices (A, B, C, and D), of which choices A and C were preferred. However, the mining company "Brzeszcze" was against choice C, and "SILESIA" mining enterprise against A. As a compromise, GDDKIA promised to work on the additional option "E". Preparatory works for DŚU were done by 7 January 2015. In March 2015 choice "E" was chosen as preferred. In June the same year Regional Directorate of the Environment Protection in Katowice has asked GDDKiA to give out the environmental decision for the section. Mysłowice (Kosztowy) Lędziny Bieruń Międzyrzecze Gilowice Miedźna Bestwinka Kaniów Dankowice Stara Wieś Bielsko-Biała (Hałcnów) The project will cost approximately 1.437 bln złotych. „Kosztowy II" (after construction the road to Tychy will be designated as S1A) „Lędziny" „Bieruń" „Oświęcim" (future connection to Oświęcim bypass) „Wola” „Brzeszcze" „Stara Wieś" „Hałcnów" Option A (39.7 km) would have run through the following counties: Mysłowice Lędziny Imielin Bieruń Bojszowy Miedźna Bestwina Wilamowice Bielsko-Biała Option B (40.4 km) would have run through the following counties: Mysłowice Lędziny Imielin Bieruń Bojszowy Oświęcim Bestwina Brzeszcze Wilamowice Bielsko-Biała Option C (40.8 km) would have run through the following counties: Mysłowice Lędziny Imielin Bieruń Bojszowy Oświęcim Bestwina Brzeszcze Wilamowice Bielsko-Biała Option D (42.1 km) would have run through the following counties: Mysłowice Lędziny Imielin Bieruń Bojszowy Oświęcim Bestwina Brzeszcze Wilamowice Bielsko-Biała. In 2013 a new option, presented by the mining companies "SILESIA" and "Brzeszcze" and by Miedźna, Brzeszcze and Bestwina counties, was proposed. The option "H"(or hybrid), as it is known, was an initial compromise between the companies and counties and GDDKiA. However it wasn't implemented. Highways in Poland European route E75 "Generalna Dyrekcja Dróg Krajowych i Autostrad - Generalna Dyrekcja Dróg Krajowych i Autostrad - Portal Gov.pl". "Mapy Google". Mapy Google. Retrieved 2015-11-20. "Mapa Polski z nazwami węzłów, stan na 27.06.2022 r." Droga ekspresowa S1 (Polska) "S-1 od w. "Kosztowy II" w Mysłowicach do w. "Suchy Potok" w Bielsku-Białej :: Generalna Dyrekcja Dróg Krajowych i Autostrad - Serwis informacyjny". www.gddkia.gov.pl. Retrieved 2015-11-20. "Mapa Polski z nazwami węzłów, stan na 27.06.2022 r." Wikimedia Commons has media related to Expressway S1 (Poland).