Year 992 (CMXCII) was a leap year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Winter – A superflare from the sun causes an Aurora Borealis, with visibility as far south as Germany and Korea. Spring – Pietro II Orseolo, doge of Venice, concludes a treaty with Emperor Basil II to transport Byzantine troops, in exchange for commercial privileges in Constantinople. Venetian ships are exempted from customs duties at Abydos (mostly foreign goods are carried on Venetian ships). Venetian merchants in Constantinople are placed directly under the Grand Logothetes (Minister of Finance). May 25 – Mieszko I, prince (duke) of the Polans, dies after a reign of more than 30 years at Poznań. He is succeeded by his son Bolesław I the Brave who becomes ruler of Poland. Having inherited the principality (located between the Oder and the Warta rivers), Bolesław forms an alliance with the Holy Roman Empire. June 27 – Battle of Conquereuil: The Angevins under Fulk III "the Black", Count of Anjou, defeat the forces of Conan I, duke of Brittany, who is killed in the battle at Conquereuil (France). Approximate date – Norse Viking settlers establish a mint in Dublin (Ireland), to produce silver pennies. August 1 – Hyeonjong, king of Goryeo (Korea) (d. 1031) Fujiwara no Michimasa, Japanese nobleman (d. 1054) Fujiwara no Yorimichi, Japanese nobleman (d. 1071) Guido Monaco, Italian monk and music theorist (or 991) Otto Orseolo, doge of Venice (approximate date) Ulric Manfred II, count of Turin (approximate date) February 1 – Jawhar al-Siqilli, Fatimid general February 29 – Oswald, archbishop of Worcester May 25 – Mieszko I, prince (duke) of Poland June 15 – Michael I, Kievan metropolitan bishop June 27 – Conan I, duke of Brittany July 1 – Heonjeong, queen of Goryeo (Korea) (b. 961) August 23 – Volkold, bishop of Meissen December 3 – Lothar II, German nobleman Æthelwine, ealdorman of East Anglia Abu al-Hassan al-Amiri, Persian philosopher Adso of Montier-en-Der, Frankish abbot (b. 920) Fujiwara no Nakafumi, Japanese waka poet (b. 923) Fujiwara no Tamemitsu, Japanese statesman (b. 942) Herbert of Wetterau, German nobleman Liu Jiyuan, emperor of Northern Han Maelpeadair Ua Tolaid, Irish abbot Marino Cassianico, bishop of Venice "Mystery glow that lit up the night sky in 992 C.E. Explained". John Julius Norwich (1991). Byzantium: The Apogee, p. 257. ISBN 0-394-53779-3. Bernard S. Bachrach, Warfare and Military Organization in Pre-Crusade Europe (Ashgate Publishing, Aldershot, UK & Burlington, VT, 2002), IX, p. 66.