The 1972 Ice Hockey World Championships was the 39th edition of the Ice Hockey World Championships. The tournament was held in Prague, Czechoslovakia from 7 to 22 April 1972, and the Czechoslovakia national team won the tournament, the third time they had done so and first since 1949, ending the Soviet Union's streak of nine consecutive titles. In addition it was the Czechoslovaks' 12th European title. For the first time, a separate tournament is held for both the World Championships and the Winter Olympics. Previously, the Winter Olympics tournament was held in lieu of a world championships, with the winner being declared world champion for that year. It also marked the first time in international ice hockey that all goaltenders were required to wear face masks. The American team, who had won the Silver medal earlier in the year at the Olympics, could not even win the 'B' pool, losing to Poland in their final game. Source:[citation needed] Played in Bucharest from 24 March to 2 April. Source:[citation needed] Poland was promoted to Group A, both Norway and France were relegated to Group C. The French team boycotted the tournament in a protest over their federation's failure to finance the team's participation in the Sapporo Olympics Played in Miercurea-Ciuc from 3 March to the 12th. The Chinese won their first game ever played in a World Championship. Source:[citation needed] Both Austria and Italy were promoted to Group B. Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Jorma Valtonen Best Defenceman: František Pospíšil Best Forward: Alexander Maltsev Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Jiří Holeček Defence: Oldřich Machač, František Pospíšil Forwards: Valeri Kharlamov, Alexander Maltsev, Vladimir Vikulov The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: The final standings of the European championships according to IIHF: Szemberg & Podnieks 2007, p. 199 France Boycotts Explanation of Olympic controversy (in french) Group C Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 142–3. Szemberg, Szymon; Podnieks, Andrew, eds. (2007), World of Hockey: Celebrating a Century of the IIHF, Bolton, Ontario: Fenn Publishing, ISBN 978-1-55168-307-2 Complete results at Passionhockey.com