Walsrode World Bird Park (German: Weltvogelpark Walsrode), known as Jubs in English until 2010, is a bird park located in the middle of the Lüneburg Heath in North Germany within the municipality of Bomlitz near Walsrode in the state of Lower Saxony, Germany. It is the largest bird park in the world in terms of species as well as land area, although the Bird Paradise in Singapore (formerly the Jurong Bird Park) claims the largest number of individual birds. Walsrode World Bird Park covers 24 hectares (59 acres) and houses some 4,000 birds of 600 species from every continent and climatic zone in the world. The park celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in 2012. The park was founded in 1962 by the Walsrode businessman, Fritz Geschke, for privately breeding pheasants and water birds. In 1962, his daughter, Uschi and her husband, Wolf Brehm, took over the park with the intention of creating a conservation and visitor centre, doubling the size within the first 6 years. In 1968, the 2,100-square-metre (23,000 sq ft) "Paradies-Halle", a tropical bird house, was opened. Trend-setting facilities such as the free flight aviary, a penguin enclosure and many others followed. In 2000, on the occasion of the Expo in Hanover, the Jungle Hall was opened with its Indonesian artefacts and Asiatic bird species. Later, the Eagle Owl Hill and Treehouse Village were added. The German bird cage museum, also located in the bird park, was closed in 2006 and auctioned at Sotheby's. Due to business difficulties, the park was transferred in 2000 to new ownership. Whilst in earlier years shows had been largely dropped, the new owners introduced more flight demonstrations which increased the number of visitors and ensured the survival of the park. Nevertheless, visitor numbers dropped in 2008 to 280,000; 50,000 fewer than necessary for a profitable operation. Looming insolvency was averted in March 2009 by the intervention of the Belgian firm, Floralux. In 2010, the official international name of Walsrode Bird Park (Vogelpark Walsrode) was changed to Walsrode World Bird Park (Weltvogelpark Walsrode). The bird park comprises a large number of internal and external aviaries as well as outdoor enclosures. In addition, the visitor can meet birds in an environment modelled on their natural habitat with no artificial barriers both in a free flight aviary with sand dunes and a wave machine, as well as in numerous buildings, such as the Jungle Hall. Whilst the more recent areas of the bird park are based more on the natural environment of the birds, the older areas mainly consist of spacious parkland and woods including large rose and rhododendron beds. One special attraction is the variety of flight demonstrations on an open-air stage where falcons and eagles are displayed, as well as parrots, pelicans and Indian Runner ducks. There are also various feeding demonstrations and a young bird rearing station which is particularly interesting to children. The bird park has a range of birds that cannot be seen in other zoos in the world, and was the first to successfully breed a number of species, such as Golden Headed Quetzals. The bird park participates in the European Endangered Species Programme and has, for example, made eagle owls available for reintroduction into the wild. In the vicinity of the bird park is a stop on the Bomlitz–Walsrode railway which runs heritage rail services. A blue-and-yellow macaw during the flying demonstration Macaw in flying demonstration Great grey owl Knobbed hornbill Penguin feeding time In the jungle hall The toco toucan – mascot of the park A shoebill on the lookout Post mill within the park Vogelpark Walsrode - viel mehr als Vögel, (ed.: Vogelpark Walsrode), o.O. o.J. (31. A.), 162 p. with numerous illustrations. Wir entdecken die Vögel (Wieso? Weshalb? Warum?), Patricia Mennen (Autorin) & Anne Ebert (Illustrator), Ravensburger Buchverlag, ISBN 978-3-473-32831-4 Wir entdecken die Vögel (Wieso? Weshalb? Warum?) [Audiobook] (Audio CD), Jumbo Neue Medien & Verlag GmbH, ISBN 978-3-8337-2620-0 "Weltvogelpark Walsrode on Zootierliste". zootierliste.de. Zootierliste. Retrieved 18 July 2021. "Über uns" [About us]. Weltvogelpark Walsrode (in German). Retrieved 27 January 2024. Der Weltvogelpark Walsrode ist der weltweit größte Vogelpark und gehört zu den zehn artenreichsten Zoos der Welt. [...] Auf 24 ha Fläche erlebst Du 4.000 Vögel aus 600 verschiedenen Vogelarten "EAZA Member Zoos & Aquariums". eaza.net. EAZA. Retrieved 26 March 2012. "Vogelpark Walsrode". sciencecentral.com Publisher=Science Central. Retrieved 17 June 2009. "The World's Largest". birdpark.com.sg. Jurong Bird Park. Retrieved 2 July 2010. "Weltvogelpark Walsrode". weltvogelpark.de. Weltvogelpark Walsrode. Retrieved 13 March 2012. "Geschichte" [History]. Weltvogelpark Walsrode (in German). 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "From Hobby to the Largest Bird Park in the World". weltvogelpark.de. Weltvogelpark Walsrode. Retrieved 2 July 2010. Mikuteit, Hanna-Lotte (28 March 2009). "The bird park Walsrode is saved". abendblatt.de (in German). Hamburger Abendblatt. Retrieved 2 July 2010. "First European Breeding Success of the Golden-Headed Quetzals in Weltvogelpark Walsrode". www.beautyofbirds.com. Retrieved 19 October 2017. Buchvorstellung am 26.06.2010 im Vogelpark: Gut recherchiert ist halb gewonnen. Für das neue Buch “Wieso? Weshalb? Warum? Wir entdecken die Vögel” haben sich Autorin Patricia Mennen und Illustratorin Anne Ebert vom Ravensburger Buchverlag vor einem Jahr drei Tage lang ausführlich bei den Experten des Weltvogelpark Walsrode informiert... Official website Walsrode Bird Park on National Geographic Brasil (blog of the photographer João Marcos Rosa) Archived 6 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Excursion report by the Bielefeld Zoo Photographs from the Walsrode Bird Park Media related to Weltvogelpark Walsrode at Wikimedia Commons