The Academy Honorary Award – instituted in 1950 for the 23rd Academy Awards (previously called the Special Award, which was first presented at the 1st Academy Awards in 1929) – is given annually by the Board of Governors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS). Since 2009, it has been presented at the separate annual Governors Awards rather than at the regular Academy Awards ceremony. The Honorary Award celebrates motion picture achievements that are not covered by existing Academy Awards, although prior winners of competitive Academy Awards are not excluded from receiving the award. Unless otherwise specified, Honorary Award recipients receive the same gold Oscar statuettes received by winners of the competitive Academy Awards. Unlike the Special Achievement Award instituted in 1972, those on whom the Academy confers its Honorary Award do not have to meet "the Academy's eligibility year and deadline requirements". Like the Special Achievement Award, the Special Award and Honorary Award have been used to reward significant achievements of the year that did not fit in existing categories, subsequently leading the Academy to establish several new categories, and to honor exceptional career achievements, contributions to the motion picture industry, and service to the Academy. Years for which the Special Award and Honorary Award recipients received their awards and the annual Academy Awards ceremonies at which they received them provided within parentheses throughout (as pertinent) follow this information for recipients listed in the Official Academy Award Database and Web-based official AMPAS documents. Bob Hope was honored on four separate occasions. "Honorary Award: About". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. 17 July 2014. Retrieved 2017-02-27. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "About Academy Awards: Honorary Award". Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 2008-04-09. Retrieved 2008-07-29. The Academy's Honorary Award is given to honor extraordinary distinction in lifetime achievement, exceptional contributions to the state of motion picture arts and sciences, or for outstanding service to the Academy. It is given at the discretion of the Board of Governors and is not necessarily given every year, although the last year it was not given before 2008 was 1987. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "About Academy Awards: Honorary Award". Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 2008-04-09. Retrieved 2008-08-01. The Honorary Award can also take the form of a life membership in the Academy, a scroll, a medal, a certificate or any other design chosen by the Bord of Governors. The John A. Bonner Medal of Commendation, given for 'outstanding service and dedication in upholding the high standards of the Academy,' is considered an Honorary Award. It is usually given at the annual presentation of Scientific and Technical Awards, a dinner ceremony separate from the annual telecast. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "Special Achievement Award". Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 2008-01-07. Retrieved 2008-07-29. The Special Achievement Award, an Oscar statuette, is given for an achievement which makes an exceptional contribution to the motion picture for which it was created, but for which there is no annual award category. ... Unlike an Honorary Award, a Special Achievement Award is conferred only for achievements in films which meet the Academy's eligibility year and deadline requirements.... In the Makeup and Sound Effects Editing categories, the Award can be given if those committees fail to come up with three nominations. In that case the committee may recommend to the Board of Governors that a special Achievement Award be voted instead. That was the case in the Visual Effects category, too, before Visual Effects became an annual award.... Thirteen of the 17 Special Achievement Awards given since the category was instituted in 1972 were given for visual effects or sound effects achievements. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "About Academy Awards: Honorary Award". Official Academy Award Website. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS), Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 2008-04-09. Retrieved 2008-08-01. "The Honorary Award is not called a lifetime achievement award by the Academy, but it is often given for a life's work in filmmaking – to Polish director Andrzej Wajda in 1999, for example, and to Elia Kazan the previous year [1998].... The Honorary Award also may be given for outstanding service to the Academy. The last time this happened, however, was in 1979, when an Oscar statuette was presented to Academy Governor Hal Elias, who had served more than a quarter century on the Board of Governors. The Academy Honorary Award is often awarded in preference to those with noted achievements in motion pictures who have nevertheless never won an Academy Award. Thus, many of its recipients are Classic Hollywood stars, such as Lillian Gish, Barbara Stanwyck, Kirk Douglas, and Lauren Bacall. Among its Honorary Awards for acting, the Academy also presents deserving young actors with the Special Juvenile Academy Award. (Most of those are not listed here; some of the early "Special Awards" that later became known in that acting category as the "Special Juvenile Academy Award" are listed with "Special Award" added parenthetically.) Following the searchable Official Academy Award Database (a primary source for this list), years listed are the years of the Academy Awards ceremony when the award was presented (with the annual award ceremony following within parentheses, as documented in the Official Academy Award Database). Removing him from the contests in which he had been nominated for an Academy Award in the "competitive classes", the Academy gave Chaplin this "Special Award" because, as it wrote to him, his "collective accomplishments" in The Circus merited his placement "in a class" by himself. "Special Award to Charles Chaplin". Official Academy Award Database. AMPAS, Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on January 12, 2012. Retrieved 2008-07-29. [NOTE: The Academy Board of Judges on merit awards for individual achievements in motion picture arts during the year ending August 1, 1928, unanimously decided that your name should be removed from the competitive classes, and that a special first award be conferred upon you for writing, acting, directing and producing The Circus. The collective accomplishments thus displayed place you in a class by yourself." (Letter from the Academy to Mr. Chaplin, dated February 19, 1929.)] "Walt Disney's Oscars® | the Walt Disney Family Museum". Archived from the original on 2015-03-22. Retrieved 2015-12-17. Bosley Crowther (1941-06-24). "Movie Review: 'Kukan,' a Vivid Fact Film about Modern China and Its Myriad Peoples, Is Seen at the World" (Web). The New York Times, Movies. movies.nytimes.com. Retrieved 2008-07-30. Crowther refers to filmmaker as a "young newspaperman, Rey Scott" in the text of this review; credits (at foot of page) describe this film as "A travel picture filmed in color in China and narrated by Ray [sic] Scott. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "Honorary Award". Official Academy Awards Database. AMPAS, Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 28 August 2008. Retrieved 2008-07-29. (Page 2 of 2 pages); cf. Awards Database. This "Special Award", which Baskett received at the 20th Academy Awards ceremony, held on March 20, 1948, effectively removed him from contention[citation needed] for a best actor award for his role of Uncle Remus; he died of heart disease on July 9, 1948. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. "From Amarcord to Z". AMPAS. Oscars.org. Archived from the original (Web) on 2013-04-15. Retrieved 2008-07-29. Posters From Fifty Years of Foreign Language Film Award Winners: January 19 through April 15, 2007, in the Academy's Grand Lobby Gallery. ... The history of the award actually goes back to 1947, when the Academy recognized Shoe-Shine, from war-scarred Italy, for offering 'proof to the world that the creative spirit can triumph over adversity.' The Academy presented seven more 'special' or 'honorary' foreign language film Oscars before officially establishing the category in 1956. That first competitive award went to Italy for La Strada. The exhibition, which has been assembled from the extensive poster collection of the Academy's Margaret Herrick Library, includes the posters for both Italian films. "[NOTE: Presented on "Jean Hersholt Night," June 26, 1949, at the Academy building.]" (Awards Database) Thompson, Anne (September 6, 2017). "Academy Announces Honorary Oscars, Reflecting Diversity: Agnes Varda, Charles Burnett, and More". Beachum, Paul Sheehan,Chris; Sheehan, Paul; Beachum, Chris (September 5, 2018). "Honorary Oscars: Cicely Tyson, Kathleen Kennedy, Frank Marshall, Marvin Levy, Lalo Schifrin chosen as 2018 awards recipients".{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Keegan, Rebecca (October 27, 2019). "Governors Awards: Honorees Lina Wertmüller, Geena Davis Call for Gender Parity in Hollywood". The Hollywood Reporter. "Oscars: Academy To Honor Danny Glover, Samuel L. Jackson, Elaine May & Liv Ullmann At 2022 Governors Awards". Deadline Hollywood. 24 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Beckett, Lois (March 26, 2022). "'This is going to be cherished': Samuel L Jackson and Elaine May receive honorary Oscars". The Guardian. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Keegan, Rebecca (March 25, 2022). "Oscars: Governors Awards Honor Samuel L. Jackson, Elaine May, Liv Ullmann and Danny Glover". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Hammond, Pete (June 21, 2022). "Governors Awards: Michael J. Fox, Diane Warren, Peter Weir & Euzhan Palcy Set For Academy Honors". Davis, Clayton (June 21, 2022). "Peter Weir, Diane Warren, Euzhan Palcy and Michael J. Fox to Receive Honorary Oscars at Governors Awards". Pond, Steve (November 20, 2022). "Governors Awards Mix Campaigning, Calls for Action and a Long-Awaited Oscar for Diane Warren". "Angela Bassett Finally Gets Her Oscar as Academy Announces 2023 Honorary Winners, Including Mel Brooks". Variety. 26 June 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Academy Juvenile Award Governors Awards Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award "Academy Award Statistics". Official Academy Awards Database. Accessed July 28, 2008. "Honorary Award". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, oscars.org (official website). Accessed July 28, 2008. (2 pages.) "Honorary Awards: Special Awards and Honorary Awards". Searchable Awards Database. Official Academy Awards Database. Accessed July 28, 2008. Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences – Official Website. The Official Academy Awards Database.