Paris Berlin London Madrid Turin Warsaw ESCP Business School (French: École Supérieure de Commerce de Paris; English: Paris Higher School of Commerce) is a French business school and grande école founded in Paris and based across Europe with campuses in Paris, Berlin, London, Madrid, Turin, and Warsaw. It is known as one of the trois Parisiennes (three Parisians), together with HEC Paris and ESSEC. Established in 1819, it is considered the world's oldest business school. ESCP Business School runs BSc, MBA, Executive MBA, master's degree programs in finance and management, executive education programs, and PhD programs. The school was established in Paris on 1 December 1819 by two former Napoleonic soldiers, Germain Legret and Amédée Brodart. Germain Legret had founded two business schools in Paris in 1815 and 1818, but both closed their doors rapidly. It was modelled on the first grande école, the École Polytechnique, founded by Lazare Carnot and Gaspard Monge, but was initially more modest, in large part because it had not been supported by the state. The school had gained international exposure since the 1820s, but it was not the only business school open to international students. Its stature and importance ascended during the 19th century and it moved to its current Parisian location on the Avenue de la République in 1898. In 1828, the project to put the school under the authority of the French Ministry of Commerce and Industry failed. The school remained independent by the intervention of Jérôme-Adolphe Blanqui, who took it over. Several times during the first half of the 19th century, French political developments resulted in plans to group ESCP with elite French engineering schools such as the École Polytechnique or the École Centrale Paris, but this ultimately did not happen. It is worth mentioning that at the time, engineering schools in France and in Europe taught future businessmen. From 1838, the French state began to fund scholarships meant for ESCP's students. In 1869, the Paris Chamber of Commerce took over the school, aiming to train future business leaders in modern methods in commerce and industry. In 1892, ESCP set up selective admissions processes, which continued to be retained and, today, take the form of competitive exams. On 5 April 1973, the concept of a multi-campus business school was created, with consecutive inaugurations of campuses taking place in the United Kingdom (London in 1974, move to Oxford in 1975) and in Germany (Düsseldorf in 1975, move to Berlin in 1985). In 1974 the ESCP developed courses in entrepreneurship in response to internal and external forces. Since then, the school has deepened its European presence to become an integrated pan-European business school: In 2018, ESCP became an École consulaire, largely financed by the public Chambers of Commerce in Paris, Berlin, and Turin. In 1985, the School's campus in Germany moved from Düsseldorf to Berlin at the invitation of the Government of Berlin. In 1988, a fourth campus was opened in Madrid. In 1999, ESCP merged with its sister school EAP. In 2001, the Master in Management programme taught at ESCP became validated by City University London. In 2004, a fifth campus in Turin was founded, whose courses became validated by the University of Turin; Master in Management students can obtain the Italian degree of Laurea Magistrale. In 2005, ESCP inaugurated its London campus, having moved from Oxford. In 2007, the Master in Management programme was recognised by the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid; students can obtain the Spanish degree of Master Europeo en Administración y Dirección de Empresas. In 2015, ESCP established its sixth European campus with its partner Kozminski University in Poland. In 2016, the School decides to strengthen its footprint in Paris by adding a second campus located in the Montparnasse area after buying back Novancia Business School's building. The campus is dedicated to executive programs. In 2019, the School removed “Europe” from its name, reverting to its original name. ESCP Business School is a grande école, a French institution of higher education that is separate from, but parallel and often connected to, the main framework of the French public university system. Grandes écoles are elite academic institutions that admit students through an extremely competitive process, and a significant proportion of their graduates occupy the highest levels of French society. Similar to Ivy League universities in the United States, Oxbridge in the UK, and the C9 League in China, graduation from a grande école is considered the prerequisite credential for any top government, administrative and corporate position in France. The degrees are accredited by the Conférence des Grandes Écoles and awarded by the French Ministry of National Education. Higher education business degrees in France are organized into three levels thus facilitating international mobility: the Licence, or Bachelor's degrees, and the Master's and Doctoral degrees. The Bachelors and the Masters are organized in semesters: 6 for the Bachelors and 4 for the Masters. Those levels of study include various "parcours" or paths based on UE (Unités d'enseignement or Modules), each worth a defined number of European credits (ECTS). A student accumulates those credits, which are generally transferable between paths. A Bachelors is awarded once 180 ECTS have been obtained (bac + 3); a Masters is awarded once 120 additional credits have been obtained (bac +5). The highly coveted PGE (Programme Grand École) ends with the degree of Master in Management (MiM). In 2017, ESCP decided to launch its MBA in International Management. To this end, it first rebranded its Master in European Management, and then completely revolutionised the curriculum of its MBA in 2023. In its new configuration, candidates can study both full-time and part-time for a period ranging from 10 to 34 months. During this period, all the typical subjects of a general management MBA are covered. The course is structured through core modules and a specialization, for a total of around 500 teaching hours. The core modules are taught in Paris, Berlin, London or online. They are followed by a specialisation taking place in Madrid, Turin or online. The MBA’s specialisations are in consulting, entrepreneurship, luxury, and fintech & innovation. The ESCP MBA is currently ranked 26th by the 2024 QS Global MBA Ranking and 25th by the 2024 Global MBA Financial Times Ranking. ESCP students can study on campuses in France (Paris), the UK (London), Spain (Madrid), Germany (Berlin), Italy (Turin), and Poland (Warsaw). They can spend either 6 months or 1 year on each campus according to their study choices. Each campus has its own specifics and develops programs with local academic institutions. For instance, in Spain, ESCP provides a Master in Business Project Management co-delivered with the Technical University of Madrid and in Italy, a double-degree program is available for engineers together with the Polytechnic University of Turin. Since 2017, ESCP has had two campuses in Paris, one near the Place de la République (in the 11th arrondissement of Paris) and another one near the Montparnasse Tower (in the 15th arrondissement of Paris). Each campus is dedicated to a specific range of programs. The campus in the 11th arrondissement hosts all the graduate programs whereas the campus in the 15th arrondissement hosts the undergraduate education, the executive education and the school's start-up Incubator, the Blue Factory. This organization is unique to Paris; on every other campus, undergraduate, graduate and executive programmes are dispensed in the same campus. ESCP has over 100 partner grandes écoles and universities worldwide, several offering dual degrees. Exchange University of Vienna, Austria Solvay Brussels School of Economics and Management, Belgium Aarhus School of Business, Denmark Copenhagen Business School, Denmark Aalto University School of Business, Finland Hertie School, Germany WHU – Otto Beisheim School of Management, Germany Reykjavík University, Iceland Trinity College Dublin, Ireland BI Norwegian Business School, Norway University of Ljubljana, Slovenia University of Navarra, Spain University of Gothenburg, Sweden University of St. Gallen, Switzerland Sabancı University, Turkey London Business School, the UK Imperial College London, the UK Singapore Management University, Singapore Dual degrees Universidad de San Andrés, Argentina Instituto Tecnológico de Buenos Aires, Argentina HEC Montréal, Canada Universidad de Chile, Chile Tongji University, China Renmin University of China, School of Business, China Chinese University of Hong Kong, China École Centrale Paris, France ENSAE ParisTech, France Mines ParisTech, France École Grégoire-Ferrandi, France Paris 1 Panthéon-Sorbonne University, France Indian Institutes of Management, India Polytechnic University of Turin, Italy Università Ca' Foscari Venezia, Italy Waseda University, Japan Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education, Mexico Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University, Netherlands Kozminski University, Poland Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Portugal Higher School of Economics, Russia Korea University Business School, South Korea National Chengchi University, Taiwan Aston University, UK Cornell University, USA Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA Sotheby's Institute of Art, USA University of South Carolina, USA University of Texas at Austin, USA Centre Franco-Vietnamien de Formation à la Gestion, Vietnam Business Christophe de Margerie (ex-CEO of TotalEnergies) Sébastien de Montessus (born 1974). CEO of Endeavour Mining from 2016 to 2024. Arnaud de Puyfontaine (CEO of Vivendi) Victor Herrero (CEO of Guess Inc.) Pierre-Yves Roussel (CEO of Tory Burch LLC) Olaf Swantee (CEO of EE Limited) Federico J. González Tejera (CEO of Radisson Hotel Group) Tristan Nitot (President of Mozilla Europe) Alexandre Ricard (CEO of family business Pernod Ricard) François Pauly (CEO of Edmond de Rothschild Group) Patrick Cohen (CEO of AXA France) Véronique Morali (President of Fimalac) Edouard de Royere (CEO of Air Liquide) Patricia Barbizet (CEO of Christie's, Vice-chairman of the Board of Kering) Renaud de Lesquen (CEO of Givenchy) André Lacroix (CEO of Intertek Group plc) Patrick Thomas (CEO of Hermès) Arnaud Nourry (CEO of Hachette group) Antoine Riboud (Founder of Danone) Thierry de La Tour d'Artaise (CEO of SEB) Laurent-Éric Le Lay (CEO of Eurosport) Philippe Heim (CEO of La Banque postale, former deputy CEO of Société Générale) Patrice Louvet (CEO of Ralph Lauren) Christian Latouche (Founder of Fiducial SA) Cyrille Vigneron (CEO of Cartier) Bertrand Dumazy (CEO of Edenred) Politics Jean-Pierre Raffarin (Prime Minister of France from 2002 to 2005) Michel Barnier (Foreign Minister of France from 2004 to 2005) Frédéric Salat-Baroux (Secretary-General of the Presidency of France from 2005 to 2007) François Zocchetto (Senator for Mayenne) Roxana Maracineanu (Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports) Claude Nougein (Senator of Corrèze) Stéphane Valeri (President of the Monégasque National Council from 2018 to 2022) Research and education Olivier Blanchard (Chief Economist of the International Monetary Fund from 2008 to 2015, Robert M. Solow Professor Emeritus of Economics at the MIT) Agnès Bénassy-Quéré (Deputy governor of Banque de France & chief economist at the Direction générale du Trésor) Ahmad Bennani (Governor of the central bank of the Kingdom of Morocco) Christine Musselin (Scientific director at Sciences Po) Michel Wieviorka (French sociologist at EHESS) Andreas Kaplan (Président at Kühne Logistics University) Media and culture Leïla Slimani (Writer, Prix Goncourt laureate in 2016) Christophe Barbier (French journalist) Irma (singer) Hervé Hubert (French television producer) Aude Lancelin (French journalist) Jean-Marc Lofficier (Writer, publisher) Gilles Martin-Chauffier (Writer, Prix Interallié laureate in 1998) Hélène Gateau (Journalist, television presenter) Sports Stéphane Diagana (Track and field gold medalist) Érik Boisse (Fencer gold medalist) Valérie Barlois (Fencer gold medalist) Anne-Lise Touya (Fencer gold medalist) Associations Roger Cukierman (Banker, businessman and president of Conseil représentatif des institutions juives de France) Nathalie Boy de la Tour (President of Ligue de football professionnel) Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Paris HEC Paris ESSEC Business School "Facts, Rankings and Acreditations". ESCP. Retrieved 25 May 2023. >"ESCP Governance". ESCP. Retrieved 21 January 2022. >"Leon Laulusa". ESCP. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "ESCP Business School". Financial Times. Retrieved 23 January 2022. "Voici les dates des oraux aux Parisiennes (HEC, ESSEC, ESCP) - Major-Prépa". major-prepa.com (in French). June 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2018. "Kaplan Andreas: A school is "a building that has four walls…with tomorrow inside": Toward the reinvention of the business school". Business Horizons. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2018.03.010. S2CID 158794290. "ESCP launches its new brand campaign – The Choice | ESCP". escp.eu. "France's educational elite". Daily Telegraph. 17 November 2003. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Pierre Bourdieu (1998). The State Nobility: Elite Schools in the Field of Power. Stanford UP. pp. 133–35. ISBN 9780804733465. Ball, MBA Crystal (19 April 2019). "Top Grandes Écoles in France: Ranking, costs, job placements and more". Monique de Saint-Martin, « Les recherches sociologiques sur les grandes écoles : de la reproduction à la recherche de justice », Éducation et sociétés 1/2008 (No. 21), p. 95-103. lire en ligne sur Cairn.info Valérie Albouy et Thomas Wanecq, Les inégalités sociales d’accès aux grandes écoles (2003), INSEE "Conférence des grandes écoles: commission Accréditation". Conférence des grandes écoles. Retrieved 21 January 2022. "Etablissements dispensant des formations supérieures initiales diplômantes conférant le grade de master". Enseignementsup-Recherche.gouv.fr. Ministère de l'Enseignement supérieur, de la Recherche et de l'Innovation. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "La Licence". enseignementsup-recherche.gouv.fr (in French). 19 July 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. "Le Master". enseignementsup-recherche.gouv.fr (in French). 19 July 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. Ben-David, Joseph and Philip G. Altbach. eds. Centers of Learning: Britain, France, Germany, United States (2nd ed. 2017). "FT European Business School Rankings 2018". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT European Business School Rankings 2019". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT European Business School Rankings 2020". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT European Business School Rankings 2021". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "European Business School Rankings 2022 - Business school rankings from the Financial Times - FT.com". rankings.ft.com. Retrieved 5 December 2022. "FT Masters in Management". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT Masters in Management". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT Masters in Management". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "FT Masters in Management". Financial Times. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "Masters in Management 2022 - Business school rankings from the Financial Times - FT.com". rankings.ft.com. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "Business school rankings from the Financial Times - FT.com". rankings.ft.com. "Paris | ESCP". escp.eu. "Outgoing | Pagina non trovata". "International Partners". ESCP. Retrieved 21 January 2022. "Leadership profile: Sébastien De Montessus". Mining Review. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Victor Herrero takes up CEO role at Guess - Executive Moves Executive Search". "Patrick-cohen". "ESCP Alumni - Hall of Fame". www.escpalumni.org. WW, FashionNetwork com. "Renaud de Lesquen named CEO of Givenchy". FashionNetwork.com. "Philippe Heim - La Banque Postale". "Cyrille Vigneron". Luxury Tribune. Wikimedia Commons has media related to École supérieure de commerce de Paris - Europe. Official website 48°51′51.84″N 2°22′50.84″E﻿ / ﻿48.8644000°N 2.3807889°E﻿ / 48.8644000; 2.3807889