K-pop (Korean: 케이팝; RR: keipap), short for Korean popular music, is a form of popular music originating in South Korea as part of South Korean culture. It includes styles and genres from around the world, such as pop, hip hop, R&B, rock, jazz, gospel, reggae, electronic dance, folk, country, disco, and classical on top of its traditional Korean music roots. The term "K-pop" became popular in the 2000s, especially in the international context. The Korean term for domestic pop music is gayo (가요; 歌謠), which is still widely used within South Korea. While "K-pop" can refer to all popular music or pop music from South Korea, it is colloquially often used in a narrower sense for any Korean music and artists associated with the entertainment and idol industry in the country, regardless of the genre.[contradictory] The more modern form of the genre, originally termed "rap dance", emerged with the formation of the hip hop boy band Seo Taiji and Boys, in 1992. Their experimentation with different styles and genres of music and integration of foreign musical elements helped reshape and modernize South Korea's contemporary music scene. Modern K-pop "idol" culture began in the 1990s, as K-pop idol music grew into a subculture that amassed enormous fandoms of teenagers and young adults. After a slump in early idol music, from 2003, TVXQ and BoA started a new generation of K-pop idols that broke the music genre into the neighboring Japanese market and continue to popularize K-pop internationally today. With the advent of online social networking services and South Korean TV shows, the current spread of K-pop and South Korean entertainment, known as the Korean Wave, is seen not only in East Asia, but also throughout the world, gaining an international audience. In 2018, K-pop experienced significant growth and became a "power player", marking a 17.9% increase in revenue growth. As of 2019, Korean popular music is ranked at number six among the top ten music markets worldwide according to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry's "Global Music Report 2019", with BTS and Blackpink cited as artists leading the market growth. In 2020, K-pop experienced a record-breaking year when it experienced a 44.8% growth and positioned itself as the fastest-growing major market of the year. The term "K-pop" is the Korean equivalent of the Japanese "J-pop," Which first known use of the term occurred on Billboard in the October 9, 1999, edition at the end of an article titled "S. Korea To Allow Some Japanese Live Acts" by Cho Hyun-jin, then a Korea correspondent for the magazine, which used it as a broad term for South Korean pop music. Cho himself, however, is not sure if he coined the term, since some articles stated that the word 'K-pop' was already being used by music industry insiders, even though he had never heard it personally. Although K-pop generally refers to South Korean popular music and the associated industry, some consider it to be an all-encompassing genre exhibiting a wide spectrum of musical and visual elements.[unreliable source?] The French Institut national de l'audiovisuel defines K-pop as a "fusion of synthesized music, sharp dance routines and fashionable, colorful outfits." Songs typically consist of one or a mixture of pop, rock, hip hop, R&B, and electronic music genres. The mainstream method is to become an idol trainee through agency auditions, online auditions, or street casting. South Korean management agencies offer binding contracts to potential artists, sometimes at a young age. Trainees live together in a regulated environment and spend many hours a day learning how to sing, dance, speak foreign languages, and gain other skills in preparation for their debut. This "robotic" system of training is often criticized by Western media outlets. In 2012, The Wall Street Journal reported that the cost of training one Korean idol under SM Entertainment averaged US$3 million. K-pop is a cultural product that features "values, identity and meanings that go beyond their strictly commercial value." It is characterized by a mixture of modern Western sounds and African-American influences (including sounds from Hip-hop, R&B, Jazz, black pop, soul, funk, techno, disco, house, and Afrobeats) with a Korean aspect of performance (including synchronized dance moves, formation changes and the so-called "point choreography" consisting of hooking and repetitive key movements). It has been remarked that there is a "vision of modernization" inherent in Korean pop culture. For some, the transnational values of K-pop are responsible for its success. A commentator at the University of California, San Diego has said that "contemporary Korean pop culture is built on ... transnational flows ... taking place across, beyond, and outside national and institutional boundaries." Some examples of the transnational values inherent in K-pop that may appeal to those from different ethnic, national, and religious backgrounds include a dedication to high-quality output and presentation of idols, as well as their work ethic and polite social demeanor, made possible by the training period. Modern K-pop is marked by its use of English phrases. Jin Dal Yong of Popular Music and Society wrote that the usage may be influenced by "Korean-Americans and/or Koreans who studied in the U.S. [who] take full advantage of their English fluency and cultural resources that are not found commonly among those who were raised and educated in Korea." Korean pop music from singers or groups who are Korean-American such as Fly to the Sky, g.o.d, Rich, Yoo Seung-jun, and Drunken Tiger has both American style and English lyrics. These Korean-American singers' music has a different style from common Korean music, which attracts the interest of young people. Increasingly, foreign songwriters and producers are employed to work on songs for K-pop idols, such as will.i.am and Sean Garrett. Foreign musicians, including rappers such as Akon, Kanye West, Ludacris, and Snoop Dogg, have also featured on K-pop songs. Entertainment companies help to expand K-pop to other parts of the world through a number of different methods. Singers need to use English since the companies want to occupy markets in the other parts of Asia, which enables them to open the Western market in the end. Most K-pop singers learn English because it is a common language in the world of music, but some singers also learn other foreign languages such as Japanese to approach the Japanese market. Similarly, increasing numbers of K-pop bands use English names rather than Korean ones. This allows songs and artists to be marketed to a wider audience around the world. However, the use of English has not guaranteed the popularity of K-pop in the North American market. For some commentators, the reason for this is because the genre can be seen as a distilled version of Western music, making it difficult for K-pop to find acceptance in these markets. Furthermore, Western audiences tend to place emphasis on authenticity and individual expression in music, which the idol system can be seen as suppressing. According to Elaine W. Chun's research, even though hybridity appears more and more often in K-pop, and sometimes may even make fans admire K-pop stars more because it is fresh, new and interesting, it is hard to change those who believe in a perfect ideal for pure linguistic. This means that the original form of language is still difficult to alter. Artist names, song titles, and lyrics have exhibited significant growth in the usage of English words. No singers in the top fifty charts in 1990 had English in their names: people who worked in the Korean music industry viewed using Korean names as standard. In 1995, most popular singers such as Kim Gun-mo, Park Mi-kyung, Park Jin-young, Lee Seung-chul, and Byun Jin-sub still used Korean names, but fourteen of the singers and groups in the top fifty used English names, including DJ DOC, 015B, Piano, and Solid. After the 1997 financial crisis, the government stopped censoring English lyrics and Korea started to have a boom in English. Since the late 1990s, English usage in singers' names, song titles, and lyrics has grown quickly. Seventeen singers in the top fifty charts used English names in 2000, and thirty-one did so in 2005. In 2010, forty-one singers used English names among the top fifty songs, but usually, three or four singers and groups had more than one or two songs on the chart simultaneously. Korean names (e.g. Baek Ji-young, Seo In-young, and Huh Gak) are seen less frequently, and many K-pop singers have English names (e.g. IU, Sistar, T-ara, GD & TOP, Beast, and After School). Notably, until the early 1990s, musicians with English names would transliterate them into hangul, but now singers would use English names written with the Roman alphabet. In 1995, the percentage of song titles using English in the top 50 charts was 8%. This fluctuated between 30% in 2000, 18% in 2005, and 44% in 2010. An example of a Korean song with a large proportion of English lyrics is Kara's "Jumping," which was released at the same time in both Korea and Japan to much success. There have been critical responses in South Korea regarding the identity of the genre since its ascendance. Some of the notable music critics in the region have criticized K-pop as "an industrial label mainly designed to promote the national brand in the global market from the beginning" and argued that it was "not formed spontaneously as a pop culture but created with the orchestrated plan led by the government with commercial considerations" although in fact "the genre has practically no ties with traditional Korean identity." There is the perspective that the name of the genre was derived from J-pop. K-pop has at times faced criticisms from journalists who perceive the music to be formulaic and unoriginal. Some K-Pop groups have been accused of plagiarizing Western music acts as well as other musical acts. In addition, K-pop has been criticized for its reliance on English phrases, with critics dubbing the use of English in titles "meaningless." K-pop groups have been regularly accused of cultural appropriation of cultures such as African-American culture, especially due to the frequent use of cornrows and bandanas in idol groups' on-stage styling. Some have used blackface and racial slurs as part of their performances. K-Pop groups have also been accused of appropriating Native American[unreliable source?] and Indian cultures. However, debate exists about whether the borrowing of cultural elements from cultures outside of Korea indeed constitutes cultural appropriation, or if this cultural appropriation is negative at all. Scholar Crystal S. Anderson writes that "appropriating elements of a culture by taking them out of their original context and using them in a completely different way does not automatically constitute negative cultural appropriation." Many agencies have presented new idol groups to an audience through a "debut showcase" which consists of online marketing and television broadcast promotions as opposed to radio. Groups are given a name and a "concept" along with a marketing hook. These concepts are the type of visual and musical theme that idol groups utilize during their debut or comeback. Concepts can change between debuts and fans often distinguish between boy group concepts and girl group concepts. Concepts can also be divided between general concepts and theme concepts, such as cute or fantasy. New idol groups will often debut with a concept well known to the market to secure a successful debut. Sometimes sub-units or sub-groups are formed among existing members. Two example subgroups are Super Junior-K.R.Y., which consists of Super Junior members Kyuhyun, Ryeowook, and Yesung, and Super Junior-M, which became one of the best-selling K-pop subgroups in China. Online marketing includes music videos posted to YouTube in order to reach a worldwide audience. Prior to the actual video, the group releases teaser photos and trailers. Promotional cycles of subsequent singles are called comebacks even when the musician or group in question did not go on hiatus. Dance is an integral part of K-pop. When combining multiple singers, the singers often switch their positions while singing and dancing by making prompt movements in synchrony, a strategy called "formation changing" (자리바꿈; jaribakkum). The K-pop choreography (안무; 按舞; anmu) often includes the so-called "point dance" (포인트 안무; pointeu anmu), referring to a dance made up of hooking and repetitive movements within the choreography that matches the characteristics of the lyrics of the song. Super Junior's "Sorry Sorry" and Brown Eyed Girls' "Abracadabra" are examples of songs with notable "point" choreography. To choreograph a dance for a song requires the writers to take the tempo into account. According to Ellen Kim, a Los Angeles dancer and choreographer, a fan's ability to do the same steps must also be considered. Consequently, K-pop choreographers have to simplify movements. The training and preparation necessary for K-pop idols to succeed in the industry and dance successfully are intense. Training centers like Seoul's Def Dance Skool develop the dance skills of youth in order to give them a shot at becoming an idol. Physical training is one of the largest focuses at the school, as much of a student's schedule is based around dance and exercise. The entertainment labels are highly selective, so few make it to fame. Students at the school must dedicate their lives to the mastery of dance in order to prepare for the vigorous routines performed by K-pop groups. This, of course, means that the training must continue if they are signed. Companies house much larger training centers for those who are chosen. An interview with K-pop choreographer Rino Nakasone lends insight into the process of creating routines. According to Nakasone, her focus is to make dance routines that are flattering for the dancers but also complementary to the music. Her ideas are submitted to the entertainment company as video recordings done by professional dancers. Nakasone mentions that the company and the K-pop artists themselves have input on a song's choreography. Choreographer May J. Lee gives another perspective, telling that her choreography often starts out as expressing the feeling or the meaning of the lyrics. What starts out as small movements turns into a full dance that is better able to portray the message of the song. The emergence of Seo Taiji and Boys in 1992 paved the way for the development of contemporary K-pop groups. The group revolutionized the Korean music scene by incorporating rap and American hip-hop conventions into their music. This adoption of Western style extended to the fashions worn by the boy band: the members adopted a hip-hop aesthetic. Seo and bandmates' outfits for the promotional cycle of "I Know" included vibrant streetwear such as oversized T-shirts and sweatshirts, windbreakers, overalls worn with one strap, overalls worn with one pant leg rolled up, and American sports team jerseys.[citation needed] Accessories included baseball caps worn backwards, bucket hats, and do-rags.[citation needed] As K-pop "was born of post-Seo trends," many acts that followed Seo Taiji and Boys adopted the same fashion style. Deux and DJ DOC can also be seen wearing on-trend hip-hop fashions such as sagging baggy pants, sportswear, and bandanas in their performances.[citation needed] With Korean popular music transforming into youth-dominated media, manufactured teenage idol groups began debuting in the mid and late 1990s, wearing coordinated costumes that reflected the popular fashion trends among youth at the time. Hip-hop fashion, considered the most popular style in the late '90s, remained, with idol groups H.O.T. and Sechs Kies wearing the style for their debut songs. The use of accessories elevated the idol's style from everyday fashion to performance costume, like ski goggles (worn either around the head or neck), headphones worn around the neck, and oversized gloves worn to accentuate choreography moves were widely used.[citation needed] H.O.T.'s 1996 hit "Candy" exemplifies the level of coordination taken into account for idol's costumes, as each member wore a designated color and accessorized with face paint, fuzzy oversized mittens, visors, bucket hats, and earmuffs, and used stuffed animals, backpacks, and messenger bags as props. While male idol groups' costumes were constructed with similar color schemes, fabrics, and styles, the outfits worn by each member still maintained individuality. On the other hand, female idol groups of the '90s wore homogeneous costumes, often styled identically. The costumes for female idols during their early promotions often focused on portraying an innocent, youthful image. S.E.S.'s debut in 1997, "('Cause) I'm Your Girl", and Baby Vox's second album 1998 hit, "Ya Ya Ya," featured the girls dressed in white outfits, "To My Boyfriend" by Fin.K.L shows idols in pink schoolgirl costumes, and "One" and "End" of Chakra presented Hindu and African style costumes. To portray a natural and somewhat saccharine image, the accessories were limited to large bows, pompom hair ornaments and hair bands. With the maturation of female idol groups and the removal of bubblegum pop in the late 1990s, the sets of female idol groups focused on following the fashion trends of the time, many of which were revealing pieces. The latest promotions of the girl groups Baby Vox and Jewelry exemplify these trends of hot pants, micro-miniskirts, crop tops, peasant blouses, transparent garments and blouses on the upper part of the torso.[citation needed] As K-pop became a modern hybrid of Western and Asian cultures starting from the late 2000s, fashion trends within K-pop reflected diversity and distinction as well. Fashion trends from the late 2000s to early 2010s can largely be categorized under the following: Street: focuses on individuality; features bright colors, mix-and-match styling, graphic prints, and sports brands such as Adidas and Reebok. Retro: aims to bring back "nostalgia" from the 1960s to 1980s; features dot prints and detailed patterns. Common clothing items include denim jackets, boot-cut pants, wide pants, hair bands, scarves, and sunglasses. Sexy: highlights femininity and masculinity; features revealing outfits made of satin, lace, fur, and leather. Common clothing items include mini skirts, corsets, net stockings, high heels, sleeveless vests, and see-through shirts. Black & White: emphasizes modern and chic, symbolizes elegance and charisma, mostly applied to formal wear. Futurism: commonly worn with electronic and hip-hop genres; features popping color items, metallic details and prints; promotes a futuristic outlook. K-pop has a significant influence on fashion in Asia, where trends started by idols are followed by young audiences. Some idols have established status as fashion icons, such as G-Dragon and CL, who has repeatedly worked with fashion designer Jeremy Scott, being labeled his "muse." According to professor Ingyu Oh, "K-pop emphasizes thin, tall, and feminine looks with adolescent or sometimes very cute facial expressions, regardless of whether they're male or female singers." The South Korean government has acknowledged benefits to the country's export sector as a result of the Korean Wave (it was estimated in 2011 that a US$100 increase in the export of cultural products resulted in a US$412 increase in exports of other consumer goods including food, clothes, cosmetics and IT products) and thus have subsidized certain endeavours. Government initiatives to expand the popularity of K-pop are mostly undertaken by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism, which is responsible for the worldwide establishment of Korean Cultural Centers. South Korean embassies and consulates have also organized K-pop concerts outside the country, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs regularly invites overseas K-pop fans to attend the annual K-Pop World Festival in South Korea. In addition to reaping economic benefits from the popularity of K-pop, the South Korean government has been taking advantage of the influence of K-pop in diplomacy. In an age of mass communication, soft power (pursuing one's goals by persuading stakeholders using cultural and ideological power) is regarded as a more effective and pragmatic diplomatic tactic than the traditional diplomatic strategy hard power (obtaining what one wants from stakeholders through direct intimidation such as military threat and economic sanctions). Cultural diplomacy through K-pop is a form of soft power. An example of the South Korean government effort in diplomacy through K-pop is the Mnet Asian Music Awards (MAMA), a K-pop music award ceremony. Park Geun-hye (the Korean president at the time) delivered the opening statement at the 2014 MAMA, which was held in Hong Kong and sponsored by the Korean Small and Medium Business Administration (SMBA). This event was considered a deliberate endeavor by the Korean government to support Korean cultural industries in order to strengthen the nation's international reputation and political influence. Another example of cultural diplomacy is K-pop performances in North Korea. Prior to 2005, South Korean pop singers occasionally gave performances in North Korea. After an interval of more than a decade, approximately 190 South Korean performers, including well-known musicians Red Velvet, Lee Sun-hee, Cho Yong-pil, and Yoon Do-hyun, performed in Pyongyang, North Korea, on March 31 and April 3, 2018. Kim Jong Un was present in the audience. Oppaneun punggakjaengi (오빠는 풍각쟁이; lit. Older brother is a street musician) A 1938 trot song by Kim Song-gyu and Park Yeong-ho. Sung by Park Hyang-rim. Problems playing this file? See media help. The history of Korean popular music can be traced back to 1885 when an American missionary, Henry Appenzeller, began teaching American and British folk songs at a school. These songs were called changga (창가; 唱歌), and they were typically based on a popular Western melody sung with Korean lyrics. For example, the song "Oh My Darling, Clementine" became known as Simcheongga (심청가; 沈淸歌). During the Japanese colonial period (1910–1945), the popularity of changga songs rose as Koreans expressed their feelings against Japanese oppression through music. One of the most popular songs was Huimangga (희망가; 希望歌). The Japanese confiscated the existing changga collections and published lyrics books of their own.[third-party source needed] K-pop was represented by H.O.T in the early days, and it was mostly fanatical, flashy, and showed the rebellious psychology of young people in the emotional aspects. Most of the songs are relatively fast-paced and have a strong sense of rhythm, which is suitable for dancing. They often sing and dance when they perform, and the choreography urbanance is a very important factor in popularity. The first known Korean pop album was I Pungjin Sewol (이 풍진 세월; 이 風塵 歲月; lit. This Tumultuous Time), by Park Chae-seon and Lee Ryu-saek in 1925, which contained popular songs translated from Japanese. The first pop song written by a Korean composer is thought to be Nakhwayusu (낙화유수; 落花流水; lit. Fallen Blossoms on Running Water) sung by Lee Jeong-suk in 1929. In the mid-1920s, Japanese composer Masao Koga mixed traditional Korean music with Gospel music that American Evangelists introduced in the 1870s. This type of music became known as Enka in Japan, and later in Korea developed into Trot (트로트; teuroteu; t'ŭrot'ŭ). In the 1930s singers such as Wang Su-bok, Lee Eun-pa and the Jeogori Sisters popularised folk music further. After the Korean Peninsula was partitioned into North and South following its liberation in 1945 from Japanese occupation, Western culture was introduced into South Korea on a small scale, with a few Western-styled bars and clubs playing Western music. After the Korean War (1950–1953) U.S. troops remained in South Korea, causing American and world culture to spread in South Korea and Western music to gradually become more accepted. Prominent figures of American entertainment like Nat King Cole, Marilyn Monroe and Louis Armstrong held USO shows in South Korea for the U.S. Army. These visits prompted attention from the Korean public. In 1957, the American Forces Korea Network radio started its broadcast, spreading the popularity of Western music. American music started influencing Korean music, as pentatony was gradually replaced by heptachords and popular songs started to be modeled after American ones. In the 1960s, the development of LP records and improvements in recording technology led to the pursuit of diverse voice tones. Open auditions were also held to recruit musicians to perform at the U.S. army clubs. Since South Korea was impoverished after the Korean War, skilled Korean singers regarded performing for the U.S. troops as a good means to earn money. Many singers sang for the American troops, usually in dedicated clubs, the number of which rose to 264. They performed various genres like country music, blues, jazz and rock & roll. The South Korean economy started blooming and popular music followed the trend, spread by the first commercial radio stations. Korean cinema also began to develop and Korean musicians began performing to wider audiences. When Beatlemania reached the shores of Korea the first local rock bands appeared, the first of which is said to be Add4, a band founded in 1962. The first talent contest for rock bands in Seoul was organized in 1968.[citation needed] Some Korean singers gained international popularity. In 1959, the Kim Sisters went to Las Vegas and became the first Korean artist to release an album in the U.S. pop market. Their cover of "Charlie Brown" reached No.7 on the Billboard Single Chart. The Kim Sisters also appeared on TV programs and radio programs and held tours in the U.S. and Europe. They made 25 appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show—more than American stars like Patti Page and Louis Armstrong (who appeared 18 times each). The Kim Sisters, Yoon Bok-hee and Patti Kim were the first singers to debut in such countries as Vietnam and the United States. The Kim Sisters became the first Korean group to release an album in the United States. They also performed in Las Vegas. Han Myeong-suk [ko]'s 1961 song "The Boy in The Yellow Shirt" was covered by French singer Yvette Giraud and was also popular in Japan. In the 1960s, the Korean artists such as Shin Joong-hyun, Pearl Sisters [ko] and Patti Kim who previously performed for the U.S. army clubs reached out to the Korean public. In the mid-1960s, due to the influence of the legendary British group The Beatles, there was a rise of "group sound" in South Korea, for example, Add4 and the Key Boys [ko].  Add4, Korea's first rock group, was formed by Shin Joong-hyun in 1962 and produced Korea's first rock song, "The Woman in the Rain," which is a form of light rock reminiscent of the early Beatles. Shin Joong-hyun was so instrumental in the development of Korean rock music that he is regarded as the "godfather of Korean rock" in South Korea. During this period, with the rise of Western pop music and Korean rock music, trot was no longer predominant in South Korea. However, trot singers like Lee Mi-ja still managed to attract a certain level of popularity, with famous songs like "Camellia Lady" (동백 아가씨; 冬柏 아가씨; dongbaek agassi). During the 1950s and 60s, Western pop music, Korean rock music, and trot co-existed in South Korea. At the end of the 1960s Korean pop music underwent another transformation. More and more musicians were university students and graduates who were heavily influenced by American culture and lifestyle (including the hippie movement of the 1960s) and made lighthearted music unlike their predecessors, who were influenced by war and Japanese oppression. The younger generation opposed the Vietnam War as much as American hippies did, which resulted in the Korean government banning songs with more liberal lyrics. In spite of this, folk-influenced pop remained popular among the youth, and local television channel MBC organized a music contest for university students in 1977. This was the foundation of several modern music festivals. The younger generation born after the 1950s had grown up under the U.S. influence and preferred the U.S. lifestyle, giving rise to the "youth culture" which was expressed through long hair, jeans, acoustic guitars and folk music.  The folk music of that time is made up of melodies sung plainly, with the singing accompanied by a guitar or two. A majority of the folk music at that time was initiated by elite university students and those who graduated from prestigious schools. Like the activists of the U.S. student movement, they turned to folk music as the preferred music of politicized youth, who staged demonstrations against the authoritarian government.  In turn, the government banned folk music due to its association with the students' anti-government movements. In the 1970s, the Park Chung Hee government banned American pop music and Korean rock music for their association with sex and drugs. Shin Joong-hyun, the "godfather of Korean rock music," was imprisoned in 1975 due to a marijuana scandal. In order to bolster its anti-Japanese credentials, the government also banned trot songs because of its "Japanese style" (왜색; 倭色; waesaek) given the influence of Japanese enka songs on trot. However, President Park actually embraced trot. One of the leading figures of the era was Hahn Dae-soo, who was raised in the United States and influenced by Bob Dylan, Leonard Cohen and John Lennon. Han's song Mul jom juso (Korean: 물 좀 주소; lit. Give me water) became iconic among young people in Korea. His daring performances and unique singing style often shocked the public and later he was banned from performing in Korea. Han moved to New York City and pursued his musical career there, only returning to his home country in the 1990s. Other notable singers of the period include Song Chang-sik, Jo Young-nam, and Yang Hee-eun.[failed verification] In the 1970s, DJs also started to become popular. The 1980s saw the rise of ballad singers after Lee Gwang-jo [ko]'s 1985 album "You're Too Far Away to Get Close to" (가까이 하기엔 너무 먼 당신) sold more than 300,000 copies. Other popular ballad singers included Lee Moon-se (이문세) and Byun Jin-sub (변진섭), nicknamed the "Prince of Ballads". One of the most sought-after ballad composers of the era was Lee Young-hoon (이영훈), whose songs were compiled into a modern musical in 2011 titled Gwanghwamun Yeonga (광화문 연가; lit. Gwanghwamun sonata). The Asia Music Forum was launched in 1980, with representatives from five different Asian countries competing in the event. Korean singer Cho Yong-pil won first place and went on to have a successful career, performing in Hong Kong and Japan. His first album Chang bakkui yeoja (창 밖의 여자; lit. Woman Outside the Window) was a hit and he became the first Korean singer to take to the stage at Carnegie Hall in New York. Cho's musical repertoire included rock, dance, trot and folk-pop. Despite his early association with rock music as an electric guitarist in a rock band, Cho Yong-pil's initial popularity came from his trot songs which were popular in both South Korea and Japan. For example, in 1976, his trot song, "Please Return to Pusan Port" (돌아와요 부산항에) was a great hit. Despite the temporary setback due to his involvement in a marijuana incident in 1977, he managed to bounce back with the song "The Woman Outside the Window" which reached a record-breaking sales of 1 million in 1980. In 1988, he sang "Seoul Seoul Seoul" in three languages (Korean, English and Japanese) to celebrate the 1988 Seoul Olympic Games. In the 1990s, Korean pop musicians incorporated partially Europop and mostly American popular music styles such as hip hop, rock, jazz, and electronic dance in their music. In 1992, the emergence of Seo Taiji and Boys marked a revolutionary moment in the history of K-pop. The trio debuted on MBC's talent show on April 11, 1992, with their song "I Know" and got the lowest rating from the jury; however, the song and their self-titled debut album became so successful that it paved the way for other songs of the same format. The song's success was attributed to its new jack swing-inspired beats and memorable chorus, as well as innovative lyrics which dealt with the problems of Korean society. A wave of successful hip hop and R&B artists followed in their footsteps, including Yoo Seung-jun, Jinusean, Solid, Deux, 1TYM and Drunken Tiger. In 1995, South Korean record producer Lee Soo-man, who was educated in the U.S. and was exposed to the trends in American music, founded the entertainment company SM Entertainment. Former Seo Taiji & Boys' member Yang Hyun-suk formed YG Entertainment in 1996, and Park Jin-young established JYP Entertainment in 1997. The huge popularity of Seo Taiji & Boys among teenagers shifted the focus of the Korean music industry to teen-centred pop music. Idol bands of young boys or girls were formed to cater to a growing teenage audience. H.O.T. was one of the first idol boybands, debuting in 1996 after rigorous training encompassing not only singing and dancing skills but also etiquette, attitude, language and the ability to deal with the media. Their song "Candy" presented a softer and gentler form of pop music with upbeat and cheerful melodies accompanied by energetic dance steps – a formula adopted by many subsequent idol groups. The group was hugely successful, with many fans copying the group members' hairstyles and fashion. Merchandise affiliated with the group ranging from candy to perfume were sold as well. Their success was followed by that of young male and female idol groups like Sechs Kies, S.E.S., Fin.K.L, NRG, Baby Vox, Diva, Shinhwa and g.o.d, which also became popular among the younger generation. During the late 1990s, talent agencies began to market K-pop stars by implementing an idol business model used in J-pop, where talents are selected and trained to appeal to a global audience through formal lessons or through residency programs. The extensive and intensive process includes physical and language training (a program sometimes called abusive), and potential talents are also selected for height, being much taller on average than their Japanese counterparts. Sociology professor Ingyu Oh has explained regarding looks, "K-pop emphasizes thin, tall, and feminine looks with adolescent or sometimes very cute facial expressions, regardless of whether they're male or female singers." Over time, Korean-American artists have become successful due to their fluency. These efforts increase the marketability of K-pop while also increasing South Korean soft power, which has become an important part of official policy. The 1990s saw a reactionary movement against mainstream popular culture with the rise of illegal underground music clubs and punk rock bands such as Crying Nut. The 1997 Asian financial crisis not only prompted South Korean entertainers to look for new markets, with H.O.T. releasing a Mandarin-language album and Diva releasing an English-language album in Taiwan, but also prompted South Korea's leaders to focus on building the nation's cultural influence through music. The government poured millions into building infrastructure, technology, and a specific department within its Ministry of Culture for K-pop. Regulations were passed on karaoke bars, for example, to protect the interests of idols. K-pop's increasing popularity forms part of Hallyu, or the Korean Wave: the popularity of South Korean culture in other countries. K-pop is increasingly making appearances on Western charts such as Billboard. The development of online social media has been a vital tool for the Korean music industry in reaching a wider audience. As part of the Korean Wave, K-pop has been embraced by the South Korean government as a tool for projecting South Korea's soft power abroad, particularly towards overseas youth. In August 2014, the prominent British news magazine The Economist dubbed Korean pop culture "Asia's foremost trendsetter." By the beginning of the 21st century, the K-pop market had slumped and early K-pop idol groups that had seen success in the 90's were on the decline. H.O.T. disbanded in 2001, while other groups like Sechs Kies, S.E.S., Fin.K.L, Shinhwa, and g.o.d became inactive by 2005. Solo singers like BoA and Rain grew in success. However, the success of the boy band TVXQ after its debut in 2003 marked the resurgence of idol groups to Korean entertainment and the growth of K-pop as part of Hallyu. The birth of second-generation K-pop was followed with the successful debuts of SS501 (2005), Super Junior (2005), BigBang (2006), Wonder Girls (2007), Girls' Generation (2007), Kara (2007), Shinee (2008), 2NE1 (2009), 4Minute (2009), T-ara (2009), f(x) (2009), and After School (2009). During the beginning of the 21st century, K-pop idols began receiving success elsewhere in Asia: in 2002, Baby Vox's single "Coincidence" (우연; uyeon) became popular in many Asian countries after it was released and promoted during the World Cup in South Korea. BoA became the first K-pop singer to reach No. 1 on the Japanese Oricon music chart and shortly afterwards, Rain had a sold-out concert to an audience of 40,000 fans in Beijing. In 2003, Baby Vox topped the Chinese music charts with their Chinese single "I'm Still Loving You" from their third album Devotion, the first idol group to do so, creating a huge fanbase in China. They also charted in various music charts in Thailand. TVXQ marked the rise of K-pop boy bands in Japan. In 2008, their single "Purple Line" made TVXQ the first foreign boy band and second Korean artist after BoA to top the Oricon music chart. Since the mid-2000s, a huge portion of the East Asian music market has been dominated by K-pop. In 2008, South Korea's cultural exports (including television dramas and computer games) rose to US$2 billion, maintaining an annual growth rate of over 10%. That year, Japan accounted for almost 68% of all K-pop export revenues, ahead of China (11.2%) and the United States (2.1%). The sale of concert tickets proved to be a lucrative business; TVXQ's Tohoshinki Live Tour in Japan sold over 850,000 tickets at an average cost of US$109 each, generating a total of US$92.6 million in revenues. Elsewhere in the world, the genre has rapidly grown in success, especially after Psy's "Gangnam Style" music video was the first YouTube video to reach one billion views, achieving widespread coverage in mainstream media. As of December 2020, the video has 3.9 billion views. Several failed attempts have been made by entertainment companies to break into the English-language market, including BoA, Wonder Girls, Girls' Generation, and CL. BTS won Top Social Artist at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards in 2017, making them the first K-pop group to win a BBMA. Their performance of the song "DNA" at the American Music Awards, the first AMA performance by a K-pop group, also led to the song peaking at number 67 on the Billboard Hot 100. The following year, BTS became the first K-pop group to reach number one on the Billboard 200 with Love Yourself: Tear. The K-pop industry is active in New York City, hosting numerous concerts in the city as well as being home to K-pop musicians. The musical KPOP opened off-Broadway in 2017 and moved to Broadway in 2022. K-pop has spawned an entire industry encompassing music production houses, event management companies, music distributors, and other merchandise and service providers. The three biggest companies in terms of sales and revenue are SM Entertainment, YG Entertainment and JYP Entertainment, often referred to as the 'Big Three.' These record labels also function as representative agencies for their artists. They are responsible for recruiting, financing, training, and marketing new artists as well as managing their musical activities and public relations. Currently, the agency with the greatest market share is S.M. Entertainment. In 2011, together with Star J Entertainment, AM Entertainment, and Key East, the Big Three companies founded the joint management company United Asia Management. In 2009, DFSB Kollective became the first distributor of K-pop on iTunes. In 2011, 1,100 albums were released in South Korea. The hip-hop genre had the most representation, at two-thirds of the total albums. One-third of the albums were from a variety of other genres, including rock, modern folk, and crossover. In 2012, the average cost of obtaining a K-pop song in South Korea amounted to US$0.10 for a single download, or $0.002 when streamed online. In the first half of 2012, according to Billboard, the Korean music industry grossed nearly US$3.4 billion—a 27.8% increase on the previous year—and was recognized by Time magazine as "South Korea's Greatest Export." In 2017, it is estimated that the K-pop music industry has a revenue of $5 billion. In 2019, the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) listed South Korea as the 6th largest music market in the world. Moreover, BTS alone accounted for $4.65 billion of South Korea’s GDP. Korean record charts include the Circle Digital Chart and the Billboard K-pop Hot 100. Some K-pop records have appeared on the Oricon Albums Chart of Japan and the Billboard Hot 100 of the United States. In 2009, singer Hwangbo entered the European music industry for a short period when she released the single R2song, reaching # 1 on the world's largest dance music site JunoDownload, being successful in the United Kingdom, Europe, as well as Korea; becoming the first Asian artist to achieve it. In May 2014, Exo became the third K-pop act to enter the Billboard 200 that year after 2NE1, Girls' Generation and Wonder Girls were the first K-Pop act to chart on Billboard 200. In October 2016, BTS's album Wings becomes the first Korean album to chart in the UK Albums Chart, reaching #62, and the highest-charting and best selling K-pop album in the Billboard 200. In February 2017, BTS landed their fourth album You Never Walk Alone at #61 on the Billboard 200. In September 2017, BTS landed at #14 on the UK Album Charts with their new album, Love Yourself: Her. Love Yourself: Tear debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with 135,000 album-equivalent units (including 100,000 pure album sales), becoming BTS' highest-charting and first number one album in the US, the first K-pop album to top the US albums chart, and the highest-charting album by an Asian act. "Fake Love" peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100 that same week, becoming the band's highest reaching song on the chart as well as their first in the top ten. Overall, only twenty non-English songs have reached the top ten, with "Fake Love" being the first for a K-Pop group. The single also debuted at number seven on Billboard's Streaming Songs chart with 27.4 million streams earned in the week ending May 24, giving BTS its first top ten on the chart and making "Fake Love" the first K-pop song to land on top ten since Psy's "Hangover" feat. Snoop Dogg in 2014. In August 2020, their song "Dynamite" topped the Billboard Hot 100 in its opening week, becoming the group's first number-one single in the US and their fourth top-10 entry. BTS became the first K-pop act in Hot 100 history to debut at number one. In June 2018, YG Entertainment's girl group Blackpink became the first K-pop girl group to hit within the top 50 of Billboard 200 album chart; their first mini-album SQUARE UP debuted at No. 40. Their title song "Ddu Du Ddu Du" charted at No. 55 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, making it the highest-charting song and the first full Korean-language song by a K-pop girl group. Since then, they have beaten their own record with Ice Cream peaking at #13 on the Billboard Hot 100. By convention in modern K-pop, trainees go through a rigorous training system for an undetermined amount of time before debut. This method was popularized by Lee Soo-man, founder of S.M. Entertainment, as part of a concept labelled "cultural technology." The Verge described this as an "extreme" system of artist management. According to the CEO of Universal Music's Southeast Asian branch, the Korean idol trainee system is unique in the world. Because of the training period, which can last for many years, and the significant amount of investment that agencies put towards their trainees, the industry is very serious about launching new artists. Trainees may enter an agency through auditions or be scouted, and once recruited are given accommodation and classes (commonly singing, dancing, rapping, and foreign languages such as Mandarin, English and Japanese) while they prepare for debut. Young trainees sometimes attend school at the same time. There is no age limit to become a trainee and no limit to the duration one can spend as a trainee. The Korean music industry has spawned numerous related reality TV shows, including talent shows such as Superstar K and K-pop Star, specialist rap competition Show Me the Money and its female counterpart Unpretty Rapstar, and many 'survival' shows, which commonly pit trainees against each other in order to form a new idol group. Examples of survival shows include Jellyfish Entertainment's MyDOL, which formed boy group VIXX; YG Entertainment's WIN: Who Is Next, which formed boy group Winner, and its follow-up MIX&MATCH, which formed iKon; JYP Entertainment's Sixteen, which formed girl group Twice; Starship Entertainment's No.Mercy, which formed boy group Monsta X; Cube Entertainment's Pentagon Maker, which formed boy group Pentagon; Mnet's Produce 101, which formed girl groups I.O.I and Iz*One and boy groups Wanna One and X1; Duble Kick's Finding Momo Land, which formed girl group Momoland; Mnet's Idol School, which formed girl group Fromis 9; Belift Lab's I-Land, which formed boy group Enhypen; MBC's My Teenage Girl, which formed girl group Classy; and Mnet's Girls Planet 999, which formed girl group Kep1er. The rise in these shows, which often involves larger agencies contracting smaller agencies' trainees into project groups and taking a larger portion of the revenues, has led to criticisms over the former monopolizing the industry. However, these shows provide an opportunity for idol trainees to showcase their charms and talents to gain a following even before their debut. This could serve as a stepping stone for these individuals to start growing their fanbase early or even receive offers from larger companies, even if they do not make the final lineup of the survival show itself. In 2002, Time magazine reported that Korean television producers such as Hwang Yong-woo and Kim Jong-jin had been arrested for "accepting under-the-table payments guaranteeing TV appearances to aspiring singers and musicians" in a bid to tackle "systemic corruption in South Korea's music business." Companies investigated included SidusHQ and SM Entertainment. K-pop management companies have also been criticized for exploitation of idols through overwork and restrictive contracts, described as "slave contracts" in a BBC report. According to The Hollywood Reporter, "Korea's entertainment business is notoriously improvisational and unregulated. In-demand K-pop stars – many of whom are teenage 'idols' – have been known to rehearse and perform without sleep." In July 2009, S.M. Entertainment was taken to court by TVXQ and a Super Junior member, who alleged that their working conditions had led to adverse health effects. The court decision in the TVXQ lawsuit determined their contract with S.M. Entertainment void, and resultantly the Fair Trade Commission released contract templates to regulate industry conditions. In 2014, South Korea passed a law to regulate its music industry, protecting idols aged under 19 from unhealthy labor practices and overtly sexualized performances and guaranteeing them "the basic rights to learn, rest and sleep." Failure to comply with these regulations may lead to the equivalent of a US$10,000 fine. Industry professionals such as SM Entertainment's CEO Kim Young-min have defended the system, arguing that individuals trained within the system are "no different than [sic] typical middle or high school kids, who go to after-school programs to cram for college entrance exams." Kim has also argued that there is a need to consider the expenses incurred by the company during the trainee period, including "facilities, equipment, costumes, and virtually everything the trainees need." On March 7, 2017, the South Korea Fair Trade Commission (KFTC) passed new regulations in order to protect trainee idols from unfair terms and working conditions. Prior to these regulations, trainee idols at eight idol agencies were not permitted to seek contracts at any other agency while at training. Moreover, agencies were able to terminate a trainee contract at any time for any reason. The Fair Trade Commission states that they believe these changes will "result in a more just contract culture within the entertainment industry between trainee and agency." The Ministry of Culture applied these regulations to all existing agencies throughout 2018. Some of the concerns raised by the idol agencies over these regulations include the risk of a trainee at one agency going undercover at another agency to receive training with the other agency. This introduces the further risk that the idol agencies must take in training new idols. Trainees train for 3 years on average and the agencies support these trainees with various training programs during this duration, resulting in each trainee being a very large investment for the agency. K-pop management is very strict in terms of regulating the public appearance of their groups, according to Michael Hurt, a lecturer of cultural theory at the Korea National University of Arts. Therefore, he reasoned, most stars are not allowed to date publicly or have "control of their own lives". Kwon Joon-won, an entertainment management professor at the Dong-ah Institute of Media and Arts, said K-pop stars should be expected to lose half of their fandom if they were to make controversial statements. This may explain why K-pop groups are more outspoken about social issues abroad than within South Korea. The industry has been criticized for the sexualization of both male and female idols, with the sexualization of minors in particular being of concern. Critics such as James Turnbull of the Korean Pop Culture blog The Grand Narrative have argued young female idols are especially susceptible to pressures to wear revealing clothing or dance provocatively. However, compared to western popular music, K-pop has little sex, drugs, or aggressive behavior and has a much more parent-friendly branding. In 2014, South Korea passed a law to protect idols under the age of 19 from overtly sexualized performances. Questions have also been raised over K-pop's focus on appearance and its effects on children and teens, especially pressure to obtain cosmetic surgeries. In 2019, the South Korean Ministry of Gender Equality and Family announced non-mandatory guidelines in an effort to prevent "lookism." One recommendation asked to limit how many idol singers can appear on TV together, saying "most of them are skinny ... with outfits exposing their bodies." The concern was that their nearly identical appearances would narrow the standards of beauty. Many young viewers of K-pop are raised in a culture where cosmetic surgery is promoted. Some idols openly document themselves undergoing surgery. The government recommendations upset many fans, however, who began circulating an online petition in protest. An opposition politician also compared the guidelines to regulations under the "military dictatorship of Chun Doo-hwan". Some K-pop artists have suggested that the uncertainty and pressures of their jobs as entertainers may be detrimental to their mental health. According to musician Park Kyung of Block B, "There are many people who debuted with no sense of self yet, and they come to realize later that every move and every word they say is being observed so they become cautious and lose their freedom." In an interview with Yonhap News, Suga of BTS talked about his own mental health, and said, "Anxiety and loneliness seem to be with me for life…Emotions are so different in every situation and every moment, so I think to agonise every moment is what life is." The suicides of prominent K-pop musicians have drawn attention to industry pressures. In 1996, singer Charles Park, also known as Seo Ji-won [ko], died by suicide at the age of 19, before the release of his second album. Kim Jong-hyun, who had previously been open about his history of depression, also died by suicide in December 2017. In the spring of 2018, a number of prominent Korean musicians participated in a free concert series to raise awareness of suicide prevention. In 2019, the death of Sulli of an apparent suicide, followed by the death of Goo Hara, after both were subjected to cyberbullying, added to calls for reform. In 2023, the death of Moonbin in another apparent suicide, renewed scrutiny on the highly competitive world of Korean show business and the pressures its performers face. One reason is that K-pop amplifies the pressure to be perfect, already intense in Korean society. Its competitive nature, where one may need to step on someone else in order to get ahead, can lead to jealousy and bullying toward those who appear more successful. After dating fellow musician Choiza, Sulli became the center of online abuse because K-pop idols are expected not to be in a relationship for years. During one talk show, she expressed how empty her life was, "I feel like I'm lying to everyone by pretending to be happy on the outside." A jewellery designer who works with K-pop stars, including Sulli, said that receiving threats and angry mail is normal for many idols. K-pop artists are frequently referred to as idols or idol groups. Groups usually have a leader, who is often the eldest or most experienced member and speaks for the group. The youngest group member is called the maknae (Korean: 막내; RR: mangnae; lit. the youngest in a family). The popular use of this term in Japan was influenced by boy group SS501 when they expanded their activities in the country in 2007. Its Japanese translation man'ne (マンネ) was often used to name the group's youngest member Kim Hyung-jun in order to differentiate him from their leader with a similar name and spelling, Kim Hyun-joong. Many fans travel overseas to see their idols on tour, and tourists commonly visit Korea from Japan and China to see K-pop concerts. A K-pop tour group from Japan had more than 7,000 fans fly to Seoul to meet boy band JYJ in 2012, and during JYJ's concert in Barcelona in 2011, fans from many parts of the world camped overnight to gain entrance. A 2011 survey conducted by the Korean Culture and Information Service reported that there were over three million active members of Hallyu fan clubs. Bang Si-hyuk, the music industry executive behind BTS, expressed that K-pop idol fans view their idol differently from how music fans view a typical singer. Idol fans want to feel close to and be a part of their idol's lifestyle, even outside of live performances. An article by The Wall Street Journal indicated that K-pop's future staying power will be shaped by fans, whose online activities have evolved into "micro-businesses." K-pop groups commonly have dedicated fan clubs with a collective name and sometimes an assigned colour, to which they will release merchandise. For example, TVXQ fans are known as 'Cassiopeia,' and their official colour is 'pearl red.' Some of the more popular groups have personalized light sticks for use at concerts; for example, Big Bang fans hold yellow crown-shaped light sticks. Fan clubs sometimes participate in charity events to support their idols, purchasing bags of 'fan rice' in order to show support. The rice bags are donated to those in need. According to Time, for one of BigBang's shows, 12.7 tons of rice were donated from 50 fan clubs around the world. There are businesses in Korea dedicated to shipping rice from farmers to the venues. Another way that fan clubs show their devotion is by sending lunch to idols during their schedules, and there are catering companies in South Korea specifically for this purpose. Increasingly, fans participate in activism that extends outside of the K-pop community. A unique feature of K-pop fandom is the "fan chant". When an idol group releases a new song, chants, usually consisting of group members' names, are performed by live concert audiences during non-singing parts of songs. Some idols and idol groups have faced problems from obsessive fans who indulge in stalking or invasive behavior. These fans are known as sasaeng fans (사생팬; 私生팬; sasaengpaen), from the Korean word for 'private life,' which alludes to their penchant for invading the privacy of idols and members of idol groups. There have been accounts of extreme behaviors from fans trying to gain idols' attention. Korean public officials recognize this as a unique but serious concern. Some idols have reacted angrily towards sasaeng fans, for which they received backlash; including members of JYJ, Super Junior member Kim Hee-chul, and Jang Keun-suk. In response to the issue, a new law introduced in February 2016 in Korea saw the penalty for stalking rise to around US$17,000 as well as a possible two-year jail sentence. 2003–present: Korean Music Festival at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles 2009–present: Philippine K-pop Convention 2011–present: K-POP World Festival in South Korea 2012–present: KCON in California 2015–present: KCON in New York 2015–present: KCON in Japan With the rise of the popularity of K-pop globally, K-pop groups and idols' appearances at internationally recognized music festivals is becoming more and more regular. 2019: Blackpink at Coachella (first K-pop girl group to perform) 2022: Aespa at Coachella 2023: Blackpink at Coachella (first K-pop group to perform on the main stage) 2023: Tomorrow X Together at Lollapalooza (headlining) 2023: NewJeans at Lollapalooza (first K-pop girl group to perform) Social media sites such as YouTube, Twitter, and Facebook allow K-pop artists to reach a global audience and to communicate readily with their fans. As global online music market revenue increased 19% from 2009 to 2014 with social media, music consumers around the world are more likely to be exposed to K-pop. K-pop idol groups benefit from video-based social media such as YouTube since visual components such as dance and fashion are essential factors in their performance. The number of searches of "K-pop" on YouTube increased by a factor of 33 from 2004 to 2014. Through social media advertisement, Korean entertainment companies narrowed the cultural gap so K-pop could enter the global market and gain recognition among overseas consumers. The export of K-pop dramatically increased from US$13.9 million to US$204 million between 2007 and 2011. Social media also changes the consumption patterns of K-pop music. Before the digital era, people would purchase and consume music products on an individual basis. Consumers now actively participate in sharing music products and advertising their favorite artists, which is advantageous for K-pop. K-pop fandoms are highly active on the said platforms as well as the likes of Instagram, TikTok, Reddit, Tumblr and Twitch. Since K-pop started to spread its industry outside South Korea, K-pop artists have set notable records on YouTube. Of the 2.28 billion worldwide K-pop YouTube views in 2011, 240 million came from the United States, more than double the figure from 2010 (94 million).[citation needed] In December 2011, K-pop became the first country-specific genre of music to gain a homepage on YouTube. In December 2012, Psy's music video for "Gangnam Style" became the first YouTube video to receive 1 billion views. In 2016 the music video for the song "TT" by Twice became the first video by a female Korean act with over 400 million YouTube views. On January 21, 2019, girl group Blackpink's music video for "Ddu-Du-Ddu-Du" became the highest viewed K-pop group music video on YouTube. On May 21, 2021, BTS' music video for "Butter" set a record for the most viewed online music video in the first 24 hours, garnering over 108 million views. Twitter has also been a significant social media platform for K-pop stars to get connections and promotions. The viral song "Gangnam Style" gained popularity from mentions by prominent Twitter users. Bang Si Hyuk, the producer of BTS, partially attributed the fast growth of their fanbase to social media such as Twitter. On November 13, 2017, BTS became the first South Korean act to reach 10 million followers on Twitter. In 2017, BTS was the most tweeted-about artist both in the United States and globally. Other K-pop groups, such as Seventeen and Monsta X, also appeared in the global top ten. Exo, a South Korean boyband, was the most followed celebrity to have entered Twitter in 2017. At the 2017, 2018, and 2019 Billboard Music Awards, BTS won the award for Top Social Media Artist based on Twitter voting by their fans. According to Sin Chang Seob, the CEO of Twitter Korea, the usage of Twitter by K-pop artists has increased Twitter's popularity among South Koreans. Many Korean entertainment companies use social media platforms, especially Facebook, to promote and communicate about their global auditions. K-pop groups use Facebook pages to promote their music and other content to large numbers of fans. K-pop fans use Facebook to express their devotion, communicate with other members of the K-pop community, and consume K-pop content. Multiple entertainment companies use TikTok to market and promote their artists' music. Many K-pop songs have gone viral on TikTok and some K-pop artists and their labels were contacted for possible collaborations. The "Any Song" dance challenge by rapper Zico got 400 million views in less than two months, and around 830,000 videos have been uploaded featuring the sound. Fifty Fifty's song "Cupid" went viral on TikTok with over 400,000 videos published with the sound. Prior to the TikTok audio, Fifty Fifty were averaging 300,000 monthly listeners, to now having over a million. TikTok continues to be an avenue in which K-pop artists can receive exposure and recognition. Following the lifting of WWII-era restrictions imposed on exchanges and trade between Korea and Japan in the late 1990s, the first-generation girl group S.E.S became the first Korean artists to debut in Japan in late 1998, releasing their first Japanese-language album Reach Out in 1999. Young K-pop star BoA had Japanese-language training before her Korean debut and when she debuted in Japan in 2002 with her first Japanese-language album Listen to My Heart, her Korean identity was inessential, as her music style and fluency in Japanese led her to be considered a part of J-pop. Listen to My Heart was the first album by a Korean singer to debut atop the Japanese Oricon Charts and become an RIAJ-certified "million-seller" in Japan. BoA has since released several Japanese albums, most of which have topped the Oricon Charts. Following BoA's successful Japanese debut, TVXQ debuted in Japan in 2005 under a procedure similar to BoA's. TVXQ did not promote their Korean identity, and their ballad-style songs fit well into J-pop's typical sound. TVXQ's first and second albums released in Japan were minor successes, peaking on the Oricon Charts at twenty-five and ten respectively.[citation needed] However, on January 16, 2008, TVXQ reached the top of the Oricon Charts with their sixteenth Japanese single "Purple Line", becoming the first Korean male group to have a number-one single in Japan. They have since had remarkable success with their comebacks. In 2018, they accumulated over 1.2 million people to their concerts, beating Japanese band B'z. Since the start of the Korean Wave, the Japanese market has seen an influx of Korean pop acts such as SS501, Shinee, Super Junior, Big Bang, Kara, and Girls' Generation. In 2011, it was reported that the total sales for K-pop artists' increased 22.3% between 2010 and 2011 in Japan. Some Korean artists were in the top 10 selling artists of the year in Japan. As of 2019, several other K-pop groups have debuted in the Japanese market including Exo, BTS, Got7, Seventeen, iKon, GFriend, Astro, Pentagon, Twice, Monsta X, FT Island, NCT 127 and Blackpink.[unreliable source?] Many of these groups debut with Japanese versions of their recent Korean releases, then later release original Japanese songs. Many groups such as NCT 127, Twice, and Pentagon also include Japanese members that auditioned in Japan and were brought to Korea, or came to Korea in order to become a K-pop singer. With tensions still remaining between Korea and Japan, the import of Korean popular culture has been met with different forms of resistance, in the form of the 'Anti-Korean Wave.' One demonstration against the Korean Wave with roughly 500 participants was broadcast on Japan's Fuji TV to an Internet audience of over 120,000. However, the chairman of the Presidential Council on National Branding cited this resistance as proof of "how successful Korean Wave is." The Korean Wave has also interested Japanese people to pursue a pop music career by going to Korea to become K-pop stars. The 1990s saw the rise of K-pop in China through groups like H.O.T. and Sechs Kies—sparking China's investment in Korea's entertainment industry. K-pop artists have achieved considerable success in China since then: in 2005, Rain held a concert in Beijing with 40,000 attendees. In 2010, the Wonder Girls won an award for the highest digital sales for a foreign artist, with 5 million digital downloads, in the 5th annual China Mobile Wireless Music Awards. Most recently, China has become the South Korean entertainment industry's biggest market for exports. Twelve percent of SM Entertainment's sales in 2015 went to China, and this number rose to 14.4 percent by the middle of 2016. China has found that K-pop is a profitable investment. According to Director of Communication for the Korea Economic Institute of America Jenna Gibson, sales for a certain shampoo brand rose by 630% after Super Junior endorsed it on a Chinese reality show. K-pop's popularity has also led China's e-commerce company Alibaba to buy roughly $30 million worth of SM Entertainment's shares in 2016 in order to help its expansion into the online music industry. Legend Capital China has also invested in BTS' label BigHit Entertainment. As of the beginning of 2017, China took up around 8–20 percent of major Korean entertainment companies' total sales. Chinese entertainment companies have also claimed stakes in the industry, partially overseeing groups like EXID and T-ara or representing groups which include both Chinese and Korean members like Uniq and WJSN. Having Chinese members in K-pop groups is one way that Korean entertainment companies increase K-pop's marketability and appeal in China. Other strategies include giving Korean members Chinese-sounding names, releasing songs or whole albums in Chinese, and making subgroups with members that predominantly speak Mandarin—like SM Entertainment's Exo-M and Super Junior-M, which has had successful results on the Kuang Nan Record and CCR. The K-pop industry's methods of producing idols have influenced the practices of Chinese entertainment companies, which aim to reproduce K-pop idols' success with their own stars so that Chinese entertainers can compete better globally. To achieve this, those companies have recruited K-pop industry experts, and some of these insiders have actively started moving into the Chinese music industry to capitalize on K-pop's increasing influence on market demands. Chinese reality show Idol Producer further highlights K-pop's impact on China's entertainment scene: closely mirroring Korea's Produce 101. A number of Chinese K-pop idols, such as Super Junior-M's Han Geng and Exo-M's Kris, Luhan, and Tao, have left their respective K-pop groups in order to pursue solo careers in China. However, lately, Korean entertainment companies have allowed their Chinese K-pop idols more freedom in pursuing solo work in China. Got7's Jackson Wang, for example, has released several of his own songs in China and, in 2017, reached number one on Chinese music charts. Additionally, the rise of K-pop has led to an increase in the number of Chinese tourists in South Korea—3.8 million more Chinese toured South Korea in 2016 than 2015 according to the Union of International Associations. K-pop has also made China's youth find South Korean culture "cool", thus helping to facilitate greater understanding between Korea and China. Despite North Korea's traditionally strict isolationism, K-pop has managed to reach a North Korean audience. While consumption of South Korean entertainment is punishable by death in North Korea, it has still become increasingly more available with the global rise of technology and the implementation of underground smuggling networks over the past decades. The popular flash drive technology containing K-pop and K-dramas was preceded by the use of DVDs burned with such content. Because North Korean law enforcement had figured out how to catch people consuming the media from DVDs, few people accessed K-pop and K-dramas. Many North Koreans considered the risk too great, so it was not until the proliferation of the flash drive media type that watching the K-pop shows hit common homes. Utilizing the increasingly sophisticated smuggling networks, several thousands of USB drives and SD cards containing K-pop and K-dramas have been distributed and sold through care packages and the black market. Some South Korean humanitarians have also deployed drones and balloons carrying these flash drives in order to make the media more accessible. Access to USB drives and SD cards rose exponentially from 26% to 81% in from 2010 to 2014 largely due to development in technology, with a large majority containing South Korean music and dramas. The expanding technology capabilities allowed the flash drives to be accessed by a wider North Korean audience. Flash drives that used to cost upwards of US$50, can now be purchased for under $10, making them more affordable and easier to send into North Korea. The content on these USB drives and SD cards are then viewed by plugging the device into a Notel, a small portable media player. Although this practice had originally begun with banned books and simple radios, there is now an even higher demand for South Korean media following the cultural phenomena of hallyu. Those near the border who choose to stay away from the banned media from flash drives often cannot escape it. Ever since the 1950s, both countries have blasted their own propaganda across the DMZ: North Korea broadcasting anti-south propaganda and South Korea broadcasting Korean and world news as well as K-pop. In 2004, both countries agreed to end the broadcasts. After an incident in 2015, South Korea resumed broadcasting anti-North news for four days, as well as in 2016, after North Korea tested its hydrogen bomb and has been broadcasting since. In April 2018, in preparation and out of respect for the meeting between North leader Kim Jong Un and South leader, Moon Jae In, the South Korean speakers ceased their broadcasts. These 11 loudspeakers can be heard up to six miles (10 km) into North Korean territory. This enables the broadcasts to influence possible defectors staying near the border as well as create bothersome propaganda that North Korean soldiers cannot escape. The dissemination of K-pop and Korean media has been crucial in presenting the realities of North Korea to its citizens. By detailing the basic conditions of life in South Korea and introducing foreign ideologies, Korean media has aroused civil unrest amongst both citizens and elites concerning the disparities between living conditions inside and outside North Korea. A defector explains that, when he escaped in 2012, only the wealthy families were the ones consuming the South Korean media because the costs of the flash drives and technology to use them were so high. Because most youths lacked the resources to afford the drives, most consumers of South Korean media before 2012 were the middle-aged elite who favored K-dramas over K-pop due to their more traditional behavior. The current high demand for Korean media continues to rise as now approximately 70% of North Koreans consume foreign media in their homes, which accounts for the higher youth following of South Korean media today. One researcher at the Korea Institute for National Unification claims to have never met a single defector who had not seen or listened to foreign media before entering South Korea. Yet experts remain wary that a cultural uprising will occur because of the media. Consuming South Korean media serves many purposes for North Koreans such as enjoyment and education, but few consider uprooting a totalitarian regime because of the cultures they've experienced through K-pop and K-dramas. Even North Korean leader Kim Jong Un has shown a liking for K-pop music. In 2018, Kim stated he was "deeply moved" after attending a two-hour concert in Pyongyang featuring South Korean performers such as singer Cho Yong-pil and the popular girl band Red Velvet. This historic concert marks the first performance by South Korean artists attended by a North Korean leader in Pyongyang. The concert featuring over 150 South Korean artists, attended by 1500 North Korean elites, also displays growing relations between the North and the South. None of the song line ups, lyrics, or dance moves of the performers were asked to be changed by traditionalist North Korean officials. This acceptance of the K-pop genre and its content shows a stark contrast to Kim Jong Un's historically stringent policies on foreign media. The South Korean artists also performed alongside notable North Korean artists in the following week. Recordings of both performances have been made public to South Koreans, though no reports have been made of their release to the North Korean public. Despite all the previous events Kim Jong-un has changed his stance on K-pop since 2021 by referring to it as a "vicious cancer" and viewing it as a threat to North Korean society. Despite sharing a similar past, the Taiwanese did not carry a positive sentiment towards South Korea after 1992, which is when South Korea broke off its diplomatic relationship with Taiwan in order to pursue one with mainland China. This changed in the early 2000s as the cultural dispersion of Hallyu has contributed to the reconstruction of South Korea's image among the Taiwanese. This change was partly prompted by the South Korean government, which wished to encourage goodwill between the two countries after the break of diplomacy. Many Taiwanese have since remarked that Korean popular music and Korean dramas have helped to foster a renewed interest and healthier relationship with South Korea. There is a thriving K-pop fanbase in Singapore, where idol groups, such as 2NE1, BTS, Girls' Generation, Got7 and Exo, often hold concert tour dates. The popularity of K-pop alongside Korean dramas has influenced the aesthetics image of Singaporeans. Korean-style "straight eyebrows" have become quite popular among many Singaporean females and males of Chinese, Malay and Indian descent. Singaporean beauty salons have seen an increase in the number of customers interested in getting Korean-style "straight eyebrows" and Korean-style haircuts in recent years. On August 5, 2017, Singapore hosted the 10th Music Bank World Tour, a concert spin-off of Music Bank, a popular weekly music programme by South Korean broadcaster KBS. This event proved the immense popularity of the Hallyu wave in Singapore. In recent years, several notable entertainment companies (both big and small scale), like Attrakt and YG Entertainment, came to Singapore to conduct auditions to select eligible candidates to train in South Korea, and a K-pop international school is also set to be established in Singapore with the collaboration between Singapore Raffles Music College (SRMC) and the prestigious School of Performing Arts Seoul (Sopa). According to Singaporean national newspaper The Straits Times in February 2024, over 120 teenage girls (mostly Singaporeans) took part in Attrakt‘s first and only on-site audition at Kallang Place, which aimed to recruit possible candidates to join the agency’s girl group Fifty Fifty. In Malaysia, among the three main ethnic groups—Malay, Chinese and Indian—many prefer to listen to music in their own languages, but K-pop and Korean movies and TV series have become popular among all three ethnic groups, which Malaysian firms have capitalized upon. The popularity of K-pop has also resulted in politicians bringing K-pop idols to the country in order to attract young voters. Malaysians have accepted the Korean Wave more rapidly and even more favorably, notably in the 2010s, despite the fact that it came to Malaysia later and that the first reaction there was relatively hostile compared to other nations. Approximately 80% of Malaysian respondents have begun learning the Korean language due to their keen interest in Korean culture. Malaysia is also seventh in the world for the quantity of travelers visiting Korea. K-pop along with Korean TV series and movies has turned into popular culture, especially among the young generation of Indonesia. This trend can be observed in any major city in the country. K-pop has also influenced music in Indonesia. Popularity of Korean culture has increased continuously in Indonesia since the early 2000s, starting with the East Asian popular culture boom. Korean telenovelas were aired locally in the Philippines starting in 2003, marking a further expansion of the Hallyu wave. K-pop took longer to catch on; it gained popularity through the internet, and through Korean expatriate celebrities like Sandara Park.[citation needed] Super Junior held a concert in the Philippines in 2010. Vietnam already had numerous contacts with South Korea in the past and even shared a similar political situation, notably the separation in half of both nations. Despite the tragedies of the Vietnam War, the country presently remains welcoming of the Korean influence on the Vietnamese population. Vietnamese pop music, known as V-pop, is heavily influenced by K-pop in terms of music production and music videos. In 2015, the northern capital city of Hanoi hosted the Music Bank World Tour. In the year of 2018, V Live and RBW Entertainment Vietnam launched special monthly mini-concerts called "V Heartbeat Live", inviting both V-pop and K-pop stars to perform, such as Winner, Momoland, IKon, Sunmi, and more. In the same year, Park Ji-yeon collaborated with a Vietnamese singer, Soobin Hoàng Sơn, releasing Vietnamese and Korean versions of the single "Between Us." K-pop, and Korean culture in general, gained popularity mainly because of the Vietnamese youth. South Korean entertainment companies are investing and searching for talent in Vietnam. For example, SM Entertainment announced plans for a Vietnamese sub-unit of the Korean boy group NCT, which executive producer Lee Soo-man called "NCT-V", to promote V-pop globally. Lee also said that Vietnamese culture is extremely similar to Korean culture, which is favorable for both countries in terms of global expansion. In 2018, SM Entertainment hosted their annual Global Audition in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City for the first time ever. Cube Entertainment held an audition session in 2018. On January 11–13 in 2019, Big Hit Entertainment established a joint venture with entertainment company CJ E&M to host an audition called the "2019 Belift Global Audition." SBS also announced that popular variety show "Running Man" will be getting a Vietnamese version. These are prime examples of hallyu and the rising popularity of K-pop in Vietnam. Bangladeshi youths, especially teens, have shown great attraction to Korean pop music as they described such songs make them feel better. Starting from 2015, Bangladesh began to participate in an annual event called K-Pop World Music Festival which started in 2011 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Korea in cooperation with The Korean Broadcasting System (KBS). The objective of the event is not only to bring the Hallyu fans all over the world to South Korea but also to bring people from different countries together in the name of culture. In the Northeast Indian state of Manipur, where separatists have banned Bollywood movies, consumers have turned to Korean popular culture for their entertainment needs. The BBC's correspondent Sanjoy Majumder reported that Korean entertainment products are mostly unlicensed copies smuggled in from neighbouring Burma, and are generally well received by the local population. This has led to the increasing use of Korean phrases in common parlance amongst the young people of Manipur. In order to capitalize on the popularity of K-pop in Manipur, many hairdressing salons have offered "Korean-style" cuts based on the hairstyles of K-pop boy bands. This wave of Korean popular culture is currently spreading from Manipur to the neighbouring state of Nagaland. K-pop is catching up in various other states of the country and K-pop festivals and competitions draw thousands of fans. In Nepal, K-pop gained popularity along with Korean dramas and films. K-pop has become influential in the Nepali music industry and K-pop music videos are often used as an accompaniment to Nepali music on YouTube.[citation needed] In 2006, Rain held sold-out concerts in New York City and Las Vegas as part of his Rain's Coming World Tour In 2009, the Wonder Girls became the first K-pop artist to debut on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart. They went on to join the Jonas Brothers on the Jonas Brothers World Tour 2009. In 2010, they toured 20 cities in the United States, Canada and Mexico, and were named House of Blues "Artist of the Month" for June. In 2010, SM Entertainment held the SMTown Live '10 World Tour with dates in Los Angeles, Paris, Tokyo, and New York. The same year, during the 8th Annual Korean Music Festival, K-pop artists made their first appearances at the Hollywood Bowl. Notable K-pop concerts in the United States in 2011 include the KBS Concert at the New York Korea Festival, the K-Pop Masters Concert in Las Vegas, and the Korean Music Wave in Google, which was held at Google's headquarters in Mountain View, California. 2012 marked a breakthrough year for K-pop in North America. At the start of the year, Girls' Generation performed the English version of "The Boys" on the late-night talk show The Late Show with David Letterman and also on the daytime talk show Live! with Kelly, becoming the first Korean musical act to perform on these shows, and the first Korean act to perform on syndicated television in the United States. In the same year, the group formed their first sub-unit, entitled Girls' Generation-TTS, or simply "TTS", composed of members Taeyeon, Tiffany, and Seohyun. The subgroup's debut EP, Twinkle, peaked at #126 on the Billboard 200. In May, SMTown returned to California again with the SMTown Live World Tour III in Anaheim. In August, as part of their New Evolution Global Tour, 2NE1 held their first American concert in the New York Metropolitan Area at the Prudential Center of Newark, New Jersey. In November, as part of their Alive Tour, BigBang held their first solo concert in America, visiting the Honda Center in Los Angeles and the Prudential Center in Newark. The tickets sold out in only a few hours, and additional dates were added. On November 13, the American singer-songwriter Madonna and backup dancers performed "Gangnam Style" alongside Psy during a concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City. Psy later told reporters that his gig with Madonna had "topped his list of accomplishments." On January 29, 2013, Billboard, one of America's most popular music magazines, launched Billboard K-Town, an online column on its website that covered K-pop news, artists, concerts, and chart information. In March of that year, f(x) performed at the K-Pop Night Out at SXSW in Austin, Texas, alongside The Geeks, who represented Korean rock. f(x) was the first K-pop group ever to perform at SXSW. Mnet hosted its Kcon event in NY and LA in July 2016. In 2017, BTS was nominated for the Top Social Artist Award at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards. Their winning of the award marks the first time a Korean group has won a Billboard Award, and the second time a Korean artist has won the award, after Psy's win in 2013. BTS won the award at the 2017, 2018, and 2019 Billboard Music Awards, as well as Top Duo/Group in 2019. They performed at the 2017 American Music Awards and the 2018 Billboard Music Awards, making them one of the first Korean groups to have performed at either awards show. BTS's album Love Yourself: Tear reached #1 on the Billboard 200, making it the first Korean act to do so. Additionally, BTS's single "Fake Love" debuted at #10 on the Billboard Hot 100, making them the second Korean artist to chart in the top ten. On August 21, 2020, BTS' song Dynamite debuted at number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, making it the first ever single of a Korean artist to top the Billboard chart. Their next single, Life Goes On, also managed to top the chart upon release on November 20, 2020. Many idol groups have loyal fan bases in Latin America. Since 2009, about 260 fan clubs with a total of over 20,000 and 8,000 active members have been formed in Chile and Peru, respectively. In recent years, an increasing number of K-pop groups have performed in Latin America. In 2011, the United Cube Concert was held in São Paulo, shortly after the second round of the first K-Pop Cover Dance Festival was held in Brazil, with MBLAQ as judges. In March 2012, JYJ performed in Chile and Peru. When the group arrived at the Jorge Chávez International Airport in Peru for the JYJ World Tour Concert, they were escorted by airport security officials through a private exit due to safety reasons concerning the large number of fans (over 3,000). At the Explanada Sur del Estadio Monumental in Lima, some fans camped out for days in to see JYJ. In April, Caracol TV and Arirang TV jointly aired a K-pop reality show in Colombia. In September, Junsu became the first K-pop idol to perform solo in Brazil and Mexico, after the Wonder Girls in Monterrey in 2009. The concerts sold out well in advance. That year there were 70 K-pop fan clubs in Mexico, with at least 60,000 members altogether. In January 2014, Kim Hyung-jun performed in Peru, Chile, and Bolivia, becoming the first K-pop idol to perform in Bolivia. When he arrived in Peru, where the tour began, about 1,000 fans cheered for him, followed him wherever Kim Hyung-joon went, and they caused serious traffic jams. Fans were also seen pitching their tents outside the concert venue for days before the actual concert. In 2013, the boy group Super Junior performed in four South American countries ― Brazil, Argentina, Chile and Peru—as part of its Super Show 5 tour. Additionally, that same year on November 7, it had a show at Mexico City Arena, which attracted over 17,000 fans. Super Junior performed on April 27, 2018, at Mexico City Arena, a stage where various famous Latin American artists such as Ozuna, J Balvin, and Marco Antonio Solís also performed in 2018. NU'EST held concerts in Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Peru in 2014. In 2017, BTS visited Brazil and Chile where it performed as part of the Live Trilogy Episode III, the Wings Tour. On March 11–12, 2017, BTS held concerts in Santiago, Chile, and in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on March 19–20. As rookies, Dreamcatcher visited 4 cities in Brazil as part of their 2017 Fly High world tour, and later returned to Latin America in 2018, visiting Argentina, Chile, Peru, Colombia and Panama as part of their Welcome to the Dream World world tour. Korean media in Mexico experienced a surge in 2002 after Mexican governor, Arturo Montiel Rojas, visited South Korea. From his trip, he brought Korean series, movies, and other programs to Mexico State's broadcasting channel: Televisión Mexiquense (channel 34). Korean dramas exposed the Mexican public to Korean products and spurred interest in other aspects of Korean culture. K-pop began to gain ground in Mexico due to the series the music accompanied. Fans particularly sought out the music of soundtracks respective to Korean dramas that were broadcast. However, K-pop's arrival to Mexico is also attributed to the influence of Japanese media in Mexico and the introduction of PIU (Pump It Up). The comic convention, La Mole, commenced selling Japanese comics and music and later commenced to sell K-pop. PIUs combined gaming and dancing, introducing the Mexican youth to Korean gaming software and generating interest in Korean music. K-pop's presence in Mexico can be outlined through the growing number of Korean music acts in the country. In recent years, the number of K-pop concerts in Mexico has risen and branched into other portions of the country. Idol groups, including BigBang and NU'EST, have visited Mexico through their respective world tours. JYJ's Kim Junsu became the first Korean star to perform solo. His concert held in Mexico City sold out in advance. The Music Bank World Tour also brought various acts to the Mexican public. Many of those groups covered widely known songs, such as Exo's cover of Sabor A Mi. In 2017, Mexico also became the first Latin American country to host KCON. The two-day convention held on March 17–18 brought over 33,000 fans to Arena Ciudad de México. Much like artists during Music Bank, idols covered Spanish songs. The strength and large number of fan clubs have continuously helped promote and support K-pop across the country. Over 70 fan clubs dedicated to Korean music are present in Mexico, bringing together around 30,000 fans. Although many fan clubs were created around 2003, they achieved a public presence in 2005 when Korea's ex-president Roh Moo Hyun visited Mexico for a meeting with Mexico's ex-president Vicente Fox Quesada. Around 30 Hallyu fan clubs held a "rally" asking Roh to bring actors Jang Dong-gun and Ahn Jae-wook to their country. Demonstrations have continued into recent years. On May 13, 2013, a large march was held in Mexico City's Zócalo. Called KPOP: Massive March K–Pop Mexico II, it was the second mass march that brought together hundreds of avid K-Pop fans. However, larger fan club organizations in Mexico receive indirect or direct support from Korean cultural programs. KOFICE (Korea Foundation for International Cultural Exchange) and the Korean Cultural Center, Mexico City often work in conjunction with fan clubs. These larger organizations contain multiple fan clubs within their structure. The three largest are MexiCorea, Hallyu Mexican Lovers, and HallyuMx. Both MexiCorea and Hallyu Mexican Lovers are supported by KOFICE while HallyuMx previously worked with the Korean Cultural Center and the Embassy of the Republic of Korea in Mexico. In 2010, both the SMTown Live '10 World Tour and the Super Junior Super Show 4 Tour were held in Paris. In February 2011, Teen Top performed at the Sala Apolo concert hall in Barcelona. In May, Rain became the first K-pop artist to perform in Germany, during the Dresden Music Festival. JYJ also performed in both Berlin and Barcelona. BigBang flew to Belfast and won the Best Worldwide Act during the 2011 MTV EMAs in Northern Ireland. In Poland, the K-pop Star Exhibition was held in the Warsaw Korean Culture Center. In February 2012, Beast held their Beautiful Show in Berlin. According to the Berliner Zeitung, many fans who attended were not just from Germany but also from neighbouring countries such as France and Switzerland. Also in February, the Music Bank World Tour drew more than 10,000 fans to the Palais Omnisports de Paris-Bercy. That year, artists such as Beast and 4Minute performed during the United Cube Concert in London, where the MBC Korean Culture Festival was also held. When Shinee arrived at the London Heathrow Airport for a concert at the Odeon West End in the same year, part of the airport became temporarily overrun by frenzied fans. The reservation system of the Odeon West End crashed for the first time one minute after ticket sales began as the concert drew an unexpectedly large response. At this time, Shinee also held a 30-minute performance at the Abbey Road Studio. The ticket demand for this performance was so high that fashion magazine Elle gave away forty tickets through a lottery, and the performance was also televised in Japan through six different channels. Also in 2012, BigBang won the Best Fan category in the Italian TRL Awards. In March 2022, KPOP.FLEX took place at Deutsche Bank Park Stadium in Frankfurt, Germany. Over 65,000 fans attended from over 80 different countries. K-pop also saw a surge in popularity in Russia. On September 6, 2011, 57 dance teams took part in the K-pop Cover Dance Festival. During the second round of the competition, Shinee flew to Moscow as judges, also performing to Russian fans. The following year, Russian youths launched K-Plus, a Korean culture magazine, and the number of Russian K-pop fans was reported at 50,000. On February 3, 2014, Park Jung-min became the first ever Korean singer to hold a solo concert in Moscow. in club Moscow Hall 600 place with tour "Park Jung Min Reverso Tour." B.A.P held concerts during their tour "Live On Earth 2016 World Tour" in Adrenaline Stadium and their tour "2017 World Tour 'Party Baby!'" in YotaSpace. On June 6, 2018, Got7 performed in the concert hall Adrenaline Stadium in Moscow for their concert tour "Eyes on You." On October 7, 2018 Zico during concert tour "King Of the Zungle" performed at the club ГЛАВCLUB Green Concert in Moscow. On December 8, 2018, on the MTV Russia channel, the project of the mobile operator MTS, MTCamp, was launched (the acronym of their company name and the word amp and at the same time MTV Trainee Camp) the result of which is half a year should be the junior team from 5 members in the style of k-pop. The show is hosted by figure skater Evgenia Medvedeva, a fan of the Korean version of Exo, Exo-K. The show collaborates with the production company Avex Trax. On July 15, Exo's "Power" and BTS' "Fake Love" were played at the 2018 World Cup Final Match in Russia. In 2022, the term "K pop" was included in the French dictionary Larousse. K-pop has become increasingly popular across the Middle East over recent years, particularly among younger fans. In July 2011, Israeli fans met South Korea's Ambassador to Israel, Ma Young-sam, and traveled to Paris for the SMTown Live '10 World Tour in Europe. According to Dr. Nissim Atmazgin, a professor of East Asian Studies at Hebrew University of Jerusalem, "Many young people look at K-pop as culture capital—something that makes them stand out from the crowd." As of 2012, there are over 5,000 K-pop fans in Israel and 3,000 in the Palestinian territories. Some dedicated Israeli and Palestinian fans see themselves as "cultural missionaries" and actively introduce K-pop to their friends and relatives, further spreading the Hallyu wave within their communities. In 2012, the number of fans in Turkey surpassed 100,000, reaching 150,000 in 2013. ZE:A appeared for a fan meet-and-greet session in Dubai and a concert in Abu Dhabi. In Cairo, hundreds of fans went to the Maadi Library's stage theater to see the final round of the K-POP Korean Song Festival, organized by the Korean Embassy. In January 2018, boy group Exo was invited to Dubai, United Arab Emirates for the Dubai Fountain Show. Their single "Power" was the first K-pop song to be played at the fountain show. In 2019, boy band BTS was invited to perform at King Fahd International Stadium by Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman. They are the first boy band to play a solo stadium tour in Saudi Arabia. The K-pop Wave has led to the creation of a number of dance groups that perform dance covers of K-pop music and teach K-pop choreography. In the K-Pop World Festival competition, AO Crew has represented Australia three times—in 2013, 2014, and 2016. Also, another dance cover group, IMI Dance, was the opening show for the RapBeat Show in 2017. Several dance studios provide classes that are based on K-pop choreography. Dance group Crave NV teaches a K-pop class every Saturday at their dance studio in New Zealand. A Sydney-based agency, The academy, began offering K-pop boot camps and other programs in 2016. A number of K-pop idols have hailed from Oceania. Australian-Korean artists include Blackpink's Rosé, ZE:A's Kevin Kim, One Way's Peter Hyun, C-Clown's Rome, Stray Kids' Bang Chan and Felix, EvoL's Hayana, and LEDapple's Hanbyul. In 2011, the K-Pop Music Festival at the ANZ Stadium was held in Sydney, featuring Girls' Generation, TVXQ, Beast, Shinee, 4minute, Miss A, 2AM, and MBLAQ. There was also demand for concerts from New Zealand. In August 2012, NU'EST visited Sydney Harbour and the University of New South Wales, as judges of a K-pop contest being held there. The following year, 4Minute were judges at the same contest in Sydney. In October, Psy toured Australia after his single "Gangnam Style" reached number one in Australia on the ARIA charts. In May 2016, B.A.P held a concert in Auckland, becoming the first K-Pop group to perform in New Zealand. KCON, an annual K-pop music and cultural convention, was launched for the first time in Australia in September 2017. They are the seventh country to host KCON since 2012. It was held at Qudos Bank Arena, Sydney. The lineup for the event was Pentagon, Wanna One, Girl's Day, Cosmic Girls (WJSN), Exo, SF9, Victon, Monsta X, and UP10TION. KBS Music Bank SBS Inkigayo MBC Show! Music Core Mnet M Countdown Arirang TV Pops in Seoul Arirang TV Simply K-Pop (formerly called The M-Wave and Wave K) JTBC Music on Top JTBC Music Universe K-909 MBC M Show Champion SBS M The Show On May 25, 2010, South Korea responded to the alleged North Korean sinking of a navy ship by broadcasting 4Minute's single "HuH" across the DMZ. In response, North Korea affirmed its decision to "destroy" any speakers set up along the border. That year, The Chosun Ilbo reported that the Ministry of National Defense had considered setting up large TV screens across the border to broadcast music videos by several popular K-pop girl groups such as Girls' Generation, Wonder Girls, After School, Kara and 4Minute as part of "psychological warfare" against North Korea. In September 2012, North Korea uploaded a video with a manipulated image of South Korean president Park Geun-hye performing the dance moves of "Gangnam Style." The video labeled her as a "devoted" admirer of the Yusin system of autocratic rule set up by her father, Park Chung Hee. Since the early 2010s, several political leaders have acknowledged the global rise of Korean pop culture, most notably U.S. President Barack Obama, who made an official visit to South Korea in 2012 and mentioned the strong influences of social media networks, adding that it was "no wonder so many people around the world have caught the Korean wave, Hallyu." A few months later, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon delivered a speech in front of the National Assembly of South Korea, where he noted South Korea's "great global success" in the fields of culture, sports and the arts, before pointing out that the Korean Wave was "making its mark on the world." This occurred a few days after U.S. State Department spokeswoman Victoria Nuland remarked in a daily press briefing that her daughter "loves Korean pop," which sparked a media frenzy in South Korea after a journalist from the country's publicly funded Yonhap News Agency arranged an interview with Nuland and described Nuland's teenage daughter as "crazy about Korean music and dance." In November 2012, the British Minister of State for the Foreign Office, Hugo Swire, addressed a group of South Korean diplomats at the House of Lords, where he emphasized the close ties and mutual cooperation shaping South Korea–United Kingdom relations and added: "As 'Gangnam Style' has demonstrated, your music is global too." In February 2013, the Vice President of Peru, Marisol Espinoza, gave an interview with South Korea's Yonhap News Agency, where she voiced her desire for more South Korean companies to invest in her country and named K-pop as "one of the main factors that made Peruvian people wanting to get to know South Korea more." According to an article published by the international relations magazine Foreign Policy, the spread of Korean popular culture across Southeast Asia, parts of South America, and parts of the Middle East are illustrating how the gradual cessation of European colonialism is giving way and making room for unexpected soft power outside of the Western world. On the other hand, an article published by The Quietus magazine expressed concern that discussions about Hallyu as a form of soft power seems to bear a whiff of the "old Victorian fear of Yellow Peril." In August 2016, China proceeded to restrict Korean media, including K-pop, to protest South Korea's of deployment of U.S. THAAD systems. The move, which lasted unti 2017, had a negative impact on the shares of Korean talent agencies, although prices later recovered. On April 1, 2018, North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un hosted a K-pop concert in Pyongyang. Pop music portal South Korea portal Korean ballad Korean hip hop Korean idol Korean rock Korean Wave List of K-pop artists List of K-pop concerts held outside Asia List of South Korean idol groups South Korean music Not to be confused with the pansori story of the same name. "케이팝" (in Korean). Archived from the original on January 13, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Hartong, Jan Laurens (2006). Musical terms worldwide: a companion for the musical explorer. Semar Publishers. p. 15. ISBN 978-88-7778-090-4. Retrieved December 5, 2011. Since the 1990s, popular genres like rap, rock and techno house have been incorporated into Korean popular music, setting the trend for the present generation of K-pop, which often emulates American models. Laurie, Timothy (2016), "Toward a Gendered Aesthetics of K-Pop", Global Glam and Popular Music: Style and Spectacle from the 1970s to the 2000s: 214–231, archived from the original on November 26, 2021, retrieved April 11, 2016 "케이팝". terms.naver.com. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2019. "정보길잡이 상세보기 | 국립중앙도서관". National Library of Korea. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Cho, Chung-un (March 23, 2012). "K-pop still feels impact of Seo Taiji & Boys". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "The Root of K-Pop: The Influences of Today's Biggest Acts". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 16, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2017. "South Korea's pop-cultural exports: Hallyu, yeah!". The Economist. January 25, 2010. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved March 23, 2019. Choi, JungBong (2014). K-pop – The International Rise of the Korean Music Industry. Maliangkay, Roald. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis. pp. 66–80. ISBN 9781317681809. OCLC 890981690. Song, Cheol-min (2016). K-pop Beyond Asia. Korea: 길잡이미디어. pp. 37–46. ISBN 9788973755981. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2018. Kelley, Caitlin (April 3, 2019). "K-Pop Is More Global Than Ever, Helping South Korea's Music Market Grow Into A 'Power Player'". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2020. "2021 State of the Industry" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. March 23, 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Jung, Sun (2017). "Shifts in Korean television music programmes: Democratization, transnationalization, digitalization". In Tay, Jinna; Turner, Graeme (eds.). Television Histories in Asia: Issues and Contexts. Routledge. ISBN 978-0815355205. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2023. "20 Years of K-Pop at Billboard". Billboard. October 11, 2019. Archived from the original on April 27, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "K-pop Music: For the Eyes or For the Ears?". Seoulbeats. October 1, 2011. Archived from the original on April 12, 2012. Retrieved March 27, 2012. Rousee-Marquet, Jennifer (November 29, 2012). "K-pop: the story of the well-oiled industry of standardized catchy tunes". Institut national de l'audiovisuel. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. K-pop is a fusion of synthesized music, sharp dance routines and fashionable and colorful outfits. "The Process Of Becoming A K-Pop Idol". creatrip. "NYT Draws Attention to K-Pop Idol-Making Factories". The Chosun Ilbo. Archived from the original on October 29, 2011. Retrieved December 28, 2012. Yang, Jeff. "Can Girls' Generation Break Through in America?". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2013. The management firms pay for everything; leading talent house S.M. Entertainment has pegged the cost of rearing a single idol at around $3 million, which for Girls' Generation would be multiplied by nine. Choi, JungBong and Roald Maliangkay (2015). K-pop – The International Rise of the Korean Music Industry. New York: Routledge. ISBN 9781138775961. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2018. Doboo Shim (2005). "Hybridity and the rise of Korean popular culture in Asia". National University of Singapore. 28: 25–44. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.489.921. doi:10.1177/0163443706059278. S2CID 204327176. Eun-Young Jung (2009). "Transnational Korea: A Critical Assessment of the Korean Wave in Asia and the United States" (PDF). Southeast Review of Asian Studies. 31. University of California, San Diego: 69–80. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.458.9491. ISSN 1083-074X. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 13, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2014. Lyan, Irina (January 2014). "Hallyu across the Desert: K-pop Fandom in Israel and Palestine". Cross-Currents: East Asian History and Culture Review. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2015. Park, T. K.; Kim, Youngdae (January 15, 2019). "A Brief History of Korean Hip-hop". Vulture. Archived from the original on February 26, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Jin, Dal Yong; Ryoo, Woongjae (December 13, 2012). "Critical Interpretation of Hybrid K-Pop: The Global-Local Paradigm of English Mixing in Lyrics". Popular Music and Society. 37 (2): 113–131. doi:10.1080/03007766.2012.731721. ISSN 0300-7766. S2CID 143689845. Lindvall, Helienne (April 20, 2011). "Behind the music: What is K-Pop and why are the Swedish getting involved?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved March 27, 2012. Xu, Tina. "The K-Pop/U.S. Music Connections You Never Knew Existed". Fuse. Archived from the original on July 15, 2018. Retrieved March 7, 2013. Hampp, Andrew (March 16, 2012). "Secrets Behind K-Pop's Global Success Explored at SXSW Panel". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2013. The American hip-hop community's recent interest in K-pop has helped open a lot of doors for other artists and managers Stateside, too. Chun, Elaine W. (February 2017). "How to drop a name: Hybridity, purity, and the K-pop fan". Language in Society. 46 (1): 57–76. doi:10.1017/S0047404516000828. ISSN 0047-4045. "[레드 기획]케이팝, 진단이 필요해". h21.hani.co.kr. Archived from the original on November 3, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Shin, Hyun-joon. 가요, 케이팝 그리고 너머. Archived from the original on November 26, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2018. "K-pop grows on disposable 'fast music'". The Korea Times. April 12, 2011. Archived from the original on December 12, 2013. Retrieved March 27, 2012. Wang, Amy X. (July 30, 2016). "Hallyu, K-pop! Inside the weirdest, most lucrative global frenzy in music". QUARTZ. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved April 11, 2018. Lhatoo, Yonden (December 30, 2017). "K-pop is an infectious disease, not a cultural export to be proud of". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Seabrook, John (October 8, 2012). "Factory Girls". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2018. "Star producer Teddy's plagiarism controversies drag on". The Korea Herald. January 19, 2018. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Lindvall, Helienne. "Behind the music: What is K-Pop and why are the Swedish getting involved?". Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2016. Tucci, Sherry (April 2, 2016). "When K-pop culturally appropriates". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on February 17, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. "We Need to Talk About K-Pop's Race Problem". Teen Vogue. March 15, 2017. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved September 21, 2023. "K-pop and Cultural Appropriation: "Cool" Culture". Seoulbeats. August 24, 2012. Archived from the original on March 3, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Dahir, Ikran (July 21, 2016). "This K-Pop Girl Group Is Being Accused Of Appropriating Indian Culture". Buzzfeed. Archived from the original on June 15, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Anderson, Crystal (January 12, 2013). "Of Misconceptions About Cultural Appropriation in K-pop". High Yellow. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Chace, Zoe (October 12, 2012). "Gangnam Style: Three Reasons K-Pop Is Taking Over The World". NPR. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2012. "12 Concepts and Styles in K-Pop". The Odyssey Online. February 8, 2016. Archived from the original on November 15, 2018. Retrieved November 15, 2018. Kallen, Stuart A. (2014). K-Pop: Korea's Musical Explosion. Twenty-First Century Books. p. 37–38. ISBN 9781467720427. Ramstad, Evan. "Korea Counts Down Not Just To New Year, But to New Girls' Album". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2013. K-pop news sites for the past couple of weeks have seemed to have some new video or bit of Girls-related gossip to chew over once or twice a day. There's been a "drama" teaser and a "dance" teaser (that's the one above) and countdown videos from each of the group's nine members... One of the unique things about album releases by K-pop artists is that they are routinely called 'comebacks' even when there's been no evidence that the musician or group went away or, in the conventional sports usage of the term, experienced a setback or loss. 정, 준화 (April 9, 2018). "[SC현장] "롤모델은 방탄소년단"...느와르, 벌써 '핫' 한 9인조 (종합)". Sports Chosun (in Korean). Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2019. "유튜브 센세이션, 그루브네이션(Groove Nation)과 인터뷰". Archived from the original on December 28, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2017. "K-pop's second wave". Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2017. "K-Pop success for easy choreography". Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved December 27, 2017. "K-Pop takes America: how South Korea's music machine is conquering the world". The Verge. October 18, 2012. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2017. "Inside the Intense Training Centers Where Young Girls Compete to Be K-Pop Stars". Broadly. October 5, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2018. "Behind the Scenes in K-pop: Interview with SM Choreographer Rino Nakasone – Beyond Hallyu". Beyond Hallyu. April 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2018. "[Video] Exploring the art of K-pop dance". January 30, 2018. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Jin, Dal Yong (April 20, 2017). Critical Discourse of K-pop within Globalization. Vol. 1. University of Illinois Press. doi:10.5406/illinois/9780252039973.003.0006. ISBN 9780252098147. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Lie, John (2012). "What Is the K in K-pop? South Korean Popular Music, the Culture Industry, and National Identity". Korea Observer. 43: 339–63. Lie, John (November 24, 2014). K-pop: popular music, cultural amnesia, and economic innovation in South Korea. Oakland, California. ISBN 9780520958944. OCLC 893686334.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "[Herald Interview] Girls' Generation's stylist caps K-pop fashion industry over years". October 18, 2017. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018. "1990s Fashion: Styles, Trends, History & Pictures". www.retrowaste.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Kwak, Nojin; Ryu, Youngju (2015). Lee, Sangjoon; Nornes, Abé Mark (eds.). Hallyu 2.0: The Korean Wave in the Age of Social Media. University of Michigan Press. doi:10.3998/mpub.7651262. hdl:10356/143911. ISBN 9780472072521. JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.7651262. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2018. Shim, Doobo (2006). "Hybridity and the Rise of Korean Popular Culture in Asia". Media, Culture & Society. 28: 29. doi:10.1177/0163443706059278. S2CID 204327176. Jin, Dal Yong (2016). "Critical Discourse of K-pop within Globalization". In Jin, Dal Yong (ed.). New Korean Wave. Transnational Cultural Power in the Age of Social Media. University of Illinois Press. pp. 111–130. doi:10.5406/illinois/9780252039973.001.0001. ISBN 9780252039973. JSTOR 10.5406/j.ctt18j8wkv.9. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2018. Kim, Yun (Spring 2012). "K-pop 스타의 패션에 관한 연구" (PDF). Journal of the Korean Society of Fashion Design. 12 (2): 17–37. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "K-pop's slick productions win fans across Asia". Inquirer. September 21, 2011. Archived from the original on December 30, 2011. Retrieved April 2, 2012. "G-Dragon Voted Best-Dressed Celebrity of the Year". The Chosun Ilbo. December 25, 2012. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017. "Jeremy Scott and CL On Moschino, Pop Culture and the Power Of Girls". Papermag. August 26, 2015. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Bow Down To The Ultimate Besties Jeremy Scott And CL In 'Paper' Mag". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Oh, Ingyu. "The Globalization of K-pop: Korea's Place in the Global Music Industry": 402. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2020. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "K-Pop Leads Record Earnings from Cultural Exports". The Chosun Ilbo. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved January 26, 2013. A BOK official said the increase "is related to a surge in exports of cultural products amid the rising popularity of K-pop in Europe and the U.S. as well as in Asia." "Korean Wave Gives Exports a Boost". The Chosun Ilbo. Archived from the original on March 1, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. But for every $100 increase in exports of cultural products themselves, outbound shipments of processed food, clothes, cosmetics and IT products also grew $412 on average. Rousee-Marquet, Jennifer (November 29, 2012). "K-pop: the story of the well-oiled industry of standardized catchy tunes". Institut national de l'audiovisuel. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. The government then identified the cultural industry as the next growth driver. Numerous state research agencies were created and some projects were subsidised in an attempt to boost the nation's cultural industry. "'Hallyu' to highlight Korea-Indonesia ties in March". Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. "K-POP World Festival (케이팝월드페스티벌)". Visit Korea. Korean Tourism Organization. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017. Wagner, Jan-Philipp (May 14, 2014). "The Effectiveness of Soft & Hard Power in Contemporary International Relations". E-International Relations. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved May 14, 2014. Kim, Tae Young; Jin, Dal Young (2016). "Cultural Policy in the Korean Wave: An Analysis of Cultural Diplomacy Embedded in Presidential Speeches" (PDF). International Journal of Communication. 10: 5514–5534. Archived from the original on April 30, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018. "Red Velvet Perform for North Korean Leader Kim Jong-Un in Rare Pyongyang Concert". Billboard. April 2, 2018. Archived from the original on April 2, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2018. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Baynes, Chris (April 2018). "South Korean pop stars perform first concert in North Korea for more than a decade". The Independent. Independent. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 47–79 Shin, Solee I.; Kim, Lanu (December 1, 2013). "Organizing K-Pop: Emergence and Market Making of Large Korean Entertainment Houses, 1980–2010". East Asia. 30 (4): 255–272. doi:10.1007/s12140-013-9200-0. ISSN 1874-6284. S2CID 153779858. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "JPNews 일본이 보인다! 일본뉴스포털!". Jpnews.kr. December 30, 2010. Archived from the original on October 13, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "고가마사오". Doosan Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "Why Korean girl groups conquering music charts are nothing new". South China Morning Post. May 23, 2018. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "The History Of K-Pop Has A Lot To Do With Politics". NPR News. July 10, 2021. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2021. "A brief history of K-Pop". A.Side. Archived from the original on November 13, 2022. Retrieved November 6, 2018. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 50–54 대중가요. Encyclopedia of Korean Culture (in Korean). Academy of Korean Studies. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012. "ADD4 & KOREAN PSYCH-ROCK & FOLK-POP reissues: ADD 4". psychemusic.org. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved February 27, 2012. ""Csomagolhattok és mehettek vissza Szöulba." Mia Kim a Quartnak" (in Hungarian). Quart.hu. September 12, 2011. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2012. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 54–57 K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 60–61 "DJ DOC". KBS World. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2012. Hartong, Jan Laurens (2006). Musical terms worldwide: a companion for the musical explorer. Semar Publishers. p. 15. ISBN 978-88-7778-090-4. Since the 1990s, popular genres like rap, rock and techno house have been incorporated into Korean popular music... which often emulates American models. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 63–66 MacIntyre, Donald (July 29, 2002). "Flying Too High?". Time. Archived from the original on July 28, 2002. Retrieved July 3, 2012. Gingold, Naomi (January 8, 2019). "Why The Blueprint For K-Pop Actually Came From Japan". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Shim, Doobo. "Hybridity and the rise of Korean popular culture in Asia". Media, Culture & Society: 29. Oh, Ingyu (2013). "The Globalization of K-pop: Korea's Place in the Global Music Industry". Korea Observer. 44 (3): 389–409. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2018. "Critical Interpretation of Hybrid K-Pop: The Global-Local Paradigm of English Mixing in Lyrics". Popular Music & Society. 37: 120. "Critical Interpretation of Hybrid K-Pop: The Global-Local Paradigm of English Mixing in Lyrics". Popular Music & Society. 37: 119. Walsh, John. Korean Wave. pp. 20–21. Hong, Euny (August 5, 2014). The Birth of Korean Cool: How One Nation Is Conquering the World Through Pop Culture (1st ed.). New York: Picador. ISBN 978-1-250-04511-9. OCLC 881387185. Ryoo, Woongjae (2009). "Globalization, or the logic of cultural hybridization: The case of the Korean wave". Asian Journal of Communication. 19 (2): 139. doi:10.1080/01292980902826427. S2CID 144161463. "Breaking & Entering: The Wonder Girls". Billboard. November 20, 2009. Archived from the original on March 17, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "K-Pop Hot 100: BIGBANG Is Unstoppable". Billboard. March 14, 2012. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Oliver, Christopher (February 10, 2012). "South Korea's K-pop takes off in the west". Financial Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2012. Constant, Linda (September 23, 2012). "K-Pop Soft Power for the SK Government". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 2, 2018. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "South Korea pushes its pop culture abroad". BBC. November 8, 2011. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved September 7, 2012. South Korea's soft power: Soap, sparkle and pop Archived August 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine The Economist (August 9, 2014). Retrieved on August 12, 2014. "The first video on MTV K: BoA "My Name"". MTV K. June 26, 2006. Archived from the original on July 5, 2006. Retrieved September 29, 2008. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, pp. 67–71 "K-pop: the story of the well-oiled industry of standardized catchy tunes". INA Global. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2013. "South Korea's K-pop craze lures fans and makes profits". BBC. April 26, 2011. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2013. According to South Korea's Trade and Investment Agency, income from cultural exports like pop music and TV shows has been rising by about 10% a year. In 2008, it was worth almost $2bn. "K-pop: the story of the well-oiled industry of standardized catchy tunes". INA Global. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2013. It accounts for most of K-pop albums' overseas sales. As of 2008, Japan accounted for 68 percent of Korea's total music industry exports in 2008, while the Chinese and U.S. markets accounted for only 11.2 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively. "TVXQ rakes in over $92 million in overseas concert revenues". Allkpop. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2013. "How Korean culture stormed the world". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2017. "Gangnam Style hits one billion views on YouTube". BBC News. December 21, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Gangnam Style statue built in South Korea's Seoul". BBC News. November 6, 2015. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Psy – Gangam Style (강남스타일) M/V, July 15, 2012, archived from the original on December 3, 2020, retrieved December 20, 2020 CHOE SANG-HUN; MARK RUSSELL (March 4, 2012). "Bringing K-Pop to the West". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 22, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "K-Pop Idols And The Formidable American Debut – KultScene". KultScene. October 22, 2014. Archived from the original on June 6, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Benjamin, Jeff (March 6, 2015). "Will a K-Pop Girl Group Take Over the U.S. Soon (Or Ever)?". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Liu, Marian. "K-pop band BTS beats US stars to win Billboard Music Award". CNN. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017. Gore, Sydney. "Watch BTS make their official U.S. television debut at the American Music Awards". The FADER. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2018. "On the Charts: BTS Become First K-Pop Act to Reach Number One". Rolling Stone. May 27, 2018. Archived from the original on May 28, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2018. Lefkowitz, Andy (November 8, 2019). "Lortel-Winning Immersive Musical KPOP Eyes Broadway Run; Talent Search Launched". Broadway.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Sullivan, Lindsey (April 4, 2022). "Kevin Woo, Min Young Lee & More to Join Luna in KPOP on Broadway". Broadway.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "The big 3 of Korean pop music and entertainment". The Dong-a Ilbo. July 26, 2011. Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved February 5, 2012. "United Asia Management to hold a 'talent meeting' at the 16th 'Busan International Film Festival'". Allkpop. September 8, 2011. Archived from the original on January 2, 2012. Retrieved March 1, 2012. "Global Star Agency, United Asia Management". HanCinema. May 6, 2011. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2012. "UAM -United Asia Management". uam.asia. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "S.M. Entertainment (041510:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on March 2, 2010. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "YG Entertainment (122870:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "JYP Entertainment Corp (035900:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013. "Korean Pop, with Online Help, Goes Global". Time. August 26, 2010. Archived from the original on August 29, 2010. Retrieved April 3, 2013. DFSB Kollective was the first company to begin direct distribution of Korean music acts on iTunes, in 2009. It began with more than 50 Korean artists in the alternative, hip-hop and electronica genres; now there are hundreds of Korean artists available in the online music store. 이, 동연 (January 11, 2012). "케이팝에 왜 열광하지?"…케이팝의 두 얼굴. Pressian (in Korean). Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2012. "PSY's riches from 'Gangnam Style' not made at home". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved December 30, 2012. South Koreans pay less than $10 a month for a subscription to a music service that allows them to download hundreds of songs or have unlimited access to a music streaming service. That makes the cost of a downloaded song about 10 cents on average. The average price for streaming a song is 0.2 cents. "South Korea's Greatest Export: How K-Pop's Rocking the World". Time. March 7, 2012. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved April 28, 2013. Kwak, Donnie. "PSY's 'Gangnam Style': The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved November 2, 2012. The Korean music industry grossed nearly $3.4 billion in the first half of 2012, according to Billboard estimates, a 27.8% increase from the same period last year. "BTS tops Billboard 100 list: How K-pop helped Korea improve its economy". The Economic Times. July 30, 2019. ISSN 0013-0389. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Global Music Report 2019 State of the Industry (PDF) (Report). 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 6, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Abramovitch, Seth (October 2, 2019). "BTS Is Back: Music's Billion-Dollar Boy Band Takes the Next Step". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 29, 2024. "S.M. Entertainment (041510:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "JYP Entertainment (041510:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "YG Entertainment (041510:KOSDAQ): Financial Statements". Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. "EXO-K's 'Overdose' EP Enters Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 24, 2021. Retrieved June 4, 2014. "BTS make history as they become the first Korean band to enter the Official Albums Chart with Wings". Official Charts. The Official UK Charts Company. October 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 9, 2017. Retrieved February 3, 2017. Benjamin, Jeff. "BTS' 'Wings' Sets New U.S. Record for Highest-Charting, Best-Selling K-Pop Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "BTS' "Spring Day," "Not Today" Reach Top 20 On US iTunes Sales Chart; "You Never Walk Alone" Also Rising". Headline Planet. February 12, 2017. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2017. Copsey, Rob. "Foo Fighters secure their fourth Number 1 on the Official Albums Chart with Concrete and Gold". Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Retrieved September 22, 2017. Thomas, C. (2018). BTS: The K-Pop Group That Finally Won America Over. Forbes.Com, 5. Trust, Gary (August 31, 2020). "BTS' 'Dynamite' Blasts in at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100, Becoming the Group's First Leader". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 1, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Zellner, Xander (June 25, 2018). "Blackpink Makes K-Pop History on Hot 100, Billboard 200 & More With 'DDU-DU DDU-DU'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2018. "Lee Soo Man: Taking Korean Pop Culture Global". Stanford Graduate School of Business. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Seabrook, John (October 8, 2012). "Factory Girls". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Flatley, Joseph (October 18, 2012). "K-Pop takes America: how South Korea's music machine is conquering the world". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved October 19, 2012. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music, p. 39 Leong, Melissa (August 2, 2014). "How Korea became the world's coolest brand". Financial Post. Archived from the original on January 8, 2015. Retrieved January 18, 2015. Woo, Jaeyeon (May 3, 2012). "Journey to K-Pop Star, 'I Am.' – Korea Real Time". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "KPop's Frontiers: How Does the Big 3 Teach Foreign Languages to Their Trainees?". Kpopstarz.com. February 7, 2012. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved March 1, 2012. Herman, Tamar (May 7, 2018). "Temporary K-Pop Acts Like Wanna One, JBJ & I.O.I Are the New Norm". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2019. Retrieved March 9, 2019. "Sung Si Kyung to feature debut process of idol stars through 'Mydol'". Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 28, 2012. "Jellyfish Male Trainees Revealed Ahead of ′My Dol′ Premiere". CJ E&M enewsWorld. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. Sung, So-young (January 21, 2016). "TV competition aims to form a K-pop supergroup". Korea JoongAng Daily. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. Kim, Ji-young. "Produce 101' girl group to be named 'IOI'". Kpop Herald. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2016. Ko, Dong-hwan (April 4, 2016). "101 girls down to 'I.O.I'". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on August 4, 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2016. Herman, Tamar (December 11, 2017). "K-Pop Audition Shows Produce Big Results, But Cause Concerns Over Industry's Future". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Hong, Dam-young (October 25, 2017). "Yet another idol competition show 'The Unit' unveiled". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. "Survival Reality Shows". thekrazemag.com. May 24, 2021. Archived from the original on March 25, 2023. Retrieved March 25, 2023. "The dark side of South Korean pop music". BBC. June 14, 2011. Archived from the original on December 31, 2011. Retrieved January 6, 2012. "South Korean Law to Protect Young K-Pop Stars From Sexualization, Overwork". The Hollywood Reporter. July 8, 2014. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "Will TVXQ Stay Together?". KBS World. October 28, 2009. Archived from the original on September 17, 2023. Retrieved October 28, 2009. "한경 "SM, 非정상적 활동강요" Archived July 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Star News. December 22, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2012 (in Korean) South Korea Passes Law Regulating K-Pop Industry Archived August 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine WonderingSound.com (July 8, 2014). Retrieved on August 3, 2014. Park, Gil-Sung (2013). "Manufacturing Creativity: Production, Performance". Korea Journal. 53 (4): 14–33. doi:10.25024/kj.2013.53.4.14. "New contractual changes cause concern within music industry". Korea Boo. March 9, 2017. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2018. "South Korea Passes new regulations for unfair trainee contracts". Korea Boo. March 7, 2017. Archived from the original on March 9, 2017. Retrieved May 6, 2018. Lee, David D. (June 17, 2022). "'No money in it': why has BTS been silent on discrimination in South Korea?". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Power, John (July 20, 2011). "Should a law ban sexualizing of K-pop teens?". The Korea Herald. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Oakeley, Lucas (April 24, 2018). "How K-pop became a propaganda tool". The Outline. Archived from the original on April 26, 2018. Retrieved April 25, 2018. Wang, Amy X. (February 21, 2019). "K-Pop Has So Many 'Lookalikes' That the Government Stepped In". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2023. Kim, Jae-heun (February 18, 2019). "TV guidelines on 'look-alike' K-pop singers spark controversy". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2023. Herman, Tamar (April 23, 2018). "2018 Sees K-pop Stars Addressing Mental Health Stressors in Industry". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Kil, Sonia (December 19, 2017). "Jonghyun Suicide Note Points to Brutal Pressure of Korean Spotlight". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. "History of K-pop: 1992–1995, The Beginning". seoulbeats. January 10, 2016. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Park, Ju-won (November 28, 2019). "Singer Goo Hara's Death Shines Light on the Dark Side of K-Pop". Time. Archived from the original on November 28, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Kwon, Jake (December 2, 2019). "After another K-pop death, spotlight turns to difficulties faced by industry's 'perfect' stars". CNN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. "Are Jonghyun, Sulli and Goo Hara victims of the K-pop industry?". South China Morning Post. December 18, 2019. Archived from the original on December 18, 2019. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Wang, Fan; Ku, Yuna (April 21, 2023). "Moonbin: Star's death renews scrutiny on pressures of K-pop". BBC News. Archived from the original on April 23, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Tai, Crystal (March 29, 2020). "Exploding the myths behind K-pop". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved March 24, 2023. "A Korean Idol's Life: Sweat and Sleepless Nights". Korean JoongAng Daily. February 18, 2010. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "K-pop dictionary: maknae". MTV Korea. Archived from the original on August 18, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2012. "ソロでの活躍がめざましい各グループのマンネたち" Archived June 29, 2017, at the Wayback MachineHwaiting! Hallyu News & Magazine. Retrieved February 23, 2013 "Winners from the 21st Seoul Music Awards". Allkpop. January 19, 2012. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2013. "Big Bang first to achieve 'Perfect All Kill' in 2012". Allkpop. February 26, 2012. Archived from the original on February 27, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2012. "IU achieves a certified all-kill with 'The Red Shoes'". Allkpop. October 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved October 31, 2013. An Instiz certified all-kill ("AK") occurs when an individual song sweeps all of South Korea's major music charts simultaneously, placing first on both the real-time and daily charts. "K-Pop Culture Glossary". Soompi. 2012. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2012. Mahr, Krista (March 7, 2012). "K-Pop: How South Korea's Great Export Is Rocking the World". Time. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "Latest K-Pop Invasion: The Fans". The Wall Street Journal. June 15, 2012. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "JYJ First K-Pop Band to Perform Solo in Europe". The Chosun Ilbo. October 13, 2011. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Mukasa, Edwina (December 15, 2011). "Bored by Cowell pop? Try K-pop". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2013. The result, according to a survey conducted by the Korean Culture and Information Service, is that there are an estimated 460,000 Korean-wave fans across Europe, concentrated in Britain and France, with 182 Hallyu fan clubs worldwide boasting a total of 3.3m members. Bruner, Raisa (October 8, 2019). "The Mastermind Behind BTS Explains the K-Pop Group's Success". Time. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Ramstad, Evan. "Behind K-pop's Pop: The Work of Fans". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 18, 2012. Retrieved January 26, 2013. Others handle things like publishing lyrics, translations of lyrics or spreading news about K-pop groups and stars. To get a feel for this micro-business, we asked the operators of a K-pop lyrics translation site called pop!gasa.com to provide a glimpse of their role in the Korean Wave. Our takeaway: it's as competitive as any business. "What's Your Name?: A Compendium of K-pop Fandoms". seoulbeats. May 19, 2014. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Official Fan Clubs and Fan Colors". Kpop Lists. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. 아이돌 팬 '응원 풍선 색깔찾기 전쟁' (in Korean). The Hankyoreh. June 13, 2011. Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2012. "'Rice wreaths' indicate that K-Pop fandoms are becoming more mature". Allkpop. August 16, 2011. Archived from the original on September 17, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2012. Mahr, Krista (March 7, 2012). "South Korea's Greatest Export: How K-pop's Rocking the World". Time. Archived from the original on September 16, 2012. Retrieved September 13, 2012. "Video: Treating Your Idol to Lunch Is the True Test of Fandom". The Wall Street Journal. February 24, 2012. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Ohlheiser, Abby (June 5, 2020). "How K-pop fans became celebrated online vigilantes". MIT Technology Review. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Lorenz, Taylor; Browning, Kellen; Frenkel, Sheera (June 21, 2020). "TikTok Teens and K-Pop Stans Say They Sank Trump Rally". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2023-02-21. Bruner, Raisa (July 25, 2020). "How K-Pop Fans Actually Work as a Force for Political Activism in 2020". Time. Retrieved 2023-01-31. "'Sasaeng Stalkers' (Part 1): K-pop fans turn to blood, poison for attention". Yahoo! Singapore. August 2, 2012. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "When an autograph isn't enough". Korea JoongAnd Daily. April 13, 2012. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "JYJ apologises over rough treatment of obsessive "sasaeng" fans". Channel NewsAsia. March 9, 2012. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "JYJ's Sasaeng fan at the center of the recorded audio clip speaks up". Allkpop. March 10, 2012. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Retrieved March 15, 2012. "Stalkers to face harsher punishment". The Korea Times. January 28, 2016. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Paul, Larisha; Mier, Tomás (January 10, 2023). "Bad Bunny and Blackpink Make History as 2023 Coachella Headliners, Frank Ocean Makes Grand Return". RollingStone. Archived from the original on January 10, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Anderson, Carys (April 24, 2022). "Coachella 2022: aespa Make Their US Live Debut". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Paul, Larisha; Mier, Tomás (January 10, 2023). "Bad Bunny and Blackpink Make History as 2023 Coachella Headliners, Frank Ocean Makes Grand Return". RollingStone. Archived from the original on January 10, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Ha, Sophie. "TXT headlines 2023 Lollapalooza with NewJeans as the first female K-pop act to perform at the music festival". Allkpop. 6Theory Media, LLC. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Ha, Sophie. "TXT headlines 2023 Lollapalooza with NewJeans as the first female K-pop act to perform at the music festival". Allkpop. 6Theory Media, LLC. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Ahn, JoongHo; Oh, Sehwan; Kim, Hyunjung (July 1, 2013). "Korean pop takes off! Social media strategy of Korean entertainment industry". 2013 10th International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management. pp. 774–777. doi:10.1109/ICSSSM.2013.6602528. ISBN 9781467344340. S2CID 24783136. Cha, Hyunhee. "A Study on K-POP Strategy: Focused on Digital Music Environment and Social Media". International Information Institute. 17: 911–917. "How K-Pop Fans Actually Work as a Force for Political Activism in 2020". Time. Archived from the original on January 9, 2023. Retrieved January 9, 2023. Anthony Wing Kosner (December 21, 2012). "Out Of This World! Gangnam Style Hits One Billion Views And Now Even NASA's In PSY's Orbit". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 22, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2012. Park, Bun-soon (2015). "12. Riding the Wave: Korea's Economic Growth and Asia in the Modern Development Era". Asia Inside Out: Connected Places. Harvard University Press. p. 366. ISBN 9780674967687. 심, 선아 (September 17, 2018). "TWICE's 'TT' music video tops record 400 mln YouTube views". Yonhap News Agency. Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2018. "Blackpink's 'Ddu-Du Ddu-Du' Becomes Most-Viewed Music Video From a K-Pop Group on YouTube". Billboard. January 23, 2019. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2019. Rolli, Bryan (May 22, 2021). "BTS's 'Butter' Breaks 24-Hour YouTube Debut Record (Updated)". Forbes. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Choi, Seong Cheol; Meza, Xanat Vargas; Park, Han Woo (February 21, 2014). "South Korean Culture Goes Latin America: Social network analysis of Kpop Tweets in Mexico". International Journal of Contents. 10 (1): 36–42. doi:10.5392/IJoC.2014.10.1.036. ISSN 2072-1439. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved October 18, 2018 – via KoreaScience. Han, Eun-hwa (January 7, 2018). "BTS 만든 방시혁 대표 "말 없이 어깨 기댈 수 있는 영웅 필요"". JoongAng Ilbo (in Korean). Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved May 5, 2021. Ming, Cheang (December 29, 2017). "How K-pop made a breakthrough in the US in 2017". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved October 14, 2018. "BTS Hits 10 Million Followers on Twitter, Earning Their Third Emoji on Twitter". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Aniftos, Rania (December 5, 2017). "BTS Is the Most Tweeted-About Artist of 2017, Plus More Twitter Year-End Data". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 31, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. "BTS Thanks Fans For Top Social Artist Win at Billboard Music Awards 2017: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2018. "BTS Wins Top Social Artist Award at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2018. "BTS_official on Twitter". Twitter. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Jo, Jae-hee (May 3, 2018). "[Tech & BIZ] "스타 인터뷰 생중계하자 전 세계 팬 몰려들어… K팝 덕에 트위터 부활"". ChosunBiz (in Korean). Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved May 5, 2021. "Facebook stats of popular Celebrities pages in South Korea". Socialbakers.com. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2018. Jung, Sun (November 15, 2011). "View of K-pop, Indonesian fandom, and social media". Transformative Works and Cultures. 8. doi:10.3983/twc.2011.0289. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2018. "Why TikTok is becoming go-to platform for K-pop". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Edwards, Clint (March 7, 2023). "FIFTY FIFTY talks new music and the life of being K-Pop idols". Fox 13 Seattle. Archived from the original on August 1, 2023. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Lie, John (2014). "Why Didn't "Gangnam Style" Go Viral in Japan?: Gender Divide and Subcultural Heterogeneity in Contemporary Japan". Cross-Currents: East Asian History and Culture Review. 3 (3): 6–31. doi:10.1353/ach.2014.0005. ISSN 2158-9674. "RIAJ 2002 million-seller list by year". RIAJ. Archived from the original on June 3, 2004. Retrieved September 29, 2012. "BoA Again Tops Oricon Chart". world.kbs.co.kr. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "東方神起-リリース-Oricon Style ミュージック" (in Japanese). Oricon. Archived from the original on November 10, 2007. Retrieved December 19, 2012. 동방신기 오리콘 위클리 1위 아시아-남성가수 최초 (in Korean). Newsen. January 22, 2008. Archived from the original on January 28, 2008. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "TVXQ draws more than legendary home acts in Japan". The Korea Herald. November 5, 2018. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "The 22nd Japan Gold Disc Award 2008". Recording Industry Association of Japan. Archived from the original on June 27, 2008. Retrieved January 26, 2014. SS501 released their first Japanese single Kokoro in 2007, debuting at the 5th spot on the Oricon chart, and moved to 3rd spot the next day. It was also chosen as an ending theme song for an anime entitled Blue Dragon. The next year in 2008, the group received the "Newcomer Award" by Japan Gold Disc Award marking the first time for Korean artists to receive this award. "SHINee Ranks #2 on Oricon Upon Release". May 17, 2012. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "CDシングル 月間ランキング-Oricon Style ランキング" (in Japanese). Oricon. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "BIGBANG Major Debut in Japan" (in Japanese). Oricon. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "How Korean Pop Conquered Japan". The Atlantic. September 13, 2011. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2012. 백, 지은 (February 17, 2012). "韓가수, 지난해 日서 3490억 벌었다! "소시-카라, 견인차 역할"". Sports Chosun. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2012. "KPop on Oricon Monthly Charts". KPopper's Guide. September 16, 2018. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Kim, Yeojin. "A Possibility of the Korean Wave Renaissance Construction Through K-Pop: Sustainable Development of the Korean Wave as a Cultural Industry". Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2015. Park, Ju-min (May 7, 2019). "K-Pop stardom lures young Japanese hopefuls to South Korea despite diplomatic chill". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Mendoza, Jaime (December 31, 2009). "Wonder Girls to Invade China in 2010". Asia Pacific Arts. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013. Retrieved March 21, 2012. Qin, Amy; Sang-Hun, Choe (August 7, 2016). "South Korean Missile Defense Deal Appears to Sour China's Taste for K-Pop". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "K-Pop Industry Relies More on Japan Than China". January 26, 2017. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Herman, Tamar. "Korean Entertainment Thrives On Beneficial But Tense Relationship With Chinese Investments". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved March 16, 2018. Kang, John. "Why Alibaba Bought $30M Stake In K-Pop Giant SM Entertainment, Home To EXO And Girls' Generation". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved March 16, 2018. "슈퍼주니어M, 중국 가요계 완전 싹쓸이". Newsis. March 8, 2011. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2012. "China V Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 6, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. Emiko Jozuka; Sol Han. "Why South Korean companies, entertainers are getting cold shoulder in China". CNN. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2018. "The surprising reason why China is blocking South Korean music videos and TV". Vox. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. "China's ban on hallyu". The Korea Times. November 23, 2016. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. "North Korea conducts public executions for theft, watching South Korea media: report". The Japan Times Online. July 19, 2017. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2018. Hajek, Danny (July 5, 2017). "Watching Foreign Movies Is Illegal In North Korea, But Some Do It Anyway". www.npr.org. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2018. Hsu, Jeremy (April 6, 2018). "How the USB Taught North Korea to Love K-Pop". Lovesick Cyborg. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Baek, Jieun. North Korea's Hidden Revolution. Oakeley, Lucas (April 24, 2018). "How K-pop became a propaganda tool". The Outline. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Kretchun, Lee, Tuohy. "Compromising Connectivity- Information Dynamics Between the State and Society in a Digitizing North Korea" (PDF). Www.intermedia.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 18, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2018 – via Intermedia.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Lee, Je Son (June 17, 2015). "Do North Koreans like K-pop?". NK News – North Korea News. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Kim, Mikyoung (August 1, 2018). "North Korea's Hidden Revolution: How the Information Underground Is Transforming a Closed Society. By Jieun Baek. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2016. xxvi, 282 pp. ISBN: 9780300217810 (cloth, also available as e-book and audiobook)". The Journal of Asian Studies. 77 (3): 816–817. doi:10.1017/S0021911818000694. ISSN 0021-9118. S2CID 165556415. "Kim Jong Un likes K-pop music, banned in North Korea. That could be a diplomatic breakthrough". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 11, 2018. "K-pop stars to perform in North Korea for first time since 2005". The Guardian. Reuters in. March 20, 2018. Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Sang-Hun, Choe (April 1, 2018). "Onstage, South Korean K-Pop Stars. In the Balcony, Kim Jong-un, Clapping". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. Sang-Hun, Choe (June 11, 2021). "Kim Jong-un Calls K-Pop a 'Vicious Cancer' in the New Culture War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Sang-Yeon Sung (July 2010). "Constructing a New Image. Hallyu in Taiwan". JSTOR 23615262. "GOT7 To Hold Their First Solo Concert in Singapore". KpopStarz. April 10, 2016. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "EXO to hold two nights of concert in Singapore in January 2016". HallyuSG. December 11, 2015. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016. Heng, Melissa (July 28, 2016). "Brows are big in the beauty business". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved September 14, 2016. "Eyebrows in spotlight as brow-grooming services and products rise in popularity". Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved August 10, 2016. Ng, Gwendolyn (August 7, 2017). "K-pop extravaganza Music Bank In Singapore is a music buffet feast". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2017. "These young Singaporeans are eyeing a career as K-pop idols. What are their odds?". CNA. January 27, 2024. "YG Entertainment to hold Singapore auditions in November, pre-applications close on Nov 5". CNA. October 27, 2023. "First K-pop international high school to open in Singapore". The Straits Times. July 7, 2023. "120 hopefuls audition for K-pop girl group Fifty Fifty". The Straits Times. Singapore. February 4, 2024. "Malaysian firms tap into K-Pop power". BBC. Kuala Lumpur. July 3, 2012. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2015. "Asians worry about 'hallyu effect'". The Korea Times. Bangkok. November 20, 2014. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2016. Mohd Jenol, Nur Ayuni; Ahmad Pazil, Nur Hafeeza (December 31, 2022). Serpa, Sandro (ed.). ""I found my talent after I become a K-pop fan": K-pop participatory culture unleashing talents among Malaysian youth". Cogent Social Sciences. 8 (1): 2062914. doi:10.1080/23311886.2022.2062914. S2CID 248314729. "Music, fashion, drama: Indonesians 'falling in love' with South Korea". ABC News. October 3, 2016. Archived from the original on April 13, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2018. "Hallyu, the Korean wave". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on April 2, 2018. Retrieved April 2, 2018. Santamaria, Carlos (September 19, 2012). "Korean 'Hallyu' and the Pinoy invasion". Rappler. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2019. Perez, Analyn (June 26, 2014). "KPop fans and stans: A deeper look into the Pinoy Hallyu fandom". GMA News Online. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Hanssen, Ulv (February 19, 2015). "Vietnam catches the Korean wave". East Asia Forum. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "'Music Bank' to restart its world tour starting in August". Allkpop. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "Jiyeon (T-ara) chủ động diễn cảnh tình cảm với Soobin Hoàng Sơn". News.zing.vn. July 27, 2018. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 8, 2019. Lee, Seungrok (September 12, 2018). "이수만 "NCT베트남팀 만들겠다"…한·베트남 비즈니스 협력 세미나 발언". entertain.naver.com (in Korean). My Daily. Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved May 5, 2021. "S.M. Entertainment to hold K-pop auditions in 10 countries". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "2018 Cube Star World Audition in Vietnam 베트남어ver". www.cubeent.co.kr (in Korean). September 11, 2018. Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. Trẻ, Phuong Thao/Thế Giới. "Công ty của BTS – Big Hit Entertainment sẽ tổ chức tuyển thực tập sinh tại Việt Nam". thegioitre.vn (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on January 9, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2019. "Youths in BD attracted to K-pop". bangladeshpost.net. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "K-Pop in Bangladesh 상세보기|Bilateral RelationsEmbassy of the Republic of Korea in People's Republic of Bangladesh". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on April 15, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Kember, Findlay. "Remote Indian state hooked on Korean pop culture". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2013. "A little corner of Korea in India". BBC. October 17, 2010. Archived from the original on September 3, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Chitransh, Anugya (June 3, 2012). "'Korean Wave' takes Indian kids in its sway". The Times of India. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "K-pop goes India! Riding the Korean musical wave". July 17, 2016. Sugathan, Priya (May 23, 2011). "South Korean films inundate Manipur market". Daily News and Analysis. Retrieved February 24, 2013. "South Korean Pop Sensation Wonder Girls Hits The States". Access Hollywood. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "Featured artist at House of Blues". House of Blues. Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "Upcoming K-Pop Concerts In The US". Soompi. April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Hong, Grace Danbi. "K-Pop Stars to Take Over Google Headquarters". Mnet. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Brown, August (April 29, 2012). "K-pop enters American pop consciousness". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012. Retrieved March 24, 2013. K-pop fans in America are largely in major immigrant hubs like Los Angeles and New York, where, with a crop of rising K-pop acts including BoA and Super Junior, Girls' Generation sold-out Madison Square Garden. Seabrook, John. "Cultural technology and the making of K-pop". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 4, 2013. The crowd was older than I'd expected, and the ambience felt more like a video-game convention than like a pop concert. About three out of four people were Asian-American, but there were also Caucasians of all ages and a number of black women. McCurry, Justin (September 28, 2012). "K-pop stars: the lowdown on South Korean pop". The Guardian. London. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Girls' Generation Splinter Group Enters Billboard 200". Billboard. May 4, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "2NE1 Holds First Concert In The US". Manila Bulletin. August 20, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "Big Bang adds two additional tour dates for the U.S". Allkpop. September 29, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Kaufman, Gil. "Madonna Goes 'Gangnam Style' With Psy". MTV. Retrieved November 15, 2012. Bae, Soo-min (January 31, 2013). "Billboard launches K-pop column with INFINITE". The Korea Herald. Retrieved October 9, 2014. Benjamin, Jeff (January 29, 2013). "Billboard & Girls' Generation Welcome You to K-Town!". Billboard. Retrieved October 9, 2014. Carr, David (January 7, 2014). "New Leader at Billboard Sees Future in Visuals". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2014. "f(x) Schedule at SXSW". SXSW. March 1, 2013. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "A Look Back At A First Timer's KCON NY 2016 – Day 1". July 8, 2016. "KCON LA 2016: BTS, Monsta X, Davichi & More Close Out Fest". Billboard. American teenager with illness meets K-pop idols, Associated Press Super Junior and SHINee meet a young American girl Archived April 11, 2013, at archive.today, Korea.com Ye-eun, Jie (May 22, 2017). "BTS becomes first K-pop group to win at Billboard Music Awards". The Korea Herald. Retrieved May 29, 2021. "Billboard Music Awards 2013: The Complete Winners List". MTV. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Cirisano, Tatiana. "BTS Wins Top Social Artist Award at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Wang, Mary (November 20, 2017). "BTS's Much-Hyped AMAs Performance Fulfilled All Your K-Pop Dreams". Vogue. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Weatherby, Taylor. "BTS Put on Epic Performance of 'Fake Love' at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Chiu, Allyson. "South Korean boy band BTS makes history: First K-pop group to top U.S. Billboard 200 chart". Washington Post. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Trust, Gary. "BTS Scores First Hot 100 Top 10 for a K-Pop Group & Its First No. 1 on Digital Song Sales Chart With 'Fake Love'". Billboard. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Trivedi, Anjani (August 1, 2013). "Forget Politics, Let's Dance: Why K-Pop Is a Latin American Smash". Time. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Bishop, Marlon (December 15, 2013). "Meet Latin America's Teenage Korean Pop Fanatics". NPR. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "South Korea's K-pop spreads to Latin America". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. Oh, Seok-min. "(Yonhap Feature) K-pop fever takes hold in Latin America". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Shin, Hyon-hee (January 27, 2013). "K-pop craze boosts Korea's public diplomacy". The Korea Herald. Retrieved January 28, 2013. In Chile alone, there are about 20,000 members of 200 clubs also for Big Bang, 2PM, CNBLUE, Shinee, MBLAQ and other artists. Peru is another K-pop stronghold, with nearly 8,000 people participating in 60 groups. Young-goog, Park (June 9, 2015). KOREA Magazine June 2015. Docuhut. "'2011 K-POP Cover Dance Festival to Celebrate the Visit Korea Year Campaign', The Second Round Contest Held Successfully in Russia and Brazil". Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Over 3,000 Peruvian fans gather to greet JYJ in Peru". Allkpop. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "AFP: South Korea's K-pop spreads to Latin America". June 19, 2012. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "Colombia Getting into K-Pop Groove with Reality TV Shows". The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "JYJ Charts New Territory for K-Pop Solo Act in Mexico". The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Cave, Damien (September 21, 2013). "For Migrants, New Land of Opportunity Is Mexico". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2013. there are now 70 fan clubs for Korean pop music in Mexico, with at least 60,000 members. "Kim Hyung Jun completes his South American concert tour on a successful note". Yahoo!. January 22, 2014. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved January 26, 2014. "Kim Hyung Jun arrives in Peru to start his South America tour". Yahoo News. January 15, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "Kim Hyung Jun Gathers Crowds of Fans Everywhere in Peru" Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Mwave. Retrieved January 26, 2014. (in Korean)"김형준 남미 인기 이 정도? 페루공항 마비 포착". Naver. Retrieved January 26, 2014. México, Arena Ciudad de. "Arena Ciudad de México". www.arenaciudaddemexico.com. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2018. "BIGHIT ENTERTAINMENT". ibighit.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2018. "드림캐쳐, 브라질 팬사인회 전석 매진…"추가 오픈 고심"". Retrieved October 28, 2021. "Dreamcatcher to go on Latin America tour". Retrieved October 28, 2021. "Inicia Montiel gira por Asia, para atraer inversiones". www.cronica.com.mx (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved March 11, 2018. "Ministerio de Cultura busca convertir a Surcorea en líder de la industria cultural del mundo". world.kbs.co.kr (in Spanish). Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018. Lopez Rocha, Nayelli. "Hallyu in Mexico and the role of Korean pop idols' fan clubs". The Journal of Foreign Studies. 24: 615–637. "JYJ Charts New Territory for K-Pop Solo Act in Mexico". Retrieved April 1, 2018. "Inaugural KCON Mexico draws over 33,000 fans plus another 200,000 live stream viewers!". Hello Asia!. March 20, 2017. Retrieved April 1, 2018. Cave, Damien (September 21, 2013). "For Migrants, New Land of Opportunity Is Mexico". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "Mexican fans ask President Roh to send hallyu stars". HanCinema. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "KPOP: Marcha Masiva K-Pop Mexico II". g-dragon-is-vip.blogspot.kr (in Spanish). May 23, 2013. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "Korea Foundation for International Culture Exchange". eng.kofice.or.kr. Retrieved February 24, 2021. "German press praises Rain at the Dresden Music Festival". Allkpop. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Mukasa, Edwina (December 15, 2011). "Bored of Cowell pop? Try K-pop". The Guardian. London. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "Schön frisiert und wohlerzogen". Berliner Zeitung (in German). February 10, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "'Music Bank in Paris' Performance Mesmerized 10,000 Fans". February 8, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "'MBC Korean Culture Festival in London 2012′ gathers 2,500 fans". Allkpop. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "SHINee's London Concert Causes a Stir". The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "Big Bang Wins 'Best Fan' MTV TRL Award In Italy". MTV. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "Europe's First Mega K-Pop Fest: All the Moments You Missed". Teen Vogue. May 17, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "К-РОР Cover Dance Фестиваль". Muz TV. Archived from the original on November 7, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "SHINee in Russia on first episode of 2011 Cover Dance Festival 'K-Pop Road Show 40120′". Allkpop. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "K-pop magazine published in Russia". Korea.net. October 15, 2012. Retrieved January 17, 2015. "Park Jung Min to Hold Solo Concert in Russia". Mwave. Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014. "Концерт Пак Чон Мина (Park Jung Min)". KudaGo.com. "B.A.P. в Москве, билеты на 17 мая 2016". ModernRock.ru. "B.A.P в Москве, билеты на 9 мая 2017". ModernRock.ru. "GOT7 впервые выступят в Москве". www.intermedia.ru. February 21, 2018. "Zico". glavclub.com. "K-POP MTCamp – твой код доступа в Корею". www.mtv.ru. "K-Pop РЕАЛИТИ-ШОУ!". www.mtv.ru. "BTS' 'Fake Love' and EXO's 'Power' played at the '2018 Russia World Cup' final match". Allkpop. "Larousse 2023: Covid long, wokisme, grossophobie... Les nouveaux mots qui entrent dans le dictionnaire" (in French). "K-pop fan base continues to grow". Korea.net. Retrieved January 20, 2013. "Middle East: Korean pop 'brings hope for peace'". BBC. August 7, 2013. Long, Natalie (December 7, 2013). "Infinite lead K-Pop invasion in Dubai". Gulf News. Retrieved January 9, 2014. "Israeli fans latch on to ever-mobile K-pop wave". Korea JoongAng Daily. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2012.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Middle East: Korean pop 'brings hope for peace'". BBC. August 7, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2013. Nissim Otmazgin; Irina Lyan (December 2013). "Hallyu across the Desert: K-pop Fandom in Israel and Palestine" (PDF). Hebrew University of Jerusalem. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 17, 2015. "K-POP İstanbul'u sallayacak!". Milliyet (in Turkish). Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2013. Türkiye'de kayıtlı 150.000 K-POP fanı bulunuyor. "K-pop invasion". Gulf News. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. Tusing, David. "Korean pop phenomenon ZE:A in Dubai". Gulf News. Archived from the original on August 29, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "Egyptian-Korean ties endorsed through pop idol competition". Egypt Independent. July 30, 2011. Retrieved September 9, 2012. "Korean pop culture spreads in Cairo". Egypt Independent. July 19, 2011. Retrieved April 14, 2013. Chowdhury, Farhana. "EXO conquer iconic Dubai Fountain". www.khaleejtimes.com. "K-pop stars BTS perform in Saudi Arabia". BBC News. October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2021. "From Rain to BTS: The Korean Wave in Australia". SBS PopAsia. June 5, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "K-pop dance classes are booming in New Zealand". SBS PopAsia. August 24, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "So you wanna be a k-pop idol". The Standard | Journalism@Swinburne. June 11, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "The Academy Australia | Kpop Boot Camp | Team mates". The Academy Australia | Kpop Boot Camp | Idol Training. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "Australian idols of the K-pop world". The Sydney Morning Herald. December 6, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "5 times Stray Kids' Felix & Bang Chan's Aussie accents were super relatable". SBS PopAsia. June 26, 2018. Retrieved October 16, 2018. "2011 K-Pop Music Fest". Azn stadium. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "Tidal wave of K-pop heads our way". The New Zealand Herald. April 26, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012. "NU'EST to judge K-pop contest in Sydney". DKpopnews. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Gangnam Style's Psy on way to Australia". news.com.au. October 2, 2012. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Dates announced for B.A.P Australian and New Zealand 2016 Tour". helloasia. February 29, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "B.A.P. first K-Pop group to perform in NZ". NZ Herald. nzherald. March 23, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "The Citizen". Retrieved October 16, 2018. "Mwave | K-pop makes one". www.mwave.me. Retrieved October 17, 2018. "South Korea blasts pop music, propaganda over the border". Daily News. New York. Retrieved March 5, 2013. "South Korean Propaganda Blasts". Time. June 7, 2010. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved March 5, 2013. "Girl Bands to Assist in 'Psychological Warfare'". The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved March 5, 2013. "N. Korea takes 'Gangnam Style' shot at South politician". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. August 20, 2012. Retrieved September 20, 2012. Kwon, K. J.; Mullen, Jethro (September 20, 2012). "North Korean video evokes 'Gangnam Style' to taunt South Korean candidate". CNN. Retrieved September 25, 2012. "Remarks by President Obama and President Park of South Korea in a Joint Press Conference". White House. May 7, 2013. Retrieved May 7, 2013. And of course, around the world, people are being swept up by Korean culture—the Korean Wave. And as I mentioned to President Park, my daughters have taught me a pretty good Gangnam Style. "Remarks by President Obama at Hankuk University". White House. March 26, 2012. Retrieved October 27, 2012. It's no wonder so many people around the world have caught the Korean Wave, Hallyu. "United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon's Statements". United Nations. Retrieved December 28, 2012. As is clear with the recent rise of Psy's "Gangnam Style", the Hallyu-wave and Korean pop music, Korean culture is making its mark on the world. "Daily Press Briefing – October 3, 2012". United States Department of State. Retrieved March 5, 2013. No, but I bet you my daughter does. She loves Korean pop. Chi-dong, Lee. "Psy-loving Nuland hopes for closer Korea-US-Japan ties". Yonhap. Retrieved March 5, 2013. Nuland's teenage daughter was the first in the family to go crazy about Korean music and dance, dubbed K-pop "Speech: Anglo-Korean Society Dinner". gov.uk. November 23, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2013. As "Gangnam Style" has demonstrated, your music is global too. "(LEAD)(Yonhap Interview) Peruvian vice president hopes for further economic ties". Yonhap. Retrieved March 5, 2013. "K-pop and soap operas have taken popularity. It was one of the main factors that made Peruvian people wanting to get to know South Korea more," Espinoza said. Russell, Mark James. "The Gangnam Phenom". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2013. More generally, it illustrates the new reality that the North-South pattern of trade and cultural exchange that has dominated the world since the ascendance of European colonialism is giving way and making room for unexpected soft power. Barry, Robert. "Gangnam Style & How The World Woke Up To The Genius Of K-Pop". The Quietus. Retrieved March 5, 2013. While suspicious talk of Hallyu as 'soft power' akin to the CIA's cultural Cold War bears a whiff of the old Victorian fear of yellow peril Frater, Patrick (August 4, 2016). "China Reportedly Bans Korean TV Content, Talent". Variety. Retrieved September 5, 2016. Brzeski, Patrick (August 2, 2016). "China Takes Aim at K-pop Stars Amid Korean Missile-Defense Dispute". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 5, 2016. Seo, Yoonjung; Levenson, Eric; McKirdy, Euan (April 2018). "Kim Jong Un 'deeply moved' by K-pop concert in Pyongyang". CNN. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Hartong, Jan Laurens (2006). Musical Terms Worldwide: A Companion for the Musical Explorer. Semar Publishers. ISBN 978-88-7778-090-4. Holden, Todd Joseph Miles; Scrase, Timothy J. (2006). Medi@sia: Global Media/tion In and Out of Context. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-37155-1. Jung, Sun (2011). Korean Masculinities and Transcultural Consumption: Yonsama, Rain, Oldboy, K-Pop Idols. Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 978-988-8028-66-5. Kim, Myung Oak; Jaffe, Sam (2010). The New Korea: An Inside Look at South Korea's Economic Rise. AMACOM Div American Mgmt Assn. ISBN 978-0-8144-1489-7. Winter, Velvet (April 30, 2023). "K-pop is taking over international music, but becoming a star is a long and restrictive road". ABC News (Australia). Retrieved May 20, 2023. K-Pop: A New Force in Pop Music (PDF) (Korean Culture No. 2 ed.). Korean Culture and Information Service; Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism. 2011. ISBN 978-89-7375-166-2. The dictionary definition of k-pop at Wiktionary {{Commons category inline}|K-pop}}