Cuculus is a genus of cuckoos which has representatives in most of the Old World, although the greatest diversity is in tropical southern and southeastern Asia. The genus Cuculus was introduced in 1758 by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae. The genus name is the Latin word for "cuckoo". The type species is the common cuckoo (Cuculus canorus). The genus contains 11 species: Black cuckoo, Cuculus clamosus Red-chested cuckoo, Cuculus solitarius Lesser cuckoo, Cuculus poliocephalus Sulawesi cuckoo or Sulawesi hawk-cuckoo, Cuculus crassirostris Indian cuckoo, Cuculus micropterus Madagascar cuckoo, Cuculus rochii African cuckoo, Cuculus gularis Himalayan cuckoo, Cuculus saturatus Oriental cuckoo, Cuculus optatus (formerly horsfieldi) (split from C. saturatus) Sunda cuckoo, Cuculus lepidus (split from C. saturatus) Common cuckoo, Cuculus canorus Some sources also include the pallid cuckoo in this genus, although there is disagreement about appropriate classification. The hawk-cuckoos are now placed in a separate genus, Hierococcyx, while the pallid cuckoo belongs in Cacomantis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. Most occur in open forests, but some prefer more open country. Several species are migratory. These are vocal species, with persistent and loud calls. They feed on large insects, with hairy caterpillars, which are distasteful to many birds, being a speciality. One or two species will also take some fruit. Cuculus cuckoos are brood parasites, that is, they lay a single egg in the nests of various passerine hosts. The best-known example is the European common cuckoo. The female cuckoo in each case replaces one of the host's eggs with one of her own. The cuckoo egg hatches earlier than the host's, and the chick grows faster; in most cases the cuckoo chick evicts the eggs or young of the host species. Cuculus species lay coloured eggs to match those of their passerine hosts. Female cuckoos specialise in a particular host species (generally the species that raised them) and lay eggs that closely resemble the eggs of that host. A species may consist of several gentes, with each gens specialising in a particular host. There is some evidence that the gentes are genetically different from one another[citation needed] though other authorities state that as female cuckoos mate with males of any gens, genes flow between gentes. Linnaeus, Carl (1758). Systema Naturae per regna tria naturae, secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis (in Latin). Vol. 1 (10th ed.). Holmiae (Stockholm): Laurentii Salvii. p. 110. Jobling, James A (2010). The Helm Dictionary of Scientific Bird Names. London: Christopher Helm. p. 124. ISBN 978-1-4081-2501-4. "Cuckoo". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) Peters, James Lee, ed. (1940). Check-List of Birds of the World. Vol. 4. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 14. Gill, Frank; Donsker, David; Rasmussen, Pamela, eds. (July 2021). "Turacos, bustards, cuckoos, mesites, sandgrouse". IOC World Bird List Version 11.2. International Ornithologists' Union. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Payne, RB (2005). The Cuckoos. Oxford University Press. 423. ISBN 978-0-19-850213-5. Brooke, Michael deL.; Horsfall, John A. (2003). "Cuckoos". In Christopher Perrins (ed.). Firefly Encyclopedia of Birds. Firefly Books. pp. 312–315. ISBN 1-55297-777-3.