The Asian thrushes are medium-sized mostly insectivorous or omnivorous birds in the genus Zoothera of the thrush family, Turdidae. The genus Zoothera was introduced in 1832 by the Irish zoologist Nicholas Vigors to accommodate a newly described species, Zoothera monticol, the long-billed thrush, which therefore becomes the type species. The genus name combines the Ancient Greek zōon meaning "animal" with -thēra meaning "hunter". Two New World species traditionally regarded as Zoothera (varied thrush and Aztec thrush) actually belong elsewhere in the thrush family. A group containing Siberian thrush and the African species is not closely related to the other Zoothera and are now assigned to the genus Geokichla. The genus contains the following 21 species: Long-tailed thrush (Zoothera dixoni) Alpine thrush (Zoothera mollissima) Himalayan thrush (Zoothera salimalii) Sichuan thrush (Zoothera griseiceps) Long-billed thrush (Zoothera monticola) Geomalia (Zoothera heinrichi) Dark-sided thrush (Zoothera marginata) Everett's thrush (Zoothera everetti) Sunda thrush (Zoothera andromedae) White's thrush (Zoothera aurea) Scaly thrush (Zoothera dauma) Nilgiri thrush (Zoothera neilgherriensis) Sri Lanka thrush (Zoothera imbricata) Amami thrush (Zoothera major) †Bonin thrush (Zoothera terrestris) - extinct (c. 1830s) Guadalcanal thrush (Zoothera turipavae) Makira thrush (Zoothera margaretae) Russet-tailed thrush (Zoothera heinei) Fawn-breasted thrush (Zoothera machiki) Bassian thrush (Zoothera lunulata) Black-backed thrush (Zoothera talaseae) Varied thrush (Ixoreus naevius) - related to other new world genera Aztec thrush (Ridgwayia pinicola) - related to Hylocichla Geokichla thrushes Siberian thrush, Geokichla sibirica Pied thrush, Geokichla wardii Grey ground thrush, Geokichla princei Black-eared ground thrush, Geokichla camaronensis Spotted ground thrush, Geokichla guttata - formerly G. fischeri Spot-winged thrush, Geokichla spiloptera Crossley's ground thrush, Geokichla crossleyi Abyssinian ground thrush, Geokichla piaggiae Kivu ground thrush, Geokichla piaggiae tanganjicae Oberländer's ground thrush, Geokichla oberlaenderi Orange ground thrush, Geokichla gurneyi Orange-headed thrush, Geokichla citrina Buru thrush, Geokichla dumasi Seram thrush, Geokichla joiceyi Orange-sided thrush, Geokichla peronii Slaty-backed thrush, Geokichla schistacea Chestnut-capped thrush, Geokichla interpres Enggano thrush, Geokichla leucolaema Chestnut-backed thrush, Geokichla dohertyi Ashy thrush, Geokichla cinerea Red-backed thrush, Geokichla erythronota Red-and-black thrush, Geokichla mendeni Vigors, Nicholas Aylward (1832). "Zoothera". Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London: 172. Mayr, Ernst; Paynter, Raymond A. Jr, eds. (1964). Check-List of Birds of the World. Vol. 10. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Museum of Comparative Zoology. p. 144. Jobling, James A. (2010). The Helm Dictionary of Scientific Bird Names. London: Christopher Helm. p. 414. ISBN 978-1-4081-2501-4. Gill, Frank; Donsker, David; Rasmussen, Pamela, eds. (July 2023). "Thrushes". IOC World Bird List Version 13.2. International Ornithologists' Union. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Klicka, J., G. Voelker, and G.M. Spellman. 2005.A molecular phylogenetic analysis of the ‘‘true thrushes’’ (Aves: Turdinae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 34: 486–500. Sangster, G., J.M. Collinson, P.-A. Crochet, A.G. Knox, D.T. Parkin, L. Svensson, and S.C. Votier. 2011. Taxonomic recommendations for British birds: seventh report. Ibis 153: 883–892. Voelker, G., and J. Klicka. 2008. Systematics of Zoothera thrushes, and a synthesis of true thrush molecular systematic relationships. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 49: 377–381. Voelke, G., and R.K. Outlaw. 2008. Establishing a perimeter position: speciation around the Indian Ocean Basin. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21: 1779–1788. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zoothera. Asian thrush videos on the Internet Bird Collection