Typhoon Haiyan, known in the Philippines as Super Typhoon Yolanda, was one of the most powerful tropical cyclones ever recorded. Upon making landfall, Haiyan devastated portions of Southeast Asia, particularly the Philippines. It is one of the deadliest Philippine typhoons on record, killing at least 6,300 people in that country alone. In terms of JTWC-estimated 1-minute sustained winds, Haiyan is tied with Meranti in 2016 for being the second strongest landfalling tropical cyclone on record, only behind Goni of 2020. As of January 2014, bodies were still being found. Haiyan was also the most intense tropical cyclone worldwide in 2013. The 30th named storm, thirteenth typhoon, and fifth super typhoon of the 2013 Pacific typhoon season, Haiyan originated from an area of low pressure several hundred kilometers east-southeast of Pohnpei in the Federated States of Micronesia on November 2. Tracking generally westward, environmental conditions favored tropical cyclogenesis and the system developed into a tropical depression on the following day. After becoming a tropical storm and being named Haiyan at 00:00 UTC on November 4, the system began a period of rapid intensification that brought it to typhoon intensity by 18:00 UTC on November 5. By November 6, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) assessed the system as a Category 5-equivalent super typhoon on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale (SSHWS); the storm passed over the island of Kayangel in Palau shortly after attaining this strength. Thereafter, Haiyan continued to intensify; at 12:00 UTC on November 7, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) upgraded the storm's maximum ten-minute sustained winds to a peak of 230 km/h (145 mph). The Hong Kong Observatory put the storm's maximum ten-minute sustained winds at 285 km/h (175 mph) prior to landfall in the central Philippines, while the China Meteorological Administration (CMA) estimated the maximum two-minute sustained winds at the time to be around 78 m/s (280 km/h or 175 mph). At the same time, the JTWC estimated the system's one-minute sustained winds at 315 km/h (195 mph), unofficially making Haiyan the strongest tropical cyclone ever observed based on wind speed, a record which would later be surpassed by Hurricane Patricia in 2015 at 345 km/h (215 mph). Haiyan is also tied with Meranti in 2016, Goni in 2020 and Surigae in 2021 as the most intense tropical cyclone in the Eastern Hemisphere by 1-minute sustained winds; several others have recorded lower central pressure readings. At 20:40 UTC on November 7, the eye of the typhoon made its first landfall in the Philippines at Guiuan, Eastern Samar at peak strength. Gradually weakening, the storm made five additional landfalls in the country before emerging over the South China Sea. Turning northwestward, the typhoon eventually struck northern Vietnam as a severe tropical storm on November 10. Haiyan was last noted as a tropical depression by the JMA on the following day. The typhoon caused catastrophic destruction in the Visayas, particularly in the islands of Samar and Leyte. According to UN officials, about 11 million people were affected and many were left homeless; many people are still missing as a result of this storm. Due to its extensive deaths and damages, the name Haiyan was retired in 2014 and replaced with Bailu. It was first used in the 2019 season. On November 2, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) began monitoring a broad low-pressure area about 425 kilometers (264 miles) east-southeast of Pohnpei, one of the states in the Federated States of Micronesia. As the system moved through a region favoring tropical cyclogenesis, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) classified it as a tropical depression early on November 3. The system quickly intensified into a tropical storm, prompting the JMA to assign it the name Haiyan (Chinese: 海燕; lit. 'petrel') at 00:00 UTC on November 4. Tracking generally westward along the southern periphery of a subtropical ridge, rapid intensification ensued by November 5 as a central dense overcast with an embedded eye developing; the JMA classified Haiyan as a typhoon later that day. On November 6, the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) assigned the storm the local name Yolanda as it approached the Philippine Area of Responsibility. Intensification slowed somewhat during the day, though the JTWC estimated the storm to have attained Category 5-equivalent super typhoon status on the Saffir–Simpson hurricane wind scale (SSHWS) around 12:00 UTC. Later, the eye of the typhoon passed over the island of Kayangel in Palau. Around 12:00 UTC on November 7, Haiyan attained ten-minute sustained winds of 230 km/h (140 mph) and a minimum central pressure of 895 mbar (hPa; 26.43 inHg). Six hours later, the JTWC estimated Haiyan to have attained one-minute sustained winds of 315 km/h (196 mph) and gusts up to 380 km/h (240 mph). The storm displayed some characteristics of an annular tropical cyclone, though a strong convective band remained present along the western side of the system. At 20:40 UTC on November 7, Haiyan made landfall in Guiuan, Eastern Samar at peak intensity. The JTWC's unofficial estimate of one-minute sustained winds of 305 km/h (190 mph) would, by that measure, make Haiyan the most powerful storm ever recorded to strike land. This record was later broken by Typhoon Goni in 2020. Interaction with land caused a slight degradation of the storm's structure, though it remained an exceptionally-powerful storm when it struck Tolosa, Leyte around 23:00 UTC. The typhoon made four additional landfalls as it traversed the Visayas: Daanbantayan, Bantayan Island, Concepcion, and Busuanga Island. Haiyan, with its core disrupted by land interaction with the Philippines, emerged over the South China Sea late on November 8. Environmental conditions ahead of the storm soon became less favorable, as cool stable air began wrapping into the western side of the storm's circulation. Continuing across the South China Sea, Haiyan turned more northwesterly late on November 9 and through November 10, as it moved around the southwestern edge of the subtropical ridge previously steering it westward. Rapid weakening ensued as Haiyan approached its final landfall in Vietnam, ultimately moving ashore in the country near Haiphong around 21:00 UTC, as a severe tropical storm. Once onshore, the storm quickly deteriorated and was last noted as it dissipated over Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China, on November 11. Upon JTWC's declaration of Tropical Depression 31W on November 3, a tropical storm warning was issued for Chuuk Lagoon, Losap, and Poluwat in the Federated States of Micronesia. Further west, Faraulep, Satawal, and Woleai, were placed under a typhoon watch while Fananu and Ulul were placed under a tropical storm watch. The following day, the tropical storm warning expanded to include Satawal while a typhoon warning was issued for Woleai. Much of Yap State and the islands of Koror and Kayangel in Palau were placed under a typhoon watch. The government issued a mandatory evacuation for Kayangel, and although most residents ignored the warning, they all survived the storm. As Haiyan progressed westward, the easternmost advisories were gradually discontinued. As Haiyan intensified into a typhoon on November 5, warnings were raised across Palau and Yap State. Government offices in Melekeok were used as an evacuation building for Palau. Despite mandatory evacuation orders, most residents on Kayangel remained on the island and rode out the typhoon. Shortly before Haiyan entered the Philippine Area of Responsibility on November 6, PAGASA raised Public Storm Warning Signal (PSWS) No.1, the lowest of four levels, for much of the Visayas and Mindanao. As the storm continued to approach the country, warnings expanded into Luzon and increased in severity for eastern areas. By the evening of November 7, PSWS No. 4, the highest level of warning which indicates winds in excess of 185 km/h (115 mph) are expected, was raised for Biliran Island, Eastern Samar, Leyte, Northern Cebu, Metro Cebu, Samar, and Southern Leyte. Through November 8, the coverage of PSWS No. 4 continued to expand, with areas in southern Luzon being included. Officials placed police officers in the Bicol Region ahead of the storm. In the provinces of Samar and Leyte, classes were canceled, and residents in flood- and landslide-prone areas were required to evacuate. Some of the storm-threatened areas were affected by an earlier earthquake in Bohol. Then-Philippine President Noynoy Aquino requested the military to deploy planes and helicopters to the region expected to be affected. As Haiyan was moving very fast, PAGASA issued warnings at different levels to about 60 of the 80 provinces, including the capital Metro Manila. On November 8, the International Charter on Space and Major Disasters was activated, providing widespread charitable satellite coverage to relief organizations. The State Flood Control and Drought Relief Headquarters hoisted a level three emergency response in the provinces of Hainan, Guangdong and Guangxi. All fishing vessels were urged to return to ports by noon on November 9. The Hong Kong Observatory issued the Strong Monsoon Signal at 19:10 HKT on November 9, and it was still in place on November 13. On November 8, Prime Minister Nguyễn Tấn Dũng activated the highest state of preparedness in the country. Approximately 600,000 people across southern and central provinces were evacuated while a further 200,000 were evacuated in northern provinces. Alerts were sent to 85,328 seagoing vessels, with a collective crew of 385,372 people, to sail to safer waters away from the storm. Requests were sent to China, Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines to aid any fishermen who needed immediate shelter from the typhoon. Threatening Vietnam after two other typhoons, Wutip and Nari, there were concerns that the storm would cause significant damage to homes with makeshift repairs. Roughly 460,000 military personnel and other authorities were mobilized to assist in evacuation efforts. Hundreds of flights were canceled across the country while schools were closed on November 11. On the small island of Cồn Cỏ, all residents were moved to underground shelters with enough supplies for several days. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) branches in Vietnam prepared relief stockpiles, consisting of food, water, housing material, and ₫6.6 billion (US$310,000) in funds. The local United Nations Resident Coordinator, Pratibha Mehta, praised the government's actions and credited them with saving numerous lives. However, there were complaints from many residents that the warnings came too late. As the storm brushed Eauripik, strong winds and heavy rain battered much of Micronesia. In Eauripik, one canoe house and three residential properties were damaged and banana and breadfruit trees were damaged. In Woleai, banana and breadfruit trees were damaged. In Ifalik, minor inundation at coastal areas and banana and breadfruit trees were damaged. On Kayangel in Palau, a high storm surge damaged several houses, while strong winds downed trees. Despite residents' refusal to evacuate, no fatalities or major injuries took place on the island. Helicopters were flown to the island to survey the damage and provide relief supplies. The government planned to evacuate those who were left homeless from the island. Koror, Babeldaob and Kayangel each lost access to water and power. In Koror, winds reaching as high as 120 km/h (75 mph) blew out rooftops and downed trees and power lines. A causeway linking an offshore hospital to the main island was temporarily shut down after being inundated by water. On the northern end of Babeldaob, Haiyan damaged schools and buildings. Lying closest to Haiyan at the time of the typhoon's passage, Kayangel was flooded in its entirety, and all homes were destroyed. Though no people were killed there, 69 others were displaced by the storm. Typhoon Haiyan, called Yolanda in the Philippines, caused catastrophic damage throughout much of the islands of Leyte, where cities and towns were largely destroyed. By April 17, 2016, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) confirmed 6,300 fatalities across the country, 5,902 of those taking place in the Eastern Visayas. However, the true death toll remains unclear. In Surigao City, 281.9 mm (11.10 in) of rainfall was recorded, much of which fell in under 12 hours. Storm surges were also recorded in many places. In the island of Leyte and Samar, PAGASA measured 5–6 m (16–20 ft) waves. In Tacloban, Leyte, the terminal building of Tacloban Airport was destroyed by a 5.2 m (17 ft) storm surge up to the height of the second story. Along the airport, a storm surge of 4 m (13 ft) was estimated. Waves of 4.6 m (15 ft) were also estimated. On the western coast of Samar, the storm surge was not as significant. Haiyan's first landfall was at Guiuan in Eastern Samar, where the typhoon touched down at 4:40 am. Nearly all structures in the township suffered at least partial damage, many of which were completely flattened. For several days following Haiyan's first landfall, the damage situation in the fishing town remained unclear due to lack of communication in and out of the area. The damage could finally be assessed after Philippine Air Force staff arrived in Guiuan on November 10. Prior to this, a local priest was able to take his motorbike from Guiuan to the cities of Catbalogan and Calbayog (also in Samar) armed with photos of the devastation, shot on his mobile phone. There was widespread devastation from the storm surge in Tacloban especially in San Jose, with many buildings being destroyed, trees knocked over or broken, and cars piled up. The low-lying areas on the eastern side of Tacloban city were hit the hardest, with some areas completely washed away. Flooding also extended for 1 km (0.62 mi) inland on the east coast of the province. City administrator Tecson John Lim stated that roughly 90 percent of the city had been destroyed. Journalists on the ground have described the devastation as, "off the scale, and apocalyptic". Most families in Samar and Leyte lost some family members or relatives; families came in from outlying provinces looking for relatives, especially children, who may have been washed away. The entire first floor of the Tacloban City Convention Center, which was serving as an evacuation shelter, was submerged by storm surge. Many residents in the building were caught off-guard by the fast-rising waters and subsequently drowned or were injured in the building. Although wind speeds were extreme, the major cause of damage and loss of life appears to have been from the storm surge. The major focus of devastation appears to have been on the east coast of Samar and Leyte, with a particular focus on Tacloban, because of its location between Samar and Leyte, and the large population in low-lying areas. Philippine Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) Secretary Mar Roxas said the scale of the relief operation that was now required was overwhelming, with some places described as a wasteland of mud and debris. Sebastian Rhodes Stampa, head of a UN disaster assessment coordination team, said there was "destruction on a massive scale" in Tacloban. "There are cars thrown like tumbleweeds and the streets are strewn with debris. The last time I saw something of this scale was in the aftermath of the [2004] Indian Ocean tsunami." There was little communication in the city and no mobile phone coverage. Up the east coast of Leyte, there were numerous towns and villages that were completely cut off without any assistance. Large parts of Leyte and Samar were without power for weeks. The storm crossed the Visayas region for almost a day, causing widespread flooding. In Cebu and Bohol, struck by a magnitude 7.2 earthquake two weeks before, cities were also severely devastated. During the morning of November 8, media stations across the country were able to broadcast live the destruction of Haiyan. However, before the afternoon, all communications on the Visayas region failed. The Presidential Communications Department of President Benigno Aquino III had difficulty contacting DILG Secretary Mar Roxas and Defense Secretary Voltaire Gazmin in Tacloban to plan relief. Widespread power interruptions, landslides, and flash floods were also reported. Major roads were blocked by trees, and impassable. 453 domestic and international airline flights were canceled. Some airports were also closed on November 8 and 9. Ferries were affected. Relief and rescue efforts were underway by November 9, but some places remained isolated and out of communication due to severe damage. Haiyan tossed up large car-sized boulders, the heaviest of them weighing 180 tons, onto Calicoan Island in Eastern Samar, of which a few were carried uphill 10 m (33 ft). This is considered the biggest weight ever moved during a tropical cyclone since record-keeping began. NDRRMC finally confirmed a total of 6,300 deaths in the Philippines, and total damages were estimated at PH₱95.48 billion (US$2.2 billion). Along the coast of Gongliao District, New Taipei, 16 people were swept out to sea by three 8 m (26 ft) waves. After several hours of search and rescue, eight were hospitalized while the other eight drowned. This was considered the largest loss of life from waves in Taiwan in several years. In May 2014, the Taiwan Keelung District Prosecutors Office [zh] confirmed that Typhoon Haiyan is responsible for the 8 deaths. Agricultural damage in Tainan were amounted to NT$400–500 million (US$13.5–16.9 million). One person also went missing off the coast of Lantau Island, Hong Kong. Typhoon Haiyan reached Hainan Province, where severe damage took place and six people were killed in various incidents. The hardest hit area was Qionghai, where roughly 3,500 people across 20 villages were isolated due to extensive flooding. 30 people were killed, while direct economic losses in China amounted to ¥4.58 billion (US$752 million). An estimated 1.21 million people were affected, of whom 26,300 were evacuated. Two people died while four others went missing after a car fell off a flooded road into a river near Beihai, Guangxi. Losses throughout Guangxi amounted to ¥275 million (US$45.2 million). Approximately 900 homes and 25,500 hectares of crops were destroyed, while 8,500 homes were damaged. Additionally, an estimated 3 million people were affected by the storm throughout Southern China. A cargo ship broke moorings at Sanya, Hainan on November 8; three members of the crew drowned while four others went missing. Haiyan produced high winds and widespread heavy rainfall which affected northern Vietnam. Rainfall totals of up to 461 mm (18.1 in) and wind gusts of up to 147 km/h (91 mph) were recorded. Ten people were killed while they were preparing for Haiyan's landfall, while no one was killed after the system made landfall; however, 4 people are missing in Quảng Ninh Province. In all, Haiyan killed 18 people, and left two missing with 93 others being injured. Economic losses in Vietnam were amounted to ₫669 billion (US$31.67 million). Due to the catastrophic loss of life caused by the storm, the name Haiyan was retired from its naming lists during the 2014 annual session the ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee, and was therefore replaced by the name Bailu. The name was first used in the 2019 season. PAGASA also announced that the name Yolanda would be stricken off the typhoon naming lists. PAGASA chose the name Yasmin to replace Yolanda for the 2017 season. By November 11, the provinces of Aklan, Capiz, Cebu, Iloilo, Leyte, Palawan, and Samar were placed under a state of national calamity, allowing the government to use state funds for relief and rehabilitation and to control prices of basic goods. Additionally, approximately ₱30.6 million (US$700,000) had been allocated in relief assistance by the NDRRMC. Local and national agencies deployed a collective 18,177 personnel, 844 vehicles, 44 seagoing vessels, and 31 aircraft for various operations. CBCP also declared 8 days of mourning for victims of the typhoon on the same date. World Health Organization Representative in the Philippines Dr. Julie Hall noted that while many survivors requiring medical attention in the first week suffer from trauma and fractures, the concern shifts toward chronic conditions as the weeks pass. The WHO coordinated the massive international response to help the Philippine government meet the acute need for healthcare services in the affected areas. Extreme damage to infrastructure throughout the region posed logistical problems that greatly slowed relief efforts. Though aid was flown into local airports, most of it remained there as roads remained closed. According to estimates on November 13, only 20 percent of the affected population in Tacloban was receiving aid. With a lack of access to clean water, some residents dug up water pipes and boiled water from there in order to survive. Thousands of people sought to evacuate the city via C-130 cargo planes, however, the slow process fueled further aggravation. Reports of escaped prisoners raping women in the city prompted a further urgency to evacuate. One resident was quoted as saying "Tacloban is a dead city." Due to the lack of electricity, planes could only operate during the daylight, further slowing the evacuations. At dawn on November 12, thousands of people broke through fences and rushed towards planes only to be forced back by police and military personnel. A similar incident occurred later that day as a U.S. cargo plane was landing. On November 14, a correspondent from the BBC reported Tacloban to be a "war zone", although the situation soon stabilized when the presence of government law enforcement was increased. Safety concerns prompted several relief agencies to back out of the operation, and some United Nations staff were pulled out for safety reasons. A message circulating among the agencies urged them to not go into Tacloban for this reason. On the west coast of Leyte Island, residents in Ormoc were fearing that the focus on Tacloban would leave them without aid. Though not as hard hit, roughly 90 percent of the city was damaged or destroyed and supplies were running low. Hospitals in the city were either shut down or working at partial capacity, leaving many of the nearly 2,000 injured in the city without medical assistance. In nearby Baybay, lack of assistance fueled anger and incited looting for survival. In the coastal community Guiuan, which took the full brunt of the typhoon, Mayor Christopher Gonzalez is credited with saving countless lives after he incessantly urged residents to evacuate. He referred to the storm as "delubyo (deluge)", which roughly translates to Armageddon. Of the town's 45,000 residents, 87 died, 931 were injured, and 23 others were listed as missing. U.S. Navy Capt. Russell Hays, a medical officer, estimated that a storm of Haiyan's caliber could have killed as many as 4,500 in Guiuan alone had it not been for the mayor's efforts. On November 18, the government of the Philippines launched an online portal, called the Foreign Aid Transparency Hub (FaiTH), that provides the public a transparency view of the funds and other aids received by the government from the international community. To lead the management and rehabilitation efforts of the central provinces in the Philippines affected by Typhoon Haiyan, Philippines President Benigno Aquino III appointed Panfilo Lacson as Typhoon Haiyan Rehabilitation Czar. Typhoon Haiyan knocked over Power Barge 103 of NAPOCOR in Estancia, Iloilo causing an oil spill. As a result of the typhoon, the government is planning to replant mangroves in coastal areas while preserving the remaining ones. Affected residents were allowed to return to their homes by the Department of Health on December 7, 2013, after an air quality test found out that benzene levels in affected areas reached near-zero parts per million. Earlier, residents were asked to evacuate affected areas as the benzene levels had reached unhealthy amounts. Throughout Tacloban, widespread looting took place in the days following Haiyan's passage. In some instances, relief trucks were attacked and had food stolen in the city. Two of the city's malls and numerous grocery stores were subjected to looting. A fuel depot in the city was guarded by armed police while 200 additional officers were dispatched to assist. Security checkpoints had since been set up all over Tacloban and a curfew was imposed on residents to prevent more attacks. Philippine military forces also prevented members of the New People's Army from ambushing a relief convoy bound for Samar in Matnog, Sorsogon, killing two. President Benigno Aquino III considered declaring martial law in hopes of restoring order in affected areas. Looting intensified as slow recovery efforts forced residents to seek any means necessary to survive. Tacloban city administrator Tecson John Lim stated, "The looting is not criminality. It is self-preservation." The Chicago Tribune reported that some areas were on the brink of anarchy, though Interior Secretary Mar Roxas denied such claims. Further complicating efforts to retain order was the lack of officers reporting for work. In Tacloban, only 100 of the city's 1,300 police personnel reported for duty. In Alangalang, just west of Tacloban, eight people were crushed to death after the walls of a warehouse collapsed during a raid on a government rice stockpile. Approximately 33,000 bags of rice, each weighing 50 kg (110 lb), were stolen. Warehouses were also raided in Jaro and Palo. Throughout the city of Tacloban itself, people began looting from homes as stores had been completely emptied. Condemnations of slow government action in the relief effort in response to the typhoon mounted days after the storm had passed. Media reports criticized the Aquino administration for apparent lack of preparation and coordination among government agencies in the aid operation. Up until November 12, five days after the typhoon struck, survivors continued to struggle with basic necessities such as food, water, and shelter while remote towns in Leyte and Samar were yet to be reached by aid. The Philippine government responded by saying that they have dealt with the tragedy "quite well" but the response had been slow due to the breakdown of the local governance in affected areas where officials and employees, who were usually the first to respond in these events, were victims of the typhoon themselves. Cabinet Secretary Jose Rene Almendras said that the national government had to take over despite logistical challenges and assured it is working toward providing aid the quickest way possible to the survivors. The national Government was also criticized for putting the responsibility of handling the dead to the Bureau of Fire instead to the Department of Health. Dr. Racquel Fortun, one of the forensic experts to go to the area three days after the typhoon insisted that handling of the bodies is a health matter and therefore a responsibility of DOH. One of the biggest controversies of Typhoon Haiyan is probably the number of victims or the body count. According to the Philippine government sources, the number of those killed during the typhoon ranges from 4,000 to 6,000 individuals while some sources claim that the body count reaches up to 15,000. In 2018, coinciding the fifth year mark of the disaster, the survivors again protested against the government's slow response on rehabilitation efforts, displaying the caricature of President Rodrigo Duterte, who was the Mayor of Davao City at the time of the disaster. However, in November 2018, the National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) confirmed that the budget is under the 2016 "Yolanda" Recovery & Reconstruction Program that "remained untapped & were not released" until the expiration of the validity of the funds last December 31, 2017, during President Duterte's second year in office. The Philippines faced a humanitarian crisis days after the typhoon hit much of the Visayas with 1.8 million homeless and more than 6,000,000 displaced. In Tacloban alone, ninety percent of the structures are either destroyed or damaged while other cities, such as Ormoc, are reporting similar damage. The United Nations fear that the possibility of the spread of disease is high due to the lack of food, water, shelter, and medication. Casualties have been reported as a result of the lack of aid in affected areas and the number of dead is likely to rise. As a result of the damage in Tacloban and much of Leyte, thousands of people who once lived in the area left and made their way into less affected areas such as Cebu and Manila. Catbalogan reported that their population more than doubled after the typhoon with the influx of refugees into the city. Around 20,000 people have fled to Manila as a result of the storm. Typhoon Haiyan has been acknowledged as a sort of "trauma milestone" for mental health awareness in the Philippines – where Filipinos had previously seen counseling as an admission of weakness, it began to be acknowledged as "a sign of how extraordinary the circumstances are." The United Nations said it was going to increase critical relief operations as a result of the devastation caused by the typhoon. Its Manila office issued a statement that read, "Access remains a key challenge as some areas are still cut off from relief operations. Unknown numbers of survivors do not have basic necessities such as food, water, and medicines and remain inaccessible for relief operations, as roads, airports, and bridges were destroyed or covered in wreckage." The United Nations also began relief operations by this time; however, the severe damage to infrastructure hampered efforts to distribute supplies. The UN activated the Cluster System, in which groups of humanitarian organizations (UN and non-UN) work to restore health, shelter, nutrition and economic activity. The World Health Organization, which leads the Health Cluster, the largest one, has developed guidance on donations of medicine and healthcare equipment so that the Philippines receives supplies appropriate for this emergency. According to WHO, many people suffered cuts, wounds, and broken bones during the disaster and others were injured in flooding that followed the typhoon. Interpol announced that they would send in Interpol officers from Lyon to help local law enforcement identify any of the corpses that are unidentified. The World Health Organization has spearheaded initiatives among help workers, especially from the Department of Health (Philippines), in extending Psychological First Aid to people in typhoon-affected areas. WHO Representative in the country Dr Julie Hall foresees long-lasting effects from the typhoon. She calls for increased preparedness to give support to families and communities for the long-term, citing the need for more trained field workers. American band Journey donated $350,000 to help relief efforts in the Philippines, and its lead singer had a message for his homeland: "Don't Stop Believin'". Arnel Pineda (the band's Filipino vocalist) and the rest of the band announced the donation on November 15, 2013. It will go to the United Nations World Food Programme, which is providing Filipinos with food assistance. The donation should provide 1.4 million meals. IKEA, Walmart, Samsung, and HSBC are among those taking advantage of the event to donate to those in need. Northwestern Mutual announced they will donate $100,000 to the American Red Cross. The Coca-Cola Company says they have donated $2.5 million of their advertising budget to the relief efforts as of November 25. By mid-December, FIFA donated $1 million. DHL deployed its Asia Pacific Disaster Response Team to the disaster areas to provide on-the-ground logistics support to assist with the relief effort in the aftermath of the devastating Typhoon Haiyan. Three rotating teams made up of volunteer employees from the Asia Pacific region were based at the Mactan Cebu Airport on Cebu island, providing support and assistance to the country's most affected areas west of Leyte Island, including Guiuan, Roxas, and Tacloban city. Many smaller initiatives were founded as well – e.g. to prepare by donating to children a typhoon-ready backpack as a floating device. Medical Doctors in global health like Edmond Fernandes who worked in service of the people of Philippines recalled that broken hearts and shattered dreams existed everywhere with widespread devastation. Sixteen-time NBA Champions Los Angeles Lakers donated $150,000 to the Philippine Red Cross to aid the typhoon-affected victims. During their home game against the Memphis Grizzlies, Kobe Bryant handed the check to the Junior NBA players representing the Philippines. His teammate, Pau Gasol, pledged to donate $1,000 per point to UNICEF with the directive to help victims of Super Typhoon Haiyan in the country as well. He scored 24 points in a won game against the Golden State Warriors. Major League Baseball donated $200,000 to UNICEF and the American Red Cross, with Commissioner Bud Selig encouraging fans to donate to the organizations. UNICEF delivered portable toilets and hygiene supplies to the region and also appealed for $34 million to help the four million children affected. The American Red Cross announced that they collected $11 million in donations for the Philippines Relief Fund. Mercy Corps dispatched an "emergency response" team to help with humanitarian efforts. MAP International launched medical relief efforts providing over $10 million in medicines and supplies to the Philippines. Among the NGO responses, among the most comprehensive disaster response came from the Taiwan-based "Buddhist Tzu Chi Foundation". Archived from the original on November 29, 2014., which organized a large-scale cash-for-work program in Tacloban from Nov 20 to Dec 8 with up to 31,000 participants per day, totaling nearly 300,000-day shifts. This operation not only helped clean out the thousands of tons of debris covering the city, but also kick-started the local economy. Tzu Chi also contributed emergency cash aid of 8000, 12000 or 15000 pesos depending on family size for over 60,000 families in the affected areas of Tacloban, Ormoc, Palo, Tanauan and Tunga, and has been providing free clinics, hot meals, and temporary classrooms for over 15 schools in the area. Doctors Without Borders is sending 200 tons of aid. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness's Food For Life Global, the world's largest vegan food relief organisation, raised money and provided vegan meals in the Philippines to Typhoon Haiyan survivors. Other NGOs run by faith-based organisations that raised money and/or aided in the disaster relief efforts of Typhoon Haiyan included Catholic Relief Services, Catholic Medical Mission Board (CMMB), Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA), LDS Philanthropies, American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJJDC), Samaritan's Purse, Salvation Army, Christian Children's Fund of Canada, MAP International and World Vision. International Responders for Emergencies and Disasters endured the storm and despite losing equipment and personnel, they contributed to over $100,000 in aid and supplied rescuer workers for 3 months. The Iglesia ni Cristo (INC), the largest indigenous Christian church based in the Philippines held series of massive relief distributions and medical and dental missions to affected population of the storm to different parts of Visayas. The humanitarian mission was done under the "Lingap sa Mamamayan" (Aid for Humanity) project in cooperation with the Felix Y. Manalo (FYM) Foundation Inc., the INC's charitable arm. The church conducted the largest walk for a cause in the world (walkathon) on February 15, 2014, dubbed as 'Iglesia ni Cristo World Wide Walk for Those Affected by Typhoon Yolanda/Haiyan'. The walk for a cause raised millions of money to help the victims of the super typhoon for the construction of their houses and shelters. The aim of the activity is to make the world understand that Haiyan survivors are still in dire need of help and financial assistance. Indeed, the worldwide walk caught the attention of the world when it broke two Guinness world records as the largest charity walk in a single venue (Manila, Philippines) with 175,000 participants, and largest charity walk in 24 hours for multiple venues (from Christchurch, New Zealand to Hawaii, USA) in 13 time zones, 54 countries, 24 hours with 519, 521 participants. Celebrities such as David and Victoria Beckham, Stephen Colbert, Kim Kardashian,[citation needed] David Guetta, and The X Factor contributed to the fundraising. On November 26, iTunes released a compilation album entitled Songs for the Philippines featuring different artists, including Katy Perry, Madonna, Bob Dylan, and The Beatles. All proceeds will go to the Philippine Red Cross. OneRepublic donated $100,000 on November 30, 2013. Other celebrities that offered their support included Linkin Park, The Offspring, Alicia Keys, and Justin Bieber. To promote 20th Century Fox's upcoming film The Secret Life of Walter Mitty, the studio hired YouTube personality & filmmaker Casey Neistat to make a promotional video based on the theme, "live your dreams", but Neistat suggested instead to spend the budget on bringing disaster relief to the Philippines. Fox agreed and gave him a budget of $25,000 to fund his relief plans, and personally visited Tacloban to aid donation efforts there. On the day of his death, actor Paul Walker attended a charity event for his organization, Reach Out Worldwide, for the victims of the typhoon that was held right before his accident. On March 11, 2014, a benefit concert called The Pinoy Relief Benefit Concert was held at Madison Square Garden in New York, City. Jennifer Hudson, Pentatonix, A Great Big World, Plain White T's, Jessica Sanchez, Charice, and REO Brothers performed. Special guests also included Dr. Oz, Dante Basco, Bobby Lopez, Kristen Anderson-Lopez and Apl.de.ap. 100% of proceeds raised directly went to the Typhoon Haiyan survivors. Pinoy Relief was created to help survivors and focus on three specific areas: restoring livelihoods, building classrooms and providing shelter in partnership with local NGOs, Habitat for Humanity Philippines and Operation Blessing Philippines. On March 13, 2016, former United States of America vice president Al Gore, visited Tacloban and delivered his speech in front of the survivors of Haiyan. He also visited the MV Eva Jocelyn, a cargo ship forced inland during the typhoon and now converted into a memorial park. Media reports initially noted the disparate aid responses by the United States and China against the backdrop of rising tensions between the Philippines and China over the two countries's competing territorial claims in the South China Sea. Fox News initially criticized China for its contribution of US$100,000 cash each from the government and the Chinese Red Cross to the typhoon victims, which led to commentary about its disputes with the Philippines. Earlier in 2013, the Philippines sued China over the nine-dash line. Western commentators attributed this low amount to China's intentions to isolate the Philippines while strengthening its ties with the rest of Southeast Asia. The move elicited mixed reactions from the Chinese public and government with some commending its decision while others, such as Global Times, a tabloid newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party, insisted that China should behave like a responsible power. China later increased its contributions by US$1.64 million and sent its naval hospital ship Peace Ark for disaster relief." The United States gave the Philippines aid worth US$51.9 million and deployed the United States Marines, United States Navy and United States Air Force to assist with the humanitarian operations. The Philippine government had been discussing with the U.S. plans regarding the deployment of U.S. military troops within the country. An article in the journal Social Medicine said this was part of the "Asia pivot" that the United States government had previously announced, a foreign policy strategy it viewed as a plan to contain China, encircle it militarily, and prevent it from competing with American political influence in the region. In November 2013, the island of the Philippines was struck by one of the strongest tropical cyclones recorded in history, the Haiyan. More than 6000 people died and it devastated towns as homes, schools, and hospitals were in ruins. Many vital infrastructures were destroyed by this cyclone, including the water and power systems. As each water pump costs US$4000 and a generator and piping system costs almost US$20,000, the local government of the Philippines is struggling to pay for recovery. Two years after this event, to help locals have access to clean water, an initiative called the Tolosa Water Systems was started by the MBA students from the National University of Singapore. This project is in works with a non-profit organization SIBAT and supported by a $44,000 grant awarded by Total S.A., an energy company. This project will promote the use of technology to address energy and water access issues. It will create a complete water distribution system that runs pipes to each household. It is sustainable and effective for areas like Tolosa, where infrastructure is still in ruins because this system runs and relies on two natural resources: sun and sand to provide clean water. This water system will install seven biosand filtration and five solar-powered water pumps that will remove pathogens, solids and unwanted color, odor, and taste from the local drinking water. The solar-powered water pumps were designed to take advantage of Tolosa's daily 11 hours of sunlight. The new system will produce 5000 to 10,000 gallons of water daily and the cost of each system costs approximately US$15,000 to US$20,000. Though it is at an expense, importantly, this biosand and solar system do not substantially recur costs. Having access to clean water is a fundamental right, and a crucial factor for developing countries to develop and succeed. The students behind this project plan to spread their work in other parts of the Philippines. Following Typhoon Haiyan's landfall in Vietnam, widespread search and rescue missions took place in the affected provinces. Damage assessments were also conducted in 13 provinces to determine what aid was needed. The IFRC began distribution of relief supplies and assisted residents in returning home by November 12. Operations regarding the aftermath of Typhoon Wutip were temporarily suspended due to Haiyan. Political leaders and climate scientists connected the typhoon to climate change, both at the time and subsequently and led to calls for climate justice. The 2013 United Nations Climate Change Conference was coincidentally in progress when the typhoon struck and Yeb Saño, the lead negotiator of the Philippines delegation, received a standing ovation at the conference when he declared a hunger strike. In solidarity with my countrymen who are struggling to find food back home, I will now commence a voluntary fasting for the climate; this means I will voluntarily refrain from eating food during this COP, until a meaningful outcome is in sight. — Yeb Saño Several delegates, including American delegate Collin Reese, joined him in fasting. Sixty people from Climate Action Network, an umbrella group of environmental non-governmental organisations, also joined the hunger strike. The correlation between the increasing intensity of storms and the progression of climate change was discussed by climate scientists. "Typhoons, hurricanes and all tropical storms draw their vast energy from the warmth of the sea. We know sea-surface temperatures are warming pretty much around the planet, so that's a pretty direct influence of climate change on the nature of the storm", said Will Steffen, director of the Australian National University climate change institute. Myles Allen, head of the climate dynamics group at the University of Oxford, said that "The current consensus is that climate change is not making the risk of hurricanes any greater, but there are physical arguments and evidence that there is a risk of more intense hurricanes." The Huffington Post made the point that the 70% deforestation of the Philippines since 1900, as reported by the national Forest Management Bureau, made far more lethal flooding from cyclones like Haiyan more likely. The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report had stated in September of the same year that "Time series of cyclone indices such as power dissipation, an aggregate compound of tropical cyclone frequency, duration, and intensity that measures total wind energy by tropical cyclones, show upward trends in the North Atlantic and weaker upward trends in the western North Pacific since the late 1970s." A detailed analysis of Typhoon Haiyan and its destruction in the Philippines was featured in a documentary called Megastorm: World's Biggest Typhoon. It aired on December 30, 2013, on Discovery Channel. The 2014 documentary Six Hours: Surviving Typhoon Yolanda, produced by Big Monster Entertainment and distributed by GRB Entertainment, also features the eyewitness account of the typhoon by GMA News reporter (now Agripreneur host) Jiggy Manicad. The documentary also give permission to Marnie Manicad Productions Inc. An episode of the PBS science documentary television program Nova titled "Killer Typhoon", aired on January 22, 2014, features the typhoon. The 2015 drama film Taklob, directed by Brillante Mendoza features the survivors in the aftermath of the typhoon. In 2021, a drama related to Typhoon Haiyan titled Kun Maupay Man It Panahon lit. “Whether the weather is fine” which is directed by Carlo Francisco Manatad which aired on August 9, 2021 In 2014, Hong Kong RTHK TV program <<Meterorology Series IV>> Epsoide 1 <<Typhoon is coming>> is broadcast Typhoon Haiyan in Tacloban City. Portals:  Tropical cyclones  Philippines 2013 Bohol earthquake – rocked Leyte's neighboring islands of Bohol and Cebu less than a month before Haiyan struck Typhoons in the Philippines 1881 Haiphong typhoon Typhoon Axel (Garding; 1994) – last typhoon to make landfall over Leyte prior to Haiyan Tropical Storm Thelma (Uring; 1991) – second deadliest Philippine tropical cyclone Typhoon Son-Tinh (Ofel; 2012) – Struck the same area during the previous year, and had a track similar to Haiyan's Typhoon Rammasun (Glenda: 2014) – First major typhoon to hit the Philippines since Haiyan 8 months prior. Typhoon Mangkhut (Ompong; 2018) – Made landfall in northern Luzon as a Category 5-equivalent super typhoon Typhoon Phanfone (Ursula; 2019) - Traversed almost the same areas as Haiyan but also had a similar track Typhoon Goni (Rolly; 2020) – the strongest landfalling storm on record, making landfall in Bato, Catanduanes with maximum sustained winds of 195 mph, same strength as Typhoon Haiyan. Typhoon Rai (Odette; 2021) – severely affected the same areas as Haiyan 8 years after. Typhoon Noru (Karding; 2022) - a powerful typhoon that rapidly intensified into category 5-equivalent typhoon shortly before making landfall Other most intense tropical cyclones List of tropical cyclone records Typhoon Nancy (1961) – strongest tropical cyclone based on reported 1-minute maximum sustained winds Typhoon Nora (Luming; 1973) – once the strongest tropical cyclone ever recorded Typhoon Rita (Kading; 1978) – similarly powerful late-season typhoon which also devastated the Philippines Typhoon Tip (Warling, 1979) – strongest tropical cyclone based on pressure in recorded history Hurricane Allen (1980) – strongest Atlantic hurricane based on sustained wind speeds Hurricane Gilbert (1988) - second most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded in terms of barometric pressure Typhoon Gay (Seniang; 1992) – unofficially the second most intense tropical cyclone recorded, tied with Patricia Hurricane Wilma (2005) – the most intense tropical cyclone in the Atlantic Ocean Hurricane Patricia (2015) – the strongest tropical cyclone based on reliably measured 1-minute maximum sustained winds and second most intense tropical cyclone on record Cyclone Winston (2016) – strongest tropical cyclone in the Southern Hemisphere; also the most intense tropical cyclone ever recorded at landfall Typhoon Meranti (Ferdie; 2016) – another intense typhoon which made landfall in Itbayat nearly 3 years after Haiyan The Joint Typhoon Warning Center is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force that issues tropical cyclone warnings for the western Pacific Ocean and other regions. The Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) is the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the western Pacific Ocean. A super typhoon is defined as a tropical cyclone with one-minute sustained winds of at least 240 km/h (150 mph). The death and missing columns includes deaths caused by Typhoon Fengshen (Frank), in the MV Princess of the Stars disaster. Why Typhoon Haiyan Caused So Much Damage (Report). NPR. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on May 22, 2014. Retrieved April 21, 2014. Typhoon Haiyan death toll rises over 5,000 (Report). BBC. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 22, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "FINAL REPORT re EFFECTS of Typhoon "YOLANDA" (HAIYAN)" (PDF). NDRRMC. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 5, 2020. Retrieved November 5, 2020. Gabieta, Joey (January 9, 2014). "More bodies turning up in Tacloban". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Asia News Network. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved January 21, 2014.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Tropical Cyclones in 2013". December 18, 2015. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved December 18, 2015. Mersereau, Dennis. "At 200 MPH, Hurricane Patricia Is Now the Strongest Tropical Cyclone Ever Recorded". The Vane. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2016. "Tacloban: City at the centre of the storm". BBC. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Joint Typhoon Warning Center Mission Statement (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. 2011. Archived from the original on July 26, 2007. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Significant Tropical Weather Advisory for the Western and South Pacific Oceans (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center. November 2, 2013. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Typhoon Haiyan (RSMC Tropical Cyclone Best Track). Japan Meteorological Agency. December 18, 2013. Archived from the original on December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 21, 2013. Annual Report on Activities of the RSMC Tokyo – Typhoon Center 2000 (PDF) (Report). Japan Meteorological Agency. February 2001. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Tropical Storm 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 04 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 4, 2013. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Tropical Cyclone Warning: Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) Severe Weather Bulletin Number One (Report). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. November 6, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Padgett, Gary; Boyle, Kevin & Clarke, Simon (February 21, 2007). Monthly Global Tropical Cyclone Summary – October 2006 (Report) (Report). Typhoon 2000. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Super Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Nr 14 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 6, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. "Palau assesses damage after Super Typhoon Haiyan". ABC News. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Super Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Nr 19 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Tropical Cyclone Warning: Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) Severe Weather Bulletin Number Six (Report). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Masters, Jeff. "Winston's 180 mph Winds in Fiji: Southern Hemisphere's Strongest Storm on Record". Weather Underground. Archived from the original on February 6, 2018. Retrieved February 5, 2018. Masters, Jeff (November 7, 2013). "Super Typhoon Haiyan: Strongest Landfalling Tropical Cyclone on Record". Weather Underground. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Super Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 20 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "PAGASA: Typhoon Yolanda exits PAR". GMA News. November 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 23 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 25 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 28 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Prognostic Reasoning for Typhoon 31W (Haiyan) Warning Nr 31 (Report). Joint Typhoon Warning Center, United States Navy. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Williams, Derek L. (November 3, 2013). Tropical Depression 31W Advisory Number 1. National Weather Service Office in Tiyan, Guam (Report). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Ziobro, Michael P. (November 4, 2013). Tropical Storm Haiyan (31W) Advisory Number 4. National Weather Service Office in Tiyan, Guam (Report). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Carl Alan Mcelroy (November 5, 2013). Tropical Storm Haiyan (31W) Advisory Number 6. National Weather Service Office in Tiyan, Guam (Report). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Kleeschulte, Kenneth R. & Guard, Charles P. (November 5, 2013). Typhoon Haiyan (31W) Advisory Number 8. National Weather Service Office in Tiyan, Guam (Report). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Chan, Patrick K. (November 5, 2013). Typhoon Haiyan (31W) Advisory Number 9. National Weather Service Office in Tiyan, Guam (Report). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013. Retrieved November 6, 2013. Palau: Typhoon Haiyan – initial damage reports as at 7 November 2013 (PDF) (Report). ReliefWeb. November 7, 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. {{cite report}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Palau assesses damage after Super Typhoon Haiyan". ABC News. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. NDRRMC Advisory: Severe Weather Bulletin No. 01 re Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Report). National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. November 6, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. NDRRMC Advisory: Severe Weather Bulletin No. 02 re Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Report). National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. NDRRMC Advisory: Severe Weather Bulletin No. 04 re Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Report). National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. NDRRMC Advisory: Severe Weather Bulletin No. 04-A (Intermediate) re Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Report). National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. NDRRMC Advisory: Severe Weather Bulletin No. 5 re Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF). Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration (Report). National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Ellalyn B. De Vera & Recuenco, Aaron B. (November 6, 2013). "Super Typhoon 'Yolanda' may hit Visayas Friday". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Jimenez, FR (November 7, 2013). "PNoy, nagbabala sa seryosong peligrong dala ng 'super typhoon' na si 'Yolanda'". GMA News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Joey Gabieta; Jani Arnaiz; Nestor Burgos; Doris Bongcac; Carla Gomez; Carmel Loise Matus; Jhunnex Napallacan (November 7, 2013). "Evacuation centers, rescue plans set in Visayas for supertyphoon Yolanda". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Kristine Angeli Sabillo (November 7, 2013). "Aquino: PH ready to face supertyphoon 'Yolanda'". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. ANC (November 7, 2013). "'Yolanda' accelerates, signal number 4 up over parts of E. Visayas". ANC. Yahoo! News Philippines. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Disaster Charter – Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines (Report). International Charter on Space and Major Disasters. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "China issues higher Typhoon alert as Haiyan nears". People's Daily. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Hong Kong Observatory [@ObservatoryHK] (November 9, 2013). "7:10PM: Strong Monsoon Signal issued" (Tweet). Retrieved November 14, 2013 – via Twitter. "Today's Weather Warnings and Signals Record (14/Nov/2013)". Hong Kong Observatory. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: UN Praises Viet Nam for High State of Preparedness". UN Country Team in Vietnam. ReliefWeb. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2013. "Viet Nam: Typhoon Haiyan Information Bulletin n° 3" (PDF). International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. ReliefWeb. November 12, 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Hundreds feared dead in Philippines". BBC News. November 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Tropical Storm Haiyan makes landfall in Vietnam". BBC News. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. China Meteorological Administration (November 22, 2013). Member Report: China (PDF). ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee: 8th Integrated Workshop/2nd TRCG Forum. ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee. p. 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan initial damage reports (6 November 2013) - Micronesia (Federated States of)". ReliefWeb. November 6, 2013. OCHA Flash Update No. 3 FSM & Palau | Tropical Storm Haiyan (31W) (Report). ReliefWeb. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. {{cite report}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Del Rosario, Eduardo D (August 9, 2011). Final Report on Typhoon "Yolanda" (Haiyan) (PDF) (Report). Philippine National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council. pp. 77–148. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 5, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2022. Alojado, Dominic (2015). Worst typhoons of the Philippines (1947-2014) (PDF) (Report). Weather Philippines. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "10 Worst Typhoons that Went Down in Philippine History". M2Comms. August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Lotilla, Raphael (November 20, 2013). "Flashback: 1897, Leyte and a strong typhoon". Rappler. Retrieved July 10, 2014. "Deadliest typhoons in the Philippines". ABS-CBNNews. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Padua, David M (June 10, 2011). "Tropical Cyclone Logs: Fengshen (Frank)". Typhoon 2000. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2011. Rabonza, Glenn J. (July 31, 2008). Situation Report No. 33 on the Effects of Typhoon "Frank"(Fengshen) (PDF) (Report). National Disaster Coordinating Council (National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Center). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2011. 2011 Top 10 Philippine Destructive Tropical Cyclones. Government of the Philippines (Report). January 6, 2012. ReliefWeb. Retrieved July 24, 2023. "Super Typhoon Haiyan: Strongest Landfalling Tropical Cyclone on Record". Wunderground. November 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Desperate Philippine survivors turn to looting". Chicago Tribune. Reuters. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Leister, Eric (November 9, 2013). "Official: Super Typhoon Death Toll Could Reach 1,200". AccuWeather. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "Super Typhoon Haiyan smashes in to Philippines". The Daily Telegraph. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. "Super Typhoon Haiyan, one of the strongest storms ever seen, hit the Philippines with record force". Quartz. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. ""Massive destruction" as Typhoon Haiyan kills at least 1,200 in Philippines, says Red Cross". Thomson Reuters Foundation. Reuters. November 9, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Hundreds feared dead in Philippines". BBC News. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "Storm Surges by Typhoon Yolanda". Project NOAH. Department of Science and Technology. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. "TYPHOON HAIYAN LEAVES EASTERN SAMAR SURF COMMUNITY IN SHAMBLES". surfline.com. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Coren, Anna; Botelho, Greg (November 12, 2013). "'Everything is gone' in Guiuan, tropical paradise forever transformed by typhoon". CNN. Archived from the original on February 5, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Some towns in Eastern Samar remain isolated". GMA News. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Aben, Elena L.; Recuenco, Aaron B. (November 10, 2013). "1,200 dead or missing". Manila Bulletin. Manila, Philippines. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "'Yolanda' flattens Guiuan, Samar". GMA News. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Corp., ABS-CBN. "A Priest, a Motorcycle and Yolanda – Choose Philippines. Find. Discover. Share". www.choosephilippines.com. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Mullen, Jethro (November 8, 2013). "Super Typhoon Haiyan, one of strongest storms ever, hits central Philippines". CNN. Archived from the original on January 30, 2014. Retrieved November 8, 2013. Hodal, Kate (November 11, 2013). "Typhoon Haiyan: desperate survivors and destruction in flattened city". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Mullen, Jethro (November 14, 2013). "Desperation, resilience in Tacloban: 'We really don't know what we're going to do'". CNN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines battles to bring storm aid". BBC News. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. del Rosario, Eduardo D. (April 2014). FINAL REPORT Effects of Typhoon YOLANDA (HAIYAN) (PDF) (Report). NDRRMC. Retrieved March 14, 2015. SitRep No. 44 for Typhoon ODETTE (2021) (PDF) (Report). NDRRMC. February 7, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Uy, Leo Jaymar G.; Pilar, Lourdes O. (February 8, 2018). "Natural disaster damage at P374B in 2006-2015". Business World. Retrieved February 8, 2018 – via PressReader. Ramos, Benito T. (September 16, 2014). FINAL REPORT re Effects of Typhoon (PDF) (Report). NDRRMC. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Jalad, Ricardo B. (October 5, 2018). Situational Report No.55 re Preparedness Measures for TY OMPONG (I.N. MANGKHUT) (PDF) (Technical report). NDRRMC. Retrieved October 7, 2018. Rabonza, Glenn J. (October 20, 2009). FINAL Report on Tropical Storm \"ONDOY\" {KETSANA} and Typhoon \"PEPENG\ (PDF) (Report). NDRRMC. Retrieved October 23, 2010. Jalad, Ricardo B. (January 13, 2021). SitRep no. 29 re Preparedness Measures and Effects for TY ULYSSES (PDF). ndrrmc.gov.ph (Report). Retrieved January 15, 2021. Jalad, Ricardo B. (November 10, 2020). "SitRep No.11 re Preparedness Measures for Super Typhoon Rolly" (PDF). NDRRMC. Retrieved November 10, 2020. Jalad, Ricardo B. (July 29, 2023). "SitRep No.11 re Preparedness Measures for Severe Tropical Storm Paeng". NDRRMC. Tran, Mark (November 8, 2013). "Philippines rescue services brace for devastation of typhoon Haiyan". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Mangosing, Frances (November 8, 2013). "Manila loses contact with Roxas, Gazmin in Leyte". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Staffs (November 8, 2013). "Super typhoon Haiyan shuts airports, flights cancelled across Philippines". News Corp Australia. Archived from the original on November 8, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "Super Typhoon Shoved Car-Size Boulders Onto Philippine Beaches". LiveScience. 2014. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. "8-meter waves kill 8 in Taiwan". Xinhua News Agency. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. 劉育辰; 王揚傑 (May 7, 2014). 浪噬樹林社大8學員 凶手是……海燕颱風 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). China Times. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018. 蔡文居; 王涵平 (November 12, 2013). 〈南部〉海燕浪襲蚵棚 台南一夕損失近5億 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Liberty Times. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2013. Luk, Eddie (November 11, 2013). "Horror as teenager lost at sea". The Standard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan Leaves 7 Dead in South China". China Radio International. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan affects over 1,200 Hainan villages". Xinhua News Agency. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Haiyan leaves 2 dead in China's Guangxi". Xinhua News Agency. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Haiyan Storm Kills 8 in China, Devastates Farming". ABC News. Associated Press. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "China reports deaths amid Typhoon Haiyan". Xinhua News Agency. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan brings gales, rainstorms to S China". Xinhua News Agency. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. Vietnamese National Center for Hydro Meteorological Forecasts (December 11, 2013). Member Report: Vietnam (PDF). ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee: 8th Integrated Workshop/2nd TRCG Forum. ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2013. "18 người chết và mất tích, 81 người bị thương do bão số 14" (in Vietnamese). Tuổi Trẻ. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "2013 VIETNAM REPORT" (PDF). "History's worst flood finally revealed". www.chinadaily.com.cn. Courtney, Chris (February 15, 2018). The Nature of Disaster in China: The 1931 Yangzi River Flood. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108284936. "Flood Horror". Geraldton Guardian and Express. September 1931. "The Worst Natural Disasters by Death Toll" (PDF). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Pedro Ribera, Ricardo Garcia-Herrera and Luis Gimeno (July 2008). "Historical Deadly Typhoons in the Philippines". Weather. 63 (7). Royal Meteorological Society: 196. doi:10.1002/wea.275. Huang, G; Yim, Wyxx W-S. "Reconstruction of an 8,000-year record of Typhoons in the Pearl River Estuary, China" (PDF). HKU Scholars Hub. Associated Press (November 16, 1964). "Another Typhoon Descends on Flood Stricken Vietnam". The Milwaukee Journal. p. 2. Retrieved March 11, 2010. SitRep No.108 re Effects of Typhoon YOLANDA (HAIYAN) (PDF) (Report). National Reduction Risk Reduction And Management Council. April 3, 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2014. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Villanueva, Marichu A. (November 13, 2013). "Full alphabet used but more to come". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "'Yolanda' joins 'Labuyo,' 'Santi' in retired list". Manila Bulletin. November 20, 2013. Archived from the original on November 23, 2013. Retrieved November 23, 2013. "Proclamation No. 682, s. 2013". Official Gazette. November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "CBCP declares 8 days of mourning for 'Yolanda' victims". ABS-CBN News. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Saaduddin, Jii. "Helping Filipinos One Can At A Time". Davao Sikat Blog. p. Typhoon Yolanda "Haiyan". "Philippines typhoon: UK doctors speak from storm-hit country". November 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 30, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2013. Michael Pearson. Nick Paton Walsh and Anna Coren (November 13, 2013). "Typhoon Haiyan: Grief and hunger dominate amid survival struggle". CNN. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. de Leon, Sunshine & Demick, Barbara (November 12, 2013). "Desperation grows among Philippine survivors of Typhoon Haiyan". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Hodal, Kate (November 14, 2013). "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines aid effort hampered by lawlessness". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Mullany, Gerry (November 14, 2013). "Overshadowed by Tacloban, Other Devastated Philippine Cities Fear Aid Will Not Come". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Baylis, Paul & Te-Ping Chen (November 14, 2013). "How One Philippine Town Avoided Calamity". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Larano, Cris (November 19, 2013). "Have Faith in Aid Donations, Say Philippine Officials". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 20, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. Zinnia Dela Peña (November 18, 2013). "'FAiTH' for foreign aid". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. Larano, Cris (December 2, 2013). "Philippines' Aquino Appoints Past Senator to Helm Typhoon Rehab". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Villa, Hazel P. (November 27, 2013). "DOH: Air pollution in Iloilo oil spill site at critical level". Rappler. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved December 9, 2013. "Napocor president assures Iloilo oil spill cleanup to abide by DOH recommendations". Philippines News Agency. Interaksyon. November 27, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Carcamo, Dennis (November 29, 2013). "Group urges Iloilo fishermen to sue Napocor for oil leak". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on December 14, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2013. "Benzene from Iloilo oil spill reaches alarming level". ABS-CBN News. November 28, 2013. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines to plant more mangroves". The Straits Times. November 24, 2013. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. K. Villanoy (December 20, 2013). "Mga residente ng Iloilo na apektado ng oil spill, pinauwi na sa kanilang mga tahanan" (in Filipino). DWIZ. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan slams into northern Vietnam". CBS News. Associated Press. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. "Curfew, armored vehicles in Tacloban". Rappler. Agence France-Presse. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Laude, Jaime (November 12, 2013). "Military foils NPA attempt to ambush relief convoy to Samar". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Philippine Red Cross says typhoon relief efforts being hampered by looters". Fox News. Associated Press. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Harlan, Chico (November 11, 2013). "Philippines reeling after historic typhoon". The Washington Post. pp. A1, A20. "Manila media cite inept typhoon aid effort". The Standard. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Aquino under pressure over typhoon aid, U.S. carrier to arrive". Reuters. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Govt slow response hit". Manila Standard Today. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines defends aid response". BBC. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Palace aware of slow relief: 'We're moving'". Rappler. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Lessons from Yolanda: 4 ways to improve the retrieval and identification of bodies in disasters". Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "Gov't stops 'Yolanda' body count at 4,011". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "Typhoon Haiyan death toll tops 6,000 in the Philippines". December 13, 2013. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "Yolanda death toll as high as 15,000, priest says". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "The World Tonight: Tacloban still reeling 5 years after 'Yolanda'" (Note: Pause at 0:56 for Duterte's caricature). ABS-CBN News – via YouTube. Retrieved November 9, 2018. "NEDA confirms P729.6-M returned 'Yolanda' funds | Philippine News Agency". Philippine News Agency. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019. "Estimate Of Number Left Homeless By Typhoon Soars". NPR. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Tacloban survivors wait for aid". BBC News. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Philippines typhoon: Aid effort gathers pace". BBC News. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Exodus from hell: Residents flee typhoon-ravaged Tacloban". USA Today. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines reflects on traumatic week". Financial Times. November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Over 18,000 Haiyan survivors flock to Manila". Rappler. December 1, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Buenafe, Cyrus Paolo; Tuazon, Anna Cristina (May 4, 2020). De Leon, R. E. (ed.). "Staying Productive Despite More Limitations". UA&P Center for Research and Communication. IST Presents. Ortigas, Pasig. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved May 5, 2020. "Australia boosts Philippines aid to US$28 mil". The Sun. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Australian emergency medical team heads for Philippines". ABC News. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Relief ship HMAS Tobruk leaves Townsville bound for the Philippines". News Corp Australia. November 18, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013. "More foreign aid pour in for 'Yolanda' victims". Philippine Daily Inquirer. November 19, 2013. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Press Release details". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Steun aan de Filippijnse bevolking" (in Dutch). Office of the Prime Minister of Belgium. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Brunei sends emergency team to Philippines". The Brunei Times. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. Mackrael, Kim (November 10, 2013). "Ottawa will match Canadians' donations to Typhoon Haiyan relief efforts, minister says". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "Ottawa sending DART to Philippines after deadly storm". CTV News. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Canada sending 3 military choppers to assist in Philippines relief effort". CTV News. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Shephard, Tamara (November 15, 2013). "GlobalMedic responds to Philippine typhoon Haiyan". Etobicoke Guardian. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Connor, Kevin (November 17, 2013). "Toronto medic, firefighter to help typhoon-devastated Philippines". Sun News Network. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Blanchfield, Mike (November 13, 2013). "Harper says Canada's DART mission heading to Iloilo, Philippines". CTV News. The Canadian Press. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. "Philippines Typhoon Victims Await Assistance As Latin America And U.S. Send Aid". Fox News Latino. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "China Increases Aid to Philippines". The New York Times. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "China's Peace Ark departs for typhoon-hit Philippines". Xinhua News Agency. November 21, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. "Danish support to the Filipino victims of Typhoon Haiyan". November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Denmark increases its support to the victims of the Typhoon Haiyan". November 12, 2013. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. "Finland sends aid to Philippines". Yle. November 11, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2020. "Philippines: la logistique, un défi pour l'aide humanitaire française". L'Express (in French). November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "Australia pledges $10m in aid for the Philippines in wake of Typhoon Haiyan". ABC News. Agence France-Presse. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "Vatican gives $150,000 in emergency aid to PH". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Agence France-Presse. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Transcript of remarks by CE at media session (with video)". Hong Kong Government Information Centre. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "HK$40m boost for disaster relief fund approved, ensuring aid for typhoon". South China Morning Post. November 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. Tsang, Emily (November 22, 2013). "Disaster fund too rigid to offer timely help in Philippines, say charities". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Iceland to Send ISK 12.3 Million to the Philippines". Iceland Review. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Akinyemi, Aron (November 12, 2013). "India Launches Relief Effort for Typhoon Haiyan Victims". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Primanita, Arientha (November 13, 2013). "Indonesia Sends $2m Typhoon Haiyan Aid to Philippines". Jakarta Globe. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "Indonesia to Send Typhoon Aid to Philippines". Jakarta Globe. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Pelepasan Misi Kemanusiaan PMI Untuk Filipina" (in Indonesian). Indonesian Red Cross. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: UN launches $301m Philippines aid appeal Aid at a glance". BBC. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 22, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Hutton, Brian (November 13, 2013). "Irish aid arriving in Philippines". Irish Independent. Press Association. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Munguia, Hayley (November 11, 2013). "IsraAID sends medical team to Philippines to help after monster storm". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Philippines typhoon Haiyan – a million euro in aid from Italy". Ako ay Pilipino. November 1, 2013. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2013. "Japan triples Philippines aid package to over $30 million". GMA News. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Typhoon Damage in the Philippines (Dispatch of Assessment Team)". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Japan sends first major deployment of relief troops". The Straits Times. November 18, 2013. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2013. Belford, Aubrey (November 16, 2013). "Aid flows to typhoon survivors as Philippines struggles to rebuild". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2013. "Japan MSDF relief ship arrives near typhoon-hit island in Philippines". GlobalPost. Kyodo News. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "Kuwait to send $10 mn in urgent aid". Gulf Times. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. Hani Shamira Shahrudin (November 13, 2013). "USD 1 million aid from Malaysia to the Philippines". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Malaysia sends RM4.2mil aid to typhoon-ravaged Philippines". The Star. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Malaysian Red Crescent to send team to help Haiyan victims". New Straits Times, AsiaOne. November 23, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Goh, Melissa (November 11, 2013). "Malaysia's Filipino community sends relief aid to those affected by Typhoon Haiyan". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2013. Soo Wern Jun (November 14, 2013). "Mercy teams land in the Philippines". The Sun Daily. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2013. Stevens, Andrew; Mullen, Jethro & Botelho, Greg (November 14, 2013). "Aid, troops head to typhoon-ravaged Philippines, but will it be enough?". CNN. Archived from the original on November 17, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "NZ to donate another $2.9m to Haiyan victims". The New Zealand Herald. November 19, 2013. Archived from the original on November 20, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: NZ Air Force airlifts survivors to safety". The New Zealand Herald. November 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2013. Tandstad, Bent (November 11, 2013). "– Situasjonen på Filippinane er desperat" (in Norwegian). NRK. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Tjørhom, Vegard (November 13, 2013). "Noreg gir nye millionar til tyfonofre" (in Norwegian). NRK. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "The Norwegian Training Center Manila sends vessel to Tacloban with relief goods". Norwegian Embassy in Manila. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Enorm interesse for norsk skip – Nyheter, tv og radio fra hele verden" (in Norwegian). NRK. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "The Norwegian Training Center Manila sends vessel to Tacloban with relief goods". Norwegian Embassy in Manila. November 18, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Artistdugnad for Filippinene – NRK – Kultur og underholdning" (in Norwegian). NRK. November 21, 2013. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Samlet inn 24 millioner kroner med fakkeltog og konsert – VG Nett om Filippinene". VG Nett (in Norwegian). November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "50 nye millioner til Filippinene" (in Norwegian). NRK. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on January 23, 2014. Retrieved January 21, 2014. "Qatar Sends Urgent Aid To The Philippines". Bernama. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. "Saudi Arabia offers $10 million aid for typhoon-hit Philippines". Al Arabiya. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Saudia Cargo delivers aid to distressed Filipinos". Saudi Gazette. November 18, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. Bryant, Christa Case (November 11, 2013). "Why Arab presidents and princes are pledging millions to Philippines in typhoon Haiyan aid (+video)". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "Dollar-for-Dollar Matching for All Donations to Singapore Red Cross Typhoon Haiyan Relief Appeal". Singapore Red Cross. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "SAF sends relief supplies to the Philippines, helps in evacuation". Channel NewsAsia. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on January 26, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "Rescue South Africa Disaster Response Team". Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2020. "Foreign Ministry Attends a Donors' Pledging Session to Help the Philippines Recover from Typhoon Haiyan". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of South Korea. December 18, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "S. Korea to offer 5 mln USD in aid for typhoon-hit Philippines". China Internet Information Center. Xinhua News Agency. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "South Korean soldiers check relief goods for victims of Typhoon Haiyan, loaded on a South Korean Air Force C-130 cargo plane before it leaves for Tacloban airport in central Philippines, at Seoul military airport in Seongnam". Reuters. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "South Korean naval ships carrying relief cargo depart for Philippines". Yonhap news english. Yonhap news. December 21, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "South Korean troops in PHL to help with Yolanda rehabilitation". GMA news. December 27, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2014. "Spain sends P80M aid for typhoon relief". Philippine Daily Inquirer. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Swedish aid on its way to the Philippines". Sveriges Radio. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2020. "Switzerland allocates CHF 6 million to victims of Typhoon Haiyan". Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 22, 2013. Love and Empathy Transcend Boundaries: Relief Aid Extended by Taiwan to the Philippines in Wake of Typhoon Haiyan Archived February 21, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Taiwan, December 2013 "World comes to aid of Haiyan victims". Bangkok Post. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. 中和艦菲律賓人道救援紀實 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Central News Agency. November 29, 2013. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved November 29, 2013. "Govt to help Philippines storm victims". Bangkok Post. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Turkey's Humanitarian Aid Reaches to Philippines – Philippines". ReliefWeb. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2013. Christa Case Bryant (November 11, 2013). "Why Arab presidents and princes are pledging millions to Philippines in typhoon Haiyan aid". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "UK to send ship to help Philippines, David Cameron announces". BBC. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "HMS Daring arrives in Philippines to aid Typhoon Haiyan victims". BBC. November 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 17, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2013. "British carrier HMS Illustrious to aid typhoon victims". BBC. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Klapper, Bradley (November 19, 2013). "Official: 5 Americans killed in Philippines typhoon; US ups humanitarian aid to $37 million". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013. "Super-Typhoon Haiyan (Yolanda)". United States Agency for International Development. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan leaves 1,774 dead, 'hideous' destruction". CNN. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2013. JTF 505 (December 1, 2013). "JTF 505 disestablished". Embassy of the United States, Manila. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) USAID (November 22, 2013). "USAID Typhoon Haiyan Infographic". US Agency for International Development. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2014. Lee, Matthew (December 17, 2013). "USAID Secretary of State John Kerry announces $25M in new aid for typhoon-ravaged Philippines". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved January 24, 2014. "Typhoon Haiyan: Philippines declares state of calamity". BBC News. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. "World responds: Even equally typhoon-weary Vietnam sends aid". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Agence France-Presse. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Yap, Cecilia, Guinto, Joel & Bennett, Simeon (November 10, 2013). "UN Rushes Aid as Typhoon Haiyan Leaves Philippines Counting Dead". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Philippines: Typhoon Haiyan Situation Report No. 22" (PDF). OCHA. December 10, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 25, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "Relief arriving in the Philippines, challenges for delivery persist". World Health Organization. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "Interpol sends expertise team for typhoon-stricken Philippines". Azeri-Press Agency. November 20, 2013. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2013. "WHO recommendations for mental health support in emergencies shared with DoH". December 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 18, 2013. "Journey donates $350K in Typhoon Haiyan relief". KGO-TV. Associated Press. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "TYPHOON DEVASTATION". USA Today. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Typhoon Haiyan: China gives less aid to Philippines than Ikea". The Guardian. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Northwestern Mutual aids Philippines with $100,000 grant to American Red Cross" (Press release). Northwestern Mutual. PR Newswire. November 20, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Goldberg, Eleanor (November 25, 2013). "Coke Suspends Ad Campaign For Best Reason You Could Imagine". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "Football: FIFA gives US$1m aid for Philippines football". Channel News Asia. December 13, 2013. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved December 13, 2013. "DHL deploys Disaster Response Team to support Philippines relief and recovery effort following Typhoon Haiyan". Transglobal express. November 18, 2013. Archived from the original on January 13, 2014. Retrieved January 10, 2014. "Taclob – Give a child a typhoon-ready backpack". betterplace.org – Change the world with your donation. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "'Broken hearts and shattered dreams everywhere'". The Times of India. December 20, 2013. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved January 28, 2024. DHNS. "'It's all shattered dreams and broken hearts in Typhoon hit Philippines'". Deccan Herald. Retrieved January 28, 2024. "Lakers Helping Philippine Super Typhoon Victims". nbclosangeles.com. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. "Lakers Win, Gasol Donates $24,000 to Philippines". nbclosangeles.com. November 23, 2013. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. "Major League Baseball donates $200,000 to support disaster relief efforts in Philippines" (Press release). Major League Baseball. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. Cha, Frances (November 19, 2013). "World Toilet Day aims to improve sanitation for 2.5 billion". CNN. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. Cohan, Josh (November 14, 2013). "Red Cross: Philippines Relief Fund Tops $11 Million". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 19, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Read, Richard (November 19, 2013). "Portland-based Mercy Corps sends team responding to Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "World comes to aid of Haiyan victims". News24. Agence France-Presse. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2013. "URGENT Help Needed for Survivors of Typhoon Haiyan". Hare Krishna Food for Life. November 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Food for Life serving hot vegan pasta to kids in the Philippines". Hare Krishna Food for Life. November 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. Dawson, Christopher & Grubb, Jennifer (November 14, 2013). "How to help Typhoon Haiyan survivors". CNN. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Emergency Relief for Typhoon Haiyan". LDS Philanthropies. November 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2013. "IRED – International Responders for Emergencies and Disasters". Retrieved September 9, 2020. "INC conducts second phase of massive relief distributions in Leyte". November 27, 2013. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2013. "INC conducts relief, medical mission in Tacloban". The Philippine Star. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2013. "Iglesia ni Cristo conducts last leg of relief distribution for Yolanda survivors in Hernani, Samar". December 1, 2013. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "INC to Stage the Largest Worldwide Walk for Yolanda(Haiyan) Survivors". January 9, 2014. Archived from the original on February 13, 2014. Retrieved February 12, 2014. "Worldwide walk For Yolanda / Haiyan Victims (Charities and Fundraising)". February 15, 2014. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved February 12, 2014. "Iglesia ni Cristo's Worldwide Walk breaks 2 Guinness world records". Philippine News Agency. February 15, 2014. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. Leslie Ann Aquino (February 15, 2014). "INC smashes Guinness Record". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "Typhoon Haiyan: Beckhams' clothes sale prompts queues". BBC News. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Lu, Anne (November 18, 2013). "Stephen Colbert Mocks China's Donation To Philippines, Raises Over $100K For Haiyan Victims [VIDEO]". International Business Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013. "David Guetta shows #love for Philippines". USA Today. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved November 22, 2013. "Philippines Helped by Voting and Downloads on X Factor". Las Vegas Guardian Express. November 16, 2013. Archived from the original on November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2013. Desta, Yohana (November 25, 2013). "New album uses hit songs to aid Philippines". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "OneRepublic donate to Philippines relief efforts". Daily Express. November 30, 2013. Archived from the original on November 30, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "Linkin Park, Offspring to Play Fundraising 'Concert for the Philippines'". Billboard. December 12, 2013. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "Typhoon Haiyan: Singer Alicia Keys visits refugees in Philippines". The Straits Times. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved November 25, 2013. "Justin Bieber sings for Typhoon Haiyan victims". The Daily Telegraph. December 12, 2013. Archived from the original on December 12, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Francesca Bacardi (December 16, 2013). "Fox marketing/advertising funds used for Philippines typhoon relief". Variety. Video on YouTube "'Fast and Furious' star Paul Walker dies in car accident". CNN. November 30, 2013. Archived from the original on December 1, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "Charice, Jessica Sanchez others in NYC Yolanda relief concert". Rappler.com. March 11, 2014. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014. "Pinoy Relief Benefit Concert @ Madison Square Garden – Empowering Typhoon Victims to Get Back on Their Feet". AsianJournal.com. March 21, 2014. Archived from the original on March 27, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014. "Al Gore visits 'Yolanda' ground zero". ABS-CBN News. March 13, 2016. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2016. "US gives, China withholds in Philippine crisis". Asia Times. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Typhoon Haiyan, the Philippines, the United States, and China". Council of Foreign Relations. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 16, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Amid territorial spat with Manila, China's paltry offer of typhoon aid threatens global image". Fox News. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "China's Philippine aid controversy". BBC News. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "China to Philippines: Here, Have a Measly $100,000 in Aid". Time. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Haiyan: U.S., Britain Send Warships to Philippines as New Weather Disturbance Threatens Relief Operations". The International Business Times. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "The US Disaster Relief Mission In The Philippines Has Big Strategic Implications". The Business Insider. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. Yamada, Seiji (July 4, 2017). "Hearts and Minds: Typhoon Yolanda/Haiyan and the Use of Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief to Further Strategic Ends". Social Medicine. 11 (2): 76–83. ISSN 1557-7112. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2017. Borenstein, Seth (November 29, 2015). "Global warming seen as more concrete, urgent problem since Kyoto". PBS Newshour. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2016. Yamada, Seiji; Galat, Absalon (October 2014). "Typhoon Yolanda/Haiyan and Climate Justice". Disaster Medicine and Public Health Preparedness. 8 (5): 432–435. doi:10.1017/dmp.2014.97. ISSN 1935-7893. PMID 25310517. S2CID 206206571. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2017. McGrath, Matt (November 11, 2013). "Typhoon prompts 'fast' by Philippines climate delegate". BBC. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. Chua, Ryan (November 14, 2013). "More delegates on hunger strike at UN climate talks". ABS-CBN News. Archived from the original on November 15, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Is climate change to blame for Typhoon Haiyan?". The Guardian. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Climate Change This Week: Super Typhoon, Calls to Action, and More!". The Huffington Post. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved November 14, 2013. "Megastorm: World's Biggest Typhoon" (Press release). Discovery Channel. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2013. "Six Hours: Surviving Typhoon Yolanda". GMA News. October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2020. Six Hours: Surviving Typhoon Yolanda at IMDb "Killer Typhoon". Nova. Season 41. January 22, 2014. PBS. Retrieved October 5, 2020 – via YouTube. "'Taklub' : Cannes Review". The Hollywood Reporter. May 19, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2020. "Typhoon Haiyan: 10 deadliest typhoons in Philippines". The Daily Telegraph. Agence France-Presse. November 8, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "5 tropical cyclones have caused most deaths in the Philippines". Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. Archived from the original on December 30, 2011. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Typhoon Haiyan (2013). General information about the typhoon Digital Typhoon: Typhoon201330 (HAIYAN) - National Institute of Informatics Super Typhoon Haiyan from Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies Past Positions and Intensities of Typhoon Haiyan (as of 20:00 HKT on November 11, 2013) from the Hong Kong Observatory Compilation of satellite imagery and mapping products, pre- and post-disaster from UN-SPIDER Severe Weather Bulletin for Typhoon YOLANDA (HAIYAN) by the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council General information about the response operation in the Philippines Assessing the Response to Typhoon Yolanda/Haiyan: Hearing before the Subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, One Hundred Thirteenth Congress, First Session, November 19, 2013 Latest humanitarian response information via ReliefWeb Response to the crisis Archived November 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine via FAO in emergencies Media coverage of Typhoon Haiyan's destruction in the Philippines MULTIMEDIA REPORT: 'The Sea Washed it Away': On the Ground After Typhoon Haiyan by The Weather Channel IMAGES: Haiyan before and after the storm by BBC Typhoon Haiyan coverage by CBS News Typhoon Yolanda updates and coverage by Rappler Relief operations of the Government of the Philippines Updates: Typhoon Yolanda by the Government of the Philippines Foreign Aid Transparency Hub (FAiTH) — Transparency portal by the Government of the Philippines