Tesla, Inc. (/ˈtɛslə/ TESS-lə or /ˈtɛzlə/ TEZ-lə) is an American multinational automotive and clean energy company headquartered in Austin, Texas, which designs, manufactures and sells electric vehicles, stationary battery energy storage devices from home to grid-scale, solar panels and solar shingles, and related products and services. Tesla was incorporated in July 2003 by Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning as Tesla Motors. The company's name is a tribute to inventor and electrical engineer Nikola Tesla. In February 2004 Elon Musk joined as the company's largest shareholder and in 2008 he was named CEO. In 2008, the company began production of its first car model, the Roadster sports car, followed by the Model S sedan in 2012, the Model X SUV in 2015, the Model 3 sedan in 2017, the Model Y crossover in 2020, the Tesla Semi truck in 2022 and the Cybertruck pickup truck in 2023. The Model 3 is the all-time bestselling plug-in electric car worldwide, and in June 2021 became the first electric car to sell 1 million units globally. In 2023, the Model Y was the best-selling vehicle, of any kind, globally. Tesla is one of the world's most valuable companies in terms of market capitalization. In October 2021, Tesla's market capitalization temporarily reached US$1 trillion, the sixth company to do so in U.S. history. In 2023, the company led the battery electric vehicle market, with 19.9% share. As of 2023[update], it is the world's most valuable automaker. Also in 2023, the company was ranked 69th in the Forbes Global 2000. Tesla has been the subject of lawsuits, government scrutiny, and journalistic criticism, stemming from allegations of whistleblower retaliation, worker rights violations, product defects, and Musk's many controversial statements. The company was incorporated as Tesla Motors, Inc. on July 1, 2003, by Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning. They served as CEO and CFO, respectively. Eberhard said that he wanted to build "a car manufacturer that is also a technology company", with its core technologies as "the battery, the computer software, and the proprietary motor". Ian Wright was Tesla's third employee, joining a few months later. In February 2004, the company raised US$7.5 million (equivalent to $12 million in 2023) in series A funding, including $6.5 million (equivalent to $10 million in 2023) from Elon Musk, who had received $100 million from the sale of his interest in PayPal two years earlier. Musk became the chairman of the board of directors and the largest shareholder of Tesla. J. B. Straubel joined Tesla in May 2004 as chief technical officer. A lawsuit settlement agreed to by Eberhard and Tesla in September 2009 allows all five – Eberhard, Tarpenning, Wright, Musk, and Straubel – to call themselves co-founders. Elon Musk took an active role within the company, but was not deeply involved in day-to-day business operations. The company's strategy was to start with a premium sports car aimed at early adopters and then move into more mainstream vehicles, including sedans and affordable compacts. In February 2006, Musk led Tesla's Series B venture capital funding round of $13 million, which added Valor Equity Partners to the funding team. Musk co-led the third, $40 million round in May 2006 which saw investment from prominent entrepreneurs including Google co-founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page, and former eBay President Jeff Skoll. A fourth round worth $45 million in May 2007 brought the total private financing investment to over $105 million. In August 2007, Eberhard was asked by the board, led by Elon Musk, to step down as CEO. Eberhard then took the title of "President of Technology" before ultimately leaving the company in January 2008. Co-founder Marc Tarpenning, who served as the Vice President of Electrical Engineering of the company, also left the company in January 2008. In August 2007, Michael Marks was brought in as interim CEO, and in December 2007, Ze'ev Drori became CEO and President. Musk succeeded Drori as CEO in October 2008. In June 2009, Eberhard filed a lawsuit against Musk for allegedly forcing him out. The case was dismissed in August 2009. Tesla began production of the Roadster in 2008 inside the service bays of a former Chevrolet dealership in Menlo Park. By January 2009, Tesla had raised $187 million and delivered 147 cars. Musk had contributed $70 million of his own money to the company. In June 2009, Tesla was approved to receive $465 million in interest-bearing loans from the United States Department of Energy. The funding, part of the $8 billion Advanced Technology Vehicles Manufacturing Loan Program, supported the engineering and production of the Model S sedan, as well as the development of commercial powertrain technology. Tesla repaid the loan in May 2013, with $12 million in interest. In May 2010, Tesla purchased the NUMMI plant in Fremont, California from Toyota for $42 million. On June 29, 2010, the company went public via an initial public offering (IPO) on the NASDAQ, the first American car company to do so since the Ford Motor Company had its IPO in 1956. The company issued 13.3 million shares of common stock at a price of $17 per share, raising $226 million. In October 2010, Tesla opened the Tesla Factory to start production of the Model S. In January 2012, Tesla ceased production of the Roadster, and in June 2012 the company launched its second car, the Model S luxury sedan. The Model S won several automotive awards during 2012 and 2013, including the 2013 Motor Trend Car of the Year, and became the first electric car to top the monthly sales ranking of a country, when it topped the Norwegian new car sales list in September 2013. The Model S was also the bestselling plug-in electric car worldwide for the years 2015 and 2016. Tesla announced the Tesla Autopilot, a driver-assistance system, in 2014. In September that year, all Tesla cars started shipping with sensors and software to support the feature, with what would later be called "hardware version 1". Tesla entered the energy storage market, unveiling its Tesla Powerwall (home) and Tesla Powerpack (business) battery packs in April 2015. The company received orders valued at $800 million within a week of the unveiling. Tesla began shipping its third vehicle, the luxury SUV Tesla Model X, in September 2015, which had 25,000 pre-orders at the time. Tesla entered the solar installation business in November 2016 with the purchase of SolarCity, in an all-stock $2.6 billion deal. The business was merged with Tesla's existing battery energy storage products division to form the Tesla Energy subsidiary. The deal was controversial because at the time of the acquisition, SolarCity was facing liquidity issues of which Tesla's shareholders were not informed. In February 2017, Tesla Motors changed its name to Tesla, Inc. to better reflect the scope of its expanded business. Tesla unveiled its first mass market vehicle in April 2016, the Model 3 sedan. The Model 3 was less expensive than Tesla's previous three vehicles, and within a week the company received over 325,000 paid reservations. In an effort to speed up production and control costs, Tesla invested heavily in robotics and automation to assemble the Model 3, but the robotics actually slowed the production of the vehicles. This led to significant delays and production problems, a period which the company described as "production hell." By the end of 2018, the production problems had been overcome, and the Model 3 became the world's bestselling electric car from 2018 to 2021. This period of production hell put significant financial pressure on Tesla, and during this time it became one of the most shorted companies in the stock market. On August 8, 2018, amid the financial issues, Musk posted on social media that he was considering taking Tesla private. The plan did not materialize and gave rise to much controversy and many lawsuits including a securities fraud charge from the SEC, which would force Musk to pay a $20 million fine and step down as the company's chairman, although he was allowed to remain the CEO. From July 2019 to June 2020, Tesla reported four consecutive profitable quarters for the first time, which made it eligible for inclusion in the S&P 500. During 2020, its share price increased 740%, and by December 14, 2020, its market capitalization was more than the next nine largest automakers combined, and it became the sixth most valuable company in the US. Tesla was added to the S&P index on December 21, 2020; it was the most valuable company ever added, and was the sixth-largest member of the index immediately after it was added. Tesla introduced its second mass-market vehicle in March 2019, the Model Y mid-size crossover SUV, based on the Model 3. Deliveries started in March 2020. During this period, Tesla invested heavily in expanding its production capacity, opening three new Gigafactories in quick succession. Construction of Gigafactory Shanghai started in January 2019, as the first automobile factory in China fully owned by a foreign company (not a joint venture). The first production vehicle, a Model 3, rolled out of the factory in December, less than one year after groundbreaking. Gigafactory Berlin-Brandenburg broke ground in February 2020, and production of the Model Y began in March 2022. Gigafactory Texas broke ground in June 2020, production of the Model Y began in April 2022, and production of the Cybertruck began in November 2023. In March 2023, Tesla announced plans for a Gigafactory Mexico to open in 2025. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Tesla closed the Fremont Factory in March 2020 due to California state and Alameda county COVID restrictions. When California lifted restrictions, but the county did not, Tesla sued the county, and restarted production on May 11, 2020. The county lifted restrictions on May 13, 2020, and Tesla dropped its lawsuit. After the dispute with county officials, on December 1, 2021, Tesla moved its legal headquarters to Gigafactory Texas. However, Tesla continued to use its former headquarters building in Palo Alto, and over the next two years significantly expanded its footprint in California. The company opened its Megafactory to build Megapack batteries in Lathrop, California in 2022, and announced in February 2023 that it would establish a large global engineering headquarters in Palo Alto, moving into a corporate campus once owned by Hewlett Packard. Tesla became a major investor in bitcoin, acquiring $1.5 billion of the cryptocurrency, and on March 24, 2021, the company started accepting bitcoin as a form of payment for US vehicle purchases. However, after 49 days, the company ended bitcoin payments over concerns that the production of bitcoin was contributing to the consumption of fossil fuels, against the company's mission of encouraging the transition to sustainable energy. After the announcement, the price of bitcoin dropped around 12%. By July 2022 Tesla had sold about 75% of its bitcoin holdings at a loss, citing that the cryptocurrency was hurting the company's profitability. As of November 2023[update], Tesla offers six vehicle models: Model S, Model X, Model 3, Model Y, Tesla Semi, and Cybertruck. Tesla's first vehicle, the first-generation Tesla Roadster, is no longer sold. Tesla has plans for a second-generation Roadster. The Model S is a full-size luxury car with a liftback body style and a dual motor, all-wheel drive layout. Development of the Model S began prior to 2007 and deliveries started in June 2012. The Model S has seen two major design refreshes, first in April 2016 which introduced a new front-end design and again in June 2021 which revised the interior. The Model S was the top-selling plug-in electric car worldwide in 2015 and 2016. More than 250,000 vehicles have been sold as of December 2018[update] (when Tesla merged production numbers for the Model S and Model X). The Model X is a mid-size luxury crossover SUV offered in 5-, 6- and 7-passenger configurations with either a dual- or tri-motor, all-wheel drive layout. The rear passenger doors open vertically with an articulating "falcon-wing" design. A prototype Model X was first shown in February 2012 and deliveries started in September 2015. The Model X shares around 30 percent of its content with the Model S. The vehicle has seen one major design refresh in June 2021 which revised the interior. The Model 3 is a mid-size car with a fastback body style and either a dual-motor, all-wheel drive layout or a rear-motor, rear-wheel drive layout. The vehicle was designed to be more affordable than the luxury Model S sedan. A prototype Model 3 was first shown in 2016 and within a week the company received over 325,000 paid reservations. Deliveries started in July 2017. The Model 3 ranked as the world's bestselling electric car from 2018 to 2021, and cumulative sales passed 1 million in June 2021. The vehicle has seen one major design refresh in September 2023 which revised the exterior and interior. The Model Y is a mid-size crossover SUV offered in 5- and 7-passenger configurations with a single‐motor, rear-wheel drive or a dual-motor, all-wheel drive layout. The vehicle was designed to be more affordable than the luxury Model X SUV. A prototype Model Y was first shown in March 2019, and deliveries started in March 2020. The Model Y shared around 75 percent of its content with the Model 3. In the first quarter of 2023, the Model Y outsold the Toyota Corolla to become the world's best-selling car, the first electric vehicle to claim the title. The Tesla Semi is a Class 8 semi-truck by Tesla, Inc. with a tri-motor, rear-wheel drive layout. Tesla claims that the Semi has approximately three times the power of a typical diesel semi truck, a range of 500 miles (800 km). Two prototype trucks were first shown in November 2017 and initial deliveries were made to PepsiCo on December 1, 2022. As of December 2023[update], the truck remains in pilot production. The Cybertruck is a full-sized pickup truck. First announced in November 2019, pilot production began in July 2023, after being pushed back multiple times, and deliveries began on November 30, 2023. Three models are offered: rear-wheel drive, dual-motor all-wheel drive, and tri-motor all-wheel drive, with EPA range estimates of 320–340 miles (510–550 km), depending on the model. The truck's exterior design made from flat sheets of unpainted stainless steel earned a notably polarizing reception from media. On November 16, 2017, Tesla unveiled the second generation Roadster with a purported range of 620 miles (1,000 km) with a 200 kilowatt-hours (720 MJ) battery pack that would achieve 0–60 miles per hour (0–97 km/h) in 1.9 seconds; and 0–100 mph (0–161 km/h) in 4.2 seconds, and a top speed over 250 mph (400 km/h). A "SpaceX Package" would include cold-gas thrusters. The vehicle would have three electric motors, allowing all-wheel drive and torque vectoring during cornering. The base price was set at $200,000. Musk said in May 2023 that the Roadster should ship in 2024. The Tesla next-generation vehicle is an announced battery electric platform. It would become the third platform for the company. Vehicles based on this platform are not expected before 2025. The original Tesla Roadster was a two-seater sports car, evolved from the Lotus Elise chassis. It was produced from 2008 to 2012. The Roadster was the first highway-legal serial production electric car to use lithium-ion battery cells and the first production all-electric car to travel more than 200 miles (320 km) per charge. Tesla cars come with "Standard Connectivity", which provides navigation using a cellular connection. For a fee, Tesla offers a subscription to "Premium Connectivity" which adds live traffic and satellite maps to navigation, internet browsing, and media streaming. Tesla's strategy is to service its vehicles first through remote diagnosis and repair. If it is not possible to resolve a problem remotely, a mobile technician is dispatched or customers are referred to a local Tesla-owned service center. Tesla has said that it does not want to make a profit on vehicle servicing, which has traditionally been a large profit center for most auto dealerships. In 2016, Tesla recommended having any Tesla car inspected every 12,500 miles or once a year, whichever comes first. In early 2019, the manual was changed to say: "your Tesla does not require annual maintenance and regular fluid changes," and instead it recommends periodic servicing of the brake fluid, air conditioning, tires and air filters. Supercharger is the branding used by Tesla for its high-voltage direct current fast chargers. The Supercharger network was introduced on September 24, 2012, as the Tesla Model S entered production, with six sites in California, Nevada, and Arizona. As of January 2024[update], Tesla operates a network of 6,000 Supercharger stations with nearly 55,000 connectors. The stations are primarily deployed in three regions: Asia Pacific (over 2,400), North America (over 2,300), and Europe (over 1,100). Superchargers supply electric power at between 72 kilowatts (kW) and 250 kW, with the maximum amount increasing over the years as the company improves its technology. Tesla also has a network of "Destination Chargers," slower than Superchargers and intended for locations where customers are expected to park and stay for several hours, such as hotels, restaurants, or shopping centers. Unlike the Supercharger network, Tesla does not own the destination chargers, instead, property owners set up the devices and set pricing. When the network first launched in 2014, Tesla provided free charging equipment and covered installation costs. One of the largest providers is hotel chain Hilton Worldwide which in 2023 announced an agreement with Tesla to install 20,000 chargers across 2,000 of its properties in North America by 2025. Tesla has offered its own vehicle insurance in the United States since 2017 and has been acting as an independent insurance producer since 2021 as Tesla Insurance Services, Inc. It was introduced after the American Automobile Association (AAA), a major insurance carrier, raised rates for Tesla owners in June 2017 after a report concluded that the automakers vehicles crashed more often and were more expensive to repair than comparable vehicles. A study in 2018 based on data from the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety confirmed the findings. The company says that it uniquely understands its vehicles, technology and repair costs, and can eliminate traditional insurance carriers' additional charges. In states where allowed, the company uses individual vehicle data to offer personalized pricing that can increase or decrease in cost based on the prior month's driving safety score. As of January 2023[update], Tesla offers insurance in the U.S. states of Arizona, California, Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, Minnesota, Nevada, Ohio, Oregon, Texas, Utah and Virginia. The company also offers insurance for non-Tesla vehicles owned by Tesla owners. Tesla subsidiary Tesla Energy develops, builds, sells and installs solar energy generation systems and battery energy storage products (as well as related products and services) to residential, commercial and industrial customers. The subsidiary was created by the merger of Tesla's existing battery energy storage products division with SolarCity, a solar energy company that Tesla acquired in 2016. In 2023, the company deployed 14.7 gigawatt-hours of battery energy storage products, an increase of 125% over 2022, but only deployed solar energy systems capable of generating 223 megawatts, a decrease of 36% over 2022. Tesla Energy products include solar panels (built by other companies for Tesla), the Tesla Solar Roof (a solar shingle system) and the Tesla Solar Inverter. Storage products include the Powerwall (a home energy storage device) and the Megapack (a large-scale energy storage system). For large-scale customers, Tesla Energy operates an online platform which allows for automated, real-time power trading, demand forecasting and product control. In March 2021, the company said its online products were managing over 1.2 GWh of storage. For home customers, the company operates a virtual power company in Texas called Tesla Electric, which utilizes the company's online platforms to manage customers Powerwall devices, discharging them into the grid to sell power when prices are high, earning money for customers. At the time of Tesla's founding in 2003, electric vehicles were very expensive. In 2006, Elon Musk stated that Tesla's strategy was to first produce high-price, low-volume vehicles, such as sports cars, for which customers are less sensitive to price. This would allow them to progressively bring down the cost of batteries, which in turn would allow them to offer cheaper and higher volume cars. Tesla's first vehicle, the Roadster, was low-volume (fewer than 2,500 were produced) and priced at over $100,000. The next models, the Model S and Model X, are more affordable but still luxury vehicles. The most recent models, the Model 3 and the Model Y, are priced still lower, and aimed at a higher volume market, selling over 100,000 vehicles each quarter. Tesla continuously updates the hardware of its cars rather than waiting for a new model year, as opposed to nearly every other car manufacturer. Unlike other automakers, Tesla does not rely on franchised dealerships to sell vehicles. Instead, the company directly sells vehicles through its website and a network of company-owned stores. The company is the first automaker in the United States to sell cars directly to consumers. Some jurisdictions, particularly in the United States, prohibit auto manufacturers from directly selling vehicles to consumers. In these areas, Tesla has locations that it calls galleries that the company says "educate and inform customers about our products, but such locations do not actually transact in the sale of vehicles." In total, Tesla operates nearly 400 stores and galleries in more than 35 countries. These locations are typically located in retail shopping districts, inside shopping malls, or other high-traffic areas, instead of near other auto dealerships. Analysts describe Tesla as vertically integrated given how it develops many components in-house, such as batteries, motors, and software. The practice of vertical integration is rare in the automotive industry, where companies typically outsource 80% of components to suppliers and focus on engine manufacturing and final assembly. Tesla generally allows its competitors to license its technology, stating that it wants to help its competitors accelerate the world's use of sustainable energy. Licensing agreements include provisions whereby the recipient agrees not to file patent suits against Tesla, or to copy its designs directly. Tesla retains control of its other intellectual property, such as trademarks and trade secrets to prevent direct copying of its technology. Tesla is highly vertically integrated and develops many components in-house, such as batteries, motors, and software. As of 2023, Tesla uses four different battery cell form factors: 18650, 2170, 4680, and prismatic. Tesla purchases these batteries from three suppliers, CATL, LG Energy Solution, and Panasonic, the latter of which has co-located some of its battery production inside Tesla's Gigafactory Nevada. Tesla is also currently building out the capacity to produce its own batteries. Tesla batteries sit under the vehicle floor to save interior space. Tesla uses a multi-part aluminum and titanium protection system to protect the battery from road debris and/or vehicle crashes. Business analysis company BloombergNEF estimated Tesla's battery pack cost in 2021 at $112 per kilowatt-hour (kWh), versus an industry average of $132 per kWh. Tesla was the first automaker to use cylindrical, lithium-ion battery cells. When it built the first generation Roadster, it used off-the-shelf 18650-type (18 mm diameter, 65 mm height) cylindrical batteries that were already used for other consumer electronics. The cells provided an engineering challenge because each has a relatively low capacity, so thousands needed to be bundled together in a battery pack. Electrical and thermal management also proved to be a challenge, requiring liquid cooling and an intumescent fire prevention chemical. However, the decision proved to be pragmatic because there was already a mature manufacturing process that could produce a high volume of the cells at a consistent quality. Although the 18650-type cells are the oldest technology, they are used in the Model S and X vehicles. Tesla sources these batteries with a nickel-cobalt-aluminum (NCA) cathode chemistry from Panasonic's factories in Japan. The next battery type to be used was 2170-type (21 mm diameter, 70 mm height) cylindrical cell. The larger size was optimized for electric cars, allowing for a higher capacity per cell and a lower number of cells per battery pack. The 2170 was introduced for the Model 3 and Y vehicles. For vehicles built at the Tesla Fremont Factory, the company sources 2170-type batteries with a nickel-cobalt-aluminum cathode chemistry from Panasonic's production line at Gigafactory Nevada. In January 2021, Panasonic had the capacity to produce 39 GWh per year of battery cells there. Tesla Energy also uses 2170 cells in its Powerwall home energy storage product. For vehicles made at Gigafactory Shanghai and Gigafactory Berlin-Brandenburg batteries with a nickel-cobalt-manganese (NMC) cathode chemistry are sourced from LG Energy Solution's factories in China. Tesla's latest cylindrical cell design is the 4680-type (46 mm diameter, 80 mm height) introduced in 2021. The battery was developed in-house by Tesla and is physically 5-times bigger than the 2170-type, again allowing for a higher capacity per cell and a lower number of cells per battery pack. Currently, Tesla builds the 4680 cells itself and has not disclosed the cathode chemistry. The company has already opened production lines in Fremont, California, and plans to open lines inside Gigafactory Nevada and Gigafactory Texas. The 4680 cells are used in the Model Y and Cybertruck built at Gigafactory Texas. Tesla also uses prismatic (rectangular) cells in many entry-level Model 3 and Model Y vehicles. The prismatic cells are a lithium iron phosphate battery (LFP or LiFePO 4) which is a less energy-dense type, but do not contain any nickel or cobalt, which makes it less expensive to produce. Tesla sources these batteries from CATL's factories in China. As of April 2022[update], nearly half of Tesla's vehicle production used prismatic cells. Tesla Energy also uses prismatic cells in its Megapack grid-scale energy storage product. Tesla invests in lithium-ion battery research. In 2016, the company established a 5-year battery research and development partnership at Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia, Canada, with lead researcher Jeff Dahn. Tesla acquired Maxwell Technologies for over $200 million – and sold in 2021. It also acquired Hibar Systems. Tesla purchased several battery manufacturing patent applications from Springpower International, a small Canadian battery company. Tesla uses over-the-air updates to deliver updates to vehicles, adding features or fixing problems. This is enabled by tight integration between a few powerful onboard computers, compared to the way automakers had previously handled technology, by purchasing off-the-shelf electronic components for each subsystem that typically could not interface at the software level. The system also has allowed Tesla to control which features customers have access to. For example, for ease of assembly all Model 3 vehicles were built with heated rear seats, but only customers who purchased a premium interior could turn them on. However, Tesla has allowed customers who didn't pay for a premium interior to purchase access to the heated rear seats. Tesla uses a similar software lock feature for Enhanced Autopilot and Full-Self Driving features, even though all vehicles are equipped with the computers and cameras necessary to enable those features. Tesla makes two kinds of electric motors. Its oldest design in production is a three-phase four-pole alternating current induction motor (asynchronous motor) with a copper rotor (which inspired the Tesla logo). These motors use electromagnetic induction, by varying magnetic field to produce torque. Induction motors are used as the rear motor in the Model S and Model X, as the front motor in the Model 3 and Model Y and were used in the first-generation Roadster. Newer, higher efficiency permanent magnet motors have been in use since the introduction of the Model 3 in 2017. They are currently used as the rear motor in the Model 3 and Model Y, the front motor of 2019-onward versions of the Model S and X, and are expected to be used in the Tesla Semi. The permanent magnet motors are more efficient, especially in stop-start driving. The North American Charging Standard (NACS) is an electric vehicle charging connector system developed by Tesla. It has been used on all North American market Tesla vehicles since 2012 and was opened for use to other manufacturers in 2022. Since then, nearly every other vehicle manufacturer has announced that starting from 2025, their electric vehicles sold in North America will be equipped with the NACS charge port. Several electric vehicle charging network operators and equipment manufacturers have also announced plans to add NACS connectors. Autopilot is an advanced driver-assistance system developed by Tesla. The system requires active driver supervision at all times. Since September 2014, all Tesla cars are shipped with sensors (initially hardware version 1 or "HW1") and software to support Autopilot. Tesla upgraded its sensors and software in October 2016 ("HW2") to support full self-driving in the future. HW2 includes eight cameras, twelve ultrasonic sensors, and forward-facing radar. HW2.5 was released in mid-2017, and it upgraded HW2 with a second graphics processing unit (GPU) and, for the Model 3 only, a driver-facing camera. HW3 was released in early 2019 with an updated and more powerful computer, employing a custom Tesla-designed system on a chip. In April 2019, Tesla announced that all of its cars will include Autopilot software (defined as just Traffic-Aware Cruise Control and Autosteer (Beta)) as a standard feature moving forward. Full self-driving software (Autopark, Navigate on Autopilot (Beta), Auto Lane Change (Beta), Summon (Beta), Smart Summon (Beta) and future abilities) is an extra cost option. In 2020, Tesla released software updates where its cars recognize and automatically stop at stop signs and traffic lights. In May 2021, Tesla removed the radar sensor and radar features from its Model 3 and Model Y vehicles, opting instead to rely on camera vision alone. The New York Times reported in December 2021 that Musk "repeatedly told members of the Autopilot team that humans could drive with only two eyes and that this meant cars should be able to drive with cameras alone," an analogy some experts and former Tesla engineers described as "deeply flawed." Similarly, a statistical analysis conducted in A Methodology for Normalizing Safety Statistics of Partially Automated Vehicles debunked a common Tesla claim that Autopilot reduced crash rates by 40 percent by accounting for the relative safety of the given operating domain when using active safety measures. Full Self-Driving (FSD) is an optional extension of Autopilot promoted as eventually being able to perform fully autonomous driving. At the end of 2016, Tesla expected to demonstrate full autonomy by the end of 2017, which as of July 2022[update] has not occurred. The first beta version of the software was released on October 22, 2020, to a small group of testers. The release of the beta has renewed concern regarding whether the technology is ready for testing on public roads. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has called for "tougher requirements" for any testing of Autopilot on public roads. Tesla's approach to achieve full autonomy is different from that of other companies. Whereas Waymo, Cruise, and other companies are relying on highly detailed (centimeter-scale) three-dimensional maps, lidar, and cameras, as well as radar and ultrasonic sensors in their autonomous vehicles, Tesla's approach is to use coarse-grained two-dimensional maps and cameras (no lidar) as well as radar and ultrasonic sensors. Tesla claims that although its approach is much more difficult, it will ultimately be more useful, because its vehicles will be able to self-drive without geofencing concerns. Tesla's self-driving software has been trained on over 20 billion miles driven by Tesla vehicles as of January 2021. Tesla also designed a self-driving computer chip that has been installed in its cars since March 2019. Most experts believe that Tesla's approach of trying to achieve full self-driving by eschewing lidar and high-definition maps is not feasible. In March 2021, according to a letter that Tesla sent to the California Department of Motor Vehicles about FSD's capability – acquired by PlainSite via a public records request – Tesla stated that FSD is not capable of autonomous driving and is only at Society of Automotive Engineers Level 2 automation. In a May 2021 study by Guidehouse Insights, Tesla was ranked last for both strategy and execution in the autonomous driving sector. In October 2021, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) called on Tesla to change the design of its Autopilot to ensure it cannot be misused by drivers, according to a letter sent to Musk. Ahead of the start of production of the Model 3, Tesla invested heavily in robotics and automation to assemble vehicles. To that end, between 2015 and 2017, the company purchased several companies involved in automation and robotics including Compass Automation, Grohmann Automation, Perbix Machine Company, and Riviera Tool and Die. Elon Musk later admitted that the robotics actually slowed the production of the vehicles. Tesla uses massive casting machines (Giga Press) to make large single pieces of vehicle underbodies and to streamline production. This saves time, labor, cost and factory space, replacing multiple robots that weld car parts together with a single machine. In September 2022, Tesla revealed prototypes of a humanoid robot named Optimus, which Musk has stated uses the same core software as FSD. During the presentations at Tesla's AI Day 2022, Musk suggested that, among other use cases, the finalized version of Optimus could be used in Tesla's car factories to help with repetitive tasks and relieve labor shortages. In July 2023, Tesla acquired Wiferion, a Germany-based developer of wireless charging systems for industrial vehicles and autonomous robots, which has since been operating as Tesla Engineering Germany GmbH. Tesla sold the business to Munich-based Puls Group three months later, but retained its staff. In November 2016, the company announced the Tesla Glass technology group. The group produced the roof glass for the Tesla Model 3. It also produces the glass used in the Tesla Solar Roof's solar shingles. The company operates seven large factories and about a dozen smaller factories around the world. As of 2024[update], the company also operates more than 1,200 retail stores, galleries, service, delivery and body shop locations globally. Tesla was founded in San Carlos, California in 2003. In 2008, the company opened its first production facility at a former Chevrolet dealership in Menlo Park, California. The original roadster was assembled inside the service bays until 2012 and used the company showroom as a retail store. Another retail store was opened in Los Angeles the same year. In 2010, Tesla moved its corporate headquarters and opened a powertrain development facility in Palo Alto. Tesla's first major assembly plant occupies the former NUMMI plant in Fremont, California, known as the Tesla Fremont Factory. The factory was originally opened by General Motors in 1962, and then operated by NUMMI, a joint venture of GM and Toyota from 1984. The joint venture ended when GM entered bankruptcy in 2009. In 2010, Toyota agreed to sell the plant to Tesla at a significant discount. Tesla's first purpose-built facility was opened in Nevada in 2016. Gigafactory Nevada produces the Powerwall, battery cells in partnership with Panasonic, Model 3 drivetrains, and the Tesla Semi. The factory received substantial subsidies (abatements and credits) from the local and state government, that, in exchange for opening in their jurisdiction, allowed Tesla to operate essentially tax free for 10 years, later extended to 20 years in exchange for expanding the factory to add a production line for the Tesla Semi and add additional battery manufacturing capacity. As part of the acquisition of SolarCity in 2016, Tesla gained control of Gigafactory New York in Buffalo on the site of a former Republic Steel plant. The state of New York spent cash to build and equip the factory through the Buffalo Billion program. In 2017, the factory started production of the Tesla Solar Roof, but faced multiple production challenges. Since 2020, Tesla has also assembled Superchargers in New York. The plant has been criticized for offering little economic benefit for the state funding. In 2018, Tesla assembled tension fabric buildings at the Fremont plant to meet production goals of 5,000 cars produced a month. The structure was assembled in two weeks and measured 53 feet high, 150 feet wide, and 900 feet long. On July 23, 2020, Tesla picked Austin, Texas, as the site of its fifth Gigafactory, since then known as Gigafactory Texas. Giga Texas is the only factory that produces the Tesla Cybertruck and produces Model Y cars for the Eastern United States. On December 1, 2021, Tesla announced it relocated its legal headquarters from Palo Alto to the Gigafactory Texas site in Austin. However, Tesla has retained the Palo Alto building. On April 7, 2022, Tesla celebrated the opening of Gigafactory Texas in a public event. Tesla acquired a former JC Penney distribution center near Lathrop, California, in 2021 to build the "Megafactory" to manufacture the Megapack, the company's large scale energy storage product. The location opened in 2022. Tesla announced in February it would open a new global engineering headquarters in Palo Alto, moving into a corporate campus once owned by Hewlett Packard, located a couple of miles from Tesla's former headquarters building. Tesla plans to open Gigafactory Mexico, the company's sixth Gigafactory near Monterrey, Mexico in 2025. Tesla opened its first European store in June 2009 in London. Tesla's European headquarters are in the Netherlands, part of a group of Tesla facilities in Tilburg, including the company's European Distribution Centre. In late 2016, Tesla acquired German engineering firm Grohmann Engineering as a new division dedicated to helping Tesla increase the automation and effectiveness of its manufacturing process. After winding down existing contracts with other manufacturers, the renamed Tesla Automation now works exclusively on Tesla projects. Tesla announced its plans to build a car and battery factory in Europe in 2016. Several countries campaigned to be the host, and eventually Germany was chosen in November 2019. On March 22, 2022, Tesla's first European Gigafactory named Gigafactory Berlin-Brandenburg opened with planned capacity to produce 500,000 electric vehicles annually as well as batteries for the cars. Tesla opened its first showroom in Asia in Tokyo, Japan, in October 2010. In July 2018, Tesla signed an agreement with Chinese authorities to build a factory in Shanghai, China, which was Tesla's first Gigafactory outside of the United States. The factory building was finished in August 2019, and the initial Tesla Model 3s were in production from Gigafactory Shanghai in October 2019. In 2021, China accounted for 26% of Tesla sales revenue, and was the second largest market for Tesla after the United States, which accounted for 45% of its sales. Tesla has expressed interest in expanding to India and perhaps building a future Gigafactory in the country. The company established a legal presence in the nation in 2021 and plans to open an office in Pune starting in October 2023. In January 2010, Tesla and battery cell maker Panasonic announced that they would together develop nickel-based lithium-ion battery cells for electric vehicles. The partnership was part of Panasonic's $1 billion investment over three years in facilities for lithium-ion cell research, development and production. Beginning in 2010, Panasonic invested $30 million for a multi-year collaboration on new battery cells designed specifically for electric vehicles. In July 2014, Panasonic reached a basic agreement with Tesla to participate in battery production at Giga Nevada. Tesla and Panasonic also collaborated on the manufacturing and production of photovoltaic (PV) cells and modules at the Giga New York factory in Buffalo, New York. The partnership started in mid-2017 and ended in early 2020, before Panasonic exited the solar business entirely in January 2021. In March 2021, the outgoing CEO of Panasonic stated that the company plans to reduce its reliance on Tesla as their battery partnership evolves. Tesla has long-term contracts in place for lithium supply. In September 2020, Tesla signed a sales agreement with Piedmont Lithium to buy high-purity lithium ore for up to ten years, specifically to supply "spodumene concentrate from Piedmont's North Carolina mineral deposit". In 2022, Tesla contracted for 110,000 tonnes of spodumene concentrate over four years from the Core Lithium's lithium mine in the Northern Territory of Australia. Tesla also has a range of minor partnerships, for instance working with Airbnb and hotel chains to install destination chargers at selected locations. Daimler and Tesla began working together in late 2007. On May 19, 2009, Daimler bought a stake of less than 10% in Tesla for a reported $50 million. As part of the collaboration, Herbert Kohler, vice-president of E-Drive and Future Mobility at Daimler, took a Tesla board seat. On July 13, 2009, Daimler sold 40% of its acquisition to Aabar, an investment company controlled by the International Petroleum Investment Company owned by the government of Abu Dhabi. In October 2014, Daimler sold its remaining holdings for a reported $780 million. Tesla supplied battery packs for Freightliner Trucks in 2010. The company also built electric-powertrain components for the Mercedes-Benz A-Class E-Cell, with 500 cars planned to be built for trial in Europe beginning in September 2011. Tesla produced and co-developed the Mercedes-Benz B250e's powertrain, which ended production in 2017. The electric motor was rated 134 hp (100 kW) and 230 pound force-feet (310 N⋅m), with a 36 kWh (130 MJ) battery. The vehicle had a driving range of 200 km (124 mi) with a top speed of 150 km/h (93 mph). Daimler division Smart produced the Smart ED2 cars from 2009 to 2012 which had a 14-kilowatt-hour (50 MJ) lithium-ion battery from Tesla. In May 2010, Tesla and Toyota announced a deal in which Tesla purchased the former NUMMI factory from Toyota for $42 million, Toyota purchased $50 million in Tesla stock, and the two companies collaborated on an electric vehicle. In July 2010, the companies announced they would work together on a second generation Toyota RAV4 EV. The vehicle was unveiled at the October 2010 Los Angeles Auto Show and 35 pilot vehicles were built for a demonstration and evaluation program that ran through 2011. Tesla supplied the lithium metal-oxide battery and other powertrain components based on components from the Roadster. The production version was unveiled in August 2012, using battery pack, electronics and powertrain components from the Tesla Model S sedan (also launched in 2012). The RAV4 EV had a limited production run which resulted in just under 3,000 vehicles being produced, before it was discontinued in 2014. According to Bloomberg News, the partnership between Tesla and Toyota was "marred by clashes between engineers". Toyota engineers rejected designs that Tesla had proposed for an enclosure to protect the RAV4 EV's battery pack. Toyota took over responsibility for the enclosure's design and strengthened it. In 2014, Tesla ended up adding a titanium plate to protect the Model S sedan's battery after some debris-related crashes lead to cars catching fire. On June 5, 2017, Toyota announced that it had sold all of its shares in Tesla and halted the partnership. Initial versions of Autopilot were developed in partnership with Mobileye beginning in 2014. Mobileye ended the partnership on July 26, 2016, citing "disagreements about how the technology was deployed." In 2021, seven women came forward with claims of having faced sexual harassment and discrimination while working at Tesla's Fremont factory. They accused the company of facilitating a culture of rampant sexual harassment. The women said they were consistently subjected to catcalling, unwanted advances, unwanted touching, and discrimination while at work. "I was so tired of the unwanted attention and the males gawking at me I proceeded to create barriers around me just so I could get some relief," Brooks told The Washington Post. "That was something I felt necessary just so I can do my job." Stories range from intimate groping to being called out to the parking lot for sex. Women feared calling Human Resources for help as their supervisors were often participants. Musk himself is not indicted, but most of the women pressing charges believe their abuse is connected to the behavior of CEO Elon Musk. They cite his crude remarks about women's bodies, wisecracks about starting a university that abbreviated to "T.IT.S", and his generally dismissive attitude towards reporting sexual harassment. "What we're addressing for each of the lawsuits is just a shocking pattern of rampant harassment that exists at Tesla," said attorney David A. Lowe. In 2017, another woman had accused Tesla of very similar behavior and was subsequently fired. In a statement to the Guardian, Tesla confirmed the company had fired her, saying it had thoroughly investigated the employee's allegations with the help of "a neutral, third-party expert" and concluded her complaints were unmerited. In May 2022, a California judge ruled that the sexual harassment lawsuit could move to court, rejecting Tesla's request for closed-door arbitration. In June 2016, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) took issue with Tesla's use of nondisclosure agreements (NDAs) regarding customer repairs and, in October 2021, the NHTSA formally asked Tesla to explain its NDA policy regarding customers invited into the FSD Beta. Tesla has used NDAs on multiple occasions with both employees and customers to allegedly prevent possible negative coverage. From 2014 to 2018, Tesla's Fremont Factory had three times as many Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) violations as the ten largest U.S. auto plants combined. An investigation by the Reveal podcast alleged that Tesla "failed to report some of its serious injuries on legally mandated reports" to downplay the extent of injuries. In January 2019, former Tesla security manager Sean Gouthro filed a whistleblower complaint alleging that the company had hacked employees' phones and spied on them, while also failing to report illegal activities to the authorities and shareholders. Several legal cases have revolved around alleged whistleblower retaliation by Tesla. These include the dismissal of Tesla safety official Carlos Ramirez and Tesla security employee Karl Hansen. In 2020, the court ordered Hansen's case to arbitration. In June 2022, the arbitrator filed an unopposed motion with the court stating Hansen "has failed to establish the claims...Accordingly his claims are denied, and he shall take nothing". In September 2019, a California judge ruled that 12 actions in 2017 and 2018 by Musk and other Tesla executives violated labor laws because they sabotaged employee attempts to unionize. In March 2021, the US National Labor Relations Board ordered Musk to remove a tweet and reinstate a fired employee over union organization activities. Later, after appealing, a federal appeals court upheld the decision. The California Civil Rights Department filed a suit in 2022 alleging "a pattern of racial harassment and bias" at the Tesla Fremont factory. As of April 2023,[update] the department is also conducting a probe of the factory based on a 2021 complaint and claims that Tesla has been obstructing the investigation. In October 2023, a strike was initiated by the Swedish labor union IF Metall against a Tesla subsidiary due to the company's refusal to sign a collective agreement. The strike initially involved approximately 120 mechanics at ten workshops servicing Tesla vehicles and later expanded via solidarity strikes to include services provided by postmen, electricians, and other workers involved with Tesla operations. There have been numerous concerns about Tesla's financial reporting. In 2013, Bloomberg News questioned whether Tesla's financial reporting violated Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) reporting standards. Fortune accused Tesla in 2016 of using creative accounting to show positive cash flow and quarterly profits. In 2018, analysts expressed concerns over Tesla's accounts receivable balance. In September 2019, the SEC questioned Tesla CFO Zach Kirkhorn about Tesla's warranty reserves and lease accounting. In a letter to his clients, hedge fund manager David Einhorn, whose firm suffered losses from its short position against Tesla that quarter, accused Elon Musk in November 2019 of "significant fraud", and publicly questioned Tesla's accounting practices, telling Musk that he was "beginning to wonder whether your accounts receivable exist." From 2012 to 2014, Tesla earned more than $295 million in Zero Emission Vehicle credits for a battery-swapping technology that was never made available to customers. Staff at California Air Resources Board were concerned that Tesla was "gaming" the battery swap subsidies and in 2013 recommended eliminating the credits. A consolidated shareholders lawsuit alleges that Musk knew SolarCity was going broke before the acquisition, that he and the Tesla board overpaid for SolarCity, ignored their conflicts of interest and breached their fiduciary duties in connection with the deal, and failed to disclose "troubling facts" essential to an analysis of the proposed acquisition. The members of the board settled in 2020, leaving Musk as the only defendant. In April 2022, the Delaware Court of Chancery ruled in favor of Musk, and its ruling was upheld by the Delaware Supreme Court in June 2023. In August 2018, Elon Musk tweeted, "Am considering taking Tesla private at $420. Funding secured." The tweet caused the stock to initially rise but then drop when it was revealed to be false. Musk settled fraud charges with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) over his false statements in September 2018. According to the terms of the settlement, Musk agreed to have his tweets reviewed by Tesla's in-house counsel, he was removed from his chairman role at Tesla temporarily, and two new independent directors were appointed to the company's board. Tesla and Musk also paid civil penalties of $20 million each. A civil class-action shareholder lawsuit over Musk's statements and other derivative lawsuits were also filed against Musk and the members of Tesla's board of directors, as then constituted, in regard to claims and actions made that were associated with potentially going private. In February 2023, a California jury unanimously found Musk and Tesla not liable in the class-action lawsuit. In September 2018, Tesla disclosed that it was under investigation by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) regarding its Model 3 production figures. Authorities were investigating whether the company misled investors and made projections about its Model 3 production that it knew would be impossible to meet. A stockholder class action lawsuit against Tesla related to Model 3 production numbers (unrelated to the FBI investigation) was dismissed in March 2019. Unlike other automakers, Tesla does not rely on franchised auto dealerships to sell vehicles and instead directly sells vehicles through its website and a network of company-owned stores. In some areas, Tesla operates locations called "galleries" which "educate and inform customers about our products, but such locations do not actually transact in the sale of vehicles." This is because some jurisdictions, particularly in the United States, prohibit auto manufacturers from directly selling vehicles to consumers. Dealership associations have filed lawsuits to prevent direct sales. These associations argued that the franchise system protects consumers by encouraging dealers to compete with each other, lowering the price a customer pays. They also claimed that direct sales would allow manufacturers to undersell their own dealers. The United States Federal Trade Commission ultimately disproved the associations' claims and recommended allowing direct manufacturer sale, which they concluded would save consumers 8% in average vehicle price. Tesla has also lobbied state governments for the right to directly sell cars. The company has argued that directly operating stores improves consumer education about electric vehicles, because dealerships would sell both Tesla and gas-powered vehicles. Doing this, according to the company, would then set up a conflict of interest for the dealers since properly advertising the benefits of an electric car would disparage the gas-powered vehicles, creating a disincentive to dealership EV sales. Musk himself further contended that dealers would have a disincentive to sell electric vehicles because they require less maintenance and therefore would reduce after-sales service revenue, a large profit center for most dealerships. In January 2021, Tesla filed a lawsuit against Alex Khatilov alleging that the former employee stole company information by downloading files related to its Warp Drive software to his personal Dropbox account. Khatilov denies the allegation that he was acting as a "willful and malicious thief" and attributes his actions to an accidental data transfer. The case was settled in August 2021 through mediation. Tesla has sued former employees in the past for similar actions, including those who left to work for a rival such as XPeng and Zoox; for example, Guangzhi Cao, a Tesla engineer, was accused of uploading Tesla Autopilot source code to his iCloud account; Tesla and Cao settled in April 2021, in which Cao was ordered to monetarily compensate Tesla. In 2018, a class action was filed against Musk and the members of Tesla's board alleging they breached their fiduciary duties by approving Musk's stock-based compensation plan. Musk received the first portion of his stock options payout, worth more than $700 million in May 2020. In July 2023, Tesla board members returned $735 million to the company to settle a claim from a 2020 lawsuit alleging misappropriation of 11 million stock options granted to Elon Musk, Kimbal Musk, Larry Ellison, and others from 2017 to 2020. In 2019, The United States Environmental Protection Agency fined Tesla for hazardous waste violations that occurred in 2017. In June 2019, Tesla began negotiating penalties for 19 environmental violations from the Bay Area Air Quality Management District; the violations took place around Tesla Fremont's paint shop, where there had been at least four fires between 2014 and 2019. Environmental violations and permit deviations at Tesla's Fremont Factory increased from 2018 to 2019 with the production ramp of the Model 3. In June 2018, Tesla employee Martin Tripp leaked information that Tesla was scrapping or reworking up to 40% of its raw materials at the Nevada Gigafactory. After Tesla fired him for the leak, Tripp filed a lawsuit and claimed Tesla's security team gave police a false tip that he was planning a mass shooting at the Nevada factory. The court ruled in Tesla's favor on September 17, 2020. In January 2024, 25 California counties sued Tesla, accusing the company of violating state health and safety codes by illegally disposing of hazardous waste. Later that week, the case was settled on the conditions that Tesla pay US$1.5 million and admit to acting "intentionally" and "negligent". On top of that, Tesla also agreed to train its employees on hazardous waste disposal and to have 10 percent of Tesla's facilities audited for waste disposal for the next 5 years. In August 2019, Walmart filed a multi-million-dollar lawsuit against Tesla, claiming that Tesla's "negligent installation and maintenance" of solar panels caused roof fires at seven Walmart stores dating back to 2012. Walmart reached a settlement with Tesla in November 2019; the terms of the settlement were not disclosed. In April 2021, a Norwegian judge found Tesla guilty of throttling charging speed through a 2019 over-the-air software update, after they failed to respond to the lawsuit. The 30 customers who were part of the lawsuit were awarded 136,000 Norwegian kroner each ($16,000). Tesla has faced numerous complaints regarding workplace harassment and racial discrimination, with one former Tesla worker who attempted to sue the employer describing it as "a hotbed of racist behavior". As of December 2021, three percent of leadership at the company are African American. A former black worker described the work environment at Tesla's Buffalo plant as a "very racist place". Tesla and SpaceX's treatment of Juneteenth in 2020 also came under fire. Approximately 100 former employees have submitted signed statements alleging that Tesla discriminates specifically against African Americans and "allows a racist environment in its factories." According to the state's Department of Fair Employment and Housing, the Fremont factory is a racially segregated place where Black employees claim they are given the most menial and physically demanding work. The accusations of racism culminated in February 2022 with the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing suing Tesla for "discriminating against its Black workers." In July 2021, former employee Melvin Berry received $1 million in his discrimination case in arbitration against Tesla after he claimed he was referred to by the n-word and forced to work longer hours at the Fremont plant. In October 2021, a jury verdict in the Owen Diaz vs. Tesla trial awarded the plaintiff $137 million in damages after he had faced racial harassment at Tesla's Fremont facility during 2015–2016. In a blog, Tesla stressed that Diaz was never "really" a Tesla worker, and that most utterings of the n-word were expressed in a friendly manner. In April 2022, federal judge William Orrick upheld the jury finding of Tesla's liability but reduced the total damage down to $15 million. Diaz was given a two-week deadline to decide if he would collect the damages. In June 2022, Diaz announced that he would be rejecting the $15 million award, opening the door for a new trial. In April 2023, Diaz was awarded $3.2 million in the new trial. Few of these cases against Tesla ever make it to trial as most employees are made to sign arbitration agreements. Employees are afterwards required to resolve such disputes out of court, and behind closed doors. Tesla's initial response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States has been the subject of considerable criticism. Musk had sought to exempt the Tesla Fremont factory in Alameda County, California from the government's stay-at-home orders. In an earnings call in April, he was heard calling the public health orders "fascist". He had also called the public's response to the pandemic "dumb" and had said online that there would be zero cases by April. In May 2020, while Alameda County officials were negotiating with the company to reopen the Fremont Factory on the 18th, Musk defied local government orders by restarting production on the 11th. Tesla also sued Alameda County, questioning the legality of the orders, but backed down after the Fremont Factory was given approval to reopen. In June 2020, Tesla published a detailed plan for bringing employees back to work and keeping them safe, however some employees still expressed concern for their health. In May 2020, Musk told workers that they could stay home if they felt uncomfortable coming back to work. But in June, Tesla fired an employee who criticized the company for taking inadequate safety measures to protect workers from the coronavirus at the Fremont Factory. Three more employees at Tesla's Fremont Factory claimed they were fired for staying home out of fear of catching COVID-19. This was subsequently denied by Tesla, which even stated that the employees were still on the payroll. COVID-19 cases at the factory grew from 10 in May 2020 to 125 in December 2020, with about 450 total cases in that time period out of the approximately 10,000 workers at the plant (4.5%). In China, Tesla had what one executive described as "not a green light from the government to get back to work – but a flashing-sirens police escort." Tesla enjoyed special treatment and strong government support in China, including tax breaks, cheap financing, and assistance in building its Giga Shanghai factory at breakneck speeds. Musk has praised China's way of doing things, a controversial stance due to deteriorating U.S.–Chinese relations, the Persecution of Uyghurs in China, and alleged human rights abuses in Hong Kong. Tesla was only the second product ever reviewed by Mozilla foundation which ticked all of their privacy concerns. A Tesla owner filed a lawsuit in 2023 following a Reuters report that Tesla employees shared "highly invasive videos and images recorded by customers' car cameras" with one another. Internal data troves shared with various international government agencies and news organizations by former employee and whistleblower Lukasz Krupski in late 2023 implicated Tesla in "serious data protection lapse[s]." The data Krupski retrieved included "information about current and former Tesla staff, including passport numbers, medical details and salaries" and was readily available on internal systems that most employees had access to. As of November 2023, the Data Protection Authority in the Netherlands is investigating whether Tesla's alleged lack of internal security violated privacy laws. TSLAQ is a collective of Tesla critics and short sellers who aim to "shape [the] perception [of Tesla] and move its stock." In January 2020, 20% of Tesla stock was shorted, the highest at that time of any stock in the U.S. equity markets. By early 2021, according to CNN, short sellers had lost $40 billion during 2020 as the stock price climbed much higher. Michael Burry, a short seller portrayed in The Big Short, had shorted Tesla previously via his firm Scion Asset Management, but removed his position in October 2021. According to automotive journalist Jamie Kitman, when multiple CEOs of major automotive manufacturers approached Tesla for EV technology that Musk had claimed the company was willing to share, they instead were offered the opportunity to buy regulatory credits from Tesla. This suggested, according to Kitman, that "the company may not be as eager for the electric revolution to occur as it claims." In 2020, the New York State Comptroller released an audit of the Giga New York factory project, concluding that it presented many red flags, including lack of basic due diligence and that the factory itself produced only $0.54 in economic benefits for every $1 spent by the state. Musk has been criticized for repeated pushing out both production and release dates of products. By one count in 2016, Musk had missed 20 projections. In October 2017, Musk predicted that Model 3 production would be 5,000 units per week by December. A month later, he revised that target to "sometime in March" 2018. Delivery dates for the Model 3 were delayed as well. Other projects like converting supercharger stations to be solar-powered have also lagged projections. Musk responded in late 2018: "punctuality is not my strong suit...I never made a mass-produced car. How am I supposed to know with precision when it's gonna get done?" On April 20, 2017, Tesla issued a worldwide recall of 53,000 (~70%) of the 76,000 vehicles it sold in 2016 due to faulty parking brakes which could become stuck and "prevent the vehicles from moving". On March 29, 2018, Tesla issued a worldwide recall of 123,000 Model S cars built before April 2016 due to corrosion-susceptible power steering bolts, which could fail and require the driver to use "increased force" to control the vehicle. In October 2020, Tesla initiated a recall of nearly 50,000 Model X and Y vehicles throughout China for suspension issues. Soon after in November, the NHTSA announced it had opened its own investigation into 115,000 Tesla cars regarding "front suspension safety issues", citing specifically 2015–2017 Model S and 2016–2017 Model X years. Cases of the "whompy wheel" phenomenon, which also included Model X and the occasional Model 3 cars, have been documented through 2020. In February 2021, Tesla was required by the NHTSA to recall 135,000 Model S and Model X vehicles built from 2012 to 2018 due to using a flash memory device that was rated to last only 5 to 6 years. The problem was related to touchscreen failures that could possibly affect the rear-view camera, safety systems, Autopilot and other features. The underlying technical reason is that the car writes a large amount of syslog content to the device, wearing it out prematurely. Also in February 2021, the German Federal Motor Transport Authority (KBA) ordered Tesla to recall 12,300 Model X cars because of "body mouldings problems". In June 2021, Tesla recalled 5,974 electric vehicles due to worries that brake caliper bolts might become loose, which could lead to loss of tire pressure, potentially increasing the chance of a crash. On December 30, 2021, Tesla announced that they are recalling more than 475,000 US model vehicles. This included 356,309 Model 3 Tesla vehicles from 2017 to 2020 due to rear-view camera issues and a further 119,009 Tesla Model S vehicles due to potential problems with the trunk or boot. The Model S recall includes vehicles manufactured between 2014 and 2021. Around 1% of recalled Model 3s may have a defective rear-view camera, and around 14% of recalled model S' may have the defect. The recall was not linked to a contemporaneous issue regarding the Passenger Play feature, which allowed games to be played on the touchscreen while the car is in motion. After an investigation was launched by the NHTSA covering 585,000 vehicles, Tesla agreed to make changes where the feature would be locked and unusable while the car is moving. In September 2022, Tesla announced that they are recalling almost 1.1 million US model vehicles because the automatic window reversal system might not react correctly after detecting an obstruction, increasing the risk of injury. In response, Tesla announced an over-the-air software fix. In February 2023, Tesla recalled its FSD software following a recommendation from NHTSA; the recall applied to approximately 360,000 cars. NHTSA found that FSD caused "unreasonable risk" when used on city streets. In March 2023, about 3,500 Model Y Teslas were recalled for a bolting issue concerning the cars' second-row seats. In December 2023, following a 2-year-long investigation by the NHTSA, Tesla issued a wider recall on all vehicles equipped with any version of Autosteer, including 2012–2023 Model S; 2016–2023 Model X; 2017–2023 Model 3; and 2020–2023 Model Y, covering 2,031,220 vehicles in total. The NHTSA concluded that Autosteer's controls were not sufficient to prevent misuse and did not ensure that the drivers maintained "continuous and sustained responsibility for vehicle operation" and states that affected vehicles will receive an over-the-air software remedy. Tesla customers have reported the company as being "slow" to address how their cars can ignite. In 2013, a Model S caught fire after the vehicle hit metal debris on a highway in Kent, Washington. Tesla confirmed the fire began in the battery pack and was caused by the impact of an object. As a result of this and other incidents, Tesla announced its decision to extend its current vehicle warranty to cover fire damage. In March 2014, the NHTSA announced that it had closed the investigation into whether the Model S was prone to catch fire, after Tesla said it would provide more protection to its battery packs. All Model S cars manufactured after March 6, 2014, have had the 0.25-inch (6.4 mm) aluminum shield over the battery pack replaced with a new three-layer shield. In October 2019, the NHTSA opened an investigation into possible battery defects in Tesla's Model S and X vehicles from 2012 to 2019 that could cause "non-crash" fires. A Model S driver died in a collision with a tractor-trailer in 2016, while the vehicle was in Autopilot mode; the driver is believed to be the first person to have died in a Tesla vehicle in Autopilot. The NHTSA investigated the accident but found no safety-related defect trend. In March 2018, a driver of a Tesla Model X was killed in a crash. Investigators say that the driver of the vehicle had his car in 'self-driving' mode and was using his phone to play games when the vehicle collided with the barrier in the middle of the freeway. Through investigation, the NTSB found that the Tesla malfunctioned due to the system being confused by an exit on the freeway. According to a document released in June 2021, the NHTSA has initiated at least 30 investigations into Tesla crashes that were believed to involve the use of Autopilot, with some involving fatalities. In early September 2021, the NHTSA updated the list with an additional fatality incident and ordered Tesla to hand over all extensive data pertaining to US cars with Autopilot to determine if there is a safety defect that leads Tesla cars to collide with first-responder vehicles. In late September 2021, Tesla released an over-the-air software update to detect emergency lights at night. In October 2021, the NHTSA asked Tesla why it did not issue a recall when it sent out that update. In June 2022, the NHTSA said it would expand its probe, extending it to 830,000 cars from all current Tesla models. The probe will be moved up from the Preliminary Evaluation level to the Engineering Analysis one. The regulator cited the reason for the expansion as the need to "explore the degree to which Autopilot and associated Tesla systems may exacerbate human factors or behavioral safety risks by undermining the effectiveness of the driver's supervision." A safety test conducted by the Dawn Project in August 2022 demonstrated that a test driver using the beta version of Full Self-Driving repeatedly hit a child-sized mannequin in its path, but there has been controversy over its conclusions. Several Tesla owners responded by conducting their own, independent tests using children; NHTSA released a statement warning against the practice. In August 2015, two researchers said they were able to take control of a Tesla Model S by hacking into the car's entertainment system. The hack required the researchers to physically access the car. Tesla issued a security update for the Model S the day after the exploit was announced. In September 2016, researchers at Tencent's Keen Security Lab demonstrated a remote attack on a Tesla Model S and controlled the vehicle in both Parking and Driving Mode without physical access. They were able to compromise the automotive networking bus (CAN bus) when the vehicle's web browser was used while the vehicle was connected to a malicious Wi-Fi hotspot. This was the first case of a remote control exploit demonstrated on a Tesla. The vulnerability was disclosed to Tesla under their bug bounty program and patched within 10 days, before the exploit was made public. Tencent also hacked the doors of a Model X in 2017. In January 2018, security researchers informed Tesla that an Amazon Web Services account of theirs could be accessed directly from the Internet and that the account had been exploited for cryptocurrency mining. Tesla responded by securing the compromised system, rewarding the security researchers financially via their bug bounty program, and stating that the compromise did not violate customer privacy, nor vehicle safety or security. Later in 2019, Tesla awarded a car and $375,000 to ethical hackers during a Pwn2Own Model 3 hacking event. In June 2022, Martin Herfurt, a security researcher in Austria, discovered that changes made to make Tesla vehicles easier to start with NFC cards also allowed for pairing new keys to the vehicle, allowing an attacker to enroll their own keys to a vehicle. In February 2022, Tesla drivers have reported a surge in "phantom braking" events when using Tesla Autopilot which coincides with the automaker's removal of radar as a supplemental sensor in May 2021. In response, NHTSA has opened an investigation. In May 2023, German business newspaper Handelsblatt published a series of articles based on a trove of internal Tesla data submitted to them from informants. The 100 gigabytes of data "contain[ed] over 1,000 accident reports involving phantom braking or unintended acceleration" as well as complaints about Tesla Autopilot. Dutch authorities responded by saying they were investigating the company for possible data privacy violations. Tesla has received thousands of complaints from owners that the driving ranges of their vehicles did not meet the ranges advertised by Tesla or the projections of in-dash range meters. When service centers were overwhelmed with appointments to take care of these issues, Tesla established a diversion team to cancel as many appointments as possible. Customers were told that remote diagnostics had determined there was no problem and their appointments were canceled. The company has been fined by South Korean regulators for its exaggerated range estimates. In 2023, Tesla ranked as the world's bestselling battery electric passenger car manufacturer, with a market share of 19.9%. Tesla reported 2023 vehicle deliveries of 1.8 million units, up 38% from 2022. In March 2024, Tesla produced its six millionth car. 100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 3 2012 4 1 2 2013 3 4 1 2 2014 3 4 1 2 2015 3 4 1 2 2016 3 4 1 2 2017 3 4 1 2 2018 3 4 1 2 2019 3 4 1 2 2020 3 4 1 2 2021 3 4 1 2 2022 3 4 1 2 2023 3 4   Model S   Model X   Model S/X   Model 3   Model 3/Y Tesla deliveries vary significantly by month due to regional issues such as availability of car carriers and registration. On March 9, 2020, the company produced its 1 millionth electric car, becoming the first auto manufacturer to achieve such a milestone. In the third quarter of 2021, Tesla sold its 2 millionth electric car, becoming the first auto manufacturer to achieve such a milestone. In the first quarter of 2023, the Model Y became the world's best-selling car, surpassing the Toyota Corolla. For the fiscal (and calendar) year 2021, Tesla reported a net income of $5.52 billion. The annual revenue was $53.8 billion, an increase of 71% over the previous fiscal year. Of the revenue number in 2021, $314 million came from selling regulatory credits to other automakers to meet government pollution standards. That number has been a smaller percentage of revenue for multiple quarters. Tesla ended 2021 with $17.6 billion of cash on hand, down $1.8 billion from the end of 2020.: 31  In February 2021, a 10-K filing revealed that Tesla had invested some $1.5 billion in the cryptocurrency Bitcoin, and the company indicated it would soon accept Bitcoin as a form of payment. Critics then pointed out how investing in cryptocurrency can run counter to Tesla's environmental goals. Tesla made more profit from the 2021 investment than the profit from selling cars in 2020, due to the Bitcoin price increase after the investment was announced. The quarter ending June 2021 was the first time Tesla made a profit independent of Bitcoin and regulatory credits. The key trends for Tesla are (as at the financial year ending December 31): Martin Eberhard (2004–2007) Ze'ev Drori (2007–2008) Elon Musk (since October 2008) Elon Musk (2004–2018) Robyn Denholm (since November 2018) Tesla has received criticism that its board lacks enough independent directors. In an April 2017 public letter, a group of influential Tesla investors, including the California State Teachers' Retirement System, asked Tesla to add two new independent directors to its board "who do not have any ties with chief executive Elon Musk". The investors wrote that "five of six current non-executive directors have professional or personal ties to Mr. Musk that could put at risk their ability to exercise independent judgement." Tesla's directors at the time included Brad Buss, who served as chief financial officer at SolarCity; Steve Jurvetson, a venture capitalist who also sits on the board of SpaceX; Elon Musk's brother, Kimbal; and Ira Ehrenpreis and Antonio Gracias, both of whom also invested in SpaceX. The letter called for a more independent board that could put a check on groupthink. At first Musk responded on Twitter, writing that the investors "should buy Ford stock" because "their governance is amazing." Two days later, he promised he would add two independent board members; Kathleen Wilson-Thompson and Larry Ellison were added at the end of 2018. Ellison stepped down in August 2022. Former Tesla CTO J. B. Straubel who left the company in 2019, was elected to the board in 2023. Another criticism of the board composition is that most of the independent directors lack automotive industry experience. The exception is Robyn Denholm who served in finance and corporate reporting roles at Toyota Australia from 1989 to 1996. Other previous board members include businessman Steve Westly; Daimler executive Herbert Kohler; CEO and Chairman of Johnson Publishing Company Linda Johnson Rice; and United Nations Special Envoy on Innovative Finance and Sustainable Investments Hiromichi Mizuno. As of May 2023[update], the board members are: The 10 largest shareholders of Tesla in March 2024 were: List of automobile manufacturers of the United States List of Easter eggs in Tesla products List of production battery electric vehicles Plug-in electric vehicles in California Plug-in electric vehicles in the United States Footnotes According to company representatives, both pronunciations are correct, though Nikola Tesla's surname is properly pronounced TESS-lə. Ewing, Jack (January 16, 2024). "Musk Demands Bigger Stake in Tesla as Price for A.I. Work". New York Times. Retrieved March 6, 2024. "Annual report Form 10-K 2023 Tesla Inc". January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 29, 2024. "Q4 2023 Shareholder Deck" (PDF). Tesla, Inc. January 24, 2024. Retrieved January 24, 2024. "Elon Musk". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "What's the correct way to pronounce 'Tesla'? We asked". Yahoo! Finance. July 13, 2017. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Shahan, Zachary (August 26, 2021). "Tesla Model 3 Has Passed 1 Million Sales". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. "The Global 2000 2023". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Vance 2015, p. 152. Kay, Grace. "Ousted Tesla cofounder Martin Eberhard sounds off on Elon Musk, how the company has changed, and the EV wars". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Reed, Eric (February 4, 2020). "History of Tesla: Timeline and Facts". TheStreet.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. "Tesla: A Carmaker With Silicon Valley Spark". Bloomberg.com. July 30, 2007. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Vance 2015, p. 154. Burns, Matt (October 8, 2014). "A Brief History of Tesla". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on July 17, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015. Tesla was founded not by Elon Musk, but rather by Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning in July 2003. The two bootstrapped the fledgling auto company until Elon Musk led the company's US$7.5 million Series A financing round in February 2004. Vance 2015, p. 155. LaMonica, Martin (September 21, 2009). "Tesla Motors founders: Now there are five". CNET. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2016. Mitchell, Russ (July 30, 2021). "Review: A deep new history of Tesla takes the shine off Elon Musk". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved July 30, 2021. Musk, Elon (August 2, 2006). "The Secret Tesla Motors Master Plan (just between you and me) No. 124". tesla.com. Tesla Motors. Archived from the original on August 2, 2010.[self-published source] Weinstock, Suzanne (January 5, 2013). "Venture-backed Tesla cuts costs". Private Equity International. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Williams, E. Freya (2015). Green giants : how smart companies turn sustainability into billion-dollar businesses. New York. ISBN 978-0-8144-3614-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Kanellos, Michael (August 13, 2007). "Tesla CEO steps down as possible delays loom". CNET. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Martin Eberhard and Marc Tarpenning | American entrepreneurs". Encyclopædia Britannica. September 18, 2023. Archived from the original on February 18, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Baer, Drake (November 11, 2014). "The Making Of Tesla: Invention, Betrayal, And The Birth Of The Roadster". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved October 3, 2018. Fehrenbacher, Katie (June 11, 2009). "Tesla Founder Eberhard Files Lawsuit Against Tesla's Elon Musk". GigaOm. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Case CIV484400; Martin Eberhard vs. Elon Musk". Superior Court of California, County of San Mateo. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Ramey, Jay (November 27, 2017). "The first Tesla Roadster: A look back at the early adopter's electric car". Autoweek. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Gulker, Chris (September 28, 2010). "Menlo Park's only auto factory assembles $100,000 cars". InMenlo. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2023. "Elon Musk's Life Story: Tesla CEO's Early Years, Career". Business Insider. June 28, 2021. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Riddell, Lindsay (June 24, 2009). "Tesla gets long-awaited government loan". American City Business Journals. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Cole, Jay (May 22, 2013). "Tesla Repays Entire DoE Loan, Taxpayers Make $12 Million on the Deal". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Isidore, Chris (May 22, 2013). "Tesla repays federal loan nearly 10 years early". CNN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Davis, Joshua (September 27, 2010). "How Elon Musk Turned Tesla into the Car Company of the Future". Wired. Vol. 18, no. 10. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Andrejczak, Matt (June 28, 2010). "Tesla Motors revs up $244 million IPO". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Scholer, Kristen; Spears, Lee (June 29, 2010). "Tesla Posts Second-Biggest Rally for 2010 U.S. IPO". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Squatriglia, Chuck (October 20, 2010). "Tesla's Got the Factory, Now It Needs to Fill It". Wired. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2020. "Tesla Motors begins delivering Model S electric cars in a Silicon Valley milestone". The Mercury News. June 22, 2012. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2020. MacKenzie, Angus (December 10, 2012). "Model S Motor Trend Car of the Year Award 2013". Motor Trend. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Voelcker, John (October 1, 2013). "Tesla Model S Was Best-Selling Car in Norway For September". Green Car Reports. Archived from the original on September 26, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Cobb, Jeff (January 26, 2017). "Tesla Model S Is World's Best-Selling Plug-in Car For Second Year in a Row". HybridCars.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved January 31, 2017. Maanyu1, K. Nived; Raj, D Goutham; Krishna, R Vamsi; Choubey, Shruthi Bhargava (May 2020). "A Study on Tesla Autopilot" (PDF). Sreenidhi Institute of Science and Technology. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Berzon, Alexandra; Sweet, Cassandra (May 1, 2015). "Tesla CEO Elon Musk Unveils Line of Home and Industrial Battery Packs". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 21, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Randall, Tom (May 8, 2015). "Tesla's Battery Grabbed $800 Million in Its First Week". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2017. Logan, Bryan (September 29, 2015). "Here's Tesla's first SUV, the all-electric Model X". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Valdes-Dapena, Peter (September 29, 2015). "Tesla has delivered the first Model X SUVs". CNN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Hawkins, Andrew J. (November 21, 2016). "Tesla completes its $2.6 billion acquisition of SolarCity". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Hamilton, Isobel Asher (July 30, 2021). "Elon Musk is defending Tesla's acquisition of SolarCity against angry shareholders. This is the story of how it was transformed into Tesla Energy". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 24, 2021. Retrieved July 24, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (October 28, 2019). "Tesla's Elon Musk knew SolarCity faced a 'liquidity crisis' at time of 2016 deal, legal documents show". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Ferris, Robert (February 1, 2017). "Tesla is following in the footsteps of Apple and is changing its name". CNBC. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2021. Hull, Dana (April 7, 2016). "Tesla Says It Received More Than 325,000 Model 3 Reservations". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016. King, Gayle (April 13, 2018). "Tesla CEO Elon Musk, stressed but "optimistic," predicts big increase in Model 3 production". CBS News. Archived from the original on July 27, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Isidore, Chris. "Tesla will start working 24/7 to crank out Model 3s". CNNMoney. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. Boudette, Neal E. (April 3, 2018). "For Tesla, 'Production Hell' Looks Like the Reality of the Car Business". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Randall, Tom (April 3, 2018). "Tesla's Model 3 Is Now America's Best-Selling Electric Car". Bloomberg Hyperdrive. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. O'Kane, Sean (February 22, 2019). "Tesla's Model 3 was the best-selling EV in the world last year". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Dickey, Megan Rose (August 8, 2018). "Elon Musk tweets he's thinking about taking Tesla private". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Huddleston, Tom Jr. (August 8, 2018). "Elon Musk says he wants to take Tesla private at over $70 billion – here's what that means". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (July 22, 2020). "Tesla reports fourth straight quarter of profits". CNBC. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Vlastelica, Ryan (January 6, 2021). "Tesla Eyes Another Milestone as Valuation Nears Facebook's". Yahoo! Finance. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Kolodny, Michael Wayland, Lora (December 14, 2020). "Tesla's market cap tops the 9 largest automakers combined – Experts disagree about if that can last". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Root, Al (December 7, 2020). "Tesla Becomes Only the Sixth Company to Top $600 Billion in Value". Barron's. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Davies, Rob (December 21, 2020). "Tesla joins Wall Street's S&P 500 share index". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Bursztynsky, Jessica (January 8, 2021). "Tesla closes day as fifth most valuable U.S. company, passing Facebook". CNBC. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Lambert, Fred (March 15, 2019). "Tesla unveils Model Y electric SUV with 300 miles range and 7-seats". Electrek. Archived from the original on March 15, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2019. Lambert, Fred (April 8, 2020). "Tesla Model Y teardown: shows some great improvements over Model 3 despite sharing 75% of parts". Electrek. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2020. Dow, Jameson (March 13, 2020). "Tesla Model Y specs: we finally know how big it is". electrek.co. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved March 14, 2020. Ohnsman, Alan (January 7, 2019). "Elon Musk Accelerates Tesla's China Strategy With Shanghai Gigafactory Groundbreaking". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "Tesla delivers its first 'Made in China' cars". BBC News. December 30, 2019. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "German court says Tesla can clear trees to build car factory". The Guardian. February 21, 2020. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020. "Tesla opens Giga Berlin factory in Germany". Deutsche Welle. March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2022. Lambert, Fred (July 25, 2020). "Watch Tesla start construction work at Gigafactory Texas in drone video". Electrek. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Carlson, Kara (April 7, 2022). "Inside Elon's big, weird Austin party: Music, robots – and even a petting zoo". Austin American-Statesman. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Hawkins, Andrew J. (November 30, 2023). "Tesla Cybertruck delivery event: Elon Musk hands over the first trucks to customers". The Verge. Retrieved February 3, 2024. Shakir, Umar (March 1, 2023). "Tesla confirms its next Gigafactory will be in Mexico". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 3, 2023. Retrieved March 3, 2023. "Tesla shuts down Fremont plant after mounting criticism". CNET. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Wong, Julia Carrie (May 11, 2020). "Elon Musk reopens California Tesla factory in defiance of lockdown order". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Sandler, Rachel (May 20, 2020). "Tesla Drops Lawsuit Against Alameda County Over Factory Reopening". Forbes. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Hull, Dana (December 1, 2021). "Tesla Makes It Official, Marking Headquarters Move to Texas". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. Amanda del Castillo (October 7, 2021). "Elon Musk says Tesla will move Palo Alto headquarters to Austin". ABC7 San Francisco. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021. Alamalhodaei, Aria (September 23, 2021). "Tesla's battery-manufacturing 'Megafactory' breaks ground in California". TechCrunch. Retrieved October 22, 2021.[permanent dead link] Hull, Dana; Breslau, Karen (February 23, 2023). "Newsom, Musk dedicate former HP headquarters in Palo Alto to Tesla engineers". Los Angeles Times. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "Tesla Bets on Bitcoin in Blue-Chip Boost to Cryptocurrency". Bloomberg L.P. February 8, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Porter, Jon (March 24, 2021). "You can now buy a Tesla with bitcoin in the US". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2021. "Tesla will no longer accept Bitcoin over climate concerns, says Musk". BBC News. May 13, 2021. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Iyengar, Rish (May 13, 2021). "Bitcoin drops around 12% after Elon Musk tweets that Tesla will not accept it as payment". CNN. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. "Elon Musk's Tesla sells most of its Bitcoin holdings". BBC News. July 21, 2022. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Tesla Signature series Model X to begin delivery September 29". CNBC. Reuters. September 3, 2015. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved September 4, 2015. "Tesla Fourth Quarter & Full Year 2016 Update" (PDF). Tesla Inc. Palo Alto. February 22, 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 23, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017. Production totaled 24,882 vehicles in 4Q 2016 and vehicle deliveries totaled 22,252 units. No breakdown by model was provided. Jose, Pontes (February 2, 2021). "Global Top 20 – December 2020". EVSales.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "Global sales totaled 3,124,793 plug-in passenger cars in 2020, with a BEV to PHEV ratio of 69:31, and a global market share of 4%. The world's top selling plug-in car was the Tesla Model 3 with 365,240 units delivered, and Tesla was the top selling manufacturer of plug-in passenger cars in 2019 with 499,535 units, followed by VW with 220,220." O'Kane, Sean (February 22, 2019). "Tesla's Model 3 was the best-selling EV in the world last year". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Jose, Pontes (January 30, 2022). "World EV Sales – Tesla Model 3 Wins 4th Consecutive Best Seller Title in Record Year". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on February 6, 2022. Retrieved February 5, 2022. "The top 3 global best selling plug-in electric cars in 2021 were the Tesla Model 3 (500,713), the Wuling Hongguang Mini EV (424,138), and the Tesla Model Y (410,517)" Munoz, Juan Felipe (May 25, 2023). "Tesla Model Y Was The World's Best-Selling Car In Q1 2023". Motor1. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023. Subramanian, Pras (December 2, 2022). "Tesla Semi unveiled with tri-motor setup, megawatt charging tech". Yahoo! Finance. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved December 5, 2022. Tarantola, A. (December 1, 2022). "Tesla finally delivers its first production Semi". Engadget. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "Shattered glass: Futuristic design questioned after Tesla Cybertruck launch". Reuters. November 22, 2019. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. Ricker, Thomas (November 22, 2019). "Elon Musk's Cybertruck is here, and so are the jokes". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. McFarland, Matt (November 22, 2019). "Tesla's Cybertruck has become the butt of every internet joke". CNN. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "Tesla Roadster is back: 0–60 in 1.9 seconds, 620-mile range". Green Car Reports. November 17, 2017. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Gibbs, Samuel (November 17, 2017). "Tesla Roadster: nine things we know about the 'smackdown to gasoline cars'". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Merano, Maria (May 17, 2023). "Elon Musk sets expectations for next-gen Tesla Roadster production". TESLARATI. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved May 17, 2023. Morris, James (January 7, 2023). "Tesla Next Generation Platform: Everything We Know So Far". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 13, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2023. Woodyard, Chris (August 3, 2011). "Tesla boasts about electric car deliveries, plans for sedan". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2011. "Supply Agreement for Products and Services – Lotus Cars Limited". sec.gov. July 11, 2005. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Lambert, Fred (December 7, 2019). "Tesla starts charging $10 a month for its 'premium connectivity' features". Electrek. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Tesla Service Struggles To Keep Up With Sales Volume". CleanTechnica. March 21, 2019. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "Tesla Mobile Service". Electrek. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Yarow, Jay (March 12, 2014). "Watch Elon Musk Make An Emotional Speech About How Auto Dealers Are 'Perverting Democracy' To Destroy Tesla And Hurt Customers". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Dent, Steve (March 22, 2019). "Tesla drops annual servicing for 'as needed' repair model". Engadget. US. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Lambert, Fred (August 2, 2022). "Tesla enables paid charging at Destination Chargers, but there's a catch". Electrek. Archived from the original on August 4, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2022. Templeton, Brad. "For Tesla Electric Car Tourism, Hotel Charging Is The Answer, Not Supercharging". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Laing, Keith (September 7, 2023). "Tesla to Supply Hilton Hotels With 20,000 EV Chargers by 2025". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on October 5, 2023. Retrieved October 5, 2023. Glon, Ronan (June 4, 2017). "AAA raising insurance rates for Tesla owners". Left Lane News. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2017. Barlyn, Suzanne; Mathias, Tamara (August 28, 2019). "Tesla rolls out insurance in California". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. "Tesla Insurance Support". Tesla, Inc. Archived from the original on August 18, 2023. Retrieved August 18, 2023. Sully, Evan (October 21, 2020). "Experts say Tesla's unique data-tracking abilities give it an advantage as Elon Musk looks to build a 'major insurance company' for Tesla owners". Business Insider. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. "Tesla expands its own insurance based on real-time driver data to two more states – now in 10 states". electrek.co. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Desjardins, Jeff (April 28, 2018). "Here's what the future of Tesla could look like". Business Insider. Archived from the original on May 1, 2018. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Weber, Harri (January 24, 2024). "Tesla's solar installs drop, but battery business is booming". TechCrunch. Retrieved February 3, 2024. Hanley, Steve (August 12, 2016). "Elon Musk & SolarCity CTO Peter Rive Announce 'Solar Roof' (Not 'Solar on the Roof')". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "Complete review of Tesla solar panels: are they worth it?". Solar Reviews. May 9, 2021. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Debord, Matthew (May 1, 2015). "Elon Musk's big announcement: it's called 'Tesla Energy'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2015. Lambert, Fred (May 3, 2020). "Tesla has a new product: Autobidder, a step toward becoming an electric utility". Electrek. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2020. Hampton, Liz; Jin, Hyunjoo (September 8, 2021). "Tesla plans energy trading team as company expands battery projects". Reuters. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Delbert, Caroline (May 4, 2020). "Elon Musk Would Like to Help You Trade Energy". Popular Mechanics. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. "Tesla Battery Backup Systems Manage Over 1.2GWh of Energy Storage Via Autobidder". finance.yahoo.com. March 16, 2021. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "Tesla Electric". Tesla. Archived from the original on June 27, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Lambert, Fred (August 17, 2023). "Tesla Electric customers came out of Texas heatwave with an extra $100 in their pockets". Electrek. Archived from the original on August 18, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Wilson, Kevin A. (March 15, 2018). "Worth the Watt: A Brief History of the Electric Car, 1830 to Present". Car and Driver. Archived from the original on March 17, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2021. Welch, David (July 30, 2007). "Tesla: A Carmaker With Silicon Valley Spark". BloombergBusinessweek. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved March 13, 2014. "Elon Musk Envisions Tesla Electric Car as Low as $20K". GigaOm. September 17, 2008. Archived from the original on March 12, 2015. Vaughan, Adam (October 25, 2013). "12 interesting things we learned from Tesla's Elon Musk this week". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved December 13, 2016. "Tesla Introduced A Business Model The World Has Not Seen Before". CleanTechnica. August 29, 2020. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Read, Richard. "GM Follows Tesla's Lead, Plans To Sell Directly To Online Shoppers". The Car Connection. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2020. "7 Reasons Why Tesla Insists on Selling its Own Cars". Fortune. January 19, 2016. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. O'Toole, James (July 2, 2013). "Tesla direct-sales petition hits 100,000 signatures". CNN. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved August 3, 2020. Shipley, Lou (February 28, 2020). "How Tesla Sets Itself Apart". Harvard Business Review. ISSN 0017-8012. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2020. "Annual report Form 10-K 2021 Tesla Inc". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 7, 2022. Chapman, Steve (June 20, 2013). "Car buyers get hijacked". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 20, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Tesla Stores". Tesla. April 2, 2021. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Borchers, Callum (November 20, 2013). "Automaker Tesla looks to bypass car dealers". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2017. "Tesla Has Altered The Car Dealership Model for the Better". InsideEVs. January 23, 2020. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Valdes-Dapena, Peter (May 20, 2013). "Tesla's fight with America's car dealers". CNN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Gallucci, Maria (June 13, 2014). "Tesla Motors Opens Patents: Elon Musk's Electric Cars Now Part Of 'Open Source Movement'". HybridCars.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2014. Lambert, Fred (February 26, 2016). "Tesla is now ~80% vertically integrated, says Goldman Sachs after a Tesla Factory visit". Electrek. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2016. McAssey, Pat (October 13, 2016). "Volkswagen CEO 'Annoyed Beyond Measure' That DHL Made Electric Van". NESN Fuel. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2016. "Alternative Fuels Data Center: Developing Infrastructure to Charge Plug-In Electric Vehicles". afdc.energy.gov. United States Department of Energy. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2016. Stringham, Edward Peter; Miller, Jennifer Kelly; Clark, J.R. (2015). "Overcoming Barriers to Entry in an Established Industry: Tesla Motors". California Management Review. 57 (4): 85–103. doi:10.1525/cmr.2015.57.4.85. ISSN 0008-1256. S2CID 155655599. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Korzeniewski, Jeremy (July 29, 2020). "Elon Musk: Tesla would share batteries, technology with competitors". Autoblog. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Blattberg, Eric (June 14, 2014). "Here's what Tesla's 'good faith' patent stance actually means". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Roberts, Jeff John (June 14, 2014). "What Elon Musk did – and did not – do when he "opened" Tesla's patents". GigaOm. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "What Batteries Are Tesla Using In Its Electric Cars?". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Tesla Now Has Multiple Battery Options: Which One Should You Choose?". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Merano, Maria (October 11, 2021). "Tesla Model S Plaid battery pack shows that 18650 cell innovations are not over yet". TESLARATI. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Prince, Max (March 28, 2014). "Meet the up-armored, titanium-shielded Tesla Model S". Road & Track. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Lee, Timothy (December 13, 2021). "Why battery costs have plunged 89 percent since 2010". Full Stack Economics. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022. Tesla hasn't shared its exact battery costs with BloombergNEF, but the group estimates Tesla spends $112 per kWh – 15 percent below the industry average of $132. Fisher, Thomas (June 11, 2013). "What Goes into A Tesla Model S Battery – And What It May Cost". Green Car Reports. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2014. Kane, Mark (May 23, 2022). "What Batteries Are Tesla Using In Its Electric Cars?". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on August 3, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2023. "Panasonic to expand battery capacity at Tesla Gigafactory". TechCrunch. September 8, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2021.[permanent dead link] Gurskiy, Denis (January 27, 2021). "Tesla Factory: Stats, Production, History, and Delivery Numbers by Gigafactory". EVBite. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Lambert, Fred (January 19, 2021). "First look at Tesla's new structural battery pack that will power its future electric cars". Electrek. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Hawkins, Andrew J. (September 22, 2020). "Tesla announces "tabless" battery cells that will improve range of its electric cars". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved September 23, 2020. Sanderson, Henry (February 19, 2020). "Tesla's choice of cheaper lithium batteries hits cobalt miners". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Lambert, Fred (April 22, 2022). "Tesla is already using cobalt-free LFP batteries in half of its new cars produced". Electrek. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Hanley, Steve (May 11, 2021). "Tesla Transitions To LFP Battery Cells For Megapack Installations". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on August 18, 2023. Retrieved August 18, 2023. MacQueen, Caitlyn (January 19, 2021). "Advanced Battery Scientists Join Excludive Tesla Partnership at DAL in Research Chair Roles". Dalhousie University. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Tesla Motors signs first Canadian university research agreement with Dalhousie University" (Press release). Dalhousie University. June 17, 2015. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Shirouzu, Norihiko; Lienert, Paul (May 14, 2020). "How Tesla tapped a tiny Canadian lab for battery breakthroughs". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Lambert, Fred (January 9, 2020). "Tesla is going to have new head of its Advanced Battery Research in Canada". Electrek. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Lambert, Fred (January 21, 2020). "Elon Musk: Tesla acquisition of Maxwell is going to have a very big impact on batteries". Electrek. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Lambert, Fred (July 21, 2021). "Tesla (TSLA) sells back Maxwell Technology's ultracapacitor business to former executives". Electrek. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Tesla Adds Hibar Systems To Its List Of Acquisitions". CleanTechnica. October 6, 2019. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Palmer, Annie (October 7, 2019). "Tesla reportedly bought a company that specializes in high-speed battery manufacturing". CNBC. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "Tesla taps tiny startup's tech to build cheaper, cleaner batteries". TechCrunch. May 4, 2021. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Bonifacic, Igor (May 4, 2021). "Tesla may have paid $3 to buy patents for making cleaner EV batteries". Engadget. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Lambert, Fred (July 19, 2017). "Tesla's over-the-air software updates make other vehicles 'highly vulnerable to obsolescence', says analyst". Electrek. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Lambert, Fred (October 3, 2023). "Tesla just made your car safer after a crash through a software update". Electrek. Archived from the original on October 3, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2023. Lambert, Fred (February 15, 2020). "Tesla starts selling rear-heated seats on Model 3 SR and SR Plus as $300 OTA upgrade". Electrek. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Baldwin, Roberto (June 22, 2020). "Musk Announces Tesla Basic Autopilot Deal". Car and Driver. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2020. "Tesla's 3-Phase 4-Pole AC Induction Motor – Why Nikola Tesla's 19th Century Induction Motor Is The Ideal Choice for the 21st Century Electric Car". CleanTechnica. May 30, 2016. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Motor technology from Model 3 helps Tesla boost Model S range 10%". ArsTechnica. April 24, 2019. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Huynh, TA (June 2018). "Performance Analysis of Permanent Magnet Motors for Electric Vehicles Traction Considering Driving Cycles". Energies. 11 (6): 1385. doi:10.3390/en11061385. Lambert, Fred (October 19, 2023). "Toyota signs deal with Tesla for NACS and Supercharger access". Electrek. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. "Apple engineer killed in Tesla SUV crash on Silicon Valley freeway was playing videogame: NTSB". MarketWatch. February 25, 2020. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Lambert, Fred (June 17, 2015). "Understanding Tesla's self-driving features: The Autopilot". Electrek. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Lambert, Fred (October 20, 2016). "A look at Tesla's new Autopilot hardware suite: 8 cameras, 1 radar, ultrasonics & new supercomputer". Electrek. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Lambert, Fred (August 9, 2017). "Tesla has a new Autopilot '2.5' hardware suite with more computing power for autonomous driving". Electrek. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Lambert, Fred (January 4, 2019). "Tesla leaks info about new self-driving computer in latest software update". Electrek. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Logan, Bryan (April 11, 2019). "Tesla made Autopilot a standard feature on all its vehicles and announced sweeping changes to the Model 3 lineup". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. O'Kane, Sean (April 27, 2020). "Teslas can now see and slow for traffic lights and stop signs". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2020. Popa, Bogdan (October 2, 2020). "Tesla Cars No Longer Need Driver Input to Automatically Go Through Intersections". Autoevolution. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2021. Lambert, Fred (March 5, 2019). "Tesla Autopilot now detects stop lines in move to handle intersections". Electrek. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Transitioning to Tesla Vision". tesla.com. May 25, 2021. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. McFarland, Matt (June 18, 2021). "Tesla is following in the steps of an unlikely rival: Subaru". CNN. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (May 25, 2021). "Tesla is ditching radar, will rely on cameras for Autopilot in some cars". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Metz, Cade; Boudette, Neal E. (December 6, 2021). "Inside Tesla as Elon Musk Pushed an Unflinching Vision for Self-Driving Cars". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2021. Lee, Timothy B. (February 13, 2019). "In 2017, the feds said Tesla Autopilot cut crashes 40% – that was bogus". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved February 5, 2022. Goodall, Noah J. (October 26, 2021). "A Methodology for Normalizing Safety Statistics of Partially Automated Vehicles". Virginia Transportation Research Council. doi:10.31224/osf.io/m8j6g. S2CID 240033225. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved February 5, 2022. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Golson, Jordan; Bohn, Dieter (October 19, 2016). "All new Tesla cars now have hardware for 'full self-driving capabilities'". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2016. "Tesla Offers 'Full Self-Driving' Feature as a Monthly Subscription". Consumer Reports. July 22, 2021. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Stoklosa, Alexander (October 22, 2020). "Tesla Puts "Beta" Version of Full Self-Driving Capability in Hands of Select Few". Motor Trend. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2020. Holderith, Peter (October 27, 2020). "Tesla's 'Full Self Driving' Beta Tech Nearly Wrecked This Model 3 Into a Parked Car". The Drive. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2020. Synced (October 28, 2020). "Tesla Rolls Out 'Full Self-Driving' Beta; Critics Apply the Brakes". Synced. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2020. Kolodny, Lora (March 12, 2021). "A federal agency warns Tesla tests unfinished driverless tech on its users". CNBC. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2021. "If GM/Cruise Is Way Behind Waymo, How Does It Compare To Tesla?". CleanTechnica. June 20, 2019. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved October 23, 2020. "Tesla Autopilot Updates & Notes from Elon Musk". CleanTechnica. October 12, 2020. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2020. Lee, Timothy B. (August 6, 2019). "Elon Musk: "Anyone relying on lidar is doomed." Experts: Maybe not". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Klender, Joey (January 14, 2021). "Tesla dials in on FSD improvements with 'millimeter-wave radar sensor' filing". Teslarati. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Agarwal, Yash (September 3, 2019). "Tesla develops new chip : has it finally cracked full autonomous driving?". DriveTribe. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2020. Hawkins, Andrew J. (April 24, 2019). "It's Elon Musk vs. everyone else in the race for fully driverless cars". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. "Tesla's plan for Level 5 not feasible, experts say". Automotive News. July 20, 2020. Archived from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2020. Group, SAE Media. "Is Lidar Necessary for Autonomous Vehicles?". techbriefs.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Baldwin, Roberto (March 9, 2021). "Tesla Tells California DMV that FSD Is Not Capable of Autonomous Driving". Car and Driver. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Abuelsamid, Sam; Shepard, Scott (May 20, 2021). "Guidehouse Insights Names Waymo, Nvidia, Argo AI, and Baidu the Leading Companies Developing Automated Driving Systems (Executive Summary)" (PDF). Guidehouse Insights. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021.(Registration required) Korosec, Kirsten (October 26, 2021). "NTSB chair calls on Elon Musk to change design of Tesla Autopilot". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2017. "Tesla quietly acquired automated manufacturing firm to design factories". Electrek. June 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 28, 2021. "Tesla just bought an automation company to help it build the factory of the future — here's what we know about it". Business Insider. November 7, 2017. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Bomey, Nathan. "A first in Michigan: Tesla buys Grand Rapids auto supplier". Detroit Free Press. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Giga Presses -- the giant die casts that are reshaping car manufacturing". US. Reuters. February 10, 2023. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2023 – via Automotive News. Inagaki, Kana; Campbell, Peter; Keohane, David (November 6, 2023). "Toyota takes on Tesla's gigacasting in battle for carmaking's future". Financial Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2023. Bobrowsky, Meghan; Elliott, Rebecca (September 30, 2022). "Elon Musk Unveils Prototype of Tesla's Humanoid Robot Optimus, Says It Will Cost Less Than a Car". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 2, 2022. Müller, Karl (July 31, 2023). "Ganz still und leise: Darum übernimmt Tesla ein deutsches Unternehmen" [Very quietly: This is why Tesla is taking over a German company]. Chip (in German). Archived from the original on August 1, 2023. Retrieved August 1, 2023. Kramer, Von Bernd; Schols, Dora (October 11, 2023). "Warum Tesla das Geschäft des Freiburger Start-ups Wiferion überraschend verkauft" [Why Tesla surprisingly sells the business of the Freiburg start-up Wiferion]. Badische Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 16, 2023. Hawkins, Andrew J. (October 11, 2023). "Tesla flips a wireless charging company". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 16, 2023. Muoio, Danielle (November 1, 2016). "Elon Musk: Tesla is developing a special kind of glass for its Model 3". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Korosec, Kirsten. "Tesla to reduce on-site staff at Nevada gigafactory by 75%". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on December 12, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2021. "Tesla Factory". Tesla. March 28, 2022. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Johnston, Adam (January 8, 2016). "Tesla Starts Off 2016 By Producing & Delivering Powerwall". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Damon, Anjeanette. "Worker injuries, 911 calls, housing crisis: Recruiting Tesla exacts a price". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Loveday, Steven (March 31, 2021). "New Nevada Tesla Semi Production Line May Build 5 Trucks Per Week". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Ayre, James (September 7, 2017). "Solar Roof Tile Production at Tesla's Buffalo "Gigafactory" Now Up & Running". Clean Technica. Archived from the original on January 12, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2017. Hanley, Steve (February 28, 2020). "Tesla Now Has 1,800 Employees in New York, Panasonic Quits Gigafactory 2 In Buffalo (The Solar One)". CleanTechnica. Archived from the original on March 19, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (October 23, 2019). "Tesla shares soar after crushing third-quarter earnings". CNBC. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Tesla to Spend $188 Million to Expand Shanghai Factory". The Street. November 26, 2021. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2021. "Elon Musk personally delivers first made-in Germany Tesla Model Y at Gigafactory Berlin". electrek.co. March 22, 2022. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2022. "New Tesla factory near Berlin to create 'up to 10,000 jobs'". The Local Germany. November 13, 2019. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Kane, Mark. "Tesla's Elon Musk Shows Off Huge Progress at Giga Berlin". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "Elon Musk opens Tesla's Texas gigafactory with an all-night, neon-light 'Cyber Rodeo'". Fortune. April 9, 2022. Archived from the original on July 18, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Vorrath, Sophie (July 22, 2020). "Giga Texas! Austin to build Tesla's new Cybertruck and Tesla Semi". The Driven. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2020. "Elon Must: Over 10,000 people are needed for Giga Texas just through 2022!". Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Marshall, Matt (June 2, 2016). "2006: San Carlos start-up Tesla seeks sexier electric car". Mercury News. San Jose, California. Archived from the original on June 8, 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2016. Gulker, Chris (September 28, 2010). "Menlo Park's only auto factory assembles $100,000 cars". InMenlo. Retrieved August 13, 2023. Behrens, Zach (May 2, 2008). "Tesla Opens First Dealership in Los Angeles". LAist. Archived from the original on May 5, 2008. Retrieved April 8, 2020. "Tesla moving headquarters and powertrain operations to Palo Alto". Mercury News. August 17, 2009. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2009. Kiley, David (April 2, 2010). "Goodbye, NUMMI: How a Plant Changed the Culture of Car-Making". Popular Mechanics. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Randall, Tom (January 4, 2017). "Tesla Flips the Switch on the Gigafactory". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved January 4, 2017. Lambert, Fred (January 3, 2018). "Tesla increases hiring effort at Gigafactory 1 to reach goal of 35 GWh of battery production". electrek.co. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2018. Hidalgo, Jason (March 2, 2023). "Nevada approves $330 million in tax incentives for Tesla electric semi facility. What we know". Reno Gazette Journal. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Damon, Anjeanette (September 16, 2014). "Inside Nevada's $1.25 billion Tesla tax deal". Reno Gazette Journal. Retrieved November 3, 2016. the company must invest a minimum of $3.5 billion in manufacturing equipment and real property in the state. Five other states charge no sales tax at all and 34 states, including Arizona and Texas, don't charges sales tax on manufacturing equipment. Robinson, David (August 31, 2017). "6 things to watch as Panasonic gears up to start production". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on September 3, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2020. Christmann, Samantha (December 27, 2016). "Panasonic will invest in Tesla's South Buffalo solar plant". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Bykowicz, Julie; Mann, Ted (July 6, 2023). "New York State Built Elon Musk a $1 Billion Factory. 'It Was a Bad Deal.'". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Tesla's newest factory is inside a fabric building" (Press release). US: ClearSpan. June 21, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2024. Lambert, Fred (January 5, 2021). "Tesla Gigafactory Texas hits hyperspeed with giant building coming up, new job postings". Electrek. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Lambert, Fred (December 1, 2021). "Tesla announces it has officially moved its headquarters next to Gigafactory Texas". Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. Campbell, Jason (September 23, 2021). "Lathrop Lands Tesla Mega Battery Plant". Mantica / Ripon Bulletin. Archived from the original on September 24, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2021. Lee-Jones, Sarah (September 22, 2021). "New Tesla Megafactory Breaks Ground in Lathrop, California". Tesla North. Archived from the original on September 23, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Hull, Dana; Breslau, Karen (February 23, 2023). "Newsom, Musk dedicate former HP headquarters in Palo Alto to Tesla engineers". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Leeds, Samson (June 28, 2009). "Tesla opens Flagship Euro Store in London". Top Car Zone. Sablog zone. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2009. Boston, William; Higgins, Tim (July 30, 2018). "Tesla Explores Building Major Factory in Europe". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Kane, Mark. "Tesla's New Tilburg Factory Now Open". InsideEVs. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2017. re-assembled after leaving Tesla's Fremont factory in California in order to meet domestic manufacturing/regulatory standards and to avoid extra EU taxation/import tariff rules. The 'final assembly' process reportedly takes about 2–3 hours per vehicle, but saves about ~10% worth of fees added to the EVs' pricing. Tredway, Gareth (November 8, 2016). "Tesla buys automated manufacturing specialist Grohmann". Automotive Logistics. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 20, 2016. Linden, Fritz-Peter (April 6, 2017). "Demnächst nur noch ein einziger Kunde für Tesla Grohmann in Prüm" [Next, only a single customer for Tesla Grohmann in Prüm] (in German). Volksfreund.de. Archived from the original on August 11, 2018. Retrieved April 8, 2017. We need all capacities in Prüm to drive the production of the Model 3 in large numbers. "a fast and smooth transfer of current customers to other suppliers" is being carried out. Lambert, Fred (November 8, 2016). "Tesla plans to choose location for 'Gigafactory 2' in Europe next year, will produce both batteries and cars". electrek.co. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2016. Lambert, Fred (January 8, 2017). "The race to get 'Tesla Gigafactory 2' heats up, French Minister visits Fremont factory". Electrek. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2017. Remondini, Chiara; Rauwald, Christoph (November 12, 2019). "Tesla Plans to Build Next Factory in Berlin, Elon Musk Says". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2019. "Mandatory Musk: Tesla is building a factory in Brandenburg". The German Times. October 1, 2020. Archived from the original on May 29, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Tesla's first European Gigafactory opens near Berlin". Deutsche Welle. March 22, 2022. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Takahashi, Chester Dawson and Yoshio (November 15, 2010). "Tesla Plans Japan Push". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Dawson, Chester; Takahashi, Yoshio (November 15, 2010). "Tesla Plans Japan Push". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2013. "Tesla to build factory in Shanghai". BBC News. July 11, 2018. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2018. "Annual Report On Form 10-K For The Year Ended December 31, 2021". United States Securities and Exchange Commission. February 4, 2022. p. 94. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Klender, Joey (April 12, 2023). "Elon Musk reignites Tesla Gigafactory India rumors with one simple move". TESLARATI. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Das, Mehul Reuben (August 3, 2023). "Tesla In India: Elon Musk's EV company sets up shop in India, leases office space in Pune". Firstpost. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Gupta, Poornima (January 7, 2010). "Tesla, Panasonic partner on electric car batteries". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "Tesla & Panasonic Make It Official, Buddy Up for Batteries: Cleantech News". Gigaom.com. January 7, 2010. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved October 3, 2010. "Panasonic invests $30m in Tesla". New Statesman. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2010. "Panasonic, Tesla agree to partnership for US car battery plant". Nikkei Inc. July 29, 2014. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2014. Kolodny, Lora (February 26, 2020). "Tesla, Panasonic will reportedly stop joint solar cell production at Gigafactory 2 in Buffalo". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "Japan's Panasonic to end solar panel production – domestic media". Reuters. January 31, 2021. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Inagaki, Kana (March 14, 2021). "Panasonic to reduce Tesla reliance as battery tie-up evolves". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Jamasmie, Cecilia (September 28, 2020). "Piedmont Lithium stock soars on confirmed Tesla deal". mining.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Piedmont Lithium Signs Sales Agreement with Tesla Archived January 26, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, September 28, 2020. Retrieved March 14, 2021. "NT opens first lithium mine, supplying Tesla". PV Magazine. October 13, 2022. Archived from the original on October 15, 2022. Retrieved October 15, 2022. Kaufman, Alexander C. (August 24, 2015). "Tesla Wants To Take Stress Out of Vacationing with an Electric Car". HuffPost. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Ross, Jeffrey N. (October 4, 2012). "Mercedes B-Class headed to America... but only as an EV?". Autoblog.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2014. Arrington, Michael (May 19, 2009). "Tesla Worth More Than Half A Billion Dollars After Daimler Investment". Techcrunch.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2009. Retrieved August 1, 2009. Godske, Bjørn (May 21, 2010). "Toyota buys $50mio stake in Tesla". Ing.dk. Archived from the original on May 23, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2010. "Daimler changes Tesla board member in shift to hyrids and EV's". Torque News. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Atkins, Thomas (July 13, 2009). "UAE'S Aabar buys 40 pct of Daimler's Tesla stake". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2015. Ramsey, Mike (October 21, 2014). "Daimler sells Tesla stake for $780 Million". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Peterson, Andrew (March 12, 2010). "Tesla Motors to Provide Batteries for Freightliner Custom Chassis Electric Van". Motor Trend. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "10-K". sec.gov. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. "Mercedes-Benz Introduces the Battery-Powered A-Class E-CELL; Production Run of 500". Green Car Congress. September 15, 2010. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2011. Masson, Laurent J (March 29, 2011). "Quick Drive: Electric Mercedes A-Class E-Cell". Plugin Cars. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2011. Halvorson, Bengt (August 7, 2017). "Bye-Bye Baby B: Mercedes Spikes Its Electric Subcompact, Eyes More Mainstream EVs". Car and Driver. Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved February 9, 2019. "Mercedes-Benz B Class Electric Coming To U.S.: Report (Compliance Car Watch)". Green Car Reports. October 9, 2012. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Gordon-Bloomfield, Nikki (September 16, 2015). "Report: Next-Generation Smart ForTwo Electric Drive Will Feature Renault-Made Motors". Transport Evolved. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Squatriglia, Chuck (January 13, 2009). "Tesla Motors Joins Daimler On a Smart EV". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2021. Abuelsamid, Sam (July 16, 2010). "Breaking: Tesla and Toyota to develop RAV4 EV, hope to launch in 2012". Weblogs, Inc. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Toyota unveils RAV4 EV demonstration vehicle; targeting fully-engineered version in 2012 for market". Green Car Congress. November 17, 2010. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Tellem, Tori (November 17, 2010). "2012 Toyota RAV4-EV: Take Two". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Garrett, Jerry (August 3, 2012). "Toyota and Tesla Trot Out the RAV4 EV". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 7, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Toyota RAV4 EV key for meeting California ZEV requirements; Tesla powertrain uses Model S components". Green Car Congress. August 10, 2012. Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. "Toyota Wraps Up Production of RAV4 EV". PluginCars.com. September 29, 2014. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2018. "Don't look for a Toyota RAV4 EV successor anytime soon". Roadshow. April 3, 2018. Archived from the original on August 28, 2018. Retrieved August 28, 2018. Trudell, Craig; Ohnsman, Alan (August 7, 2014). "Why the Tesla-Toyota Partnership Short-Circuited". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Tajitsu, Naomi (June 5, 2017). "Toyota dumps all its shares in Tesla as their tie-up ends". Business Insider. Reuters. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Tajitsu, Naomi (June 3, 2017). "Toyota sells all shares in Tesla as their tie-up ends". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Taylor, Paul Lienert, Norihiko Shirouzu, Edward (September 22, 2020). "The Musk Method: Learn from partners then go it alone". Reuters. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Ramsey, Mike (July 26, 2016). "Mobileye Ends Partnership With Tesla". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2020. Bonifacic, Igor (December 15, 2021). "Six more women sue Tesla over workplace sexual harassment". TechCrunch. US. Retrieved February 18, 2022.[permanent dead link] Dillon, Nancy (December 15, 2021). "Six Women Sue Tesla Alleging 'Rampant Sexual Harassment' at California Facilities". Rolling Stone. US. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Siddiqui, Faiz (December 14, 2021). "Six Tesla workers file additional lawsuits alleging sexual harassment". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Ohnsman, Alan (December 14, 2021). "Tesla Hit By 6 More Sexual Harassment Claims". Forbes. US. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Levin, Sam (June 1, 2017). "Tesla fires female engineer who alleged sexual harassment". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Trop, Jaclyn (May 25, 2022). "Tesla sexual harassment suit can proceed in court". TechCrunch. US. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Tesla revises nondisclosure clause as Musk accuses customers of 'fraud' on suspension claims". CNBC. June 11, 2016. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (October 13, 2021). "NHTSA asks Tesla why it didn't initiate a recall when it pushed safety-related software update". CNBC. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Burgess, Christopher (August 30, 2018). "Tesla insider with expired NDA spills the tech beans". CSO Online. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (October 12, 2021). "Tesla invites more drivers to 'Full Self-Driving Beta' program – read the email here". CNBC. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Tesla NDA Warns 'Self Driving' Beta Testers 'People Want Tesla to Fail'". Vice (magazine). September 27, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021. "Tech workers at Tesla, Intel say NDAs have 'silenced' them". HR Dive. Retrieved October 19, 2021. Stumpf, Rob (March 3, 2019). "Tesla Had 3 Times as Many OSHA Violations as the 10 Largest US Plants Combined". The Drive. Retrieved May 15, 2020. "Tesla says its factory is safer. But it left injuries off the books". Reveal. April 16, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2020. O'Kane, Sean (March 13, 2019). "Tesla allegedly hacked, spied on, and followed Gigafactory whistleblower: report". The Verge. Retrieved May 11, 2020. O'Kane, Sean (March 11, 2019). "Another former Tesla security manager says the company spied on employees". The Verge. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Gouthro v. Tesla Motors Inc :: Nevada District Court :: Federal Civil Lawsuit No. 2:20-cv-00286-GMN-BNW, Judge Gloria M. Navarro presiding". plainsite.org. Retrieved September 20, 2020. Evans, Will (June 11, 2018). "Tesla fired safety official for reporting unsafe conditions, lawsuit says". Reveal. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Ramirez v. Tesla, Inc. :: Superior Court of California, County of Alameda :: State Civil Lawsuit No. RG18908005". plainsite.org. Retrieved September 20, 2020. Spillman, Benjamin. "Tesla whistleblower claims rampant theft, drug dealing at Nevada Gigafactory". Reno Gazette Journal. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Case 3:19-cv-00413-LRH-WGC Document 55". PlainSite. July 15, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Hoffman, Bill (June 17, 2022). "JAMS Arbitration Case Reference No. 1260005897". PlainSite. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Claimant has failed to establish the claims contained in his demand for arbitration. Accordingly, his claims are denied, and he shall take nothing. Eidelson, Josh (September 27, 2019). "Tesla Labor Practices and Musk Tweet Broke the Law, Judge Rules". Bloomberg L.P. Campbell, Alexia Fernández (September 30, 2019). "Elon Musk broke US labor laws on Twitter". Vox Media. "US labor board orders Elon Musk to delete a threatening tweet from 2018". Engadget. March 26, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (March 25, 2021). "Tesla ordered to have Elon Musk delete anti-union tweet". CNBC. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Scheiber, Noam (March 31, 2023). "Tesla and Musk Lose Ruling on Factory Union Issues". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "Tesla Obstructed Probe of Worker Discrimination, California Says". Bloomberg.com. April 13, 2023. Retrieved April 14, 2023. Eddy, Melissa (November 5, 2023). "Job Action Against Tesla Puts Sweden's Unions in Spotlight". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 23, 2023. OlanderText, Karin (November 22, 2023). "Dråpslag för Tesla: Bilarna får inga nya registreringsskyltar". Dagens industri (in Swedish). Retrieved November 23, 2023. Stewart, Heather (December 1, 2023). "We can't let Tesla get away with this: why Swedish unions are fighting Elon Musk". Retrieved December 1, 2023. Hiltzikh, Michael (November 18, 2013). "The air starts leaking out of Tesla's tires". Los Angeles Times. Tully, Shawn (September 2, 2016). "Why Tesla's Cash Crunch May Be Worse Than You Think". Fortune. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Mitchell, Russ (November 2, 2018). "Three takeaways from the 10-Q report that Tesla just filed". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Owens, Jeremy C. "The SEC recently quizzed Tesla about its accounting, filings show". MarketWatch. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Powell, Jamie; Jones, Claire (December 18, 2019). "The question of Tesla's cash to be collected". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Cox, Jeff (November 8, 2019). "Elon Musk gloats to hedge fund adversary over Tesla surge, calling David Einhorn 'Mr. Unicorn'". CNBC. Querolo, Nic; Trudell, Craig (April 30, 2020). "Tesla Declines After Einhorn Questions Musk's Accounting". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Richards, Tori (July 23, 2015). "Tesla got $295M in subsidies for technology it didn't offer". Watchdog.org. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Niedermeyer, Edward (June 23, 2015). "Tesla Battery Swap: CARB's Bridge To Nowhere". DailyKanban. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Elon Musk knew SolarCity was going broke before merger with Tesla, lawsuit alleges". Los Angeles Times. September 24, 2019. Retrieved May 19, 2020. Hals, Tom (January 31, 2020). "Tesla directors settle, isolating Musk as SolarCity trial looms". Reuters. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "Elon Musk wins $13B suit over Solar City deal Tesla shareholders called a 'bailout'". techcrunch.com. April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Elon Musk wins shareholder lawsuit over Tesla's $2.6 billion SolarCity acquisition". CNBC. April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Hals, Tom (June 6, 2023). "Court upholds Musk's win in $13 bln lawsuit over Tesla-SolarCity deal". Reuters. O'Kane, Sean (August 7, 2019). "The lesson from Elon Musk's 'funding secured' mess is to never tweet". The Verge. Rosenblatt, Joel (April 15, 2020). "Tesla Can't Duck Lawsuit Over Musk's Take-Private Tweet". Bloomberg L.P. Osborne, Charlie. "The $40 million tweet: Elon Musk settles with SEC, Tesla bears the brunt". ZDNet. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Mitchell, Russ (April 15, 2020). "Judge deems Musk's 'funding secured' tweet false and misleading. A trial awaits". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Wayland, Michael (August 8, 2019). "Tesla's chaotic year after Musk's 'funding secured' tweet". CNBC. "Tesla, Elon Musk must face shareholder lawsuit over going-private tweet". Autoblog. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Tesla 10-K Files with SEC". sec.gov. February 19, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2019. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Godoy, Jody; Jin, Hyunjoo (February 3, 2023). "Tesla's Elon Musk found not liable in trial over 2018 'funding secured' tweets". Reuters. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Viswanatha, Dana Cimilluca, Susan Pulliam and Aruna (October 26, 2018). "Tesla Faces Deepening Criminal Probe Over Whether It Misstated Production Figures". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved May 19, 2020.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Sage, Alexandria. "Tesla, Elon Musk win dismissal of lawsuit over Model 3 production". Reuters. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Kelleher, Kevin (March 25, 2019). "Federal Judge Dismisses Tesla Shareholders' Lawsuit on Model 3 Production – Again". Retrieved December 17, 2019. "Elon Musk's Big Lie About Tesla Is Finally Exposed". Rolling Stone. December 17, 2023. "Direct-to-consumer auto sales: It's not just about Tesla". May 11, 2015. Read, Richard (May 13, 2015). "Can The FTC Persuade Michigan & Other States To Open Their Doors To Tesla?". The Car Connection. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Bodisch, Gerald R. (May 2009). "Economic Effects Of State Bans On Direct Manufacturer Sales To Car Buyers". US: Department of Justice. Retrieved July 9, 2019. "EV rivals Tesla, Rivian unite to target direct sales legislation". TechCrunch. March 3, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Lyons, Kim (January 24, 2021). "Tesla sues former employee for allegedly stealing software". The Verge. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Manskar, Noah (January 22, 2021). "Ex-staffer being sued by Tesla denies he stole massive cache of code days after starting work". New York Post. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "Tesla, Inc. v. Khatilov :: California Northern District Court :: Federal Civil Lawsuit No. 4:21-cv-00528-YGR, Judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers presiding". plainsite.org. Retrieved September 11, 2022. "Tesla settles with ex-engineer accused of stealing trade secrets". The Statesman. April 17, 2021. "Tesla sues former employees for allegedly stealing data, Autopilot source code". Reuters. March 21, 2019. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Cranz, Alex (April 16, 2021). "Tesla settles with ex-engineer accused of stealing Autopilot source code". The Verge. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Kolodny, Lauren Feiner, Lora (May 28, 2020). "Elon Musk earns first performance-based payout from Tesla, worth more than $700 million". CNBC.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Bellan, Rebecca (July 17, 2023). "Tesla directors pay $735M to settle claims they overpaid themselves". TechCrunch. Retrieved July 21, 2023. O'Kane, Sean (April 1, 2019). "Tesla penalized for violating hazardous waste law at California factory". The Verge. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Niedermeyer, Edward (June 6, 2019). "Tesla in Settlement Proceedings Over 19 Air Quality Violations As Investigation Continues". The Drive. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Niedermeyer, Edward (June 3, 2019). "Tesla Air Quality Compliance Violations Center On Troubled Paint Shop". The Drive. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Niedermeyer, Edward (June 3, 2019). "Documents Show Persistent Air Quality Non-Compliance at Tesla Factory". The Drive. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Robinson, Matt; Faux, Zeke (March 13, 2019). "When Elon Musk Tried to Destroy a Tesla Whistleblower". Bloomberg Businessweek. Klippenstein, Matthew (July 21, 2019). "Tesla Enters 'Whistleblower Hell'". The Drive. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Szymkowski, Sean. "Tesla wins lawsuit against whistleblower accused of hacks". Roadshow. Retrieved September 20, 2020. "Tesla, Inc. v. Tripp :: Nevada District Court :: Federal Civil Lawsuit No. 3:18-cv-00296-MMD-CLB, Judge Miranda M. Du presiding". plainsite.org. Retrieved September 20, 2020. "Tesla, Inc. Settles Environmental Enforcement Action Brought by California District Attorneys". sjgov.org. Retrieved March 25, 2024. Calma, Justine (February 3, 2024). "How bad is Tesla's hazardous waste problem in California?". The Verge. Retrieved February 5, 2024. "Tesla ordered to pay $1.5 million over alleged hazardous waste violations in California". AP News. February 3, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024. Lee, Timothy. "After seven roof fires, Walmart sues Tesla over solar panel flaws". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Korosec, Kirsten (November 5, 2019). "Walmart reaches settlement with Tesla over solar panel fires, drops lawsuit". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Porterfield, Carlie (May 24, 2021). "Tesla Found Guilty Of Throttling Battery Life, Charging Speed in Norway". Forbes. Hawkins, Andrew J. (May 24, 2021). "Tesla faces a huge fine in Norway for throttling battery charging speeds". The Verge. Retrieved March 25, 2024. Hepler, Lauren (November 30, 2018). "Menial Tasks, Slurs and Swastikas: Many Black Workers at Tesla Say They Faced Racism". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 9, 2021. "Former Tesla employee who said supervisors called him the N-word awarded $1 million". CBS News. August 6, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "Lawsuit calls Tesla factory a hotbed of racism; Tesla calls lawsuit a 'hotbed of misinformation'". Los Angeles Times. November 15, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2021. "Tesla Impact Report 2021" (PDF). Tesla. June 26, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. "Former Tesla workers describe hostile workplace at Buffalo facility". News 4 Buffalo. November 25, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Koren, Marina (June 21, 2020). "Elon Musk's Lesson in How Not to Celebrate Diversity". The Atlantic. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Wille, Matt (July 6, 2021). "Tesla Fremont employees allege widespread racism on the factory floor". Input. Archived from the original on August 4, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Hepler, Lauren (November 30, 2018). "Menial Tasks, Slurs and Swastikas: Many Black Workers at Tesla Say They Faced Racism". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Wiessner, Daniel; Jin, Hyunjoo (February 11, 2022). "California sues Tesla over Black workers' allegations of discrimination". Reuters. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "California Sues Tesla, Alleging Racial Discrimination and Harassment". news.justia.com. February 10, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Ex-Tesla Employee Called Racial Slur Wins Rare $1 Million Award". Bloomberg.com. August 5, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. "Black ex-Tesla worker who claimed racial abuse awarded $137M". AP NEWS. October 5, 2021. "Tesla must face lawsuit claiming racism at California factory". Reuters. December 31, 2019. "Regarding Today's Jury Verdict". tesla.com. October 4, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Kolodny, Lora (October 5, 2021). "Tesla must pay $137 million to ex-worker over hostile work environment, racism". CNBC. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Stempel, Jonathan; Wiessner, Daniel (April 14, 2022). "Judge finds Tesla liable to Black former worker who alleged bias, but slashes payout". Reuters. "Former Tesla worker rejects $15M payout in racial abuse lawsuit". TechCrunch. June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Paul, Kari (April 3, 2023). "Black former worker awarded $3.2m in Tesla factory racial-harassment suit". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved April 28, 2023. "Tesla Racism Verdict of $137 Million Could Be Cut if Appealed". Time. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Siddiqui, Faiz (March 13, 2021). "Hundreds of covid cases reported at Tesla plant following Musk's defiant reopening, county data shows". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Walsh, Joe. "Elon Musk's False Covid Predictions: A Timeline". Forbes. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Marshall, Aarian. "Elon Musk Defies Lockdown Orders and Reopens Tesla's Factory". Wired. Retrieved June 12, 2020. "The dispute over reopening the Tesla factory may be over". Los Angeles Times. May 13, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Boudette, Neal E. (May 8, 2020). "Tesla Tells Workers It Will Reopen California Factory Despite County Order". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 8, 2020. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Difeliciantonio, By Chase (May 21, 2020). "Tesla drops lawsuit against Alameda County after Fremont factory reopens". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved June 14, 2020. Kolodny, Jessica Bursztynsky, Lora (May 20, 2020). "Tesla drops lawsuit against California's Alameda County over coronavirus restrictions". CNBC. Retrieved June 13, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Kolodny, Emma Newburger, Lora (May 10, 2020). "Tesla says it will resume operations. Here is the company's plan to bring employees back to work". CNBC. Retrieved June 13, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Kolodny, Lora (June 12, 2020). "Tesla safety boss tries to calm factory workers, some are concerned about lax coronavirus precautions". CNBC. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Holmes, Aaron. "More Tesla employees say they were fired for staying home over COVID-19 fears even though CEO Elon Musk said they could". Business Insider. Retrieved July 2, 2020. "Tesla worker who criticized coronavirus safety measures receives termination notice". The Mercury News. June 18, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Coronavirus: Elon Musk's Tesla denies firing employees who stayed home during lockdown". Sky News. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Coleman, Justine (March 14, 2021). "Hundreds of Tesla workers tested positive at reopened plant". The Hill. Retrieved March 15, 2021. "Elon Musk Loves China, and China Loves Him Back – for Now". Bloomberg.com. January 13, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. "It's Official: Cars Are the Worst Product Category We Have Ever Reviewed for Privacy". mozilla foundation. Retrieved September 13, 2023. Jeong, Andrew (September 12, 2023). "Carmakers can collect — and sell — too much data about you, watchdog says". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 13, 2023. Jin, Hyunjoo; Scarcella, Mike (April 10, 2023). "Tesla hit with class action lawsuit over alleged privacy intrusion". Reuters. Retrieved October 13, 2023. "Tesla recall vindicates whistleblower Lukasz Krupski". Blueprint for Free Speech. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Titcomb, James (December 11, 2023). "China had access to Tesla employees' data, whistleblower claims". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Ewing, Jack (November 10, 2023). "Man vs. Musk: A Whistleblower Creates Headaches for Tesla". The New York Times. "The Tesla Skeptics Who Bet Against Elon Musk". Bloomberg.com. January 22, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2021. "Electric Burn: Those Who Bet Against Elon Musk And Tesla Are Paying A Big Price". NPR.org. January 16, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Isidore, Chris (January 6, 2021). "Tesla short sellers lost $40 billion in 2020. Elon Musk made more than triple that". CNN. Retrieved April 28, 2021. "'Big Short' investor Burry says he's no longer betting against Tesla – CNBC". Reuters. October 15, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2022. "Does Tesla actually want competitors to make electric cars?". Marketplace. August 27, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2021. "Scathing audit of high-tech projects slams ESD for lack of due diligence on Tesla at RiverBend". News 4 Buffalo. August 21, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Heaney, Jim (August 24, 2020). "Buffalo Billion audit: shock and ugh". Investigative Post. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Hogan, Bernadette; Hicks, Nolan (August 21, 2020). "More 'Buffalo Billion' woes as audit finds Cuomo boondoggle a waste of tax money". New York Post. Retrieved February 9, 2021. Jones, Chuck. "Tesla's Musk Is Overpromising Again On Self-Driving Cars". Forbes. Retrieved February 8, 2021. DeBord, Matthew. "This is why Tesla always overpromises and underdelivers". Business Insider. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Dugan, Susan Pulliam, Mike Ramsey and Ianthe Jeanne (August 15, 2016). "Elon Musk Sets Ambitious Goals at Tesla – and Often Falls Short". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved February 8, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Holley, Peter (October 2, 2017). "'We understand what needs to be fixed,' Tesla says after missing Model 3 production goals". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 5, 2017. Holley, Peter (November 3, 2017). "Analysis – Sleepless nights, broken robots and mounting pressure: Musk offers rare glimpse inside Tesla's 'production hell'". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 6, 2017. Mitchell, Russ (January 9, 2018). "Tesla Model 3 delivery delayed again". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Lavrinc, Damon (December 17, 2014). "What Will Tesla And Elon Musk Over Promise Next?". Jalopnik. Stahl, Lesley (December 9, 2018). "Tesla CEO Elon Musk: The 60 Minutes Interview". CBS News. Retrieved April 27, 2021. Lee, Timothy B. (June 10, 2016). "Tesla's real problem isn't that its cars are expensive. It's that they're unreliable". Vox. Retrieved April 21, 2017. Lee, Timothy B. (April 20, 2017). "Tesla is recalling most of the cars it sold in 2016". Vox. Retrieved April 21, 2017. Wang, Christine (March 29, 2018). "Tesla voluntarily recalls 123,000 Model S cars over faulty steering component". CNBC. Retrieved March 31, 2018. Kolodny, Lora (October 23, 2020). "Tesla recalls nearly 50,000 Model S and X cars in China over faulty suspension". CNBC. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Taylor, Thom (August 1, 2020). "This Is Bad: "Whompy Wheel" Syndrome Causing Teslas To Crash". MotorBiscuit. Retrieved February 8, 2021. Lopez, Linette. "'Aladdin' star says a defect in his Tesla Model 3 led to his car wreck, and it comes from a problem area the company has known about for years". Business Insider. Retrieved October 26, 2020. "Tesla agrees to recall 135,000 vehicles over touch screen failures after sparring with regulators". The Washington Post. February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. Ewing, Steven. "Tesla asked to recall Model S, Model X over touchscreen failures". Roadshow. Retrieved January 15, 2021. "Tesla recalls 158,000 Model S and Model X vehicles – report". CarAdvice. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Quandt, Jeffrey (August 14, 2020). "Confidential Business Information: Re: PE20-010 – Response to Information Request (First Submission)" (PDF). National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Tesla must recall 12,300 Model X cars over faulty moulding – KBA". Reuters. February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Krok, Andrew. "Tesla told to recall 12,300 Model X SUVs over trim adhesive". Roadshow. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Bursztynsky, Jessica (June 2, 2021). "Tesla recalls 6,000 cars over risk of loose bolts". CNBC. Retrieved June 3, 2021. "Tesla to recall 475,000 cars in the US". BBC. December 30, 2021. Levy, Ari (December 24, 2021). "Tesla locks access to video games in main display while car is in motion". CNBC. Retrieved December 31, 2021. Shepardson, David (September 22, 2022). "Tesla recalls nearly 1.1 million U.S. vehicles to update window reversing software". Reuters. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Root, Al (September 22, 2022). "Tesla Recalls Another Million-Plus EVs. Elon Musk Goes After the Safety Patrol". Barrons. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Isidore, Chris (February 16, 2023). "Tesla recalling nearly 363,000 vehicles equipped with 'Full Self-Driving' | CNN Business". CNN. Retrieved March 7, 2023. Boudette, Neal E. (February 16, 2023). "Tesla to Recall 362,000 Cars With Its 'Full Self Driving' System". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 7, 2023. Mendoza, Jordan. "Tesla recalls thousands of Model Y vehicles over loose bolts in seat back frames". USA TODAY. Retrieved March 7, 2023. Krisher, Tom (December 13, 2023). "Tesla recalls nearly all vehicles sold in US to fix system that monitors drivers using Autopilot". AP News. Associated Press. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Part 573 Safety Recall Report (PDF) (Report). National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. December 12, 2023. 23V-838. Retrieved December 13, 2023. At no cost to customers, affected vehicles will receive an over-the-air software remedy Laing, Keith (December 13, 2023). "How Over-the-Air Updates Are Changing the Auto Recall Game". bloomberg.com. Retrieved December 17, 2023. "The Detroit News". detroitnews.com. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Jensen, Christopher (October 2, 2013). "Tesla Says Car Fire Started in Battery". The New York Times. Voelcker, John (November 19, 2013). "Tesla Fires: NHTSA Will Probe, Warranty To Cover Fire Damage, Ride-Height Tweak". Green Car Reports. Ivory, Danielle (March 28, 2014). "Federal Safety Agency Ends Its Investigation of Tesla Fires". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. George, Patrick (March 28, 2014). "The Tesla Model S: Now With Road Debris-Crushing Titanium!". Jalopnik. Siddiqui, Faiz; Duncan, Ian (November 1, 2019). "Federal safety officials probe alleged Tesla battery defects". The Washington Post. Lopez, Linette (June 24, 2020). "Tesla knew its Model S battery had a design flaw that could lead to leaks and, ultimately, fires starting in 2012. It sold the car anyway". Business Insider. Blanco, Sebastian (November 1, 2019). "NHTSA, Investigating Tesla Fire Reports, Demands Data on Battery Software Changes". Car and Driver. Vlasic, Bill; Boudette, Neal E. (June 30, 2016). "Self-Driving Tesla Was Involved in Fatal Crash, U.S. Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. "Preliminary Report, Highway HWY16FH018". NTSB. July 26, 2016. Steware, Jack (January 20, 2017). "After Probing Tesla's Deadly Crash, Feds Say Yay to Self-Driving". Wired. "Apple engineer killed in Tesla SUV crash on Silicon Valley freeway was playing videogame: NTSB". MarketWatch. February 25, 2020. "PlainSite :: Documents :: NHTSA Special Crash Investigations ADAS / ADS Case Spreadsheet". plainsite.org. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "U.S. safety agency probes 10 Tesla crash deaths since 2016". Reuters. June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Kolodny, Lora (September 1, 2021). "Tesla must deliver Autopilot crash data to federal auto safety watchdog by October 22". CNBC. Retrieved September 4, 2021. White, Annie (September 2, 2021). "Tesla Must Send Autopilot Data to Feds by October 22". Car and Driver. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Mitchell, Russ (September 2, 2021). "'A very big deal': Federal safety regulator takes aim at Tesla Autopilot". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Holderith, Peter (September 27, 2021). "Tesla Autopilot Will Now Recognize Emergency Lights, Reduce Speed: Report". The Drive. Retrieved September 7, 2022. Shepardson, David (October 13, 2021). "U.S. asks Tesla why it did not recall Autopilot after software changes". Reuters. Retrieved September 7, 2022. Hetzner, Christiaan (June 12, 2022). "Elon Musk's regulatory woes mount as U.S. moves closer to recalling Tesla's self-driving software". Fortune. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Helmore, Edward (August 9, 2022). "Tesla's self-driving technology fails to detect children in the road, tests find". The Guardian. Stumpf, Rob (August 12, 2022). "Controversy Erupts Over Video of FSD Tesla Striking Child Mannequin". The Drive. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Don't Use Your Kids to Test Tesla's Safety Features, NHTSA Warns". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg L.P. August 17, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2022. Masunaga, Samantha (August 6, 2015). "Researchers hack a Tesla Model S, bring car to stop". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Mahaffey, Kevin (August 6, 2015). "The new assembly line: 3 best practices for building (secure) connected cars". Lookout. Retrieved August 13, 2015. O'Connor, Fred (August 7, 2015). "Tesla patches Model S after researchers hack car's software". Wired. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "Car Hacking Research: Remote Attack Tesla Motors". September 19, 2016. Retrieved September 21, 2016. Lambert, Fred (September 20, 2016). "First Tesla Model S remotely controlled by hackers, Tesla already pushed a fix". Electrek. Retrieved September 21, 2016. "This Tesla Investor's Tech Team Just Hacked the Model X – Again". Fortune. July 28, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Hackett, Robert (February 20, 2018). "Tesla Hackers Hijacked Amazon Cloud Account to Mine Cryptocurrency". Fortune. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2018. Lambert, Fred (February 20, 2018). "Tesla's cloud was 'hijacked' by hackers to mine cryptocurrencies". electrek.co. Retrieved February 21, 2018. Villaruel, John Carlo A. (March 24, 2019). "Hackers Who Cracked Tesla Model 3 Security in Competition Win Electric Car And $375K". Tech Times. Goodin, Dan (June 8, 2022). "Gone in 130 seconds: New Tesla hack gives thieves their own personal key". Ars Technica. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Tesla drivers report a surge in 'phantom braking'". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 9, 2022. "Tesla investigated over 'phantom braking' problem". BBC News. February 18, 2022. "Elektromobilität : "Mein Autopilot hat mich fast umgebracht": Tesla-Files nähren Zweifel an Elon Musks Versprechen" ["My autopilot almost killed me": Tesla files cast doubt on Elon Musk's promises]. Handelsblatt (in German). Retrieved May 26, 2023. "Whistleblower Drops 100 Gigabytes Of Tesla Secrets To German News Site: Report". Jalopnik. May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023. Alkousaa, Riham; Sterling, Toby (May 26, 2023). "Dutch watchdog looking into alleged Tesla data breach". Reuters. Retrieved May 26, 2023. Steve Stecklow and Norihiko Shirouzu. "Tesla created secret team to suppress thousands of driving range complaints". Reuters, July 27, 2023. Retrieved July 27, 2023. Chen, Caroline (February 20, 2024). "Press Center - BYD Set to Challenge Tesla for the Crown in EV Sales in 2024, Says TrendForce". TrendForce. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Kolodny, Lora (January 2, 2024). "Tesla reported 485,000 deliveries for the fourth quarter, bringing 2023 total to 1.8 million". CNBC. Retrieved March 29, 2024. "Tesla Vehicle Production & Deliveries and Date for Financial Results & Webcast for Fourth Quarter 2023". ir.tesla.com. January 2, 2024. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Nurman, Andy (March 29, 2024). "Tesla's Electrifying 6 Million Production Milestone – The Road Ahead". Carlist. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Lambert, Fred (March 9, 2020). "Tesla produces its 1 millionth electric car". Electrek. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Kane, Mark (October 21, 2021). "Tesla Sold 2 Million Electric Cars: First Automaker To Reach Milestone". InsideEVs. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Weatherbed, Jess (May 26, 2023). "The Tesla Model Y is now the world's bestselling car". The Verge. Retrieved May 29, 2023. "Tesla Fourth Quarter & Full Year 2021 Update" (PDF). Palo Alto: Tesla. January 26, 2022. Retrieved January 27, 2022. See table "Operational Summary" pp. 7 and 8 for revised and final production and sales numbers. "Tesla, Inc.: Shareholders Board Members Managers and Company Profile | US88160R1014". MarketScreener. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Jackson, Jon (February 8, 2021). "Elon Musk's Bitcoin investment supports energy waste, some critics say". Newsweek. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Shieber, Jonathan (February 8, 2021). "Tesla's Bitcoin investment could be bad for the company's climate reputation and its bottom line". Yahoo! Finance. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Dean, James. "Tesla made more profit from bitcoin in a month than from selling cars last year". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved February 19, 2021. "Tesla May Have Already Made More in Profits From Bitcoin Than Electric Vehicles". Yahoo! Finance. February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2021. O'Kane, Sean (July 26, 2021). "Tesla finally made a profit without the help of emission credits". The Verge. Retrieved October 22, 2021. "2006: San Carlos start-up Tesla seeks sexier electric car". July 14, 2014. "Tesla, Inc. TSLA on Nasdaq". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "History of Tesla: Timeline and Facts". TheStreet. February 4, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Tesla Motors Zaps Another C.E.O. and Lays Off Staff". The New York Times. October 15, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Tesla Inc. Company Profile & Executives". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 12, 2022. "Elon Musk's Job Duties Keep Growing: Here's a List of His Board Positions Over the Years". The Wall Street Journal. April 5, 2022. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Tesla Seeks Independent Directors as Board's Musk Ties Eyed". Bloomberg.com. April 11, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2020. "Elon Musk spars with investors who want independent Tesla board". USA Today. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Rapier, Graham. "Tesla has named two new board members – here's the full list of company directors". Business Insider. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Waters, Richard (April 12, 2017). "Tesla investors seek stronger boardroom controls". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2020. "Musk Promises 2 New Directors for Tesla Amid Shareholder Criticism". Fox Business. April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Rai, Sonam; Klayman, Ben (December 28, 2018). "Tesla names close Musk friend Larry Ellison to board". Reuters. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Ponciano, Jonathan (June 10, 2022). "Tesla Files For Another Stock Split—Reveals Billionaire Larry Ellison To Leave Board". Forbes. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Hull, Dana; O'Kane, Sean (May 16, 2023). "Tesla Investors Elect Former Executive JB Straubel to Board". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Hartmans, Avery. "Tesla's biggest investor says the company's chairwoman gives Elon Musk 'emotional' support so he can focus on leading the company". Business Insider. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Holland, Maximilian (November 8, 2018). "More Background On New Tesla Chair Robyn Denholm". CleanTechnica. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Wesoff, Eric (April 22, 2019). "Tesla Announces Departure of 4 Board Members Ahead of a Really Big Week". Greentech Media. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Yoshida, Kaori (December 31, 2020). "Tesla director Hiro Mizuno picked as UN sustainable investment envoy". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved December 31, 2020. "Tesla Changes Up Board With Nomination of Former Tech Chief". Bloomberg.com. April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 29, 2023. "TSLA | Tesla Inc. Company Profile & Executives – WSJ". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Kolodny, Lora (November 8, 2018). "Robyn Denholm replaces Elon Musk as Tesla's board chair". CNBC. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Date of report (Date of earliest event reported): October 7, 2021". sec.gov. Retrieved October 15, 2021. "Elon Musk is sticking with SpaceX board member Steve Jurvetson, shows new SEC filing". TechCrunch. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Ohnsman, Alan. "Elon's Enablers: Tesla's Submissive Board May Be As Big A Risk As An Erratic CEO". Forbes. Retrieved February 22, 2020. Nishant, Niket; Sriram, Akash (September 28, 2022). "Tesla adds billionaire Airbnb co-founder Gebbia to board". Reuters. Korosec, Kirsten (September 28, 2022). "Tesla appoints Airbnb co-founder to board". TechCrunch. Jin, Hyunjoo (April 27, 2023). "Glass Lewis recommends vote against Tesla board nominee JB Straubel". Reuters. Vance, Ashlee (2015). Elon Musk: Tesla, SpaceX, and the Quest for a Fantastic Future. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0062301239. OCLC 881436803. Higgins, Tim (2021). Power Play: Tesla, Elon Musk, and the Bet of the Century. Doubleday. ISBN 978-0385545464. McKenzie, Hamish (2018). Insane Mode: How Elon Musk's Tesla Sparked an Electric Revolution to End the Age of Oil. New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-1101985953. Niedermeyer, Edward (2019). Ludicrous: The Unvarnished Story of Tesla Motors. Dallas: BenBella. ISBN 978-1948836326. OCLC 1089841254. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tesla, Inc.. Official website Business data for Tesla, Inc.: Bloomberg Google Reuters SEC filings Yahoo! 30°13′N 97°37′W﻿ / ﻿30.22°N 97.62°W﻿ / 30.22; -97.62