The Hunger Games is a series of young adult dystopian novels written by American author Suzanne Collins. The first three novels are part of a trilogy following teenage protagonist Katniss Everdeen, and the fourth book is a prequel set 64 years before the original. The novels in the trilogy are titled The Hunger Games (2008), Catching Fire (2009), and Mockingjay (2010). Each was adapted for film, establishing The Hunger Games film series, with the film adaptation of Mockingjay split into two feature-length motion pictures. The first two books in the series were both New York Times best sellers, and Mockingjay topped all US bestseller lists upon its release. By the time the film adaptation of The Hunger Games was released in 2012, the publisher had reported over 26 million Hunger Games trilogy books in print, including movie tie-in books. The Hunger Games universe is a dystopia set in Panem, a North American country consisting of the wealthy Capitol and 13 districts in varying states of poverty. Every year, children from the first 12 districts are selected via lottery to participate in a compulsory televised battle royale death match called The Hunger Games. The 13th district was also subjected to this, but led a rebellion against the Capitol. Since District 13 specialized in nuclear weaponry, the Capitol quickly surrendered and agreed to a peace deal. The two sides agreed that the residents of District 13 would all move underground and the land above would be bombed to make it seem like the Capitol had won. The novels were all well received. In August 2012, the series ranked second, exceeded only by the Harry Potter series in NPR’s poll of the top 100 teen novels, which asked voters to choose their favorite young adult books. On August 17, 2012, Amazon announced the Hunger Games trilogy as its top seller, surpassing the record previously held by the Harry Potter series. As of 2014[update], the trilogy has sold more than 65 million copies in the U.S. alone (more than 28 million copies of The Hunger Games, more than 19 million copies of Catching Fire, and more than 18 million copies of Mockingjay). The Hunger Games trilogy has been sold in 56 territories in 51 languages to date. A prequel novel, titled The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes, about the early days of the Hunger Games, featuring a young Coriolanus Snow as the protagonist, was released on May 19, 2020. The prequel has been sold by Stimola Literary Studio into 35 territories to date. The Hunger Games trilogy takes place in an unspecified future time, in the dystopian, post-apocalyptic nation of Panem, located in North America. The country consists of a wealthy Capitol city, located in the Rocky Mountains, surrounded by twelve (originally thirteen) poorer districts ruled by the Capitol. The Capitol is lavishly rich and technologically advanced, but the districts are in varying states of poverty. The trilogy's narrator and protagonist, Katniss Everdeen, lives in District 12, the poorest region of Panem, located in Appalachia, where people regularly die of starvation. As punishment for a past rebellion against the Capitol (called the "Dark Days"), in which District 13 was destroyed, one boy and one girl from each of the twelve remaining districts, between the ages of 12 and 18, are selected by lottery to compete in an annual pageant called the Hunger Games. The Games are a televised event in which the participants, called "tributes", are forced to fight to the death in a dangerous public arena. The lone victor and their home district are then rewarded with food, supplies, and riches. The purposes of the Hunger Games are to provide entertainment for the Capitol and to remind the districts of the Capitol's power and its lack of remorse or forgiveness for the failed rebellion of the current competitors' ancestors. Each book in The Hunger Games trilogy has three sections of nine chapters each. Collins has said this format comes from her playwriting background, which taught her to write in a three-act structure; her previous series, The Underland Chronicles, was written in the same way. She sees each group of nine chapters as a separate part of the story, and comments still call those divisions "act breaks". Collins says she drew inspiration for the series from both classical and contemporary sources. Her main classical source of inspiration is the Greek myth of Theseus and the Minotaur, in which, as a punishment for past crimes, Minos forces Athens to sacrifice seven youths and seven maidens to the Minotaur, which kills them in a vast labyrinth. Collins says that even as a child, she was stunned by the idea since "it was just so cruel" to force Athens to sacrifice its own children. Collins also cites as a classical inspiration the Roman gladiator games. She feels three key elements create a good game: an all powerful and ruthless government, people forced to fight to the death, and the game's role as a source of popular entertainment. A contemporary source of inspiration was Collins' recent fascination with reality television programs. She says they are like The Hunger Games because the Games are not just entertainment but also a reminder to the districts of their rebellion. Collins says that while she was channel-surfing the television on a quiet night, she saw people competing for a prize and then saw footage of the Iraq War. She described how the two combined in an "unsettling way" to create her first ideas for the series. The Hunger Games is the first book in the series and was released on September 14, 2008. The Hunger Games follows 16-year-old Katniss Everdeen, a girl from District 12 who volunteers for the 74th Hunger Games in place of her younger sister Primrose Everdeen. Also selected from District 12 is Peeta Mellark, who once saved Katniss from starvation when they were children. They are mentored by their district's only living victor, Haymitch Abernathy, who won 24 years earlier and has since led a solitary life of alcoholism. Peeta confesses his longtime secret love for Katniss in a televised interview prior to the Games. This revelation stuns Katniss, who usually does not allow herself to think of romantic attraction due to her traumatic childhood and her fear of losing future children to the Hunger Games. However, she believes that Peeta is only feigning love for her as a tactic for the Games. In the arena, Peeta saves Katniss's life multiple times without her realizing. Katniss allies with Rue, a young tribute from District 11 who reminds Katniss of her sister. When Rue is killed, Katniss places flowers around her body as an act of defiance toward the Capitol. The remaining tributes are alerted to a rule change allowing tributes from the same district to win as a team. Katniss finds a seriously wounded Peeta, and, rather than compete alone and be unencumbered by him, she risks her life and nurses him back to health. Haymitch advises her to feign feelings for Peeta in order to gain wealthy sponsors who can provide crucial supplies to the "star-crossed lovers" during the Games. As she allows herself to get close to Peeta, she develops real feelings for him. When all of the other tributes are dead, the rule change is abruptly revoked. With neither willing to kill the other, Katniss comes up with a solution: a double suicide by eating poisonous berries. This forces the authorities to concede that they have both won the Games, just in time to save their lives. During and after the Games, Katniss's genuine feelings for Peeta grow, and she struggles to reconcile them with the fact that their relationship developed under duress. Haymitch warns her that the danger is far from over. The authorities are furious at being made fools, and the only way to try to allay their anger is to continue to pretend that her actions were because of her love for Peeta and nothing else. On the journey home, Peeta is dismayed to learn of the deception. Catching Fire is the second installment in the series, released on September 1, 2009. In Catching Fire, which begins six months after the conclusion of The Hunger Games, Katniss learns that her defiance in the previous novel has started a chain reaction that has inspired rebellion in the districts. President Snow threatens to harm Katniss's family and friends if she does not help to defuse the unrest and marry Peeta. Meanwhile, Peeta has become aware of Katniss's disingenuous love for him, but while he feels sad, he does not pressure her in any way. He has also been informed of Snow's threats, so he promises to help keep up the act to spare the citizens of District 12. Katniss's best friend, Gale Hawthorne, confesses his love for Katniss, which shocks and confuses her. Katniss and Peeta tour the districts as victors and plan a public wedding. While they follow Snow's orders and keep up the ruse, Katniss and Peeta inadvertently fuel the rebellion, and the mockingjay pin she wears becomes its symbol. District by district, the citizens of Panem begin to stage uprisings against the Capitol. Snow announces a special 75th edition of the Hunger Games—known as the Quarter Quell—in which Katniss and Peeta are forced to compete with other past victors, effectively canceling the wedding. Katniss believes that Peeta should survive these Games instead of her, and dedicates her life to saving him. Peeta, in turn, dedicates his life to saving her, and they both acknowledge the other's opposite intentions. At Haymitch's urging, the pair teams up with several other tributes and manages to destroy the arena and escape the Games. Katniss is rescued by rebel forces from District 13, and learns that the Capitol has captured both Peeta and their District 7 ally, Johanna Mason. Katniss ultimately learns—to her surprise—that she had inadvertently been an integral part of the rebellion all along; her rescue had been jointly planned by Haymitch, Plutarch Heavensbee, and Finnick Odair, among others. At the knowledge that Peeta has been captured and will now be tortured and killed, Katniss is furious and loses the will to live. Gale informs her that the Capitol has destroyed District 12 in retaliation. After some hesitation, Katniss joins the rebels. Mockingjay, the third and final book in The Hunger Games series, was released on August 24, 2010. Most of the districts have rebelled against the Capitol, led by District 13 and its President Alma Coin. The Capitol lied about the district being destroyed in the Dark Days. After a standoff with the Capitol, the District 13 residents took to living underground and rebuilding their strength. The District 12 survivors find shelter with them. Katniss also learns that Peeta is alive and is being tortured and forced to speak on national television discouraging the rebellion. She agrees to become the "Mockingjay", the symbol of the rebellion. In return, she demands immunity for Peeta, Johanna Mason, Annie Cresta, and Enobaria, fellow Games victors captured by the Capitol. Katniss also demands the privilege of killing President Snow herself. When Katniss realizes that the Capitol will keep torturing Peeta as long as she fuels the rebellion, she has a panic attack and loses the ability to function as the Mockingjay. A rescue mission is mounted that succeeds in rescuing Peeta, Johanna and Annie. However, Peeta has been brainwashed to kill Katniss, and he tries to choke her to death upon their reunion. He undergoes experimental treatment to try to cure him. Katniss does not have hope for his recovery, and decides to give her all to the rebellion and die in the process. Throughout the novel, Katniss sees how ruthless Gale is. He does not seem to value human life as much as she does. He feels no sympathy for the enemies to the rebellion, and he feels fine with torture and murder, even of innocent civilians, to advance the rebellion. She struggles to reconcile this with the fact that she still cares for Gale. Amid her crushing loneliness and her PTSD, she kisses Gale, but he says that the kiss is not real as it is like “kissing someone who’s drunk.” After she recovers from Peeta's attack, Katniss and a team known as the "Star Squad", composed of Gale, Peeta, Finnick, a camera crew, and various other soldiers, are assigned to film propaganda in relatively quiet combat zones. Katniss, however, decides to go to the Capitol to kill Snow, pretending Coin gave her that mission. Peeta still struggles with his brainwashing, but he is in recovery and is still in love with Katniss. Most of the squad are killed along the way, including recently married Finnick. As Katniss approaches Snow's mansion, she sees a group of Capitol children surrounding it as human shields. Suddenly a hovercraft drops silver parachutes on the children, who reach for them, hoping they bear food. Some of the parachutes explode, creating carnage. The advancing rebels send in medics, including Primrose Everdeen. Then the rest of the parachutes explode, killing Primrose just as she sees her sister. Later, Katniss, also injured, awakens from a coma to learn that the rebels have won, and Snow is awaiting execution at her hands. When she meets Snow by chance, he claims that it was Coin who secretly ordered the bombings in order to strip away the support of his remaining followers. This bomb also matches the description of the one Gale was helping to devise, and she breaks off her friendship with Gale. Coin then asks the surviving victors to vote on a final Hunger Games, involving the children of high-ranking Capitol officials (including Snow's granddaughter). In order to gain Coin's trust, Katniss and Haymitch cast the deciding votes in favor of the scheme. However, at what is supposed to be Snow's execution, Katniss instead kills Coin with her bow. Snow laughs, then dies. Katniss attempts to commit suicide, but Peeta stops her and she is instead arrested. Katniss is tried, but the jury believes she was mentally unfit, and she is sent home to District 12. Both Katniss's mother and Gale take jobs in other districts. Peeta regains his sanity. Katniss settles down with him, and the two "grow back together." After many years, she finally agrees to have children. They have a girl and then a boy, who grow up in a world without the Hunger Games. To cope with her lingering PTSD, Katniss often spends time recounting every kind deed she has ever witnessed anyone do. A prequel to the trilogy, titled The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes, was released on May 19, 2020. The novel is set 64 years before The Hunger Games events, during the 'Dark Days' which led to the failed rebellion in Panem. The story follows an 18-year-old Coriolanus Snow, whose family name has fallen from grace as the remaining Snows live in poverty and struggle to keep up appearances in post-war Panem. Snow becomes a mentor for the 10th annual Hunger Games as his final project before graduating from school. Snow shows great commitment in mentoring his tribute Lucy Gray Baird from the impoverished district 12 because her winning means he will be awarded a monetary prize that will cover his university tuition. Though skeptical at first, Snow believes he can turn the odds of the Games in his favor after seeing Lucy Gray defiantly sing during her reaping ceremony. During his time spent mentoring Lucy Gray, Snow begins to fall in love with her and must choose between her and his promising political future. Collins credits her character Lucy Gray as having introduced the concept of entertainment into the Hunger Games with her performative and musical talent. Major themes of the novels include distrust of authority (of adults and the government), class discrimination and caste, resistance, the ethics of entertainment, and most notably, the origins and effects of war. Social inequality, unaccountable governance and violence against children have also been suggested as prominent themes. "In the world of the 'Hunger Games', the Capitol lives a life of extravagant wealth and consumption. Meanwhile, out in the 'districts', millions of people work dangerous jobs with low pay. As the Capitol wallows in excess, the districts can barely afford to feed their children." Author Suzanne Collins also mentions the themes of "just war", gladiatorial combat and hunger. War as a result of climate disaster, and the power and illusions of television have also been cited as themes. Others have mentioned revolution and rebellion as themes. "Although it’s... aimed at young adults, it presents potentially quite subversive ideas of mass revolution, economic sabotage and the populist fight against oligarchy." All three books have been favorably received. Praise has focused on the addictive quality, especially of the first book, and the action. Young adult fiction author John Green, writing for The New York Times, compared The Hunger Games with Scott Westerfeld's The Uglies series. Catching Fire was praised for improving upon the first book, and Mockingjay was praised for its portrayal of violence, well-realized worldbuilding, and romantic intrigue. The series received criticism regarding its reality TV "death game" theme being derivative of earlier works, particularly Battle Royale, as well as The Running Man, The Long Walk, The 10th Victim, and Series 7: The Contenders. The series was also criticized for the romantic plotline: Rollie Welch of Ohio's The Plain Dealer criticized the characters' lack of resolute behavior, and Jennifer Reese of Entertainment Weekly stated that there was little distinction between Peeta and Gale and the series lacked the "erotic energy" seen in the Twilight series. J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters stated, "While the film saga does capture the action of The Hunger Games, the novels are most assuredly the heart of the story. They are nothing less than 'The Writer’s Cut' of the films themselves." In his review Mike Ruiz argues that The Hunger Games film does not have the first-person narrative that is in the original novel. As a result, Ruiz contends the novel is better than the film. The last book, Mockingjay, was criticized by Dan Shade of SF Site, who felt that Katniss is a weaker character than her comrades and less resolute in her journey to the Capitol, and that with respect to her vendetta against President Snow, her actions in the finale are inconsistent with her established character. On November 5, 2019, the BBC News listed The Hunger Games on its list of the 100 most influential novels. Lionsgate Entertainment acquired worldwide distribution rights to a film adaptation of The Hunger Games, produced by Nina Jacobson's Color Force production company. Collins adapted the novel for film herself, along with director Gary Ross. The cast included Jennifer Lawrence as Katniss, Josh Hutcherson as Peeta, and Liam Hemsworth as Gale. The first film began production in Spring 2011, and was released in March 2012. For Catching Fire, Ross was replaced as director by Francis Lawrence; the film was released in November 2013. Lawrence then directed Mockingjay, Part 1 and Part 2, released in November 2014 and November 2015 respectively. The prequel was adapted for film, with Francis Lawrence as the director. The film was produced by Lawrence himself alongside Nina Jacobson, and Brad Simpson with Suzanne Collins as one of the executive producers. The cast includes Tom Blyth as Coriolanus Snow, Rachel Zegler as Lucy Gray Baird, and Hunter Schafer as Tigris Snow. It was released on November 17, 2023. The Hunger Games, alongside Brave, has been credited with increasing female interest in archery. Immediately following the release of the first Hunger Games film, many archery vendors experienced a significant upsurge in business, with their lessons fully booked and recurve bows on long periods of back-order. In a 2016 report, approximately half of the girl archers surveyed were influenced by The Hunger Games to take up the sport. The three-finger gesture used in the books to express unity with the rebellion has been used in real-life protests in Thailand (2014, 2020) and Myanmar (2021). American University in Washington D.C. offered a class 2014-2016 that examined the themes in The Hunger Games world titled "The Hunger Games: Class, Politics, and Marketing". The class was offered for the school's American Studies Program and covered topics of oppression, feminism, food deserts, rebellion, the publishing industry, and social media marketing. The course's professor, Stef Woods, believes that using the fictional world of Panem to discuss real word problems helps students better understand sociopolitical issues in American society. The Most Dangerous Game, a 1924 short story about a big game hunter who is hunted down by another hunter on an isolated island The Long Walk, a 1979 dystopian novel about a deadly contest Battle Royale, a 1999 dystopian novel with a similar premise Cowles, Gregory (December 27, 2009). "Children's Books". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2009. "Mockingjay Tops All National Bestseller Lists with Sales of More Than 450,000 Copies in its First Week of Publication" (Press release). Scholastic. September 2, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2011. Springen, Karen (March 22, 2012). "The Hunger Games Franchise: The Odds Seem Ever in Its Favor". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved April 11, 2012. Suzanne, Collins (2009). Catching Fire. Scholastic Inc. p. 146. ISBN 9780545586177. "Your Favorites: 100 Best-Ever Teen Novels" (Press release). NPR. August 7, 2012. Retrieved August 10, 2012. Bosman, Julie (August 17, 2012). "Amazon Crowns 'Hunger Games' as Its Top Seller, Surpassing Harry Potter Series". The New York Times. "'Hunger Games: Mockingjay - Part 1' Set for World Premiere in London". TheWrap. October 16, 2014. Retrieved March 3, 2015. Knight, Rosie (June 17, 2019). "Will New 'Hunger Games' Be Relevant in 2020?". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 18, 2019. "Scholastic Releases New Interview with Suzanne Collins, Author of the Worldwide Bestselling Hunger Games Series | Scholastic Media Room". mediaroom.scholastic.com. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Collins, Suzanne (2008). The Hunger Games. Scholastic Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-439-02348-1. Collins, Suzanne (2008). The Hunger Games. Scholastic Press. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-439-02348-1. Collins, Suzanne. "Similarities To Underland". Scholastic Canada (Interview: Video). Retrieved June 15, 2010. "Video: Classical Inspiration – The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins". Scholastic. Retrieved September 4, 2010. "Video: Contemporary Inspiration – The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins". Scholastic. Archived from the original on September 1, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2010. "'Hunger Games' prequel novel coming in 2020". NBC News. June 17, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Quinn, Annalisa (May 19, 2020). "'The Ballad Of Songbirds And Snakes' Is A Lackluster Prequel To 'The Hunger Games'". National Public Radio. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Perez, Lexy (May 19, 2020). "Suzanne Collins Revisited 'The Hunger Games' to "Plant the Seeds" on Snow's Backstory". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 29, 2023. "Everything we know so far about The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes". Vogue Singapore. September 21, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Perez, Lexy (May 19, 2020). "Suzanne Collins Revisited 'The Hunger Games' to "Plant the Seeds" on Snow's Backstory". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Alex Abad-Santos (November 21, 2014). "The Hunger Games, explained". Vox. Van Jones (November 21, 2014). "'Hunger Games,' a mirror of America's inequality". CNN. David Levithan (October 18, 2018). "Suzanne Collins Talks About 'The Hunger Games,' the Books and the Movies". New York Times. Joseph Romm (March 19, 2012). "The Hunger Games: The world after a climate apocalypse, teen fiction style". Grist. Peter Bloom (December 19, 2014). "Subversive message behind "Hunger Games": rebellion works". Denver Post. King, Stephen (September 8, 2008). "The Hunger Games review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2010. Goldsmith, Francisca. The Hunger Games. Booklist. Retrieved November 26, 2010. John Green (November 7, 2008). "Scary New World". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2011. Zevin, Gabrielle (October 9, 2009). "Constant Craving". The New York Times. Retrieved November 26, 2010. "'Mockingjay' review: Spoiler alert!". Entertainment Weekly. August 24, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2010. "Mockingjay". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on August 26, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2010. "Suzanne Collins's War Stories for Kids". The New York Times. April 8, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. Ricky (November 16, 2013). "Essential Viewing for Fans of 'The Hunger Games': Part One". PopOptic. Retrieved May 16, 2016. O'Hehir, Andrew (March 13, 2012). "What came before 'The Hunger Games'". Salon. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Welch, Rollie (September 6, 2009). "'Catching Fire' brings back Suzanne Collins's kindhearted killer". The Plain Dealer. Brooklyn, Ohio. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2010. Reese, Jennifer (August 28, 2009). "Catching Fire review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 24, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2010. Maçek III, J.C. (June 20, 2016). "'The Hunger Games': The Writer's Cut Really Is Better". PopMatters. Ruiz, Mike (November 30, 2015). "Which is better? "The Hunger Games" novel or film?". The Retriever. Shade, Dan (2010). "Mockingjay". SF Site. "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2019. The reveal kickstarts the BBC's year-long celebration of literature. Jay A. Fernandez; Borys Kit (March 17, 2009). "Lionsgate picks up 'Hunger Games'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 4, 2011. Karen Springen (August 5, 2010). "Marketing 'Mockingjay'". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved September 4, 2010. "The Changing Objective of the American Film Market". Baseline Intel. November 18, 2010. Archived from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2011. Joshua L. Weinstein (March 16, 2011). "Exclusive: Jennifer Lawrence Gets Lead Role in 'The Hunger Games'". TheWrap.com. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved March 17, 2011. Jeff Labrecque (April 4, 2011). "'Hunger Games' casts Peeta and Gale: Josh Hutcherson and Liam Hemsworth nab the roles". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 4, 2011. Lionsgate announced that the trilogy will be made into 4 movies. Valby, Karen (January 6, 2011). "'Hunger Games' exclusive: Why Gary Ross got the coveted job, and who suggested Megan Fox for the lead role". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 26, 2011. Valby, Karen (January 25, 2011). "'The Hunger Games' gets release date". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 26, 2011. Hopkinson, Deborah. "Suzanne Collins Interview-Catching Fire". BookPage. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2010. "'Hunger Games' Sequel 'Catching Fire' Nabs Director Francis Lawrence". Access Hollywood. April 20, 2012. Nikki Finke (April 10, 2012). "Gary Ross Decides NOT to Direct "Hunger Games Two: Catching Fire': Lionsgate In 'Shock''". Deadline. Retrieved April 10, 2012. "9 Untold Secrets of the High Stakes 'Hunger Games'". The Hollywood Reporter. February 1, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. Goldberg, Matt (November 1, 2012). "Exclusive: Francis Lawrence to Direct Remainder of THE HUNGER GAMES Franchise with Two-Part Adaptation of MOCKINGJAY". Collider. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2015. Pastrick, Chris (April 21, 2020). "'Hunger Games' prequel in the works". TCA Regional News. "The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds & Snakes". Lionsgate. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Perez, Lexy (September 3, 2022). "Who's Who in 'The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes' Movie Cast". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 25, 2023. The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes (2023) - IMDb, retrieved April 25, 2023 The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds & Snakes (2023) Official Trailer, retrieved April 29, 2023 The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes (2023 Movie) - Reveal, retrieved April 27, 2023 "The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds & Snakes". Lionsgate Publicity. April 25, 2023. Retrieved April 25, 2023. Hood, Grace (November 27, 2013). "More Girls Target Archery, Inspired By 'The Hunger Games'". NPR. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Geena Davis Institute on Gender in Media (August 4, 2016). "New Study from Geena Davis Institute finds Archery Catches Fire Thanks to Inspiring Hollywood Images". Mount Saint Mary's University. Retrieved February 10, 2023. "Five Thai students held for 'Hunger Games' salute at PM". BBC News. November 19, 2014. Retrieved January 27, 2023. "'Hunger Games' salute back". www.bangkokpost.com. Bangkok Post reporters. August 18, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2021. "First Thailand, now Myanmar: Asia protesters borrow three-finger salute from Hunger Games". The Straits Times. Reuters. February 4, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Woods, Stef (2019). "Woods CV Fall 2019" (PDF). American University. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Calta, Alex (August 26, 2014). "The Hunger Games: Class, Politics, and Marketing". American University. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Hunger Games. The U.S. Scholastic Website Portals:  Books  Literature