Stadt Wehlen (also: Wehlen) is a town in the Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge district, in Saxony, Germany. It is situated on the western edge of Saxon Switzerland, on the right bank of the Elbe, 6 km east of Pirna, and 23 km southeast of Dresden (centre). Wehlen includes the following subdivisions: Dorf Wehlen Pötzscha Stadt Wehlen Zeichen View to the left side of the Elbe onto Wehlen/Pötzscha Townchurch at the Marketplace Michalischurch in Dorf Wehlen „Trommel“(drum): Northside of castleruin Stadt Wehlen „Weiße Brüche“(white quarries) View from the Raunenstein (mountain) Beergarden in Wehlen/Pötzscha Beergarden in Wehlen/Pötzscha Stadt Wehlen station, on the Dresden S-Bahn and the Dresden to Prague railway, is located on the south bank of the Elb and is connected to the town centre, on the north bank, by the frequent Stadt Wehlen passenger ferry. Also on the north bank, an infrequent bus service connects the town to Pirna. Both ferry and bus are operated by the Regionalverkehr Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge. Königstein is also a stop for the Sächsische Dampfschiffahrt ships, including historic paddle steamers, operating on the Elbe between Dresden and the Czech border. Stadt Wehlen is twinned with: Wehlen an der Mosel (Rhineland-Palatinate) Wangen im Allgäu (Baden-Württemberg Dorn-Dürkheim Trochtelfingen Bergtest near Wehlen, an annual competition walk. Gewählte Bürgermeisterinnen und Bürgermeister im Freistaat Sachsen, Stand: 17. Juli 2022, Statistisches Landesamt des Freistaates Sachsen. "Bevölkerung des Freistaates Sachsen nach Gemeinden am 31. Dezember 2021" (XLS) (in German). Statistisches Landesamt des Freistaates Sachsen. 2022. Eisenbahnatlas Deutschland [German railway atlas] (in German) (2009/2010 ed.). Schweers + Wall. 2009. ISBN 978-3-89494-139-0. "Piers". Sächsische Dampfschiffahrt. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "Elbe ferries". Verkehrsverbund Oberelbe. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "F8: Fährstelle Stadt Wehlen" (PDF). Regionalverkehr Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge. Retrieved 22 July 2022. "238: Pirna - Mockethal - Stadt Wehlen / Pirna - Lohmen - Stadt Wehlen" (PDF). Regionalverkehr Sächsische Schweiz-Osterzgebirge. Retrieved 22 July 2022. Webpage of the town of wehlen Tourist information of the town of wehlen v t e