Burbank is a city in the southeastern end of the San Fernando Valley in Los Angeles County, California, United States. Located 12 miles (19 km) northwest of downtown Los Angeles, Burbank has a population of 107,337. The city was named after David Burbank, who established a sheep ranch there in 1867. Burbank consists of two distinct areas: a downtown/foothill section, in the foothills of the Verdugo Mountains, and the flatland section. Often called the "Media Capital of the World" and only a few miles northeast of Hollywood, numerous media and entertainment companies are headquartered or have significant production facilities in Burbank, including Warner Bros. Entertainment, The Walt Disney Company, Nickelodeon Animation Studio, The Burbank Studios, Cartoon Network Studios with the West Coast branch of Cartoon Network, and Insomniac Games. The broadcast network The CW is also headquartered in Burbank. "Beautiful Downtown Burbank" was stated often as a joke on Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In and The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson, as both shows were taped at NBC's former studios. The Hollywood Burbank Airport was the location of Lockheed's Skunk Works, which produced some of the most secret and technologically advanced airplanes, including the U-2 spy planes. In addition, the city contains the largest IKEA in the U.S. The history of the Burbank area can be traced back to the Tongva people, the indigenous people of the area, who lived in the region for thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans. In the late 1700s and early 1800s, Spanish explorers and mission priests arrived in the Los Angeles area. The city of Burbank occupies land that was previously part of two Spanish and Mexican-era colonial land grants, the 36,400-acre (147 km2) Rancho San Rafael, granted to Jose Maria Verdugo by the Spanish Bourbon government in 1784, and the 4,063-acre (16.44 km2) Rancho Providencia created in 1821. This area was the scene of a military skirmish which resulted in the unseating of the Spanish Governor of California, and his replacement by the Mexican leader Pio Pico. New Spain achieved its independence from the Spanish Empire in 1821, and from 1824, Rancho San Rafael existed within the new Mexican Republic. Dr. David Burbank purchased over 4,600 acres (19 km2) of the former Verdugo holding and another 4,600 acres (19 km2) of the Rancho Providencia in 1867 and built a ranch house and began to raise sheep and grow wheat on the ranch. By 1876, the San Fernando Valley became the largest wheat-raising area in Los Angeles County. But the droughts of the 1860s and 1870s underlined the need for steady water supplies. A professionally trained dentist, Burbank began his career in Waterville, Maine. He joined the great migration westward in the early 1850s and, by 1853 was living in San Francisco. At the time the American Civil War broke out, he was again well established in his profession as a dentist in Pueblo de Los Angeles. In 1867, he purchased Rancho La Providencia from David W. Alexander and Francis Mellus, and he purchased the western portion of the Rancho San Rafael (4,603 acres) from Jonathan R. Scott. Burbank's property reached nearly 9,200 acres (37 km2) at a cost of $9,000. Burbank would not acquire full titles to both properties until after a court decision known as the "Great Partition" was made in 1871 dissolving the Rancho San Rafael. He eventually became known as one of the largest and most successful sheep raisers in southern California, and as a result, he closed his dentistry practice and invested heavily in real estate in Los Angeles. When the area that became Burbank was settled in the 1870s and 1880s, the streets were aligned along what is now Olive Avenue, the road to the Cahuenga Pass and downtown Los Angeles. These were largely the roads the Native Americans traveled and the early settlers took their produce down to Los Angeles to sell and to buy supplies along these routes. At the time, the primary long-distance transportation methods available to San Fernando Valley residents were stagecoach and train. Stagecoaching between Los Angeles and San Francisco through the Valley began in 1858. The Southern Pacific Railroad arrived in the Valley in 1876, completing the route connecting San Francisco and Los Angeles. A shrewd businessman, foreseeing the value of rail transport, Burbank sold Southern Pacific Railroad a right-of-way through the property for one dollar. The first train passed through Burbank on April 5, 1874. A boom created by a rate war between the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific brought people streaming into California shortly thereafter, and a group of speculators purchased much of Burbank's land holdings in 1886 for $250,000. One account suggests Burbank may have sold his property because of a severe drought that year, which caused a shortage of water and grass for his livestock. Approximately 1,000 of his sheep died due to the drought conditions. The group of speculators who bought the acreage formed the Providencia Land, Water, and Development Company and began developing the land, calling the new town Burbank after its founder, and began offering farm lots on May 1, 1887. The townsite had Burbank Boulevard/Walnut Avenue as the northern boundary, Grandview Avenue as the southern boundary, the edge of the Verdugo Mountains as the eastern boundary, and Clybourn Avenue as the western border. The establishment of a water system in 1887 allowed farmers to irrigate their orchards and provided a stronger base for agricultural development. The original plot of the new townsite of Burbank extended from what is now Burbank Boulevard on the north, to Grandview Avenue in Glendale, California on the south, and from the top of the Verdugo Hills on the east to what is now known as Clybourn Avenue on the west. At the same time, the arrival of the railroad provided immediate access for the farmers to bring crops to market. Packing houses and warehouses were built along the railroad corridors. The railroads also provided access to the county for tourists and immigrants alike. A Southern Pacific Railroad depot in Burbank was completed in 1887. The boom lifting real estate values in the Los Angeles area proved to be a speculative frenzy that collapsed abruptly in 1889. Much of the newly created wealthy went broke. Many of the lots in Burbank ended up getting sold for taxes. Vast numbers of people would leave the region before it all ended. The effects of the downturn were felt for several years, as the economy struggled to recover and many businesses closed. However, the region eventually rebounded and continued to grow and develop in the decades that followed. Before the downturn, Burbank built a hotel in the town in 1887. Burbank also later owned the Burbank Theatre, which opened on November 27, 1893, at a cost of $200,000. Burbank, who came to California in his early thirties, died in 1895 at the age of 73. The theater continued to operate but struggled for many years and by August 1900 had its thirteenth manager. The new manager's name was Oliver Morosco, who was already known as a successful theatrical impresario. He put the theater on the path to prosperity for many years. Though the theater was intended to be an opera house, instead it staged plays and became known nationally. The theatre featured leading actors of the day, such as Fay Bainter and Marjorie Rambeau, until it deteriorated into a burlesque house. In August 1900, Burbank established its first telephone exchange, making it the first in the San Fernando Valley. Within five years, several other telephone exchanges were established in the Valley, and a company known as the San Fernando Valley Home Telephone Company was formed, based in Glendale. This company provided telephone service to the entire Valley, connecting communities and facilitating growth. Home Telephone competed with Tropico, and in 1918 both were taken over by Pacific Telephone Company. At this time, there were an estimated 300 hand-cranked telephones in Burbank. The telephone network helped to connect the sprawling metropolis of Los Angeles and its surrounding areas such as Burbank, making it easier for people to move around and do business. By 1904, Burbank gained worldwide recognition when the renowned heavyweight boxing champion James J. Jeffries became a significant landowner in the town. Jeffries acquired 107 acres (0.43 km2) of land along Victory Boulevard to establish his ranch. He ventured into cattle farming and exported his livestock to Mexico and South America, becoming one of the pioneering residents to participate in foreign trade. Eventually, he constructed a sizable ranch house and barn near the present-day intersection of Victory Boulevard and Buena Vista Street. Subsequently, the barn was relocated and reconstructed at Knott's Berry Farm in Buena Park, California. The town's first bank was formed in 1908 when Burbank State Bank opened its doors near the corner of Olive Avenue and San Fernando Blvd. On the first day, the bank collected $30,000 worth of deposits, and at the time the town had a population of 300 residents. In 1911, the bank was dissolved; it would then become the Burbank branch of the Security Trust & Savings Bank. In 1911, wealthy farmer Joseph Fawkes grew apricots and owned a house on West Olive Avenue. He was also fascinated with machinery, and soon began developing what became known as the "Fawkes Folly" aerial trolley. He and his wife Ellen C. Fawkes secured two patents for the nation's first monorail. The two formed the Aerial Trolley Car Company and set about building a prototype they believed would revolutionize transportation. Joseph Fawkes called the trolley his Aerial Swallow, a cigar-shaped, suspended monorail driven by a propeller that he promised would carry passengers from Burbank to downtown Los Angeles in 10 minutes. The first open car accommodated about 20 passengers and was suspended from an overhead track and supported by wooden beams. In 1911, the monorail car made its first and only run through his Burbank ranch, with a line between Lake and Flower Streets. The monorail was considered a failure after gliding just a foot or so and falling to pieces. Nobody was injured but Joseph Fawkes' pride was badly hurt as Aerial Swallow became known as "Fawkes' Folly." City officials viewed his test run as a failure and focused on getting a Pacific Electric Streetcar line into Burbank. Laid out and surveyed with a modern business district surrounded by residential lots, wide boulevards were carved out as the "Los Angeles Express" printed: Burbank, the town, being built in the midst of the new farming community, has been laid out in such a manner as to make it by and by an unusually pretty town. The streets and avenues are wide and, all have been handsomely graded. All improvements being made would do credit to a city ... Everything done at Burbank has been done right. The citizens of Burbank had to put up a $48,000 subsidy to get the reluctant Pacific Electric Streetcar officials to agree to extend the line from Glendale to Burbank. The first Red Car rolled into Burbank on September 6, 1911, with a tremendous celebration. That was about two months after the town became a city. The "Burbank Review" newspaper ran a special edition that day advising all local residents that: On Wednesday, the first electric car running on a regular passenger-carrying schedule left the Pacific Electric station at Sixth and Main streets, Los Angeles, for Burbank at 6:30 a.m. and the first car from Burbank to Los Angeles left at 6:20 a.m. the same day. Upon arrival of this car on its maiden trip, many citizens gave evidence of their great joy by ringing bells and discharging firearms. A big crowd of both men and women boarded the first car and rode to Glendale and there changed to a second car coming from Los Angeles and rode home again. Every face was an expression of happiness and satisfaction. The Burbank Line was completed through to Cypress Avenue in Burbank, and by mid-1925 this line was extended about a mile further along Glenoaks Boulevard to Eton Drive. A small wooden station was erected in Burbank in 1911 at Orange Grove Avenue with a small storage yard in its rear. This depot was destroyed by fire in 1942 and in 1947 a small passenger shelter was constructed. On May 26, 1942, the California State Railroad Commission proposed an extension of the Burbank Line to the Lockheed plant. The proposal called for a double-track line from Arden Junction along Glenoaks to San Fernando Boulevard and Empire Way, just northeast of Lockheed's main facility. But this extension never materialized and the commission moved on to other projects in the San Fernando Valley. The Red Car line in Burbank was abandoned and the tracks removed in 1956. The city marshal's office was changed to the Burbank Police Department in 1923. The early department consisted of only a handful of officers who were responsible for maintaining law and order in a rapidly growing community. The first police chief was George Cole, who later became a U.S. Treasury prohibition officer. Through the decades, the department has grown and evolved, adapting to the changing needs of the city. Today, the Burbank Police Department is a well-respected agency, known for its professionalism and commitment to serving the community. The department has a diverse range of specialized units, including a SWAT team, K-9 unit, air support, and a detective bureau. In 1928, Burbank was one of the first 13 cities to join the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, one of the largest suppliers of water in the world. This contrasted with other San Fernando Valley communities that obtained water through political annexation to Los Angeles. By 1937, the first power from Hoover Dam was distributed over Burbank's own electricity lines. The city purchases about 55% of its water from the MWD. The town grew steadily, weathering the drought and depression that hit Los Angeles in the 1890s and in 20 years, the community had a bank, newspaper, high school and a thriving business district with a hardware store, livery stable, dry goods store, general store, and bicycle repair shop. The city's first newspaper, Burbank Review, was established in 1906. The populace petitioned the State Legislature to incorporate as a city on July 8, 1911, with businessman Thomas Story as the mayor. Voters approved incorporation by a vote of 81 to 51. At the time, the Board of Trustees governed the community which numbered 500 residents. With the action of the Legislature, Burbank thus became the first independent city in the San Fernando Valley. The establishment of Burbank as a city was a crucial milestone in the area's progress, triggering a fresh phase of growth and advancement. This cityhood meant that Burbank gained the ability to govern itself, making decisions independently regarding its development and expansion. It also granted the city greater authority over its valuable resources, such as land, water, and other assets. With this newfound control, Burbank could shape its own future and manage its local affairs more effectively. The first city seal adopted by Burbank featured a cantaloupe, which was a crop that helped save the town's life when the land boom collapsed. In 1931, the original city seal was replaced and in 1978 the modern seal was adopted. The new seal shows City Hall beneath a banner. An airplane symbolizes the city's aircraft industry, the strip of film and stage light represent motion picture production. The bottom portion depicts the sun rising over the Verdugo Mountains. In 1915, major sections of the valley were annexed, helping Los Angeles to more than double its size that year. But Burbank was among a handful of towns with their own water wells and remained independent. By 1916, Burbank had 1,500 residents. In 1922, the Burbank Chamber of Commerce was organized. In 1923, the United States Postal Service reclassified the city from the rural village mail delivery to city postal delivery service. Burbank's population had grown significantly, from less than 500 people in 1908 to over 3,000 citizens. The city's business district grew on the west side of San Fernando Blvd. and stretched from Verdugo to Cypress avenues, and on the east side to Palm Avenue. In 1927, five miles (8 km) of paved streets had increased to 125 miles (201 km). The Wall Street Crash of 1929 set off a period of hardship for Burbank where business and residential growth paused. The effects of the Depression also caused tight credit conditions and halted home building throughout the area, including the city's Magnolia Park development. Around this time, major employers began to cut payrolls and some plants closed their doors. The Burbank City Council responded by slashing 10% of the wages of city workers. Money was put into an Employee Relief Department to help the unemployed. Local civic and religious groups sprang into action and contributed with food as homeless camps began to form along the city's Southern Pacific railroad tracks. Hundreds began to participate in self-help cooperatives, trading skills such as barbering, tailoring, plumbing or carpentry, for food and other services. By 1930, as First National Studios, Andrew Jergens Company, The Lockheed Company, McNeill and Libby Canning Company, the Moreland Company, and Northrop Aircraft Corporation opened facilities in Burbank and the population jumped to 16,662. In the 1930s, Burbank and Glendale prevented the Civilian Conservation Corps from stationing African American workers in a local park, citing sundown town ordinances that both cities had adopted. Sundown towns were municipalities or neighborhoods that practiced racial segregation by excluding non-white individuals, especially African Americans, from living within the city limits after sunset. Following a San Fernando Valley land bust during the Depression, real estate began to bounce back in the mid-1930s. In Burbank, a 100-home construction project began in 1934. By 1936, property values in the city exceeded pre-Depression levels. By 1950, the population had reached 78,577. From 1967 to 1989, a six-block stretch of San Fernando Blvd. was pedestrianized as the "Golden Mall". In 1887, the Burbank Furniture Manufacturing Company was the town's first factory. In 1917, the arrival of the Moreland Motor Truck Company changed the town and resulted in growing a manufacturing and industrial workforce. Within a few years, Moreland trucks were seen bearing the label, "Made in Burbank." Watt Moreland, its owner, had relocated his plant to Burbank from Los Angeles. He selected 25 acres (100,000 m2) at San Fernando Blvd. and Alameda Avenue. Moreland invested $1 million in the factory and machinery and employed 500 people. It was the largest truck maker west of the Mississippi.[citation needed] Within the next several decades, factories would dot the area landscape. What had mainly been an agricultural and ranching area would get replaced with a variety of manufacturing industries. Moreland operated from 1917 to 1937. Aerospace supplier Menasco Manufacturing Company would later purchase the property. Menasco's Burbank landing gear factory closed in 1994 due to slow commercial and military orders, affecting 310 people. Within months of Moreland's arrival, Community Manufacturing Company, a $3 million tractor company, arrived in Burbank.[citation needed] In 1920, the Andrew Jergens Company factory opened at Verdugo Avenue near the railroad tracks in Burbank. Andrew Jergens Jr.—aided by his father, Cincinnati businessman Andrew Jergens Sr. and business partners Frank Adams and Morris Spazier—had purchased the site and built a single-story building. They began with a single product, coconut oil soap, but would later make face creams, lotions, liquid soaps, and deodorants. In 1931, despite the Depression, the Jergens company expanded, building new offices and shipping department facilities. In 1939, the Burbank corporation merged with the Cincinnati company of Andrew Jergens Sr. becoming known as the Andrew Jergens Company of Ohio. The Burbank plant closed in 1992, affecting nearly 90 employees.[citation needed] The establishment of the aircraft industry and a major airport in Burbank during the 1930s set the stage for major growth and development, which was to continue at an accelerated pace into World War II and well into the postwar era. Brothers Allan Loughead and Malcolm Loughead, founders of the Lockheed Aircraft Company, opened a Burbank manufacturing plant in 1928 and, a year later, aviation designer Jack Northrop built his Flying Wing airplane in his own plant nearby. Dedicated on Memorial Day Weekend (May 30 – June 1), 1930, the United Airport was the largest commercial airport in the Los Angeles area until it was eclipsed in 1946 by the Los Angeles Municipal Airport (now Los Angeles International Airport) in Westchester when that facility (the former Mines Field) commenced commercial operations. Amelia Earhart, Wiley Post and Howard Hughes were among the notable aviation pioneers to pilot aircraft in and out of the original Union Air Terminal. By 1935, Union Air Terminal in Burbank ranked as the third-largest air terminal in the nation, with 46 airliners flying out of it daily. The airport served 9,895 passengers in 1931 and 98,485 passengers in 1936. In 1931, Lockheed was then part of Detroit Aircraft Corp., which went into bankruptcy with its Lockheed unit. A year later, a group of investors acquired assets of the Lockheed company. The new owners staked their limited funds to develop an all-metal, twin-engine transport, the Model 10 Electra. It first flew in 1934 and quickly gained worldwide notice. A brochure celebrating Burbank's 50th anniversary as a city touted Lockheed payroll having "nearly 1,200" by the end of 1936. The aircraft company's hiring contributed to what was a favorable employment environment at the time. Moreland's truck plant was later used by Lockheed's Vega Aircraft Corporation, which made what was widely known as "the explorer's aircraft." Amelia Earhart flew one across the Atlantic Ocean. In 1936, Lockheed officially took over Vega Aircraft in Burbank. During World War II, the entire area of Lockheed's Vega factory was camouflaged to fool an enemy reconnaissance effort. The factory was hidden beneath a rural neighborhood scenes painted on canvas. Hundreds of fake trees and shrubs were positioned to give the entire area a three-dimensional appearance. The fake trees and shrubs were created to provide a leafy texture. Air ducts disguised as fire hydrants made it possible for the Lockheed-Vega employees to continue working underneath the huge camouflage umbrella designed to conceal their factory. The growth of companies such as Lockheed, and the burgeoning entertainment industry drew more people to the area, and Burbank's population doubled between 1930 and 1940 to 34,337. Burbank saw its greatest growth during World War II due to Lockheed's presence, employing some 80,800 men and women producing aircraft such as the Lockheed Hudson, Lockheed P-38 Lightning, Lockheed PV-1 Ventura, Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, and America's first jet fighter, the Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star. Lockheed later created the U2, SR-71 Blackbird and the F-117 Nighthawk at its Burbank-based "Skunk Works". The name came from a secret, ill-smelling backwoods distillery called "Skonk Works" in cartoonist Al Capp's Li'l Abner comic strip. Dozens of hamburger stands, restaurants and shops appeared around Lockheed to accommodate the employees. Some of the restaurants operated 24 hours a day. At one time, Lockheed paid utility rates representing 25% of the city's total utilities revenue, making Lockheed the city's cash cow. When Lockheed left, the economic loss was huge. At its height during World War II, the Lockheed facility employed up to 98,000 people. Between the Lockheed and Vega plants, some 7,700,000 square feet (720,000 m2) of manufacturing space was located in Burbank at the peak in 1943. Burbank's growth did not slow as war production ceased, and over 7,000 new residents created a postwar real estate boom. Real estate values soared as housing tracts appeared in the Magnolia Park area of Burbank between 1945 and 1950. More than 62% of the city's housing stock was built before 1970. Following World War II, homeless veterans lived in tent camps in Burbank, in Big Tujunga Canyon and at a decommissioned National Guard base in Griffith Park. The government also set up trailer camps at Hollywood Way and Winona Avenue in Burbank and in nearby Sun Valley. But new homes were built, the economy improved, and the military presence in Burbank continued to expand. Lockheed employees numbered 66,500 and expanded from aircraft to include spacecraft, missiles, electronics and shipbuilding. Lockheed's presence in Burbank attracted dozens of firms making aircraft parts. One of them was Weber Aircraft Corporation, an aircraft interior manufacturer situated adjacent to Lockheed at the edge of the airport. Throughout the 1950s and into the late 1960s, Weber Aircraft became a leading supplier of seats for a variety of aircraft, including the Boeing 707, the Douglas DC-8, and the Lockheed L-1011. In 1988, Weber closed its Burbank manufacturing plant, which then employed 1,000 people. Weber produced seats, galleys, lavatories and other equipment for commercial and military aircraft. Weber had been in Burbank for 36 years. In 1987, Burbank's airport became the first to require flight carriers to fly quieter "Stage 3" jets. By 2010, Burbank's Bob Hope Airport had 4.5 million passengers annually. The airport also was a major facility for FedEx and UPS, with 96.2 million pounds of cargo that year. The motion picture business arrived in Burbank in the 1920s. In 1926, First National Pictures bought a 78-acre (320,000 m2) site on Olive Avenue near Dark Canyon. The property included a 40-acre (160,000 m2) hog ranch and the original David Burbank house, both owned by rancher Stephen A. Martin. In 1928, First National was taken over by a company founded by the four Warner Brothers. Notably, First National had produced and released many of the early "talkie" films of the late 1920s. By 1929, Warner Bros.-First National Pictures was dissolved and the First National name was retired. However, Warner Bros. continued to operate on the site as a standalone studio. Columbia Pictures purchased property in Burbank as a ranch facility, used primarily for outdoor shooting. Walt Disney's company, which had outgrown its Hollywood quarters after success of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film), bought 51 acres (210,000 m2) in Burbank. Disney's million-dollar studio, designed by Kem Weber, was completed in 1939 on Buena Vista Street. Disney originally wanted to build "Mickey Mouse Park," as he first called it, next to the Burbank studio. But his aides finally convinced him that the space was too small, and there was opposition from the Burbank City Council. One council member told Disney: "We don't want the carny atmosphere in Burbank." Disney later built his successful Disneyland in Anaheim. During World War II, many of the movie studios in Burbank were used for war-related production, including civil defense-related films, and the city experienced a population boom as a result of the increased job opportunities. From Disney Studios alone, more than 70 hours of film was produced during the wartime effort. This included films that were used to boost morale on the home front and others that were used to educate and inform the public about the war. Burbank, which was previously known primarily as a center of the entertainment industry, became a major player in the war effort and a thriving community as a result. As the war came to an end, the movie studios in Burbank returned to their primary function of producing entertainment films, but the city had permanently changed as a result of its wartime experience. Burbank saw its first real civil strife as the culmination of a six-month labor dispute between the set decorator's union and the studios resulted in the Battle of Burbank on October 5, 1945, a confrontation that led to the largest wave of strikes in American history. For six months, the union had been negotiating for better pay and working conditions, but the studios refused to budge. Frustrated and desperate, the set decorators decided to take action. The studios responded by hiring non-union workers to replace the striking decorators, but the union was not about to back down. They organized picket lines and rallies, drawing support from other unions in the area. The studios, in turn, called in police and private security to break up the protests. Streets were filled with striking workers, non-union replacements, and security personnel, all engaged in a violent confrontation. Cars were overturned, windows were smashed, and tear gas was used to disperse the crowds. In the end, studios forced to negotiate with the union, and the decorators eventually won their demands for better pay and working conditions. By the 1960s and 1970s, more of the Hollywood entertainment industry was relocating to Burbank. NBC moved its west coast headquarters to a new location at Olive and Alameda avenues. The Burbank studio was purchased in 1951, and NBC arrived in 1952 from its former location at Sunset and Vine in Hollywood. Although NBC promoted its Hollywood image for most of its West Coast telecasts (such as Ed McMahon's introduction to The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson: "from Hollywood"), comedians Dan Rowan and Dick Martin began mentioning "beautiful downtown Burbank" on Laugh-in in the 1960s. By 1962, NBC's multimillion-dollar, state-of-the-art complex was completed. One of the biggest productions to come out of the Burbank studios during this time was the hit television series Batman. The show, which aired from 1966 to 1968, was filmed entirely on the Warner Bros. lot in Burbank and was a huge success, both critically and commercially. It was instrumental in launching other superhero shows and movies, and its popularity helped to establish the studio as a major player in the television industry. As the 1970s came to a close, the Burbank studios had firmly established themselves as a major player in the industry. Warner Bros., NBC, Disney and Columbia TriStar Home Video (now Sony Pictures Home Entertainment) all ended up located very close to each other along the southern edge of Burbank (and not far from Universal City to the southwest), an area now known as the Media District, Media Center District or simply Media Center. In the early 1990s, Burbank imposed growth restrictions in the Media District. Since then, to house its growing workforce, Disney has focused on developing the site of the former Grand Central Airport in the nearby city of Glendale. Only Disney's most senior executives and some film, television, and animation operations are still based at the main Disney studio lot in Burbank. Rumors surfaced of NBC leaving Burbank after its parent company General Electric Corporation acquired Universal Studios and renamed the merged division NBC Universal. Since the deal, NBC has been relocating key operations to the Universal property located in Universal City. In 2007, NBC Universal management informed employees that the company planned to sell much of the Burbank complex. NBC Universal would relocate its television and cable operations to the Universal City complex. When Conan O'Brien took over hosting The Tonight Show from Carson's successor Jay Leno in 2009, he hosted the show from Universal City. However, O'Brien's hosting role lasted only 7 months, and Leno, who launched a failed primetime 10pm show in fall 2009, was asked to resume his Tonight Show role after O'Brien controversially left NBC. The show returned to the NBC Burbank lot and had been expected to remain there until at least 2018. However, in April 2013 NBC confirmed plans for The Tonight Show to return to New York after 42 years in Burbank, with comic Jimmy Fallon replacing Leno as host. The change became effective in February 2014. The relocation plans changed following Comcast Corp.'s $30 billion acquisition of NBC Universal in January 2011. NBC Universal announced in January 2012 it would relocate the NBC Network, Telemundo's L.A. Bureau, as well as local stations KNBC and KVEA to the former Technicolor building located on the lower lot of Universal Studios in Universal City. The former NBC Studios were renamed The Burbank Studios. In 2019, the Conan O'Brien moved his TBS talk show, Conan, to Stage 15 on the Warner Bros. studios lot in Burbank, where it continued to tape until 2021 when the show ended. Stage 15, constructed in the late 1920s, was used to shoot films such as Calamity Jane (1953), Blazing Saddles (1974), A Star Is Born (1976) and Ghostbusters (1984). In the early 1990s, Burbank tried unsuccessfully to lure Sony Pictures Entertainment, the Columbia and TriStar studios owner based in Culver City, and 20th Century Fox, which had threatened to move from its West Los Angeles lot unless the city granted permission to upgrade its facility. Fox stayed after getting Los Angeles city approval on its $200 million expansion plan. In 1999, the city managed to gain Cartoon Network Studios which took up residence in an old commercial bakery building located on North 3rd St. when it separated its production operations from Warner Bros. Animation in Sherman Oaks. Hundreds of major feature films have been filmed in the studios in Burbank including Casablanca (1942), starring Humphrey Bogart. The movie began production a few months after the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor. Due to World War II, location shooting was restricted and filming near airports was banned. As a result, Casablanca shot most of its major scenes on Stage 1 at the Warner Bros. Burbank Studios, including the film's airport scene. It featured a foggy Moroccan runway created on the stage where Bogart's character does not fly away with Ingrid Bergman. Bonnie and Clyde (1967) was also filmed at the Warner Bros. Burbank Studios. The Gary Cooper film High Noon (1952) was shot on a western street at the Warner Brothers "Ranch", then known as the Columbia Ranch. The ranch facility is situated less than a mile north of Warner's main lot in Burbank. 3:10 to Yuma (1957) was also filmed on the old Columbia Ranch, and much of the outdoor filming for the Three Stooges took place at Columbia Ranch, including most of the chase scenes. In 1993, Warner Bros. bulldozed the Burbank-based sets used to film High Noon and Lee Marvin's Oscar-winning Western comedy Cat Ballou (1965), as well as several other features and television shows. A $500-million redevelopment of the Warner Bros. Ranch Lot is currently underway, which will add new offices and soundstages to the historic production facility. While filming Apollo 13 (1995) and Coach Carter (2005), the producers shot scenes at Burbank's Safari Inn Motel. True Romance (1993) also filmed on location at the motel. Back to the Future (1985) shot extensively on the Universal Studios backlot but also filmed band audition scenes at the Burbank Community Center. San Fernando Blvd. doubled for San Diego in The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997) while much of Christopher Nolan's Memento was shot in and around Burbank with scenes on Burbank Blvd., at the Blue Room (a local bar also featured in the 1994 Michael Mann feature Heat), the tattoo parlor, as well as the character Natalie's home. The city's indoor shopping mall, Burbank Town Center, is often used as a backdrop for shooting films, television series and commercials. Over the years, it was the site for scenes in Bad News Bears (2005) to location shooting for Cold Case, Gilmore Girls, ER and Desperate Housewives. The ABC show Desperate Housewives also frequently used the Magnolia Park area for show scenes, along with the city's retail district along Riverside and adjacent to Toluca Lake, California. Also, Universal Pictures' Larry Crowne shot exterior scenes outside Burbank's Kmart, the store doubled for 'U Mart', and in The Hangover Part II (2011) a breakfast scene was filmed at the IHOP restaurant across the street. The Burbank Airport is also an important part of the city's cinematic history. In the early days of Hollywood, many stars and filmmakers used the airport to travel to and from Los Angeles. The airport has also been featured in a number of films and television shows over the years, including The Hindenburg (film), Wonder Woman (TV series), and Perry Mason (1957 TV series). In 2012, an international filmmaking and acting academy opened its doors in Burbank. The school, the International Academy of Film and Television, traces its roots to the Philippines. The first class will include students from 30 countries. Burbank, like other cities in California, has been facing many economic, political and social challenges in recent years. One of the main issues is the lack of affordable housing in the city. The cost of single-family homes in Burbank topped $1 million by early 2021. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the average rent price in Burbank is around $1,800 and 29% of Burbank residents spend over half of their income on rent. These high housing costs are putting a strain on many residents, and as a result, a rent-control ordinance known as Measure RC was put on the ballot in 2021 to cap rent increases at 7% annually on at least 24,000 residential units; the measure failed to pass 36 to 64%. California law bars communities in the state from putting rent control on complexes built after February 1995. Rising housing costs in California in the last decade have contributed to a shortage of affordable housing in large metropolitan areas. Rent control is seen as a way to keep housing costs affordable but some economists have suggested ordinances limiting rent only contribute to California's chronic housing problem. Burbank has taken the initiative in various anti-smoking ordinances in the past decade. In late 2010, Burbank passed an ordinance prohibiting smoking in multi-family residences sharing ventilation systems. The rule went into effect in mid-2011. The new anti-smoking ordinance, which also prohibits smoking on private balconies and patios in multi-family residences, is considered the first of its kind in California. Since 2007, Burbank has prohibited smoking at all city-owned properties, downtown Burbank, the Chandler Bikeway, and sidewalk and pedestrian areas. The murder of Burbank police officer Matthew Pavelka in 2003 by a local gang known as the Vineland Boys sparked an intensive investigation in conjunction with several other cities and resulted in the arrest of a number of gang members and other citizens in and around Burbank. Among those arrested was Burbank councilwoman Stacey Murphy, implicated in trading guns in exchange for drugs. Pavelka was the first Burbank police officer to be fatally shot in the line of duty in the department's history, according to the California Police Association officials. The city's namesake street, Burbank Boulevard, started getting a makeover in 2007. The city spent upwards of $10 million to plant palm trees and colorful flowers, a median, new lights, benches and bike racks. Additionally, various utility boxes throughout the city were painted in 2020 with original art inspired by the theme of "A World of Entertainment." Artists were selected through a committee consisting of City of Burbank representatives and members of art communities. Today, an estimated 100,000 people work in Burbank. The physical imprints of the city's aviation industry remain. In late 2001, the Burbank Empire Center opened with aviation as the theme. The center, built at a cost of $250 million by Zelman Development Company, sits on Empire Avenue, the former site of Lockheed's top-secret "Skunk Works", and other Lockheed properties. In a real estate deal announced in April 2019 Warner Bros. plans to open a series of two new Frank Gehry-designed office towers on the new site that have been described as "like icebergs floating alongside the 134 freeway." According to the United States Census Bureau, Burbank has a total area of 17.4 square miles (45 km2). 17.4 square miles (45 km2) of it is land and 0.04 square miles (0.10 km2) of it (0.12%) is water. It is bordered by Glendale to the east, North Hollywood and Toluca Lake on the west, and Griffith Park to the south. The Verdugo Mountains form the northern border. Elevations in the city range from 500 feet (150 m) in the lower valley areas to about 800 feet (240 m) near the Verdugo Mountains. Most of Burbank features a water table more than 100 feet (30 m) deep, more than the measures found in the 1940s when the water table was within 50 feet (15 m) of the ground surface in some areas of Burbank. The geology of the Burbank area is primarily composed of sedimentary rocks, including sandstone, siltstone, and shale. These rocks were formed by sediment deposited by ancient rivers and seas, and have been uplifted and folded due to tectonic activity. Burbank is located within a seismically active area. At least eight major faults are mapped within 13.5 miles (21.7 km) of Burbank's civic center. The San Fernando Fault, located 6 miles (10 km) northwest of Burbank's downtown, caused the 6.6 magnitude 1971 San Fernando earthquake. The Verdugo Fault, which can reach a maximum estimated 6.5 magnitude earthquake on the Richter Scale, is about 1.5 miles (2.4 km) from the city of Burbank's civic center. This fault extends throughout the city and is located in the alluvium just south of the Verdugo Mountains. The fault is mapped on the surface in northeastern Glendale, and at various locations in Burbank. Other nearby faults include the Northridge Hills Fault (10 miles (16 km) northwest of Burbank), the Newport–Inglewood Fault (12.5 miles (20.1 km)), Whittier Fault (21 miles (34 km)), and lastly the San Andreas Fault (28 miles (45 km)) with its 8.25 magnitude potential on the Richter Scale. The 1971 San Fernando earthquake, with a magnitude of 6.6, caused some damage in Burbank. Poorly reinforced and unreinforced masonry fences were damaged as well as masonry chimneys. Pacific Manor care facility on Glenoaks, which was later razed and replaced with a new care facility, was badly damaged and had to be evacuated. Some factories, including Lockheed, had spills of hazardous materials. There were also small fires from electrical or fuel gas-related sources. Lastly, there were cases of flooding in buildings due to broken pipes and risers used for fire sprinklers. Burbank suffered $66.1 million in damage from the 1994 Northridge earthquake, according to the city's finance department. There was $58 million in damage to privately owned facilities in commercial, industrial, manufacturing and entertainment businesses. Another $8.1 million in losses included damaged public buildings, roadways and a power station in Sylmar that is partly owned by Burbank. The Burbank Fire Department responded to 292 calls for damage inspections and reports of natural gas leaks. It is to be noted that the damage caused was more extensive than the 1971 San Fernando earthquake but still relatively moderate in nature. Burbank has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: Csa) with hot summers and mild winters. The highest recorded temperature was 114 °F (46 °C) which occurred on July 6, 2018, and again on September 6, 2020. The lowest recorded temperature was 22 °F (−6 °C) on December 8, 1978, and again on January 29, 1979. Average annual precipitation is just over 17 inches (430 mm), but is highly variable from year to year. Wet years (with well over 20 inches of rainfall) are generally associated with El Niño conditions, and dry years with La Niña. The driest water year (October to September of the next year) on record was the 2013–14 season with 5.37 in (136 mm), while the wettest was 1940–41 with 41.29 in (1,049 mm). The months that receive the most precipitation are February and January, respectively. It rarely snows in Burbank, as it is located in a Mediterranean climate zone, which typically experiences mild winters. However, the city has experienced snow several times, including in December 1931, January 1932, January 1949, January 1950, and February 2011. Highest recorded temperature: 114 °F (46 °C) Lowest recorded temperature: 22 °F (−6 °C) Warmest month: August Coolest month: December Highest precipitation: February Lowest precipitation: July/August Magnolia Park, established on Burbank's western edge in the early 1920s, had 3,500 houses within six years after its creation. When the city refused to pay for a street connecting the subdivision with the Cahuenga Pass, real estate developer and daily farmer Earl L. White did it himself and called it Hollywood Way. White was the owner of KELW, the San Fernando Valley's first commercial radio station, which went on the air on February 13, 1927. KELW, a 1,000-watt station, could be heard by listeners up and down the Pacific Coast. Some reports suggest it also could be heard as far away as New Zealand. The 1,000-watt radio station was sold in 1935 to the Hearst newspaper company. KELW was a short-lived radio station, operating for just a decade out of Burbank between 1927 and 1937. The city's Magnolia Park area, bordered by West Verdugo Avenue to the south, Chandler Boulevard to the north, Hollywood Way to the west and Buena Vista Street to the east is known for its small-town feel, shady streets and Eisenhower-era storefronts. Most of the homes in the area date to the 1940s, when they were built for veterans of World War II. Central to the community is Magnolia Boulevard, known for its antique shops, boutiques, thrift shops, corner markets, and occasional chain stores. The neighborhood is in constant struggle with developers looking to expand and update Magnolia Boulevard. Independent merchants and slow-growth groups have fought off new construction and big-box stores. The neighborhood remains quiet despite being beneath the airport flight path and bordered by arterial streets.[citation needed] One of the centerpieces of the area's comeback has been Porto's Bakery at the old Albin's drug store site located at 3606 and 3614 West Magnolia Boulevard. As part of the project, Burbank loaned Porto's funds for building upgrades. Under the agreement, a portion of the loan will be forgiven over a 10-year period. East of Porto's is Antique Row, a hub for shopping in the city. Other enhancements include converting the disused railroad right-of-way along Chandler Boulevard into a landscaped bikeway and pedestrian path. This project was part of a larger bike route linking Burbank's downtown Metrolink station with the B Line subway in North Hollywood. The bike-friendly neighborhood and vintage shops has made this a part of the San Fernando Valley that is frequented by Hipsters. Perhaps the most famous collection of neighborhoods in Burbank is the Rancho Equestrian District, flanked roughly by Griffith Park to the south, Victory Boulevard to the east, Olive Avenue to the west and Alameda Avenue to the north. Part of the Rancho community extends into neighboring Glendale. The neighborhood zoning allows residents to keep horses on their property. Single-family homes far outnumber multifamily units in the Rancho, and many of the homes have stables and horse stalls. There are about 785 single-family homes, 180 condos and townhomes, and 250 horses. The Rancho has traditionally been represented by the Burbank Rancho Homeowners, which was formed in 1963 by Floran Frank and other equestrian enthusiasts and is the oldest neighborhood group in the city. Rancho real estate sells at a premium due to its equestrian zoning, numerous parks, connection to riding trails in Griffith Park and its adjacency to Warner Bros. and Disney Studios. Riverside Drive, its main thoroughfare, is lined with sycamore and oak trees, some more than 70 years old. It is quite common to see people on horseback riding along Riverside Drive's designated horse lanes. Of historical note, the Rancho was the home to TV star Mister Ed, the talking horse of the show of the same name. Other notable former Rancho residents included Ava Gardner and Tab Hunter, as well as Bette Davis in the adjoining Glendale Rancho area. The rancho is especially known for its parks and open space. This includes centrally located Mountain View Park, Johnny Carson Park, Los Angeles' Griffith Park and Equestrian Center, Bette Davis Park (in the adjoining Glendale Rancho) and the neighborhood's beloved Polliwog, extending along Disney's animation building and used by local residents to exercise their horses. In the 1960s, General Motors Corporation opened training facilities on Riverside Drive in the Rancho area, but in 1999 decided to contract out dealer-technician training to Raytheon Company and dismissed a dozen employees. In 2006, GM confiscated EV1 electric-powered cars from drivers who had leased them and moved them to the GM facility in Burbank. When environmentalists determined the location of the cars, they began a month-long vigil at the facility. To challenge the company's line that they were unwanted, they found buyers for all of them, offering a total of $1.9 million. The vehicles were loaded on trucks and removed, and several activists who tried to intervene were arrested. The property was sold in 2012 to Lycée International de Los Angeles (LILA), a dual French-English language school, which opened a private high school in August 2013. The new school includes 23 classrooms, four labs, an auditorium, an art room, an indoor sports rooms, two outdoor volleyball courts and basketball courts, according to the school's website. Burbank Public Library Burbank City Hall Buena Vista Branch Burbank Public Library De Bell Municipal Golf Course Providence Saint Joseph Medical Center Northwest Park Branch Burbank Public Library Southern California Genealogical Society Library Gordon R. Howard Museum Martial Arts History Museum New York Film Academy Valhalla Memorial Park Nickelodeon Animation Studio The Burbank Studios Walt Disney Studios Cartoon Network Studios Warner Bros. Ranch Warner Bros. Studios Stoopid Buddy Stoodios Columbia TriStar Home Video (now Sony Pictures Home Entertainment) 1978 to 1995 New Normal Studios/The Tom Leykis Show Providencia Ranch area – 1911 to 1960 Nestor Ranch 1911 Universal City 1912 to 1914 Lasky Ranch Hasbro Studios Hudkins Stables of Hollywood (Providencia) Orby TV Warner Bros. Studios, Burbank is a major filmmaking facility owned and run by Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. in Burbank, California. First National Pictures built the 62-acre (25 ha) studio lot in 1926 as it expanded from a film distributor to film production. The financial success of The Jazz Singer and The Singing Fool enabled Warner Bros. to purchase a majority interest in First National in September 1928 and it began moving its productions into the Burbank lot. The First National studio, as it was then known, became the official home of Warner Bros.–First National Pictures with four sound stages. By 1937, Warner Bros. had all but closed the Sunset studio, making the Burbank lot its main headquarters—which it remains to this day. Eventually, Warner dissolved the First National company and the site has often been referred to as simply Warner Bros. Studios since. The studio runs public backlot tours that offer visitors the chance to glimpse behind the scenes of one of the oldest film studios in the world (Warner Bros. Studio Tour Hollywood). In 1999, Cartoon Network Studios, a division of Warner Bros. took up residence in an old commercial bakery building located on North 3rd Street when it separated its production operations from Warner Bros. Animation in Sherman Oaks. On April 15, 2019, it was announced that Warner Bros. will sell Warner Bros. Ranch, another one of its facilities to Worthe Real Estate Group and Stockbridge Real Estate Fund as part of a larger real estate deal to be completed in 2023 which will see the studio get ownership of The Burbank Studios in time to mark its 100th anniversary. The Walt Disney Studios in Burbank serve as the international headquarters for media conglomerate The Walt Disney Company. Disney staff began the move from the old Disney studio at Hyperion Avenue in Silver Lake on December 24, 1939. Designed primarily by Kem Weber under the supervision of Walt Disney and his brother Roy, the Burbank Disney Studio buildings are the only studios to survive from the Golden Age of film. Disney is the only remaining major studio company to remain independent from a larger conglomerate and whose parent entity is still located in the Los Angeles area. Disney is also the only major film studio that does not run public backlot tours. Filmmaking began in the Providencia Ranch area (marked in yellow on the Providencia Land, Water & Development Co. map in this section). Nestor Studios began using the ranch location in 1911. The Providencia Ranch became part of the Universal Film Manufacturing operations on the Pacific/West Coast in 1912. From 1912 to 1914 Universal's ranch studio was also referred to as the Oak Crest Ranch. Carl Laemmle called the ranch "Universal City" as recorded in issues of The Moving Picture World Volume: 16 (April – June 1913). Universal City existed on the Providencia Land and Water property from 1912 to 1914. In 1914, the Oak Crest studio ranch and Hollywood studio operation would move to the new Universal City located on the Lankershim Land and Water property. The official public opening occurred on March 15, 1915, on the Lankershim Property. The new Universal City (three tracts of land) was much larger than the old Universal (Oak/Providencia) Ranch. The Universal Ranch tract of land became smaller after the 1914 move to the Taylor Ranch. The leased land surrounding the Universal ranch would soon become the Lasky Ranch. The Providencia property was used as a filming location by other motion picture companies, most notably for battle scenes in the silent classic about the American Civil War, The Birth of a Nation (1915). From 1949 to 1952, the St. Louis Browns, a Major League Baseball team, selected Burbank as their destination for spring training to escape the harsh winters of the Midwest. As the players donned their uniforms and stepped onto the field at Olive Memorial Park, they not only honed their baseball skills but also forged a special bond with Burbank and its Hollywood luminaries. Workers in Burbank came by during their lunch hour to watch the game. Additionally, well-known entertainment figures such as Bing Crosby, Bob Hope, and Nat King Cole would gather to witness the action. Marilyn Monroe herself even joined the Browns for promotional photos. Over time, the St. Louis Browns would evolve into the Baltimore Orioles. The Los Angeles Rams also used the stadium from 1958 to 1962 as a practice field. While the stadium, originally dedicated in 1947 to commemorate the soldiers lost in World War II, saw its stands razed in 1995, the fields themselves endure as an integral part of the Olive Recreation Center. In 1984, the park underwent a name change and became known as George Izay Park. Burbank experienced a 4.8% increase in population between 2000 and 2016, bringing its total population in 2016 to 105,110. Population growth was influenced by Burbank's expanding employment base, high-quality public schools, and access to regional transportation routes and metropolitan Los Angeles. According to the Southern California Association of Government's 2016 Demographic and Growth Forecast, the population of Burbank is expected to reach about 118,700 by 2040, an increase of 15% from 2012. The 2010 United States Census reported that Burbank had a population of 103,340. The population density was 5,946.3 inhabitants per square mile (2,295.9/km2). The racial makeup of Burbank was 75,167 (72.7%) White (58.3% Non-Hispanic White), 2,600 (2.5%) African American, 486 (0.5%) Native American, 12,007 (11.6%) Asian, 89 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 7,999 (7.7%) from other races, and 4,992 (4.8%) from two or more races. There were 25,310 people of Hispanic or Latino origin, of any race (24.5%). The Census reported that 102,767 people (99.4% of the population) lived in households, 291 (0.3%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 282 (0.3%) were institutionalized. There were 41,940 households, out of which 12,386 (29.5%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 18,388 (43.8%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 4,984 (11.9%) had a female householder with no husband present, 2,050 (4.9%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 2,177 (5.2%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 396 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 12,823 households (30.6%) were made up of individuals, and 4,179 (10.0%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.45. There were 25,422 families (60.6% of all households); the average family size was 3.13. The population was spread out, with 20,488 people (19.8%) under the age of 18, 8,993 people (8.7%) aged 18 to 24, 32,513 people (31.5%) aged 25 to 44, 27,552 people (26.7%) aged 45 to 64, and 13,794 people (13.3%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.6 males. There were 44,309 housing units at an average density of 2,549.6 per square mile (984.4/km2), of which 18,465 (44.0%) were owner-occupied, and 23,475 (56.0%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.6%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.3%. 50,687 people (49.0% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 52,080 people (50.4%) lived in rental housing units. According to the 2010 United States Census, Burbank had a median household income of $66,240, with 9.4% of the population living below the federal poverty line. While white residents continue to comprise the majority of Burbank's population, this proportion has decreased substantially from almost 80% in 1980 to approximately 72% in 2000. In contrast, the share of Hispanic residents increased steadily over the past two decades, growing from 16% in 1980 to 25% in 2000. Although Asian residents represent a smaller segment of the population, the share of Asian residents more than tripled since 1980, increasing from 3% in 1980 to 9% in 2000. The black population remained limited, rising from less than 1% in 1980 to almost 2% in 2000. As of the census of 2000, there were 100,316 people, 41,608 households, and 24,382 families residing in the city. The population density was 5,782.4 inhabitants per square mile (2,232.6/km2). There were 42,847 housing units at an average density of 2,469.8 per square mile (953.6/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 72.2% White, 2.1% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, 9.2% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 9.9% from other races, and 6.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 24.9% of the population. There were 41,608 households, out of which 28.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.8% were married couples living together, 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41.4% were non-families. 33.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 3.14. In the city, the population was spread out, with 22.3% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 35.4% from 25 to 44, 21.8% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.7 males. The median income for a household in the city was $72,347, and the median income for a family was $78,767. Males had a median income of $59,792 versus $41,273 for females. The per capita income for the city was $29,713. About 6% of families and 9.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.4% of those under age 18 and 12.2% of those age 65 or over. According to Mapping L.A., Mexican and Armenian were the most common ancestries in 2000. Mexico and Iran were the most common foreign places of birth. Burbank's overall crime rate for violent and property crimes during 2018 fell by about nearly 11% compared with 2017 levels, according to the statistics from the city police department. It represented the first decline in three years, with property and violent crimes in the city falling from 3,197 in 2017 to 2,852 in 2018. Rapes also were down in 2018, according to the police data. There were no murders listed in Burbank during 2018, 2017 and 2016. Three bodies were found in Burbank in 2018, but these homicides were determined to have occurred in Riverside County. Niche, a national online database that publishes city rankings, listed Burbank in 2018 as one of the top-13 "safest cities in America" and number 63 in terms of the "best cities to live." Burbank's violent crime rate was approximately 2.34 per 1,000 people in 2009, well below the national average of 4.29 per 1,000 people as reported by the U.S. Department of Justice in the Bureau of Justice Statistics. Furthermore, Burbank was named again in 2010 as One of the Nation's 100 Best Communities for Young People by America's Promise Alliance. As of December 2011, Burbank Police began for the first time posting arrest information online. The website contains archives from the start of the program. Criminal offenses are charged and locally prosecuted in the Burbank Courthouse. The Los Angeles District Attorney handles all of the felony violations which occur within Burbank city limits. The Burbank City Attorney, through its Prosecution Division, handles the remaining violations, which include all misdemeanors, and municipal code violations such as the Burbank Anti-Smoking Ordinance, as well as traffic offenses. The Burbank Superior Court is a high-volume courthouse, which is part of the Los Angeles County Superior Court system. The City Prosecutor files approximately 5,500 cases yearly, and the Burbank Police Department directly files approximately 12,000 to 15,000 traffic citations per year. Burbank Court, Division Two, handles all of the misdemeanor arraignments for Burbank offenses. A typical arraignment calendar is between 100 and 120 cases each day, including 15 to 25 defendants who are brought to court in custody. Many cases are initiated by arrests at the Hollywood Burbank Airport. Common arrests include possession of drugs such as marijuana, weapons, prohibited items, as well as false identification charges.[citation needed] The second-largest office space market in the San Fernando Valley is located in Burbank. Much of the space is utilized by the entertainment industry, which has among the highest office lease rates in the region. In 2017, two entities owned about 70% of Burbank's office Cities and Census Designated Places by Individual Countyspace. About 150,000 people work in Burbank each day, or more than live in the city. As of 2016, only 25% of the city's employed residents worked in Burbank. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2012 there were 17,587 companies within the city of Burbank and with combined payroll totaling in excess of $13.4 billion. Nearby Hollywood is a symbol of the entertainment industry and much of the production occurs in Burbank. Many companies have headquarters or facilities in Burbank, including Warner Bros. Entertainment, Warner Music Group, Legendary Pictures, The Walt Disney Company, ABC, The CW, Cartoon Network Studios with the West Coast headquarters of Cartoon Network, Nickelodeon Animation Studios, New Wave Entertainment, Insomniac Games and West Coast Customs. Many ancillary companies from Arri cameras, to Cinelease, Entertainment Partners, JL Fisher, and Matthews Studio Equipment also maintain a presence in Burbank. Xytech Systems Corporation, a business software and services provider to the entertainment industry, is headquartered in Burbank. Local IATSE union offices for the Stagehands Local 33, Grips Local 80, Make-up and Hairstylist Local 706, Set Painters Local 729 and Animation Guild Local 839 also make their home in Burbank with Teamsters Local 399, IBEW Local 40 and many other IATSE locals nearby. Burbank's economy felt stress as a result of the recession. From 2007 to 2016, the city had more than 1,200 home foreclosures, with about three-fourths of them happening from 2007 to 2011. City officials prepared for cutbacks going into 2009. Burbank's City Manager, Mike Flad, estimated the city's 2009–10 fiscal budget would suffer a 5% shortfall. In fact, the city's budget woes continued well into 2017. At the beginning of the budget development process for fiscal 2016–17, the city's staff was projecting a recurring budget deficit of $1.3 million for the year. That followed several years of across-the-board budget cuts by various city departments, according to budget documents. Even so, the city still managed to add some new positions and increase fire staffing. One of the increased costs Burbank and many other California cities are coping with is unfunded pension liability. The city manager's budget message in 2016-17 identified Burbank's aging infrastructure as one of the top priorities of city officials but also one of its biggest financial challenges. The city's 2017 budget documents indicated Burbank should be spending at least $5 million more annually to address the backlog of maintenance on infrastructure and update Burbank's facilities. Regardless, the city forecasts it will post a deficit for at least the next five years, projecting about $9.4 million in red ink in fiscal year 2017-18 and a deficit of about $27.4 million by 2022–23. As of April 2012, unemployment in the Burbank area stood at 8.4%, or below the state's jobless rate of 10.9%, according to the California Employment Development Department. Back in January 2011, the unemployment rate in Burbank had reached 10.7%, according to EDD. By November 2017, though, the unemployment rate in Burbank was just 3.4%, below the 4.1% rate in Los Angeles County, according to EDD data. In November 2022, Burbank's unemployment was at 5.40%, compared to 7.2% in November 2021. One bright spot in the otherwise bleak job market during the late 2007 into 2009 recession was Kaiser Permanente's decision to relocate some administrative offices near the Burbank airport. The relocation from Kaiser's Glendale and Pasadena administrative offices to Burbank was completed in 2009. Additionally, KCET television announced plans in 2012 to relocate to Burbank's Media District. KCET is a former PBS station and the largest independent station in southern and central California. Hasbro Studios also is located in Burbank just east of the airport in a commercial complex previously occupied by Yahoo. According to the city's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the city are: The revitalized downtown Burbank provides an urban mix of shopping, dining, and entertainment. The San Fernando Strip is an exclusive mall designed to be a modern urban village, with apartments above the mall. An upscale shopping district is located in the state-of-the-art Empire Center neighborhood. The Burbank Town Center is a retail complex adjacent to the downtown core that was built in two phases between 1991 and 1992. In 1979, the Burbank Redevelopment Agency entered into an agreement with San Diego-based Ernest Hahn Company to build a regional mall known as Media City Center. It would later get renamed Burbank Town Center and undergo a $130 million facelift starting in 2004, including a new exterior streetscape façade. The agency, helped out with its powers of eminent domain, spent $52 million to buy up the 41-acre (170,000 m2) land in the area bounded by the Golden State Freeway, Burbank Boulevard, Third Street and Magnolia Boulevard. Original plans were for Media City Center included four anchor tenants, including a J.W. Robinson's. But May Co. Department Stores later bought the parent company of Robinson's and dropped out of the deal. The other stores then dropped out as well and Hahn and the agency dropped the project in March 1987. Within months, Burbank entered into negotiations with the Walt Disney Company for a shopping mall and office complex to be called the "Disney MGM Backlot." Disney had estimated that it could spend $150 million to $300 million on a complex of shops, restaurants, theaters, clubs and hotel, and had offered to move its animation department and Disney Channel cable network operation to the property as well. These plans ended in failure in February 1988 when Disney executives determined that the costs were too high. In January 1989, Burbank began Media City Center project negotiations with two developers, the Alexander Haagen Co. of Manhattan Beach and Price Kornwasser Associates of San Diego. Eight months later, Haagen won the contract and commenced construction, leading to the $250 million mall's opening in August 1991. Under terms of the agreement with Haagen, the city funded an $18 million parking garage and made between $8 and $12 million in improvements to the surrounding area. Plans by Sheraton Corporation to build a 300-room hotel at the mall were shelved because of the weak economy. The new mall helped take the strain off Burbank's troubled economy, which had been hard hit by the departure of several large industrial employers, including Lockheed Corp. The center was partially financed with $50 million in city redevelopment funds. Construction had been in doubt for many years by economic woes and political turmoil since it was first proposed in the late 1970s. In 2003, Irvine-based Crown Realty & Development purchased the 1,200,000-square-foot (110,000 m2) Burbank Town Center from Pan Pacific Retail Properties for $111 million. Crown then hired General Growth Properties Inc., a Chicago-based real estate investment trust, for property management and leasing duties. At the time, the Burbank mall ranked as the No. 6 retail center in Los Angeles County in terms of leasable square footage, with estimated combined tenant volumes in excess of $240 million. In 1994, Lockheed selected Chicago-based Homart Development Company as the developer of a retail center on a former Lockheed P-38 Lightning production facility near the Burbank Airport that was subject to a major toxic clean-up project. A year later, Lockheed merged with Martin Marietta to become Lockheed Martin Corp. Lockheed was ordered to clean up the toxics as part of a federal Superfund site. The northern Burbank area also became identified as the San Fernando Valley's hottest toxic spot in 1989 by the South Coast Air Quality Management District, with Lockheed identified among major contributors. Lockheed always maintained the site was never a health risk to the community. The Lockheed toxic clean-up site, just east of the Golden State Freeway, later became home to the Empire Center. Four developers competed to be selected to build the $300 million outdoor mall on the site. In 1999, Lockheed picked Los Angeles-based Zelman Cos. from among other contenders to create the retail-office complex on a 103-acre (0.42 km2) site. Zelman purchased the land in 2000 for around $70 million. As part of the sales agreement, Lockheed carried out extensive soil vapor removal on the site. Lockheed had manufactured planes on the site from 1928 to 1991. Together with $42 million for demolition and $12 million for site investigation, Lockheed would eventually spend $115 million on the project. Warner Bros. proposed building a sports arena there for the Kings and the Clippers on the former B-1 bomber plant site. Price Club wanted it for a new store. Disney considered moving some operations there too. The city used the site in its failed attempt to lure DreamWorks to Burbank. Phoenix-based Vestar Development Company planned a major retail development and spent more than a year in negotiations to buy the property from Lockheed before pulling out late in 1998. Less than eight months after breaking ground, the Empire Center's first stores opened in October 2001. Local officials estimated the complex would generate about $3.2 million a year in sales tax revenue for the city, and as many as 3,500 local jobs. Within a year of completion, the Empire Center was helping the city to post healthy growth in sales tax revenues despite a down economy. Alone, the Empire mall generated close to $800,000 in sales tax revenues in the second quarter of 2002. The outdoor mall's buildings hark back to Lockheed's glory days by resembling manufacturing plants. Each of the outdoor signs features a replica of a Lockheed aircraft, while the mall design brings to mind an airport, complete with a miniature control tower. In 2009, work was finished on a $130-million office project adjacent to the Empire Center. The completion of the seven-story tower marked the final phase of the mixed-use Empire development near Bob Hope Airport. In late 2012, IKEA announced plans to relocate to a new site in Burbank. Its original location was situated north of the Burbank Town Center mall. The new location was approved by the city in 2014 and is just north of Alameda Avenue and east of the Golden State Freeway. The new 456,000-square-foot store was completed in February 2017, and when it opened was the largest IKEA in the United States. Meanwhile, the old IKEA site north of the mall is getting its own makeover and will feature residential and retail space. Also, the Burbank Town Center mall itself is getting a facelift of its own. The two projects together are expected to cost more than $350 million. The redevelopment reportedly includes using some of the land just north of the old IKEA site, including the Office Max location. Burbank is a charter city which operates under a council–manager form of government. In 1927, voters approved the council–manager form of government. The five-member City Council is elected for four-year overlapping terms, with the Mayor appointed annually from among the council. The City Clerk and the City Treasurer are also elected officials. Burbank is a full-service, independent city, with offices of the City Manager and City Attorney, and departments of Community Development, Financial Services, Fire, Information Technology, Library Services, Management Services, Police, Parks-Recreation & Community Services, Public Works, and Burbank Water and Power (BWP). Burbank opened its first library in 1913 as a contracted branch of the Los Angeles County Library. In 1938, the Burbank Public Library began operation separately from the county as a city department. Today, there are three public library locations in Burbank. The newest location is the Buena Vista Branch Library, which opened in 2022. In March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused normal life to come to a standstill. The staff at Burbank Public Library adapted and transitioned services to meet the new circumstances. They implemented curbside pickup and virtual programming to connect the community and provide access to resources. They also provided homework help for students and ensured that all students had access to online resources. In October 2023, Burbank received a grant of $9.95 million from the California State Library. This funding is set to breathe life into the vision of a new Central Library. This planned state-of-the-art library is an integral component of the ambitious Burbank Civic Center Project, a project including the development of affordable and workforce housing, new open space, parking, and city office space in downtown Burbank. The upcoming library will serve as a replacement for the existing facility, a 60-year-old building that faces limitations due to its age and condition. This new library is designed to better cater to the educational, workforce development, technology training, and information and culture access needs of the Burbank community. The first power was distributed within the city limits of Burbank in 1913, supplied then by Southern California Edison Company. Today, the city-owned BWP serves 45,000 households and 6,000 businesses in Burbank with water and electricity. Additionally, the $382-million annual revenue utility offers fiber optic services. Burbank's city garbage pickup service began in 1920; outhouses were banned in 1922. Most of Burbank's current power comes from the Magnolia Power Project, a 310-megawatt natural gas-fired combined cycle generating plant located on Magnolia Boulevard near the Interstate 5 freeway. The municipal power plant, jointly owned by six Southern California cities (Burbank, Glendale, Anaheim. Pasadena, Colton, and Cerritos), began generating electricity in 2005. It replaced a 1941 facility that had served the customers of Burbank for almost 60 years. At the height of California's 2001 energy crisis, BWP unveiled a mini-power plant at its landfill. It marked the world's first commercial landfill power plant using Capstone microturbine technology. Ten microturbines run on landfill gas, producing 300 kilowatts of renewable energy for Burbank. That is enough energy to serve the daily needs of about 250 homes. The landfill is located in the Verdugo Mountains in the northeastern portion of the city. In 2015, Burbank reached its 2007 goal of providing 33% renewable energy to the city five years ahead of schedule. As of 2017, the city was getting 35% of its power from renewables. Like other cities in California, Burbank has a long history of facing drought conditions and water cutbacks mandated by the state. In September 2021, as the drought worsened, Burbank proactively moved to Stage II in an effort to comply with the governor's challenge to reduce water use by 15% from 2020 levels. Despite these efforts, the drought continued to worsen, and by June 2022, Burbank was forced to adopt Stage III of their Sustainable Water Use Ordinance. With heavy rains in January 2023, the drought conditions eased, even though Burbank remains 100% dependent on imported water purchased from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. The Sustainable Water Use Ordinance sets specific targets for water conservation and requires businesses and residents to comply with certain water-saving measures. According to Burbank Water and Power, over the last 10 to 15 years, Burbank residents have successfully decreased their water consumption by 22%, from 170 gallons per person to 132 gallons per person. Previously, the 2015 drought in Burbank lasted for several years and led to a reduced water supply for the city and its residents, causing a focus on water conservation and the long-term sustainability of the area's water resources. Burbank was required to lower water use by 28% of 2013 levels. The state threatened stiff fines for non-compliance. The Burbank City Council lost a court case in 2000 involving the right to begin meetings with a sectarian prayer. A Los Angeles County Superior Court judge ruled that prayers referencing specific religions violated the principle of separation of church and state in the First Amendment. While invocations were still allowed, Burbank officials were required to advise all clerics that sectarian prayer as part of Council meetings was not permitted under the Constitution. In 1977, Californians passed Proposition 13, a property tax initiative, and Burbank and other cities in the state soon experienced constrained revenues. Burbank dealt with the ramifications of maintaining service levels expected by the community but still with impacts on city finances. As a result, Burbank officials opted to cut some services and implement user fees for specialized services and residents in special zoned areas. One fee was an equine license fee for owners of horse property, even if they no longer owned a horse just to keep from losing their rural zoning. In 1916, the original Burbank City Hall was constructed after bonds were issued to finance the project and pay for fire apparatus. Burbank's current City Hall was constructed from 1941 to 1942 in a neo-federalist Moderne style popular in the late Depression era. The structure was built at a total cost of $409,000, with funding from the Federal Works Agency and Works Project Administration programs. City Hall was designed by architects William Allen and W. George Lutzi and completed in 1943. Originally, the City Hall building housed all city services, including the police and fire departments, an emergency medical ward, a courthouse and a jail. One of the most distinctive features of the cream-colored concrete building is its 77-foot (23 m) tower, which serves as the main lobby. The lobby interior features more than 20 types of marble, which can be found in the city seal on the floor, the trim, walls and in the treads and risers of the grand stairway. Artist Hugo Ballin created a "Four Freedoms" mural in Burbank's City Council chambers during World War II, although it was covered up for decades until art aficionados convinced the city to have the mural fully revealed. Ballin's work illustrates the "Four Freedoms" outlined in President Franklin Roosevelt's 1941 speech at the signing of the Atlantic Charter. In 1996, the City Hall was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places, becoming the second building in Burbank to be listed on the register. The first was Burbank's main post office just blocks away from City Hall on Olive Avenue. In 1998, Burbank's state-of-the-art Police/Fire facility opened. The current Mayor of the City of Burbank is Nick Schultz. Mayor Schultz was elected to Burbank City Council in 2020 and assumed office as Mayor on December 18, 2023. Burbank Mayor Will Rogers led the city from May 1, 2017, until his death on April 19, 2018. Rogers had served as a council member since 2015. Rogers' term had been scheduled to end May 1, 2019. Emily Gabel-Luddy was elected as the new mayor on April 30, 2018. Prior to that, she had served as the city's vice mayor and acting mayor following the death of Rogers. The Mayor is appointed annually from among the city council serving a one-year term. In the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, Burbank is in the Fifth District, represented by Kathryn Barger. The Los Angeles County Department of Health Services operates the Glendale Health Center in Glendale, serving Burbank. In the state legislature, Burbank is in the 25th Senate District, represented by Democrat Anthony Portantino, and in the 43rd Assembly District, represented by Democrat Luz Rivas. In the United States House of Representatives, Burbank is split between California's 28th and 30th congressional districts, which are represented by Democrat Judy Chu and Democrat Adam Schiff, respectively. In the United States Senate, Burbank is represented by California's senators Alex Padilla and Laphonza Butler, both Democrats. The United States Postal Service (USPS) operates the Burbank Downtown Post Office. Previously the USPS also operated the Glenoaks Post Office in Burbank. Due to area businesses getting postal services, traffic at Glenoaks declined and in 2011 the USPS began considering closing the branch. In 2013 the agency announced that it will close that branch. Congressperson Adam Schiff opposed the closure. The closure occurred in 2014. The USPS hoped to save $740,270 over a ten-year period from the closure. Burbank Downtown absorbed the functions of Glenoaks. Burbank is within the Burbank Unified School District. The district was formed on June 3, 1879, following a petition filed by residents S.W. White and nine other citizens. First named the Providencia School District, Burbank's district started with one schoolhouse built for $400 on a site donated by Dr. Burbank, the area's single largest landholder. The first schoolhouse, a single redwood-sided building serving nine families, is on what is now Burbank Boulevard near Mariposa Street. In 1887, a new schoolhouse was constructed at San Fernando Blvd. and Magnolia Boulevard, which was in Burbank's center of commerce. In 1908, citizens passed a bond measure to raise money to build a high school. At the time, Burbank-area high school students were attending schools in Glendale. When it opened on September 14, 1908, the original Burbank High School had 42 students and two instructors. Burbank is home to several California Distinguished Schools including the Luther Burbank Middle School and David Starr Jordan Middle School. Both its public and private K–12 schools routinely score above state and national average test scores. According to U.S. News Best High Schools rankings, the district contains three schools that received gold, silver or bronze medals in the publication's latest rankings. The largest university in Burbank is Woodbury University. Woodbury has a number of undergraduate and graduate programs, including business, architecture, and several design programs. A number of smaller colleges are also located in Burbank, including several makeup and beauty trade schools serving the entertainment industry. The nearest community college to Burbank is Los Angeles Valley College, which is west of the city. During the early 1920s, Burbank was a contender to become the location for the southern branch of the University of California. Planners were considering locating the university in the Ben Mar Hills area near Amherst Drive and San Fernando Boulevard. The seaside community of Rancho Palos Verdes was also considered for the campus. Both sites were eventually bypassed when the Janss Investment Company donated property now known as Westwood to build the University of California, Los Angeles. PUC Schools has its administrative offices in Burbank. The Concordia Schools Concordia Burbank, a K–6 private school, is in the city. In April 2012, Lycee International de Los Angeles, a bilingual French American college preparatory school, submitted an application with the city of Burbank to operate a private school for grades 6–12 on the site of the former General Motors Training Center on Riverside Drive. The school opened in August 2013 and now features 23 classrooms. The Hollywood Burbank Airport, until late 2017 known as Bob Hope Airport, serves over 4 million travelers per year with six major carriers and over 70 flights daily. The airport, located in the northwestern corner of the city, is the source of most street traffic in the city. Noise from the airport has been a source of concern for nearly decades. There was even a report in 2018 that a new satellite air-traffic control system may be responsible for some of the noise by putting jets on a path that includes certain neighborhoods. A bill introduced in May 2013 by two California congressmen would put into law an overnight curfew on flights from 10 p.m. to 7 a.m. The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration had rejected the airports' applications for a curfew. However, the airport still suggests a volunteer curfew of 10 p.m. to 7 a.m., where airlines are strongly encouraged not to schedule any arrivals or departures, to respect the surrounding neighborhoods. In December 2008, a slowdown in passenger traffic led the Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena Airport Authority to curtail spending plans, including deferring multimillion-dollar construction projects. The weak economy continued to affect the airport in 2010, with figures showing a 6% decline in passengers for the fiscal year ending June 30. The slowdown is one reason the airport authority scrapped plans to spend $4 million to erect barriers at the west end of the runway. In 2000, a Southwest Airlines Boeing 737 flight with 142 persons aboard overshot the runway and went through the east fence, coming to a stop on Hollywood Way near a Chevron gas station. The construction of major freeways through and around the city of Burbank starting in the 1950s both divided the city from itself and linked it to the rapidly growing Los Angeles region. Burbank is easily accessible by and can easily access the Southern California freeways via the Golden State Freeway (I-5), which bisects the city from northwest to southeast, and the Ventura Freeway which connects Burbank to U.S. Route 101 on the south and the nearby Foothill Freeway to the east. The Ventura Freeway was completed in 1960. In May 2012, the state Transportation Commission approved $224.1 million in funding for the improvements to the Golden State Freeway (I-5) in the Burbank area along with safety improvements to the railroad tracks at Buena Vista Street. The allocation will fund most of the effort to build a new interchange at Empire Avenue, giving greater access to the nearby Empire Center shopping center as it prepares to get a Walmart store. Construction is expected to start in early 2013 and be completed in early 2016 with an estimated cost of $452 million. The state-backed project will include elevating the railroad crossing at Buena Vista Street to prevent people from getting in harm's way when a train is coming. The crossing has been the site of at least two fatalities in recent years. Burbank contains about 227.5 miles (366.1 km) of streets, nearly 50 miles (80 km) of paved alleys, 365.3 miles (587.9 km) of sidewalks, 181 signalized intersections and 10 intersections with flashing signals, according to city figures. Many of the current signals date back to the late 1960s, when voters passed a major capital improvement program for street beautification and street lighting. The funding also helped upgrade dated park and library facilities. The Burbank Chandler Bike Path is popular with cyclist and pedestrians alike. Metro operates public transport throughout Los Angeles County, including Burbank. Commuters can use Metrolink and Amtrak for service south into Downtown, west to Ventura and north to Palmdale and beyond. Burbank has three rail stations: Burbank Airport–North station, served by the Antelope Valley Line, Burbank Airport–South station, served by the Ventura County Line, and the Amtrak Pacific Surfliner, and Downtown Burbank station, served by both Metrolink lines but not Amtrak. Burbank has its own public transportation system known as the Burbank Bus. In 2006, Burbank opened its first hydrogen fueling station for automobiles. The projected California High-Speed Rail route will pass through the city and include a stop near Burbank. The train will connect the San Francisco area to Los Angeles, traveling at speeds up to 220 mph (350 km/h) at some points. At the time of cityhood, Burbank had a volunteer fire department. Fire protection depended upon the bucket brigade and finding a hydrant. It wasn't until 1913 that the city created its own fire department. By 1916, the city was installing an additional 40 new fire hydrants but still relying on volunteers for fire fighting. In 1927, the city switched from a volunteer fire department to a professional one. The department consists of six strategically located fire stations, consisting of 6 fire engines (type 1); 2 aerial ladder trucks (tractor-drawn) and 3 paramedic ambulances. In the late 1970s, Burbank became part of the Verdugo Fire Communications Center under a joint agreement with Glendale and Pasadena. All three cities were experiencing issues with fire dispatching at the time. Like a lot of cities, dispatching was done by law enforcement due to cost-effectiveness. A "tri-city" joint dispatching center was created to solve the issue and fill the void. Under the contract, Burbank provided a Hazardous Materials team, Glendale provided an Air-Light unit as well as the dispatch center, and Pasadena provided an Urban Search and Rescue (USAR) Type Heavy team. Today, both Glendale and Pasadena offer USAR Type 1 Heavy teams. The three city fire departments are all dispatched from the Verdugo Fire Communications Center, located in Glendale. Each of the three cities shares the cost of operating and maintaining this dispatch facility. Today, Verdugo is a regional dispatch center, providing communications for all 13 fire departments in California's OES "Area C" mutual aid area and the 14th agency which is the Burbank Airport Fire Department. In 1907, Burbank's first major hospital opened under the name "Burbank Community Hospital". The 16-bed facility served the community during a deadly smallpox epidemic in 1913 and helped it brace for possible air raids at the start of World War II. The two-story hospital was located at Olive Avenue and Fifth Street. By 1925, the hospital was expanded to 50 beds and in the mid-1980s operated with 103 beds and a staff of over 175 physicians. For years, it also was the only hospital in Burbank where women could receive abortions, tubal ligations and other procedures not offered at what is now Providence St. Joseph Medical Center. A physicians group acquired the hospital for $2 million in 1990 and renamed it Thompson Memorial Medical Center, in honor of the hospital's founder, Dr. Elmer H. Thompson. He was a general practitioner who made house calls by bicycle and horseback. In 2001, Burbank Community Hospital was razed to make way for a Belmont Village Senior Living community. Proceeds from that sale went to the Burbank Health Care Foundation, which assists community organizations that cater to health-related needs. In 1943, the Sisters of Providence Health System, a Catholic non-profit group, founded Providence St. Joseph Medical Center. Construction of the hospital proved difficult due to World War II restrictions on construction materials, and in particular the lack of structural steel. But the challenges were met and the one-story hospital was erected to deal with wartime restrictions. During the baby boom of the 1950s, the hospital expanded from the original 100 beds to 212. By 2012, the hospital featured 431 licensed beds and ranked as the second-largest hospital serving the San Fernando and Santa Clarita Valleys. The hospital employs about 2,500 employees and 600-plus physicians. In the mid-1990s, Seattle-based Sisters of Providence Health System, which owns St. Joseph in Burbank, renamed the hospital Providence St. Joseph Medical Center. The medical center has several centers on campus with specialized disciplines. Cancer, cardiology, mammogram, hospice and children's services are some of the specialty centers. The newest addition to the medical center's offerings is the Roy and Patricia Disney Family Cancer Center, which opened in February 2010. The cancer center features four stories of the latest in high-tech equipment to treat cancer patients and provide wellness services. The center, estimated to cost in excess of $36 million, was built with money from the family of Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt Disney. Roy E. Disney died in December 2009 of stomach cancer. John F. Aiso (1909–1987), Japanese-American WW2 Army Colonel, US Samuel J. Aquila (b. 1950), Roman Catholic Archbishop of Denver Manny Ayulo (1921–1955), Formula One driver for Lesovsky Sterling Beaumon (b. 1995), actor, musician Tyler Blackburn (b. 1986), actor, singer Kelly Blatz (b. 1987), actor, model Scott Borchetta (b. 1962), president/CEO of Big Machine Records Tim Burton (b. 1958), film director, producer Paul Cameron (b. 1932), football player Mark Cerny (b. 1964), video game programmer Eddie Cibrian (b. 1973), actor Royce Clayton, Major League Baseball shortstop Glenn Davis (1924–2005), football player, Heisman Trophy winner Doug DeCinces (b. 1950), Major League Baseball third baseman Debbe Dunning (b. 1966), actress Carrie Fisher (1956–2016), actress, writer, humorist Max Homa (born 1990), professional golfer on the PGA Tour Andrew Gold (1951–2011), singer-songwriter, born in Burbank Namrata Singh Gujral, actress, producer Mark Harmon (b. 1951), actor Jason Hirsh (b. 1982), professional baseball player Clint Howard (b. 1956), actor Ron Howard (b. 1954), actor, director Jeremy Howard (b. 1981), actor Ashley Johnson (b. 1983), actress, voice actress Edmund Kemper (born 1948), serial killer William M. Kramer (1920–2004), rabbi Ryan Lavarnway (b. 1987), Major League Baseball catcher Blake Lively (b. 1987), actress Masiela Lusha (b. 1985), actress, writer, humanitarian Chris Marquette (b. 1984), actor Remy Martin (b. 1998), basketball player Larry Maxam (1948–1968), Medal of Honor Cady McClain (b. 1969), actress Sean McNamara (b. 1962), filmmaker Hayley McFarland (b. 1991), actress Katie Meyer (2000–2022), soccer player Erin Moran (1960–2017), actress Sandy Neilson (b. 1956), Olympic swimming gold medalist Jeff Nelson (b. 1961), athlete (held high school two-mile record 1979–2014) Sean Penn (b. 1960), actor Greg Plitt (1977–2015), fitness model, actor Eve Plumb (b. 1958), actress Bonnie Raitt (b. 1949), blues singer-songwriter, musician and activist Debbie Reynolds (1932–2016), actress, singer Randy Rhoads (1956–1982), musician, guitarist Jason Ritter (b. 1980), actor, raised in Burbank, son of John Ritter John Ritter (1948–2003), actor, TV personality, born and raised in Burbank, son of Tex Ritter, father of Jason Ritter Tex Ritter (1905–1974), actor, country singer, father of John Ritter Kerry Rossall (b. 1947), stuntman and actor Todd Sand (b. 1963), figure skater, 3-time national champion, born in Burbank Adam Schiff (b. 1960), U.S. congressman Kendall Schmidt (b. 1990), actor, singer, formed band Heffron Drive – part of Big Time Rush Ben Shapiro (b. 1984), conservative talk show host Ryan Shore (b. 1974), film composer Daniel Steres (b. 1990), professional soccer player Frank Sullivan (1930–2016), Major League baseball pitcher, active 1953–1963 Vic Tayback (1930–1990), actor Wil Wheaton (b. 1972), actor Mara Wilson (b. 1987), playwright, author, actress Anton Yelchin (1989–2016), actor Rob Zabrecky (b. 1968) actor, magician, musician Burbank is currently twinned with: Gaborone, Botswana Hadrut, Republic of Artsakh (2014–2020) Incheon, South Korea Ōta, Japan Paterna, Spain Solna, Sweden Los Angeles portal Greater Los Angeles portal California portal "California Cities by Incorporation Date". California Association of Local Agency Formation Commissions. Archived from the original (Word) on November 3, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. "Council-Manager Form of Government". City of Burbank. Retrieved December 20, 2022. "Elected Officials". City of Burbank. Retrieved December 20, 2022. "Executive Team". Burbank, California. Retrieved December 20, 2022. "2020 U.S. Gazetteer Files". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved October 30, 2021. "Burbank". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey, United States Department of the Interior. Retrieved November 6, 2014. "ZIP Code(tm) Lookup". United States Postal Service. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2014. "Quick Facts: Burbank city, California". U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "The American Period". A history of Burbank. Burbank Unified School District. 1967. Archived from the original on August 25, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2009. "Burbank, Ca. – Media Capital of the World". Travel America. April 20, 2007. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved December 21, 2008. "The Largest IKEA in North America". Visit Burbank. April 5, 2019. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Ogilvie, Jessica (October 10, 2022). "Why A Property Worth Millions Was Returned To The Tongva Tribe". laist.com work. Retrieved January 16, 2023. larivermasterplan.org (2019). "Indigenous Villages" (PDF) (Map). Indigenous Villages [Fernandeño Tataviam Villages Gabrielino Tongva Villages] (pdf). 24x36. 1. Los Angeles, California: larivermasterplan.org. p. 1. § 1. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Greene, Sean; Curwen, Thomas (May 9, 2019). "Mapping the Tongva villages of L.A.'s past". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 16, 2023. "Battle of La Providencia: Second Battle of Cahuenga Pass". The California State Military Museum. Archived from the original on October 26, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Rasmussen, Cecilia (June 3, 2007). "What's in a name? Clues to a city's past". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 28, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Clark, Wes (1967). "The American Period". Burbankia. Archived from the original on October 28, 2009. Retrieved October 19, 2008. Roderick, Kevin (November 24, 2005). "Timeline of Valley history". The Valley Observed. Archived from the original on November 21, 2011. "Chapter 2 – The American Period". Archived from the original on October 28, 2009. Retrieved January 15, 2018. "City of Burbank: Citywide Historic Context Report" (PDF). September 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "History of Burbank, California". City of Burbank. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "The County of Los Angeles Annual Report, 2009–2010" (PDF). 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2010. "Burbank: A New Town To Be Located On The Providencia". The Los Angeles Times. April 20, 1887. p. 2. Retrieved January 6, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "A new theater". Press Democrat. April 22, 1888. Retrieved January 21, 2023. "Dr. Burbank Gone - Death of a prominent property-holder of Los Angeles". San Francisco Call. January 22, 1895. Retrieved January 21, 2023. "The Theatre Magazine Company, 1913". Cornell University Library. 1913. p. X. Retrieved May 4, 2019. "Dr. David Burbank, 1850". Oviatt Library Digital Collections. Archived from the original on February 25, 2012. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Bills, Emily (2004). "The Telephone Shapes Los Angeles, 1880–1950". PART (11). Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Ira Brown Cross (1927). Financing an Empire: History of Banking in California. S. J. Clarke Publishing Company. p. 160. Bullock, Craig (March 5, 2003). "A person living in Burbank at the beginning of the 20th Century". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "Aerial Trolley Car Co., Inc. L.W. and E.C. Fawkes, Palentees. Burbank, California C.C. Pierce". Calisphere. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "The City of Burbank". A history of Burbank. Burbank Unified School District. 1967. Archived from the original on August 25, 2009. Retrieved August 10, 2009. Coscia, David (2011). Pacific Electric and the Growth of the San Fernando Valley. Bellflower, CA: Shade Tree Books. ISBN 978-1-57864-735-4. "Pacific Electric Glendale-Burbank Line". The Electric Railway Historical Association of Southern California. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "History of Burbank Police Department". Burbank Police Department. Retrieved January 16, 2023. "The History of Burbank Water and Power". Burbank Water and Power. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Cadelago, Christopher (May 18, 2009). "Service fees may rise soon". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "CONTENTdm Collection: Item Viewer". Digital-library.csun.edu. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "CONTENTdm Collection: Item Viewer". Digital-library.csun.edu. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Loewen, James W. (2005). Sundown Towns: A Hidden Dimension of American Racism. New York City: The New Press. ISBN 978-1-62097-454-4 – via Google Books. "General Population By City: Los Angeles County, 1910–1950". Los Angeles Almanac. Archived from the original on September 22, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "Burbank Furniture Manufacturing Company, 1887". Oviatt Library Digital Collections. Archived from the original on February 25, 2012. Retrieved February 16, 2019. "Fiscally Responsible City Governance" (PDF). City of Burbank Strategic Plan 2001–2010. Parker, Dana T. Building Victory: Aircraft Manufacturing in the Los Angeles Area in World War II, pp. 59, 93, 103–6, Cypress, CA, 2013. ISBN 978-0-9897906-0-4. Parker, Dana T. Building Victory: Aircraft Manufacturing in the Los Angeles Area in World War II, p. 59, Cypress, CA, 2013. ISBN 978-0-9897906-0-4. "CONTENTdm Collection: Item Viewer". Digital-library.csun.edu. Archived from the original on September 29, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Herman, Arthur. Freedom's Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II, pp. 86, 203, Random House, New York, NY, 2012. ISBN 978-1-4000-6964-4. Parker, Dana T. Building Victory: Aircraft Manufacturing in the Los Angeles Area in World War II, p. 74, Cypress, CA, 2013. ISBN 978-0-9897906-0-4. "World War II-Lockheed Burbank Aircraft Plant Camouflage". Amazing Posts. August 16, 2008. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "California Becomes a Giant Movie Set". Flat Rock. July 16, 2009. Archived from the original on October 28, 2008. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Herman, Arthur. Freedom's Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II, pp. 85, 203, 287, Random House, New York, NY, 2012. ISBN 978-1-4000-6964-4. Parker, Dana T. Building Victory: Aircraft Manufacturing in the Los Angeles Area in World War II, pp. 59–76, Cypress, CA, 2013. ISBN 978-0-9897906-0-4. Hennigan, W. J. (June 20, 2013). "Skunk Works: Developing top-secret weapons in SoCal for 70 years". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2015. "Demographics". The Burbank Chamber of Commerce. Archived from the original on January 10, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "Profile of the City of Burbank" (PDF). p. 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2015. Peltz, James (September 15, 1987). "Airport's fares are 3rd-lowest Wage Cut or Doors Shut: Burbank's Weber Aircraft Factory Issues an Ultimatum to Hundreds of Union Workers". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 16, 2023. [1] Archived April 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Geduld, Harry (1975). The Birth of the Talkies - From Edison to Jolson. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0253107431. Retrieved January 21, 2023. "Military History Museum". the-past.com. May 9, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2023. "The War for Warner Brothers". iatse728.com. September 10, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Sakoui, Anousha (September 10, 2021). "The last time it was 'Hollywood's Bloody Friday.' With no deal in sight, will crews strike again?". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Horne, Gerald (February 15, 2001). Class Struggle in Hollywood 1930–1950. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press. p. 290. ISBN 978-0-292-73138-7. City of Burbank Community Development Department (January 8, 1991). "The Burbank Media District Specific Plan". Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2014. "Burbank Media Center". Burbank.com. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014. Bartholomew, Dana (October 7, 2009). "Universal Studios to get $3 billion NBC makeover". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on June 21, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2009. Strauss, Bob (January 21, 2010). "Conan and NBC separation finalized". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on June 21, 2011. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Shain, Michael (April 4, 2013). "Comic reliever as Jay exits". nypost.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2013. Jacquelyn Ryan (January 4, 2012). "NBC's Big MetroStudios Project Killed, Smaller Facility Planned". Los Angeles Business Journal. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Conan O'Brien to shoot TBS talk show on Warner Bros. TV lot EW.com. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "Top Movies Filmed in Burbank, California". TopTenReviews.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Sharp, Steven (October 26, 2021). "$500M development to transform historic Warner Bros. Ranch in Burbank". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Janssen, Mike (May 1, 2007). "The Mall Coming To A Theater Near You". Retail Traffic. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Lisa (August 8, 2011). "Finding the Famous: U Mart – Larry Crowne – Burbank, CA". Findingthefamous.blogspot.com. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Kellam, Mark (May 5, 2012). "Filmmaking and acting school opens in Burbank, California". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Leonard, Christian (December 4, 2021). "Home Prices Keep Climbing". Burbank Leader. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Quentin, Gavin (August 30, 2022). "Governor Signs Portantino Bill Creating Regional Affordable Housing Trust". Burbank Leader. Retrieved January 16, 2023. "November 3, 2020 Measure RC - Summary". City of Burbank - City Clerk's Office. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Clark Carpio, Anthony (December 23, 2017). "Burbank official presents City Council with pros and cons of rent control". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018. Lawrence, Carol (March 28, 2007). "Burbank Toughens Smoking Ordinance". San Fernando Valley Business Journal. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Meier, Gretchen (October 2, 2010). "Smoking law gets tougher again". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Lee, Wendy (July 15, 2005). "Burbank Official Arrested in Gang Probe". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, Calif. p. B.1. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2009. Keller, Michelle (January 10, 2006). "Council Revisits Drug Testing". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2009. "Calling all Artists for Burbank Arts Beautification Program". City of Burbank. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Meg James and Roger Vincent (April 15, 2019). "Warner Bros. plans to buy Burbank Studios and occupy new Frank Gehry 'iceberg' towers". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019. "Geology and Soils" (PDF). Land Use and Mobility Elements Update: City of Burbank Draft Program EIR. April 2006. Retrieved August 19, 2009.[permanent dead link] Sherwood, Craig (February 10, 2011). "A Look Back At The Big Quake That Shook Burbank 40 Years Ago". MyBurbank.com. Goettel, Kenneth (March 14, 2011). "Regional All-Hazard Burbank CH-6_Earthquake". Retrieved January 21, 2023. Goettel, Kenneth (April 2011). "City of Burbank All-Hazard Mitigation Plan". Retrieved January 21, 2023. "NOWData - NOAA Online Weather Data". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved September 7, 2020. "Average weather for Burbank". Weather.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2008. Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the expected highest and lowest temperature readings at any point during the year or given month) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020. "CA Burbank Glendale Pasadena AP". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved April 11, 2018. "NOAA NCEI U.S. Climate Normals Quick Access". "U.S. Climate Normals Quick Access – Station: Burbank Valley Pump PLT, CA". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "NOAA Online Weather Data – NWS Los Angeles". National Weather Service. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Hilliker, Jim; Ricquish, David (May 2, 2018). "Early Tejano Music heard in New Zealand". radioheritage.net. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "My grandfather, Earl Loy White". theburbanktribune.wordpress.com. February 3, 2012. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved September 18, 2013. McDaniel, Mike (October 26, 2018). "FLASHBACK FRIDAY: Burbank's First Radio Station". myburbank.com. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "The History of Magnolia Park". Magnolia Park Merchants Association Inc. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Dobuzinskis, Alex (November 25, 2004). "Porto's gets city loan for expansion". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. Lecaro, Lina (March 26, 2015). "The Retro Charm Of Burbank's Magnolia Boulevard: A Shopping Guide". Laist.com. Archived from the original on December 26, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2018. "EV1 Vigil At GM Burbank Facility Enters Day Three". Motor Trend. February 18, 2005. Archived from the original on January 8, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Moore, Bill (February 27, 2005). "EV1 Vigilers Pledge to Pay GM $1.9 Million for 'Incarcerated' Electric Cars". EV World. Archived from the original on July 10, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "Rancho residents say 'oui' to French prep school". tribunedigital-burbankleader. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2013. Warner Bros. "Warner Bros. Studios, Burbank website". "First National Properties", The Wall Street Journal, May 21, 1926, p. 16. Warner Bros. Studio Tour Hollywood Official Guide. Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. 2015. p. 22. "Warner Bros. plans to buy Burbank Studios and occupy new Frank Gehry 'iceberg' towers". Los Angeles Times. April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2021. "SPRING TRAINING SPECIAL: Re-Live the History of the St. Louis Browns in Burbank". myburbank.com. February 25, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "The St. Louis Browns Came West 34 Years Ago for Spring Training and Took Up Residence in a Park That Was Only a Long Home Run From Downtown Burbank: The Stadium That Time Forgot". Los Angeles Times. April 17, 1986. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "Burbank's Big Leagues: At Olive Memorial Stadium, Hapless St. Louis Browns Got Some Respect". Los Angeles Times. October 2, 1994. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "Census of Population and Housing". Census.gov. Retrieved June 4, 2015. "Profile of the City of Burbank" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2015. "Southern California Association of Government's 2016 Demographic and Growth Forecast" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2018. "P004: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race – 2000: DEC Summary File 1 – Burbank city, California". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "P2: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race – 2010: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) – Burbank city, California". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "P2: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race – 2020: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) – Burbank city, California". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "2010 Census Interactive Population Search: CA – Burbank city". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved July 12, 2014. "State & County QuickFacts: Burbank (city), California". Archived from the original on August 19, 2012. "United States Census 2000: Burbank Demographic Profile" (PDF). United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 20, 2009. Retrieved August 20, 2009. "U.S. Census website". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 31, 2008. "Burbank Profile - Mapping L.A. - Los Angeles Times". Los Angeles Times. "Crime Information". Burbank Police Department. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019. "3 bodies found in a parked vehicle; Burbank police investigate possible homicide". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. "2018 Safest Cities in America". Niche.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2018. "Burbank Page". Niche.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. "Table 8 (California) – Crime in the United States 2009". .fbi.gov. Archived from the original on January 2, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Burbank, California". America's Promise. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2014. Hsin, Maria (December 2, 2011). "City's arrest reports go public". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 23, 2019. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 6, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Vincent, Roger (September 21, 2017). "Wall Street equity fund buys control of $1.7-billion Burbank Media District portfolio". Los Angeles Times. "Profile of the City of Burbank" (PDF). p. 21. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2015. "U.S. Census website". Retrieved January 15, 2018. "City Manager's Budget Message". Burbank, CA. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2017. "Adopted Annual Budget 2016-2017". Burbank, CA. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2017. staff, Burbank Leader (January 2, 2018). "Looking ahead at stories affecting the Media City: Systemic city budget shortfall still looming". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved January 8, 2018. "Glendale, Pasadena see big drops in unemployment". Burbank Leader. May 18, 2012. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012. Retrieved August 11, 2012. Kisliuk, Bill (March 4, 2011). "Local jobless figures rise". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Cities and Census Designated Places by Individual County". Archived from the original on January 30, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. "Cities and Census Designated Places by Individual County". Retrieved January 16, 2018. "Kaiser Permanente Moving Employees to Burbank Early 2009 – Video Dailymotion". Dailymotion.com. October 20, 2008. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Stettler, Meghan (April 13, 2012). "KCET Announces Move to the Pointe in Burbank". KCET press release. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "City of Burbank (page 154)". Retrieved January 5, 2022. Pierce, Todd James (May 28, 2008). "Looking back on the Disney-MGM Studio Backlot project – Part I". Jim Hill Media. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Liu, Caitlin (March 8, 2003). "EPA Slashes Fine for Burbank Lockheed Plant". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Barrett, Beth; Condon, Lee; Jacobs, Chip (August 4, 1996). "Lockheed Resolves Toxic Claims". Daily News. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Young, D.B. (January 18, 2000). "Huge 'Power Center Mall' Awaits Burbank's Blessing". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. McGreevy, Patrick; Gettleman, Jeffrey (July 15, 1999). "L.A. Officials Wooing a DreamWorks Studio". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Boghossian, Naush (October 1, 2001). "New mall: think big Burbank giant to boost tax base". Daily News. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2009. Brinsley, John (March 25, 2002). "Nostalgic Burbank Empire Center has air of success". Los Angeles Business Journal. Tchekmedyian, Alene (March 12, 2014). "urban approves construction of largest Ikea store in U.S." Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2015. Grigoryants, Olga (January 5, 2018). "Former IKEA site in Burbank will get new look, new retail-residential strategy". Pasadena Star News. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018. "Our History Through the Decades". Burbank Public Library Department. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "City of Burbank Awarded $9.95 Million Grant to Build a Modern Central Library" (PDF). City of Burbank. October 16, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023. "6 Southern California Cities to Celebrate Dedication of Magnolia Power Project in Burbank on June 2" (PDF) (Press release). Magnolia power project. May 16, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 28, 2011. "City of Burbank Expands Landfill Gas Installation". Burbank Water & Power. Archived from the original on December 22, 2008. Retrieved January 7, 2009. "Burbank Remains on Stage III of the Sustainable Water Use Ordinance". City of Burbank (Press release). January 12, 2023. "Burbank Power & Water" (PDF). Burbank Power & Water. May 4, 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 28, 2011. Aziza, Shuler (October 27, 2021). "Burbank places restrictions on landscape water use as drought worsens". Spectrum News One. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Rogers, Paul (June 15, 2015). "California drought: Jerry Brown says $10,000-a-day state fines for water-wasting cities are not bluster". Marin Independent Journal. Retrieved January 16, 2023. "City Council can't begin meetings with sectarian prayer". Freedom Forum. Associated Press. September 10, 2002. Archived from the original on November 29, 2008. Martha L. Willman (January 1, 1987). "Bounty Hunt : Los Angeles Targets Horse Owners Who Haven't Paid Fee". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Anthony Clark Carpio (April 19, 2018). "Burbank Mayor Will Rogers, 60, dies after battle with liver cancer". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on April 24, 2018. Anthony Clark Carpio (April 30, 2018). "Councilwoman Emily Gabel-Luddy appointed as mayor, Sharon Springer as vice mayor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018. "Mayors of Burbank, 1911–2014". politicalgraveyard.com. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "Supervisor Kathryn Barger – The 5th District". "Glendale Health Center Archived May 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine." Los Angeles County Department of Health Services. Retrieved on March 27, 2010. "Statewide Database". UC Regents. Archived from the original on February 1, 2015. Retrieved November 19, 2014. "Communities of Interest – City". California Citizens Redistricting Commission. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved September 24, 2014. "California's 30th Congressional District - Representatives & District Map". Civic Impulse, LLC. California Senators Archived March 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine accessed November 7, 2018 Tchekmedyian, Alene (June 21, 2013). "Glenoaks post office in Burbank to close, officials confirm". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 21, 2020. Tchekmedyian, Alene (January 30, 2014). "Glenoaks Post Office closes in Burbank". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "[2] Archived November 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine." US News.com. Retrieved on November 29, 2014. "Contact PUC Schools Archived December 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine." PUC Schools. Retrieved on November 27, 2011. " PUC Schools (Home Office) 1405 North San Fernando Blvd. Suite 303 Burbank, CA 91504" "Home Archived March 31, 2012, at the Wayback Machine." Concordia Burbank. Retrieved on September 1, 2011. "1001 S. Glenoaks Blvd., Burbank, CA 91502" "Burbank, CA : 1105 Riverside Dr. (Proposed School)". Burbankca.gov. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2012. Clark Carpio, Anthony (January 12, 2018). "Burbank seeks to write joint letter with airport authority regarding NextGen". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved January 15, 2018. "Congressmen try again for nighttime curfews at Van Nuys, Burbank airports". Los Angeles Daily News. May 22, 2013. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "Noise Rules Summary". Hollywood Burbank Airport. October 20, 2015. Archived from the original on February 28, 2018. Retrieved February 20, 2019. Kisliuk, Bill (October 20, 2010). "Bright news for Bob Hope Airport". Burbank Leader. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Southwest Airlines flight 1455, Burbank, California, March 5, 2000" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on December 28, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Kellam, Mark (May 29, 2012). "Interstate 5 project through Burbank gets major piece of funding". Glendale News Press. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved August 11, 2012. "Magnolia Boulevard to Buena Vista Street". California Department of Transportation, District 7. 2012. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2013. Hymon, Steve (September 15, 2008). "Metrolink's grim national record". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2012. "Burbank – A community profile and historical timeline" (PDF). Adopted budget FY 2008–09. City of Burbank. June 17, 2008. "U.S. Hydrogen Fueling Stations" (PDF). Fuel Cells 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2015. "Burbank, CA : California High Speed Rail Project". Burbankca.gov. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2012. Rocha, Veronica (October 29, 2009). "Behind the 911 dispatchers – Verdugo center serves multiple cities. Workers are highly trained for all situations". Glendale News-Press. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Abram, Susan (January 27, 2010). "Disney Family Cancer Center set to open February 8". Los Angeles Daily News. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Ichinokuchi, Tad (1988). John Aiso and the M.I.S. MIS Club of Southern California. "Glenn Davis Statistics". Pro-Football-Reference.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2018. Retrieved March 30, 2018. "Doug DeCinces Stats, Fantasy & News". MLB.com. Retrieved June 13, 2022. "Mark Harmon: Biography". TV Guide. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved April 14, 2008. "Jason Hirsh Stats". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved December 3, 2012. Dilbeck, Steve (December 5, 2014). "Dodgers claim Boston catcher Ryan Lavarnway, designate Drew Butera". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. "Remy Martin Profile". KUAthletics.con. July 6, 2021. Teper, Lonnie (July 16, 2009). "Greg Plitt". Ironman Magazine. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014. "John Ritter". TVGuide.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2015. "Shore, Ryan". Alumni Directory. Berklee College of Music. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2010. "Anton Yelchin Biography". Tribute. Archived from the original on November 16, 2009. Retrieved May 25, 2009. "Burbank's Sister Cities". Burbank Sister City Organization. Archived from the original on May 21, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2010. "Artsakh's Hadrut and Burbank Become 'Friendship Cities'". Asbarez. November 14, 2014. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2014. "Networks, town twinning and partnerships" (PDF). City of Solna. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 4, 2013. Retrieved August 4, 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Burbank, California. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Burbank. Official website Burbank Chamber of Commerce Burbank Community Book, 1944 A History of Burbank, 1968 Burbankia, History and Lore of Burbank