The Seattle Thunderbirds are a major junior ice hockey team based in the city of Kent, Washington, south of Seattle. They are part of the U.S. Division of the Western Conference in the Western Hockey League. They play their games at home in accesso ShoWare Center. The team was founded in 1971 as the Vancouver Nats of the Western Canada Hockey League (WCHL) but moved to Kamloops, British Columbia, to become the Kamloops Chiefs in 1973.[citation needed] In 1977 the team moved to Seattle and was renamed the Seattle Breakers. The Breakers played in the Seattle Center Ice Arena, which had a seating capacity of 4,141 for ice hockey. Through eight seasons, the Breakers finished with a regular season record of 225 wins, 319 losses, and 32 ties; and playoff record of 11 wins and 21 losses, although they twice played in the West Division Finals. After the 1984–85 season, the Breakers were sold to new owners and renamed the Seattle Thunderbirds.[citation needed] The 1986–87 season saw the addition of Glen Goodall, who remained with the team through 1990. Goodall set the Western Hockey League career records for most games played (399), goals scored (262), assists (311) and points (573). He is still[when?] the Thunderbirds leader in goals, assists and points. His jersey, number 10, was the first one to be retired by the Thunderbirds.[citation needed] The 2015–16 season was a breakout season for the Thunderbirds, and was one of the most successful seasons in franchise history. During the season, the Thunderbirds clinched the U.S. Division after a 4–1 win over the Spokane Chiefs on March 15. This was Seattle's third division championship in team history and first since the 2004–05 season. Seattle also finished the regular season with the second most wins in team history (45). In the quarter-final round of the 2015–16 WHL Playoffs, the Thunderbirds swept the Prince George Cougars, 4 games to 0, and advanced to the semi-final round against the Everett Silvertips, where the Thunderbirds dominated the Silvertips, winning the series 4 games to 1. With the win, they advanced to the Western Conference Finals against the Kelowna Rockets, the defending WHL Champions. Once again, the Thunderbirds continued their dominant playoff run, as they swept the series against the Rockets, 4 games to 0. The series-clinching win came in a double-overtime thriller as rookie Matt Wedman scored the game-winning goal halfway through the second overtime to give the Thunderbirds the 5–4 overtime victory, clinching the Western Conference championship. With the win, the Thunderbirds advanced to the WHL Championship for the first time since 1996–97. The Thunderbirds faced the Brandon Wheat Kings in the league final and lost the series 4–1. The Thunderbirds did not have to wait long for their next shot at a league championship. Although they did not repeat as division champions the following season, Seattle finished the regular season with the second most wins in team history (46), topping their record from the previous season. In the quarter-final round of the 2016–17 WHL playoffs, the Thunderbirds swept the Tri-City Americans, 4 games to 0, and advanced to the semi-final round for a rematch with the Everett Silvertips. The Thunderbirds continued their postseason domination of the Silvertips, sweeping the series 4 games to 0 to advance to the Western Conference Finals and yet another rematch with Kelowna Rockets. Although this series did not end in a sweep in Seattle's favor like the previous year, the Thunderbirds still prevailed over the Rockets, 4 games to 2. With the win, the Thunderbirds advanced to the WHL Championship for the second straight year, this time against the Regina Pats. Unlike their previous two league final appearances, the Thunderbirds broke through and won their first-ever league championship, taking the series 4–2. The series-clinching win in Game 6 at the Brandt Centre came in an overtime thriller after the Thunderbirds rallied from a late two-goal deficit to force overtime with 2:54 remaining in the third period. Alexander True scored the game-winning goal midway through the first overtime period to give the Thunderbirds the 4–3 victory, clinching the Championship and sending the team to their second Memorial Cup appearance in team history and first as WHL champions. Following their 2017 championship, the Thunderbirds lost many of their top players to AHL and NHL contracts. After several years of rebuilding, consisting mainly of early playoff exits, Seattle broke through in 2022. They finished only fourth in the Western Conference standings, but went on an impressive postseason run. Against the fifth-seeded Kelowna Rockets, Seattle took their first-round series in just five games. And after several recent playoff meetings with the Everett Silvertips|, this time Seattle faced their other archrival, the Portland Winterhawks. It was the first postseason meeting since 2015 and eighth overall. Having narrowly missed another title, Seattle geared up for another championship run in the 2022–23 season. It paid off, with the team enjoying its greatest-ever season. Seattle quickly asserted themselves, climbing to the top of the Western Conference. They finished the regular season with the most wins (54) and most points (111) in franchise history, thus earning the top seed in the Western Conference. Seattle also allowed a WHL-fewest 155 goals. In a rematch of 2022, the Thunderbirds opened the playoffs against the Kelowna Rockets. All four games were close, but Seattle won all four. Round two was easier as the Thunderbirds swept away the Prince George Cougars 4 games to 0, outscoring them 25–5. Then in another rematch, Seattle faced the Kamloops Blazers in the conference finals. Seattle won the first two games, setting the franchise record for most consecutive wins to open a postseason (10). The Blazers proved a much tougher challenge than the previous two, but the Thunderbirds won the series in six games and returned to the final. In a battle of the league's top two seeds, Seattle faced the Winnipeg Ice in the Championship Series. And despite losing the opening game, the Thunderbirds finished the job this time. Seattle won the next four straight contests, ending at home in game 5. In the final game, Nico Myatovic scored a penalty shot 2:27 into the third period. It became the game-winning goal, as Seattle won 3–1 to secure the title. The team therefore earned its third-ever trip to a Memorial Cup, in which they performed far better than in 2017. They won two of their three round-robin games with victories over the OHL champion Peterborough Petes and host Kamloops. However, despite then winning the semi-final game against Peterborough, they ultimately lost in the final to the QMJHL champion Quebec Remparts. The Thunderbirds originally played at Mercer Arena, then split time with the Seattle Center Coliseum beginning in the 1989–90 season. When the Coliseum was renovated into KeyArena, the Thunderbirds returned.[citation needed] In 2009, the Thunderbirds moved to ShoWare Center, 20 miles south in Kent. Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties OTL = Overtime losses Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against 1996–97: Loss, 0–4 vs Lethbridge 2015–16: Loss, 1–4 vs Brandon 2016–17: Win, 4–2 vs Regina 2021–22: Loss, 2–4 vs Edmonton 2022–23: Win, 4–1 vs Winnipeg Ed Chynoweth Cup overall record: 11–15 Ed Chynoweth Cup series record: 2–3 1992 Memorial Cup (host) Win, 5–3 vs Verdun Collège Français Loss, 3–4 vs Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds Loss, 1–3 vs Kamloops Blazers Loss, 3–8 vs Kamloops Blazers Eliminated in semi-finals 2017 Memorial Cup Loss, 2–4 vs Erie Otters Loss, 1–7 vs Windsor Spitfires Loss, 0–7 vs Saint John Sea Dogs Eliminated in round-robin 2023 Memorial Cup Win, 6–3 vs Peterborough Petes Loss, 1–3 vs Quebec Remparts Win, 6–1 vs Kamloops Blazers Win, 4–1 vs Peterborough Petes Loss, 0–5 vs Quebec Remparts Eliminated in Memorial Cup Final Memorial Cup overall record: 4–8 Memorial Cup series record: 0–3 Updated March 1, 2024. Several National Hockey League players started with the Thunderbirds: Glenn Anderson Doug Barrault Mathew Barzal Ethan Bear Matt Berlin Rick Berry Zdenek Blatny Lonny Bohonos Landon Bow Jim Camazzola Shawn Chambers Ben Clymer Ken Daneyko Kimbi Daniels Brenden Dillon Peter Dineen Steve Dykstra Craig Endean Shane Endicott Brennan Evans Brent Fedyk Zack Fitzgerald Wade Flaherty Aaron Gagnon Steven Goertzen Stanislav Gron Dylan Guenther Barrett Heisten Riku Helenius Chris Herperger Matt Hervey Thomas Hickey Bud Holloway Jan Hrdina Tim Hunter Jamie Huscroft Scott Jackson Chris Joseph Mike Kennedy Alan Kerr Jon Klemm Rob Klinkhammer Samuel Knazko Keegan Kolesar Kevin Korchinski John Kordic Brent Krahn Greg Kuznik Brooks Laich John Lilley Danny Lorenz Dwayne Lowdermilk Brian Lundberg Jamie Lundmark Stewart Malgunas Patrick Marleau Glenn Merkosky Tomas Mojzis David Morisset Petr Nedved Jim O'Brien Chris Osgood Mark Parrish Ed Patterson Lane Pederson Calvin Pickard Jame Pollock Deron Quint Errol Rausse Jeremy Reich Matt Rempe Scott Robinson Cody Rudkowsky Oleg Saprykin Cory Sarich Chris Schmidt Andy Schneider Corey Schwab Brent Severyn Mike Siklenka Trevor Sim Matthew Spiller Turner Stevenson Austin Strand Garret Stroshein Rob Tallas Shea Theodore Nate Thompson Denis Tolpeko Alexander True Lindsay Vallis Wayne Van Dorp Ryan Walter Joe Ward Chris Wells David Wilkie Mitch Wilson Brendan Witt Dody Wood Brad Zavisha "Seattle Breakers". seattlehockey.net. Archived from the original on February 22, 2013. "WHL Official Guide". WHL Network. Archived from the original on June 25, 2014. "Team Records". Seattle Thunderbirds. Archived from the original on February 2, 2013. "Brandon Takes Game 5 To Win WHL Championship". Seattle Thunderbirds. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. "Seattle Thunderbirds sweep Kelowna with double-overtime victory, advance to WHL finals". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. "Seattle Thunderbirds beat Regina in OT to take WHL title". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 15, 2017. "Portland Winterhawks get rare playoff shot at rival Seattle Thunderbirds". The Oregonian. May 6, 2022. "2022-23 Regular Season Conference Standings". Western Hockey League. "Remparts win 2023 Memorial Cup". chl.ca. May 6, 2022. "Venue Overview". ShoWare Center. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. WHL Network, Western Hockey League, retrieved March 1, 2024 Seattle Thunderbirds official homepage Seattle Hockey History