John Michael Green (born August 24, 1977) is an American author, YouTuber, podcaster, and philanthropist. His books have more than 50 million copies in print worldwide, including The Fault in Our Stars (2012), which is one of the best-selling books of all time. Green's rapid rise to fame and idiosyncratic voice are credited with creating a major shift in the young adult fiction market. Green is also well known for his work in online video, most notably his YouTube ventures with his brother Hank Green. Born in Indianapolis, Indiana, Green was raised in Orlando, Florida, before attending boarding school outside of Birmingham, Alabama. He attended Kenyon College, graduating with a double major in English and religious studies in 2000. Green then spent six months as a student chaplain at a children's hospital. He reconsidered his path and began working at Booklist in Chicago while writing his first novel. His debut novel Looking for Alaska (2005) was awarded the 2006 Michael L. Printz Award. While living in New York City, Green published his second novel, An Abundance of Katherines (2006). Starting on January 1, 2007, John and his brother Hank launched the Vlogbrothers YouTube channel, a series of vlogs submitted to one another on alternating weekdays; the videos spawned an active online-based community called Nerdfighteria and an annual telethon-style fundraiser called Project for Awesome, both of which have persisted and grown over time. John moved back to Indianapolis in 2007, and published three novels over the next three years: Let It Snow: Three Holiday Romances (2008, with Maureen Johnson and Lauren Myracle); his third solo novel, Paper Towns (2008); and Will Grayson, Will Grayson (2010, with David Levithan). From 2010 to 2013, John and Hank launched several online video projects, including VidCon, an annual conference for the online video community, and Crash Course (2011–present), a wide-ranging educational channel. Green's 2012 novel, The Fault in Our Stars, proved to be a massive success. The book created a passionate fan base of readers and remained on The New York Times Best Seller list for children's chapter books for over two years. The 2014 film adaptation was also a commercial and critical success, leading to several other film and television adaptations of his work. That same year, Green was included in Time magazine's list of the 100 most influential people in the world. Green's subsequent projects, his novel Turtles All the Way Down (2017) and The Anthropocene Reviewed (2018–2021), dealt more directly with his anxiety and obsessive–compulsive disorder. The Anthropocene Reviewed began as a podcast in January 2018, with Green reviewing different facets of the Anthropocene on a five-star scale. The podcast was then adapted into The Anthropocene Reviewed: Essays on a Human-Centered Planet (2021), his first nonfiction book. Since the mid-2010s, John Green has been a prominent advocate for global health causes: he is a trustee for Partners In Health (PIH), supporting their goal of reducing maternal mortality in Sierra Leone, and has worked with PIH, USAID, the Stop TB Partnership, and the government of the Philippines, among others, in fighting tuberculosis worldwide. John Michael Green was born on August 24, 1977, in Indianapolis, Indiana, to Mike and Sydney Green. Within two months of his birth, his family moved to Michigan, then later Birmingham, Alabama, and finally to Orlando, Florida. There he attended Glenridge Middle School and Lake Highland Preparatory School. Green's father worked as the executive director of The Nature Conservancy of Florida, and his mother, after being a stay-at-home mother, worked for a nonprofit called the Healthy Community Initiative. When he was 15, he started attending Indian Springs School outside of Birmingham, Alabama, graduating in 1995. While attending the preparatory school, Green became good friends with Daniel Alarcón, who would go on to become an author as well. Green's future wife Sarah Urist also attended Indian Springs at the same time as Green, though they did not become friends until they became reacquainted in the early 2000s. Green has characterized his upbringing by saying that "although he had a happy childhood, [...] he was not always a happy child." Green has struggled with severe anxiety and obsessive–compulsive disorder his whole life. He has also spoken about being bullied during high school and how it made life as a teenager miserable for him. Green enrolled at Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio in 1995, graduating with a double major in English and religious studies in 2000. While attending the school, he befriended and was in a comedy troupe with Ransom Riggs. After graduation, Green spent about half a year working as a student chaplain at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, while enrolled at the University of Chicago Divinity School, although he never actually attended the school. He intended to become an Episcopal priest, but the traumatic experiences of working in a hospital with children suffering from life-threatening illnesses and injuries made him reconsider his path. Parts of his experience inspired him to become an author, and later to write The Fault in Our Stars. After his time as a chaplain, Green moved to Chicago where he briefly continued performing with his college comedy troupe. In 2001, Green was hired as an editorial assistant at the book review journal Booklist, later becoming a production editor. Whilst there he reviewed hundreds of books, particularly on literary fiction, Islam, and conjoined twins. He also wrote radio essays for NPR's All Things Considered and Chicago's public radio station WBEZ. He wrote essays for WBEZ after beginning an email correspondence with Amy Krouse Rosenthal, who became a close friend and mentor. While working at Booklist, Green met author Ilene Cooper, whose example persuaded him he could write a novel, saying, "I saw that real people like Ilene wrote books; they weren't written in ivory towers." Cooper invited Green to lunch to discuss his future. She set a deadline for Green to present her with a draft of his first book, which Green failed to present to her twice over. Near the end of 2001, Green suffered from a mental health crisis so severe he could not eat, and instead drank only two-liter bottles of Sprite. He lived with his parents for a brief time while seeing a psychiatrist and going on medication. When he returned to Chicago, he began writing Looking for Alaska. Green wrote the novel divided into "before" and "after" the character Alaska's death, with chapters denoted through the number of days before or after the death. The structure was partially inspired by Green's reaction to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, months prior, and its status as a dividing line in history and in people's lives. Green presented the first draft to Cooper, who served as a mentor through the following two versions. Cooper sent the third draft to Dutton Children's Books in early 2003, who awarded Green with a publishing contract and a small four-figure book deal. Looking for Alaska was assigned to editor Julie Strauss-Gabel, which began their collaboration that has persisted through all of Green's books. In a 2015 interview with The New York Times, Green reflected, "In a publishing world that maybe doesn't have as many long-term relationships as it used to, she invested a lot of time in me before I ever earned a profit. I've never written a book without Julie. I wouldn't know how to do it." Looking for Alaska was published in March 2005. The novel is a coming-of-age school story and teen romance about a boarding school student who gets bullied, partially inspired by Green's experiences at Indian Springs, Alabama, fictionalized as Culver Creek Preparatory High School. The novel was well-received critically, but saw only modest sales at first. The novel was awarded the annual Michael L. Printz Award by the American Library Association (ALA), recognizing the year's "best book written for teens, based entirely on its literary merit." Receiving the award caused book sales to rapidly rise, with Green describing his reaction upon hearing he had won the award as, "probably the purest moment of joy I've experienced. Even when my children were born it wasn't as raw and surprising." It also appeared on the ALA's annual "Top 10 Best Books for Young Adults" and appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list seven years later during a surge in Green's popularity after the release of The Fault in Our Stars. Green left his job at Booklist after receiving the Printz Award. Green moved to the Upper West Side in New York City in 2005 while his then-fiancée Sarah Urist attended graduate school at Columbia University. He worked at Mental Floss magazine while he continued his second novel, having already finished a first draft while living in Chicago. He co-authored several Mental Floss gift books while there, including Cocktail Party Cheat Sheets, What's the Difference? and Scatterbrained. He also critiqued books for The New York Times Book Review. His second novel, An Abundance of Katherines, was released in September 2006. Set in Chicago, the novel is about an extremely intelligent but depressed 17-year-old boy who is constantly dating (and being dumped by) girls named Katherine. Reviewers noted that the book's tone was significantly more comedic and light than Looking for Alaska. It was runner-up for the Printz Award, and a finalist for the Los Angeles Times Book Prize. Green began writing his third solo novel while still living in New York. Green moved back to Indianapolis in June 2007 when Sarah began a position as a curator of contemporary art at the Indianapolis Museum of Art. In an interview in October 2007, Green mentioned that his next solo novel's working title was Paper Towns. Green's next novel was a collaboration with fellow young adult authors Maureen Johnson and Lauren Myracle titled Let It Snow: Three Holiday Romances, released in September 2008. The book consists of three interconnected short stories, including Green's "A Cheertastic Christmas Miracle", with each set in the same small town on Christmas Eve during a massive snowstorm. In November 2009, the book reached number ten on The New York Times Best Seller list for paperback children's books. Green's third solo novel, Paper Towns, was released in October 2008. Set in the suburbs of Orlando, Florida, the book is about the coming-of-age of the protagonist, Quentin "Q" Jacobsen and his search for Margo Roth Spiegelman, his neighbor and childhood sweetheart. The story has often been described as a deconstruction of the "Manic Pixie Dream Girl" trope, including by Green himself. It debuted at number five on The New York Times Best Seller list for children's books. Paper Towns was awarded the 2009 Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Young Adult Novel and the 2010 Corine Literature Prize. After this, Green and fellow young-adult writer David Levithan collaborated on the novel Will Grayson, Will Grayson, which was published by Dutton in April 2010. Set in the suburbs of Chicago, the book's narrative is divided evenly between two boys named Will Grayson; Green wrote the odd chapters on the Will Grayson who is straight, and Levithan wrote the even chapters on the Will Grayson who is gay. The novel debuted on The New York Times children's best-seller list after its release and remained there for three weeks. It was the first LGBT-themed young adult novel to make it to the list. It was a runner-up for two of the annual ALA awards: the Stonewall Book Award for excellence in LGBT children's and young adult literature, and the Odyssey Award for Excellence in Audiobook Production. In 2007, John and his brother Hank began a video blog project called Brotherhood 2.0 which ran from January 1 to December 31 of that year and was published to their YouTube channel "Vlogbrothers". The two agreed that they would forgo all text-based communication for the project's duration and instead maintain their relationship by exchanging these vlogs. Each submitted one to the other on alternating weekdays. The brothers gained a large following during the early years of YouTube, especially after Hank's video "Accio Deathly Hallows" was featured on the front page of YouTube. In what would have been the project's final video, the brothers revealed that they would extend their video correspondence indefinitely. As of November 2022[update], they have continued exchanging their vlogs and the channel has over 3.5 million subscribers and 900 million views. Since the project's inception, the duo has gained a wide-reaching international fanbase whose members identify collectively as "Nerdfighters". One prominent early Nerdfighter was Esther Earl, who developed a bond with the Green brothers and the Nerdfighter community before she died in 2010 at the age of sixteen to thyroid cancer. Green and the Nerdfighteria community continue to celebrate "Esther Day" each year on August 3, and support the non-profit foundation This Star Won't Go Out, founded by Esther's parents Wayne and Lori Earl. Green wrote the introduction to Earl's biography and has stated that Earl was an inspiration for the main character Hazel in The Fault in Our Stars. The group, in collaboration with the two brothers, promote and participate in several other humanitarian efforts and community events, including loaning more than $4 million through Kiva.org, as well as the Project for Awesome (P4A). The Project for Awesome is an annual telethon-style fundraiser began in 2007. The event includes a 48-hour livestream in which charities are voted on by the community while supporters pledge money and receive donated perks, such as artwork or digital content. The livestream is hosted by the Greens and other YouTube personalities, including Destin Sandlin and Phil Plait. The event has continued annually, gaining support and higher donations over time, most recently raising over $3 million in 2023. Hank Green and Alan Lastufka co-founded DFTBA Records (an initialism for "Don't Forget to Be Awesome") in 2008, with John Green later becoming a co-owner. Originally a record label, its main focus was music generated by prominent YouTube stars. The company now focuses on selling merchandise. In 2010, the brothers launched VidCon as a conference for the online video community. The Greens created the conference in response to the growing YouTube community. Hank stated, "We wanted to get as much of the online video community together, in one place, in the real world for a weekend. It's a celebration of the community, with performances, concerts, and parties, but it's also a discussion of the explosion in community-based online video." The event drew many popular YouTubers, as well as their fans, and provided room for the community to interact. The event also contained an industry conference for people and businesses working in the online video field. The convention was a success, leading to it becoming an annual event that was acquired by Viacom in 2018. Green had announced in August 2009 he was writing a new book titled The Sequel. The work was later scrapped, with parts integrated into his next book, The Fault in Our Stars, released on January 10, 2012. Green's fourth solo novel, the story is about Hazel, a 16-year-old girl living in Indianapolis, Indiana, who has thyroid cancer. She is forced by her parents to attend a support group where she meets and falls in love with 17-year-old Augustus Waters, an ex-basketball player, amputee, and survivor of osteosarcoma. Green was inspired by his friendship with Esther Earl, as well as his time working as a student chaplain in a children's hospital. In an interview with The Atlantic in 2013, he stated, "The kids I met [while working as a student chaplain] were funny and bright and angry and dark and just as human as anybody else. And I really wanted to try to capture that. I felt that the stories that I was reading sort of oversimplified and sometimes even dehumanized them. [...] I wanted to argue for their humanity, their complete humanity." He crafted the novel in collaboration with his long-time editor Julie Strauss-Gabel. Green signed all 150,000 copies of the first printing. The Fault in Our Stars was massively successful, creating a passionate fan base of readers. Six months before the release of the book, before it had even been finished, online pre-orders led to the book being a number one seller on Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble. After release, the book debuted at number one on The New York Times Best Seller list for children's chapter books. It went on to spend forty-three total weeks at the number one spot and over two years in the top ten. Green himself also saw a significant increase in his fame, with the Indianapolis Business Journal noting that he had much more "visibility and presence in his fans' lives" than other contemporaneous authors with equal or greater book sales. Upon the book's release, Green began a 17-city book tour, visiting largely sold-out venues across the country. On the first anniversary of its release, John and his brother Hank performed a sold-out show at Carnegie Hall's Isaac Stern Auditorium in New York City, which also featured appearances from Neil Gaiman and The Mountain Goats. Green appeared on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson in March 2013. Green stated his anxiety leading up to the television interview prevented him from getting work done for weeks before. In late 2013, Green stated that he was writing a new book with the working title The Racket. He sold 5,000 words of a rough draft of the work during that years Project for Awesome. That same year, Green hired long-time Nerdfighter Rosianna Halse Rojas as his executive assistant. A film adaptation of The Fault in Our Stars was green-lit within three weeks of the book's release. Green had initially been hesitant to sell the movie rights for the book, saying, "I'd had some unhappy experiences before, and I didn't want a movie I didn't like being made from a book that's so important to me. This book frankly is more important to me than my other books." To that end, Green was involved in the movie's pre-production, and was on set for most of the film's shooting. The Hollywood Reporter stated in May 2014 that even before the movie's release, its expected success was causing a shift in the types of films being made for teenagers, with Pouya Shahbazian, the producer of the dystopian science fiction film Divergent, stating, "I've already had calls from studio execs who want to be on the list for small, intimate stories that previously would have been impossible to sell to their senior execs. Who would have believed a small-budget, YA teenage cancer love story would have rival studio execs calling it a potential event movie?" Additionally, the magazine reported that the film studio behind the movie, Fox 2000, would consider anything over $125 million in box office earnings a huge success. On June 6, 2014, The Fault in Our Stars film was released, the first adaptation of one of Green's novels. The film was massively successful, opening number one at the box office during its opening weekend and grossing $307 million worldwide against a budget of $12 million. Green filmed a cameo role for the movie that was not included in the final cut of the film. The profound success of the book and the movie further launched Green into mainstream culture, an experience he found emotionally fraught. Green appeared on The Colbert Report to promote the movie's release in June 2014. Green was included in Time magazine's 2014 Time 100 list of the 100 most influential people in the world. The trade paperback version of The Fault in Our Stars was the top selling novel of the year on Publishers Weekly's annual list. Just over a year after the first film's release, an adaptation of Paper Towns was released, starring Cara Delevingne and Nat Wolff. Green served as an executive producer for the movie and entered into a first-look production deal with the studio behind the film, Fox 2000, alongside his now producing partner Rojas. In 2016, Green announced that Fox 2000 would be making a movie about the formation of AFC Wimbledon, a soccer team that he supports, and he would serve as a producer. As of 2022[update], the movie has not been released. As part of the platform's "YouTube Original Channel Initiative", YouTube approached John and Hank with an opportunity to start a Google-funded channel. YouTube gave the brothers $450,000, which they used to launch the Crash Course YouTube channel. The channel was launched in January 2012, with the first episode of its World History series hosted by John Green. The channel has since grown to 44 series covering topics including history, literature, and science. All of the content is available for free and many follow the curricula for the Advanced Placement program. John has hosted several of the series, including the first on world history, which he co-wrote with his high school history teacher, Raoul Meyer. After two years of producing Crash Course and Hank's science-related channel SciShow through the grants provided by YouTube, the Green brothers sought a more sustainable way to fund the projects. In 2013, they launched Subbable, a subscription-based crowdfunding platform that would enable donators to pledge a monthly sum to creators and receive perks in exchange. Among the platform's creators and channels were the Green brothers' Crash Course and SciShow, and YouTubers CGP Grey, MinutePhysics and Wheezy Waiter. The platform went on to be acquired by fellow subscription-based crowdfunding platform Patreon in March 2015. Patreon added Subbable's creators into its fold and the Green brothers became advisors at Patreon. Starting in 2012 and 2013, John and Hank began celebrating an event called "Pizzamas" in which they sold merchandise, including t-shirts, of "Pizza John": a white outlined image of John sporting a thick mustache, originating from a 2009 Vlogbrothers video that then became a popular meme in the Nerdfighteria community. Starting in 2014, John and Hank began uploading videos to Vlogbrothers every weekday for two weeks during Pizzamas, and began selling more varied merchandise, including fan art of Pizza John printed on blankets, tote bags, and pizza-scented air fresheners. All the proceeds are donated to various charities, including Partners In Health. From 2013 to 2018, Green was one of the hosts of the YouTube channel for the magazine Mental Floss, for whom he had worked when in New York. Green presented "The List Show" in which he listed off interesting facts centered on one particular subject. These episodes were directed by Mark Olsen and produced by John and Hank Green and Stan Muller. A new format, titled Scatterbrained, named after one of the books he had written for Mental Floss, was introduced on the channel in 2018; Green was joined by multiple hosts on a single episode each week, which tackled one topic from multiple angles. In 2019, Mental Floss brought its YouTube production in-house and ceased using Green as a host. On February 20, 2014, Sarah Urist Green launched The Art Assignment, a PBS and Complexly video series. John served as an executive producer for the series. In September 2019, Sarah Urist Green, in collaboration with John and the Poetry Foundation, launched the YouTube channel Ours Poetica. In June 2015, John Green and his brother Hank started a weekly podcast titled Dear Hank & John. Taking a mainly humorous tone, each podcast consists of the brothers reading a series of questions submitted by listeners and offering their "dubious" advice. The podcast closes with a news segment with two standard topics: Mars, presented by Hank, and AFC Wimbledon, presented by John. EcoGeek LLC, a company founded by Hank Green to support his blog on environmental and science issues in the early 2000s, was renamed to Complexly in 2016. Complexly became the umbrella video and audio production company which produces and manages most of the Green brother's YouTube shows, as well as a number of other shows, podcasts, and projects. John serves as the co-founder and strategic advisor for the company. Green gave commencement speeches at Butler University in 2013 and at his alma mater Kenyon College in May 2016. Both universities conferred Honorary Doctorates of Letters on him. In January 2016, Green was named to the Forum of Young Global Leaders by the World Economic Forum (WEF). He attended the annual meeting of the WEF in Davos, Switzerland that year. In February 2016, Green visited Jordan to meet with Syrian refugees with the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC). Green has often acted as an advocate for refugees, stating that "for those of you who share my faith, Jesus is awfully unambiguous about the poor, shelterless, and imprisoned". In November 2014, amidst the intense success of The Fault in Our Stars, Green wrote on his Tumblr page that he was not working on his previously announced next project, The Racket, anymore, but was working on something else with a different title. In September 2015, Green announced that he would be taking a break from social media to focus on writing his next book. Around this time, Green experienced a period of severe anxiety, partly due to the perceived burden to follow up the massive success of The Fault in Our Stars. He worried he might never write another book. He stopped taking his prescribed medications hoping to reinvigorate his creativity and his mental health suffered, with him later describing the experience saying, "I can't think straight—I can only think in swirls and scribbles." After he recovered in late 2015, he began writing Turtles All the Way Down. In August 2016, Green stated that over the next ten months he would be limiting his public appearances in order to finish a draft of the new book. But on September 20, Green took to his YouTube channel to say that he may never publish another book, citing his current writing experience as, "this intense pressure, like people were watching over my shoulder while I was writing." He eventually submitted a draft to his editor Strauss-Gabel, and they worked on the book together for another year. On June 22, 2017, it was announced that Green's fifth solo novel would be titled Turtles All the Way Down. It was released on October 10, 2017, and debuted at number one on the New York Times bestseller list. The story centers on 16-year-old Aza Holmes, an Indianapolis high school student with obsessive–compulsive disorder and anxiety, and her search for a fugitive billionaire as she begins a relationship with that billionaire's son. Speaking about the novel, Green said, "This is my first attempt to write directly about the kind of mental illness that has affected my life since childhood, so while the story is fictional, it is also quite personal." Like his previous books, Green signed the first 200,000 copies of the book, as part of the initial run of 1.5 million copies. Upon the release of his book, he and his brother Hank went on a book tour. In May 2018, Green was interviewed by then-quarterback for the Indianapolis Colts, Andrew Luck, after Turtles All the Way Down was named a selection for the Andrew Luck Book Club. They discussed the book and their relationships with anxiety and stress for the event that promoted the PBS series The Great American Read. In January 2018, Green launched The Anthropocene Reviewed, a solo podcast where he reviews different facets of the Anthropocene, the epoch that includes significant human impact on the environment, on a five-star scale. This can include completely artificial products like Diet Dr. Pepper, natural species that have had their fates altered by human influence like the Canada goose, or phenomena that only influence humanity such as Halley's Comet. Episodes typically contained Green reviewing two topics, accompanied by stories on how they have impacted his life. At the end of 2018, the Green brothers partnered with WNYC Studios to bring all of their podcasts, including The Anthropocene Reviewed, to the distributor. Green adapted the essays into a book, The Anthropocene Reviewed: Essays on a Human-Centered Planet, which was published by Dutton Penguin on May 18, 2021. The book was Green's first nonfiction book and sixth solo publication. The book received positive reviews and debuted at number one on The New York Times Best Seller list. The book featured revised versions of many of the essays from the podcast, as well as new original essays, ordered chronologically through Green's life to give the book the approximate structure of a memoir. Green wrote about living through the COVID-19 pandemic in many of the essays. As he had done with many of his previous books, Green signed all 250,000 tip-in sheets of the first printing for the United States and Canada. He wrote a review of the experience on the final signed page. This review was later revised and expanded on for an episode of the podcast released on the same day as the book. Green subsequently ended the podcast in August 2021 after 36 episodes. In May 2021, Green hosted a virtual book tour for The Anthropocene Reviewed, with guests Clint Smith, Latif Nasser, Sarah Urist Green, Hank Green, and Ashley C. Ford making appearances at the various shows. In April 2022, The Anthropocene Reviewed was chosen to be the 2022 common read at the University of Mississippi. Green gave a keynote address at the university's annual fall convocation. Green had sold the film the rights for Looking for Alaska in 2005 to Paramount, which hired Josh Schwartz as writer and director. However, after five years with no progress on the project, Green told fans that, while he "desperately loved" the screenplay, there seemed to be little interest at Paramount. In 2012, the book reached The New York Times Best Seller list for children's paperbacks. Finally, in May 2018, it was announced that Looking for Alaska would be made into a Hulu series with Schwartz and others on board. The casting was announced in October 2018. Looking for Alaska was released to Hulu on October 18, 2019. The series was critically well-received, with Kathryn VanArendonk of Vulture calling it a "rare adaptation that dismantles the original in order to build something that works better." In 2017, Green authorized a stage play adaptation of The Fault in Our Stars. The play was written by theatre director Tobin Strader of Brebeuf Jesuit Preparatory School in Indianapolis and four students at the high school. It was performed in 2019. In 2019, Let It Snow was adapted into a film of the same name by Netflix. On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on reviews from five critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". In August 2014, India's Fox Star Studios announced it would adapt The Fault in Our Stars into an Indian Hindi-language film, with the working title of Kizie Aur Manny. The adaptation ages up the characters and changes the main setting to India. The title of the movie was later changed to Dil Bechara ("The Helpless Heart") and is named after one of the original songs written for the movie. Music composer A. R. Rahman composed the background music and songs of the movie. The film was scheduled to be released on May 8, 2020, after having been initially scheduled in November 2019, but was later postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in India. It was released on July 24, 2020, on Disney+ Hotstar and was met with mainly positive reviews. The 2020 Chinese film A Little Red Flower has been noted for having significant similarities to The Fault in Our Stars, which was never theatrically released in China. A Chinese remake of The Fault in Our Stars had been in development by Fox International Productions in 2016. In 2018, a notice was released by the China Film Administration for a project with a similar premise and the same writers and producers to the original remake, and in 2020, A Little Red Flower was released with no credit given to Fox. In December 2017, Green announced that a film adaptation of Turtles All The Way Down was in development by Fox 2000 and Temple Hill Productions. In May 2018, Green confirmed that the film adaptation would be written by Isaac Aptaker and Elizabeth Berger, the screenwriters for Love, Simon. In January 2019, it was announced that Hannah Marks would direct the movie. After Fox 2000 was closed as part of the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney, the film was put on hold. In March 2022, it was announced the film had switched studios to New Line Cinema and would be released on the streaming service HBO Max. The film is set to star Isabela Merced and began filming in April 2022. Green and Rosianna Halse Rojas have served as executive producers. Since the mid-2010s, John and Hank Green and their families have supported the international public health nonprofit Partners In Health (PIH). Beginning with the annual Project for Awesome fundraiser in 2013, Partners In Health received $50,000 as one of the community-chosen charities. The charity was first selected as one of the "designated charities" the following year, meaning Green and the other organizers had chosen for it to receive a large portion of the funds raised, totaling $291,000. It was again selected as a designated charity in 2016 before becoming a permanent designated charity in every iteration of the fundraiser since 2018. In October 2018, Green founded the Life's Library book club with Rosianna Halse Rojas. The book club read a book approximately every 6 weeks, with online discussion occurring on the Life's Library Discord. Green and Rojas alternated choosing books, with guest curators occasionally making selections. Life's Library was free to participate in, with paid options available to receive digital or physical subscriptions, containing additional materials such as a discussion podcast, or a version of the book itself. All profits from Life's Library were donated to Partners In Health Sierra Leone. The Life's Library project ended in March 2022. John and Sarah Urist Green visited Sierra Leone in April 2019 after John was inspired by a December 2017 profile in The New Yorker on PIH co-founder Ophelia Dahl. In October 2019, Green announced that he, Hank, and their families would be donating $6.5 million to Sierra Leone's branch of Partners In Health, as part of an initiative to raise $25 million over the following five years. The goal of the initiative is to help fight maternal mortality, specifically in the country's Kono District, where the money will be used to staff and support the Maternal Center of Excellence, among other primary care centers and health workers. The Maternal Center of Excellence broke ground in April 2021, with a planned opening in 2023. In August 2019, John and Hank performed live versions of their own podcasts on stage, with John presenting a new episode of The Anthropocene Reviewed, as well as a live episode of their shared podcast Dear Hank & John, with all profits going to Partners In Health. The live performances returned in March 2020 with a planned three-city tour including stops in Columbus, Ohio, and Carmel, Indiana, with a third performance set for Ann Arbor, Michigan. However, the third performance was cancelled due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. In September 2021, Green continued his advocacy for refugees, writing an op-ed in The Independent on the need for education for refugee children. After receiving $429,000 from the Project for Awesome in 2021 and over $100,000 from that year's Pizzamas, Partners in Health received over $1 million during the 2022 Project for Awesome. The week prior to the 2022 Project for Awesome, Partners In Health co-founder Paul Farmer unexpectedly died at the age of 62. Green wrote a tribute to Farmer for The Washington Post. In November 2020, John and Hank started the "Awesome Socks Club", a monthly subscription service where members receive a pair of socks designed by independent artists. All post-tax profits are donated to the charity, in a business model similar to Newman's Own products. As of October 2022[update], the Awesome Socks Club had over 40,000 members. In March 2022, the brothers started the "Awesome Coffee Club", with an identical business model and goal to the Awesome Socks Club. The coffee is ethically sourced from Colombia via the brothers' sourcing partner Sucafina. In August 2022, Hank Green reported that the Awesome Socks Club had over 40,000 subscribers and the Awesome Coffee Club had over 10,000 subscribers. A third subscription, called "Sun Basin Soap", was announced in April 2023. These products were brought under the common branding and website of "Good.Store" in August 2023. On January 1, 2017, Green began a YouTube series titled "100 Days" in collaboration with his friend Chris Waters. The pair endeavored to get fit and establish healthy habits, while avoiding emphasis on weight loss. Near the end of the effort, Green fundraised for a 10K charity run for Exodus Refugee Immigration, an Indianapolis-based refugee resettlement organization. At the end of 2018, John Green chose to leave social media for a year, including Twitter, where he had more than 5 million followers. In January 2019, Green wrote an op-ed for The Washington Post on his decision, saying, "I had noticed over the past couple of years that my attention had become more fractured. I found it harder to lose myself in a book, for instance, without feeling the urge to check my phone or open my laptop." Green created a TikTok account in 2020, which has over 2 million followers and 48 million views as of October 2022[update]. In December 2022, Green left Twitter in response to the policy changes made after Elon Musk's acquisition of Twitter. Green is a frequent lecturer and moderated discussion host. In March 2019, Green moderated a discussion with former First Lady Michelle Obama on her memoir Becoming as part of a YouTube-sponsored event titled "BookTube". In April 2019, Green recorded a live version of the podcast Harry Potter and the Sacred Text at the Indianapolis Central Public Library. Green gave a virtual commencement address to all graduates in May 2020 during the beginning months of the COVID-19 pandemic. In October 2022, Green gave the opening lecture at Harvard University's 2022 William Belden Noble Lecture series, titled "How the World Ends". Green became a member of the board of trustees for Partners in Health in 2022. In mid-2023, Green was a leading figure in a successful campaign to persuade pharmaceutical company Johnson & Johnson (J&J) to allow generic versions of the tuberculosis drug bedaquiline to be produced, allowing increased global access to the drug. In May, Green published an op-ed in The Washington Post on the subject. A deal with the Stop TB Partnership was formed after J&J's evergreening of the patent received public backlash from an awareness campaign started by Green in June; J&J stated they had decided to allow generics to be produced the month prior. Two months later, Green urged Cepheid, an American molecular diagnostics company owned by Danaher Corporation, to lower the cost of the cartridges used in their GeneXpert machines to $5, hoping to save lives by giving more people access to early detection of tuberculosis. The pressure campaign was again partially successful, with Danaher reducing the price of one of the most critical tests by one-fifth and committing to make no profit on the sale of that test to lower and middle income countries. On September 22, 2023, Green attended, and briefly spoke at, a high-level United Nations meeting on tuberculosis. Green is working on a nonfiction book on tuberculosis he expects to be released in 2025. He described the book in February 2024 as "a history of human responses to tuberculosis intertwined with a contemporary story of one person's experience." In March 2024, the Green brothers announced that they and their families were pledging $1 million a year through 2027 alongside $10 million provided by USAID and $11 million matched by the Ministry of Health in the Philippines to address tuberculosis in the Philippines. That same month, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) named John Green a 2024 "TB Elimination Champion" and he published another op-ed in The Washington Post on the need for greater access to tuberculosis diagnostics in poorer countries. In January 2023, John and Hank announced that Crash Course would be offering college courses on YouTube, in continued partnership with Arizona State University and Google, with the project's main goal being to lower the monetary barriers to receive college credit. In May 2023, Hank announced he had Hodgkin's lymphoma, a type of cancer that affects the lymphatic system. While Hank received chemotherapy and recovered, John took over Hank's role as CEO for their companies DFTBA and Complexly. Laura Joukovski took over the role of CEO at DFTBA in August 2023, and Julie Walsh Smith took over the role of acting CEO at Complexly in October 2023. All of Green's books have received positive critical reception and appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list. Green's books have been translated into 55 languages with more than 50 million copies in print worldwide, including The Fault in Our Stars, which is one of the best-selling books of all time. Green's idiosyncratic voice and rapid rise to fame in 2014 are credited with creating a major shift in the young adult fiction market. While reviewing the Andrew Smith young-adult novel, Winger, A. J. Jacobs of The New York Times used the term "GreenLit" to describe young adult books that contain "sharp dialogue, defective authority figures, occasional boozing, unrequited crushes, and one or more heartbreaking twists." According to The Wall Street Journal, "[s]ome credit him with ushering in a new golden era for contemporary, realistic, literary teen fiction, following more than a decade of dominance by books about young wizards, sparkly vampires, and dystopia. A blurb or Twitter endorsement from Mr. Green can ricochet around the Internet and boost sales, an effect book bloggers call 'the John Green effect'." Zareen Jaffery, executive editor of Simon & Schuster Books for Young Readers said: "What I really like about what people are calling 'the John Green effect' is that there's more of an interest in authentic, genuine, relatable characters." Some readers and authors have been critical of the terms. Green himself voiced his disagreement with the idea that he is single-handedly responsible for launching or promoting any one individual's career. Critics have also noted Green's evolution as an author. With the release of the Turtles All the Way Down in 2017, several reviewers referenced a dismissive perception of Green's now very popular œuvre as "sad teen books", which had emerged since the success of The Fault in Our Stars. Despite this, they praised Turtles All the Way Down as truthful and authentic enough to transcend these imagined drawbacks. Matt Haig of The Guardian wrote, "[Turtles All the Way Down] often dwells in cliché, but only as pop songs and epic poems do, mining the universal to create something that speaks to the familiar rhythms of the heart. It might just be a new modern classic." Likewise, with the release of The Anthropocene Reviewed book in 2021, Scott Neumyer of Shondaland wrote that, "Green may have made his name by writing fiction (and for good reason), but this first foray into nonfiction is his most mature, compelling, and beautifully written book yet." Green has received criticism for his perceived writing of "Manic Pixie Dream Girls", a term coined by Nathan Rabin to describe a female character that, "exists solely in the fevered imaginations of sensitive writer-directors to teach broodingly soulful young men to embrace life and its infinite mysteries and adventures". Paper Towns and the character of Margo Roth Spiegelman have often been cited as a deconstruction of the "Manic Pixie Dream Girl" trope, and Green has stated he specifically wrote her as such. In October 2022, Green tweeted, "I think basically all criticisms of my work are correct and justifiable other than the most popular one, 'he writes manic pixie dream girls,' which is just so stupid. [...] THE WHOLE POINT OF THE NOVELS is the danger of such misimagining, hence the eventual revelation: 'Margo was not a miracle. She was not an adventure. She was not a fine and precious thing. She was a girl.' It's not like I made it subtle." Despite this, some critics have questioned whether the story adequately deconstructed the trope, or merely perpetuated it. Green has readily discussed what he believes to be flaws in his novels when he looked at them in retrospect. Additionally, in response to a fan's tweet, Green apologized for using the word retarded in Paper Towns, stating, "Yeah, I regret it. At the time, I thought an author's responsibility was to reflect language as I found it. Still, now... eight years later, I don't feel like a book about humanizing the other benefited from dehumanizing language." Several of Green's books have been the subject of book banning attempts. Looking for Alaska was named the most challenged book of 2015 by the American Library Association, with some people complaining about the book's "offensive language" and "sexually explicit descriptions". In September 2022, a group of parents attempted to ban the novel from all Orange County, Florida, school libraries, a district Green had attended as a child. In August 2023, The Fault in Our Stars was removed from the young adult section at a library in the Indianapolis suburb of Fishers, Indiana, and moved to the general collection after a policy decision was made by the library's board that targeted "language about sexuality and reproduction, profanity and criminal acts." Green responded with a letter to the board, stating the library should "walk this awful policy back and allow the real experts to decide where to shelve my books and those of my colleagues." A Twitter post he made stating, "You Won't Catch Me Alive or Dead in Fishers, Indiana" was turned into a t-shirt by a local clothing company, with proceeds being donated to the Kurt Vonnegut Museum and Library. After the move received significant attention, the board decided to move the novel back to the Young Adult section, later suspending the policy responsible all together. In October, Green discussed book banning at an event hosted by Indiana State Senator Andrea Hunley at the Indianapolis Central Library. In November 2023, Green joined a lawsuit by Penguin Random House, the Iowa State Education Association [d], and fellow authors Laurie Halse Anderson, Malinda Lo, and Jodi Picoult, against the state of Iowa over a new law that banned books that depict sex acts from schools. As John and Hank Green began uploading YouTube videos regularly in 2007, they became part of the early culture of YouTube as the modern content creator industry was born from the YouTube Partner Program. The New York Times noted John as having "[an] uncanny knack for channeling the voice of marginalized but smart, self-identifying nerds, a gift he has turned into a YouTube empire." Many others have come to regard the brothers and their YouTube empire as pioneering in the online video space. In 2011, The Daily Dot named the Green brothers as the most important people on YouTube. The Vlogbrothers' content has received positive reception from commentators and fans, especially for the shared values expounded by their videos. Amelia Thomson-Deveaux writing for The American Prospect commented that, "what makes Nerdfighteria so potent does seem to be the moral imperative that the Brothers Green throw at their bajillion viewers' feet: to take their weirdness and anxiety and turn it into empathy. It's become kind of a culture." The Crash Course project has also been successful in its reach, with the John Green-hosted "World History" series alone having attracted millions of viewers. Green is married to Sarah Urist Green, with whom he has two children. John and Sarah met when they both attended the same preparatory school in Indian Springs, Alabama. They became reacquainted eight years later in Chicago, when Green began dating Sarah's boxing partner; after they broke up, John became friends with Sarah. The two became engaged in April 2005 and married in May 2006. In early videos on the VlogBrothers channel, Sarah is referred to as "the Yeti" due to her not appearing visibly on camera, though she no longer is referred to as such. Green was born in Indianapolis, Indiana and has lived there since 2007. The city has served as the setting for several of his novels, and he wrote a review of it in his podcast and book of essays The Anthropocene Reviewed. Green often speaks of his love for the city. On July 14, 2015, Greg Ballard, the mayor of Indianapolis, proclaimed that that day would be "John Green Day" in his city. That month, Teresa Jacobs, the mayor of Orange County, Florida, declared that July 24 would also be John Green Day. Green is an Episcopalian Christian, and was married in a Catholic church. Green is an avid sports fan. Green drove the pace car at the 2016 Grand Prix of Indianapolis, and was honorary co-chairman of the 500 Festival Host Committee that year. He is also a supporter of the English football club Liverpool F.C. of the Premier League and an official sponsor of the English League Two club AFC Wimbledon. Starting in 2011, Green had a gaming series on YouTube where he played FIFA, first as the "Swoodilypoopers", a fictionalized version of Swindon Town F.C., and then, starting in 2013, as the "Wimbly Womblys", a fictionalized version of AFC Wimbledon. Advertising revenue from the series was donated to the team. Looking for Alaska (2005) An Abundance of Katherines (2006) Let It Snow: Three Holiday Romances (2008) – with Maureen Johnson and Lauren Myracle Paper Towns (2008) Will Grayson, Will Grayson (2010) – with David Levithan The Fault in Our Stars (2012) Turtles All the Way Down (2017) The Anthropocene Reviewed: Essays on a Human-Centered Planet (2021) "The Approximate Cost of Loving Caroline", Twice Told: Original Stories Inspired by Original Artwork (2006), illustrated by Scott Hunt "The Great American Morp", 21 Proms (2007), edited by David Levithan and Daniel Ehrenhaft "Freak the Geek", Geektastic: Stories from the Nerd Herd (2009), edited by Holly Black "Reasons", What You Wish For: A Book for Darfur (2011) Cocktail Party Cheat Sheets (2006), Mental Floss gift book for which Green served as an editor and contributor Scatterbrained (2006), Mental Floss gift book for which Green served as an editor and contributor What's the Difference? (2006), Mental Floss gift book for which Green served as an editor and contributor Thisisnottom (2009), an interactive novel hidden behind riddles. Zombicorns (2010), an online Creative Commons licensed zombie novella. The War for Banks Island (2012), a sequel to Zombicorns, released as a Project for Awesome donation perk. The Sequel (2012), an unfinished novel, much of which was reworked into The Fault in Our Stars. The first 6,000 words were released as a Project for Awesome donation perk. Space and The Cat and the Mouse (2013), stories released as Project for Awesome donation perks An Imperial Affliction (2014), extracts used as a prop in the film adaptation of The Fault in Our Stars and later released as a Project for Awesome donation perk. This Star Won't Go Out: The Life and Words of Esther Grace Earl (2014), by Esther Earl, Wayne Earl, and Lori Earl, introduction by John Green My Drunk Kitchen (2014), by Hannah Hart, foreword by John Green The Golden Rule: Deluxe Edition (2019), by Ilene Cooper, foreword by John Green The Shortest History of Our Universe: The Unlikely Journey from the Big Bang to Us (2022), by David Baker, foreword by John Green Children and Young Adult Literature portal List of YouTubers Hedger, Leigh A.; Hays, Holly V. (August 24, 2017). "The internet exudes happiness for Indianapolis author John Green's 40th birthday". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Barnard, Linda (March 15, 2014). "Divergent star Shailene Woodley is a Hollywood rebel with a social conscience". The Toronto Star. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Biographical Questions – John Green". johngreenbooks.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved January 27, 2015. Lindquist, David. "John Green 'Turtles' book tour balances anxiety, laughs". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 11, 2021. Talbot, Margaret (June 9, 2014). "The Teen Whisperer". The New Yorker. Retrieved July 16, 2018. Blanchard, Tamsin. "Paper Towns author John Green: 'I didn't know who Cara Delevingne was... but she gets Margo better than I do'". www.telegraph.co.uk. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Lindquist, David. "John Green's next book will be nonfiction. Here's what it will be about". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Mendelsohn, Aline (February 21, 2005). "From last words to first books". The Orlando Sentinel. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Boedeker, Hal (June 4, 2014). "John Green of 'Fault in Our Stars' found inspiration in Orlando". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on October 18, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2017. Alter, Alexandria (May 14, 2014). "John Green and His Nerdfighters Are Upending the Summer Blockbuster Model". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Kaufman, Leslie (January 16, 2013). "A Novelist and His Brother Sell Out Carnegie Hall". The New York Times. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Macpherson, Karen (October 8, 2006). "John Green: from bad boy to Printz Award winner". The Herald-Palladium. pp. B6. Retrieved September 30, 2022. "From the Head of School". Indian Springs School. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2017. "Countdown to Bliss". The Observer. November 7, 2005. Retrieved October 31, 2015. Jovanovic, Katherine (November 15, 2017). "Prism Picks: Turtles All the Way Down". UF PRISM. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Alter, Alexandra (October 10, 2017). "John Green Tells a Story of Emotional Pain and Crippling Anxiety. His Own". The New York Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Senior, Jennifer (October 10, 2017). "In John Green's 'Turtles All the Way Down,' a Teenager's Mind Is at War With Itself". The New York Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. "Alabama Library Association announces author awards". The Selma Times-Journal. April 16, 2006. p. 8. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Thompson, Madeleine (April 3, 2014). "On the record: Ransom Riggs". The Kenyon Collegian. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Ulaby, Neda (September 1, 2016). "Literary 'It Couple,' Both Best-Selling Authors, Work Side By Side". NPR. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Green, John (May 13, 2007). "Floating Away". The New York Times Book Review. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Goldstein, Jonathan (October 7, 2021). "#37 John by HEAVYWEIGHT" (Podcast). Gimlet Media. Retrieved September 22, 2022. "Interview: John Green". Sydney Morning Herald. January 21, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2012. Cooper, Ilene (March 1, 2005). "Last Words From a First Novelist". Booklist. Vol. 101, no. 13. p. 1181. Retrieved April 28, 2019. Maughan, Shannon (December 18, 2014). "John Green Celebrates 10 Years of 'Looking for Alaska'". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "Author Interview: John Green". Book Wholesalers, Inc. Archived from the original on November 20, 2008. O'Donnell, Maureen (March 13, 2017). "Author John Green: Amy Krouse Rosenthal was a huge influence". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Corbett, Sue (June 24, 2005). "Spring 2005 Flying Starts: John Green". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved October 10, 2022. "Looking for Alaska by John Green – Reading Guide: 9780525556541". PenguinRandomhouse.com. Retrieved March 2, 2023. Alter, Alexandra (April 10, 2015). "Her Stinging Critiques Propel Young Adult Best Sellers". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "LOOKING FOR ALASKA by John Green". www.publishersweekly.com. March 2005. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Carlton, Bob (June 4, 2014). "Before 'The Fault in Our Stars,' John Green was an 'awkward' student at Indian Springs in Alabama". AL.com. Retrieved October 18, 2017. Green, John. "Questions about Looking for Alaska (SPOILERS!): Questions about Writing and Inspiration". Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. "Michael L. Printz Winners and Honor Books". Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA). March 15, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "2006 Best Books for Young Adults with annotations". Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA). American Library Association. July 30, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Flood, Alison (October 14, 2017). "John Green: 'Having OCD is an ongoing part of my life'". The Guardian. Retrieved July 11, 2023. May, Ethan (February 1, 2019). "'Spectacular in our ordinariness': How John Green rated Indianapolis in a new podcast episode". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Harry, Lou (February 1, 2014). "2014 Forty Under 40: John Green". Indianapolis Business Journal. Archived from the original on October 23, 2014. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Haughney, Christine (September 1, 2014). "Mental Floss Is Buoyed by Online Video". The New York Times. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Wheeler, Sheba R. (June 21, 2006). "Put some fizz in your ability to gab at parties". The Sacramento Bee. Denver Post. pp. E2. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Theiss, Evelyn (July 6, 2006). "Book leads way through party patter". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Newhouse News Service. p. 45. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Green, John (May 14, 2006). "Fighting for Their Lives". The New York Times Book Review. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Green, John (November 7, 2008). "Scary New World". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2022. "An Abundance of Katherines by John Green". www.publishersweekly.com. September 2006. Retrieved March 25, 2023. MacPherson, Karen (November 18, 2008). "John Green's young-adult novels appeal to other ages". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. 25. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (June 18, 2014). "'Fault' Author John Green's Other Books Still Available for Movie Versions". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Zutter, Natalie (August 12, 2013). "Spotlight: John Green, author of 'The Fault in Our Stars'". USA TODAY. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Los Angeles Times Names Book Prize Winners For 2006". Los Angeles Times. April 27, 2007. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Lindquist, David (February 17, 2014). "Will you accept Sarah Urist Green's 'Art Assignment'?". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Lindquist, David (June 26, 2015). "'Paper Towns' actors, John Green headed to Indiana". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Bradbury, Kelsey (October 17, 2007). "Meet John Green". The Buffalo News. p. 51. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "LET IT SNOW | Kirkus Reviews". Kirkus Reviews. May 20, 2010. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Hubert, Jennifer (September 15, 2008). "Let It Snow: Three Holiday Romances, by John Green | Booklist Online". Retrieved October 11, 2022. "Best Sellers – Children's Paperback Books". The New York Times. December 6, 2009. Whitley, Carla Jean (July 22, 2015). "From the archives: Birmingham magazine's review of 'Paper Towns' by John Green". Alabama.com. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Welch, Rollie (December 21, 2008). "'Paper Town' is author John Green's best work". Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2012. O'Keeffe, Kevin (July 27, 2015). "'Paper Towns' Deconstructs How We Talk About the "Manic Pixie Dream Girl" Movie Stereotype". Mic. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Leszkiewicz, Anna (June 8, 2021). "Paper Towns and the myth that just won't die: the Manic Pixie Dream Girl". New Statesman. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "Best Sellers – Children's Books – Chapter Books". The New York Times. October 24, 2008. "2009 Edgar Award Winners" (PDF). MysteryWriters.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 27, 2012. "John Green leaves hospital after bout of viral meningitis". The Arizona Republic. August 9, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Scherf, Martina (November 22, 2010). "Giraffensex und andere Schwierigkeiten". Süddeutsche.de (in German). Retrieved March 23, 2023. "Odyssey Award for Excellence in Audiobook Production 2011 | Teenreads". Teen Reads. Archived from the original on February 21, 2018. Retrieved February 21, 2018. "Will Grayson, Will Grayson by David Levithan, John Green". www.publishersweekly.com. March 1, 2010. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Kehe, Marjorie (June 24, 2010). "Gay-themed novels for young readers enter the mainstream". Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Books With Gay Themes for Young Readers Take Off". Associated Press. March 25, 2015. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "2011 – Stonewall Honor Books in Children and Young Adult Literature". American Library Association. Archived from the original on December 15, 2015. Retrieved December 9, 2015. "Will Grayson, Will Grayson – YALSA Book Finder". YALSA. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Galuppo, Mia (January 28, 2013). "Caldecott, Newbery Medal Winners Announced". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Levine, Meredith (June 6, 2014). "The Online Fandom That Launched "The Fault in Our Stars"". Vox. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Schatz, Amy (September 29, 2007). "Local Politics, Web Money". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Brothers Reconnect Using Video Blogging". NPR.org. January 20, 2008. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Dec 31: Goodbye Brotherhood 2.0" on YouTube. VlogBrothers. December 31, 2007. "vlogbrothers – About". YouTube. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Dean, Michelle (March 13, 2013). "A NOTE ON NERDFIGHTERS". The New Yorker. Retrieved January 18, 2014. Jamal, Zakiya (June 7, 2014). "Meet Esther Earl, the Brave Girl Who Inspired The Fault in Our Stars". People. Retrieved July 21, 2014. Jaworski, Michelle (August 3, 2012). "Nerdfighters come together to celebrate Esther Day". The Daily Dot. Retrieved November 5, 2014. Minzesheimer, Bob (January 27, 2014). "John Green's 'star' tells her story – posthumously". USA Today. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Kligler-Vilenchik, Neta (June 27, 2014). "Nerdfighters: The Online Community Behind the Box-Office Hit". Huffington Post. Retrieved July 21, 2014. Earl, Evangeline (June 12, 2014). "My sister Esther inspired 'The Fault in Our Stars.' The movie is her sequel". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 21, 2014. "John Green Contributes To 'This Star Won't Go Out: The Life and Words of Esther Grace Earl,' Book About Cancer Victim". Huffington Post. March 28, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2014. Machemer, Theresa (November 4, 2019). "Famous Vloggers donate $6.5M to fight maternal mortality". The Hill. Retrieved March 25, 2023. "2022's 'Project for Awesome' Raised $3M for Charity in 48 Hours". Good Good Good. February 27, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Lindquist, David (December 16, 2013). "John Green is fired up for 'Project for Awesome'". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Gutelle, Sam (December 21, 2012). "Vlogbrothers Raise $483,446 With Project For Awesome". TubeFilter. "Project For Awesome 2015". Project for Awesome. Retrieved April 4, 2016. Lulay, Stephanie (December 7, 2009). "I'm with the bandwidth". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Lindquist, David (June 4, 2014). "John Green's online work (and play) yields smart money". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 2, 2022. Lindsay, Kathryn (January 27, 2020). "YouTube's First Big Scandal Was Cancel Culture Done Right — What Happened?". www.refinery29.com. No. Refinery29. Retrieved March 23, 2023. "DFTBA Records – We are so pleased to announce the launch of Hannah ..." DFTBA Records. March 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2016. "CGP Grey is now working with DFTBA Records and he ... – Hank's Tumblr". Hank's Tumblr. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. Lopez, Ricardo (February 5, 2018). "Viacom Acquiring VidCon (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved May 6, 2018. Wilkinson, Amy (June 25, 2016). "John Green recalls once begging brother Hank to stop doing VidCon". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 21, 2018. Green, Hank (December 31, 2009). VidCon Questions Answered. VidCon. YouTube. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Spangler, Todd (February 7, 2018). "Viacom Announces Acquisition of VidCon Internet-Video Conference". Variety. Retrieved May 6, 2018. "What I'm Working On". August 4, 2009. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Zuckerman, Esther (May 6, 2014). "'The Fault in Our Stars' Author John Green on Fandom and His Favorite YA Romances". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Green, John. "Questions about The Fault in Our Stars". John Green Books. Archived from the original on October 5, 2014. "'Star'-Crossed: When Teens With Cancer Fall In Love". NPR. January 28, 2012. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Standiford, Natalie (January 13, 2012). "The Tenacity of Hope". The New York Times. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Gleeson, Sinéad (March 23, 2013). "John Green: 'You have to be honest about the fact that some lives are short'". The Irish Times. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Guy Raz (January 16, 2023). "Complexly: Hank and John Green". How I Built This with Guy Raz (Podcast). Event occurs at 57:56. Retrieved January 17, 2023. Rosen, Rebecca J. (February 25, 2013). "How John Green Wrote a Cancer Book but Not a 'Bullshit Cancer Book'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Ashley Ross, July 23, 2014, Time magazine, New If I Stay Trailer Ups the Romance, Retrieved April 14, 2015, "...focuses on the idea of teenage love being ever-inconvenient...Dutton Publisher Julie Strauss-Gabel edited both books...." Kirch, Claire (June 29, 2011). "YA Author John Green to Sign All First Editions of Next Novel". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Simon, Rachel (January 10, 2022). "9 Ways The Fault in Our Stars Changed the Last Decade of Pop Culture". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2022. Harry, Lou (June 2, 2014). "Author John Green sees earnings boost as movie debut nears". Indianapolis Business Journal. 35 (14). Retrieved November 3, 2022. Cowles, Gregory (January 29, 2012). "Best Sellers – Children's Chapter Books". The New York Times. Carpenter, Susan (January 21, 2012). "John Green's adds to his fan base with 'The Fault in Our Stars'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Minzesheimer, Bob (January 16, 2013). "John and Hank Green rock Carnegie Hall". USA TODAY. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Spalding, Julia (December 31, 2015). "John Green Finally Goes To The Movies!". Indianapolis Monthly. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Busbee, Jay (December 18, 2013). "Author John Green harnesses the power of YouTube for good". Yahoo! News. Reynolds, Simon (June 17, 2014). "Fault in Our Stars: Who is John Green?". Digital Spy. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Grossman, Lev (May 29, 2014). "Behind the Scenes with John Green". Time. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Ford, Rebecca (July 23, 2015). "'Paper Towns' Producers on Keeping Up With 'Twilight' Stars and Making John Green Cry". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Lewis, Andy (May 1, 2014). "'Fault in Our Stars' Author John Green: Why He's 'Freaking Out' About Hollywood Success". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Deutsch, Lindsay (October 8, 2013). ""The Fault In Our Stars Movie" announced release date". USA Today. Retrieved February 13, 2014. Subers, Ray (June 8, 2014). "Weekend Report: 'Stars' Align for 'Fault,' Cruise Misses with 'Edge'". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 13, 2015. Vineyard, Jennifer (April 29, 2014). "Summer Movie Preview 2014: John Green on The Fault in Our Stars and the Magic of Shailene Woodley". Vulture. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Hartsell, Carol (June 24, 2014). "Colbert Wants To Know If John Green Is A Cult Leader". HuffPost. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Miller, Liz Shannon (June 24, 2014). "Watch: Stephen Colbert Calls 'Fault in Our Stars' Author John Green a 'Cult Leader'". IndieWire. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "John Green". Time. April 23, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2014. Swanson, Clare (January 2, 2015). "The Bestselling Books of 2014". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Chang, Justin (July 4, 2015). "Film Review: 'Paper Towns'". Variety. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Lewis, Andy (August 21, 2015). "John Green Promotes 24-Year-Old "Virtual Assistant" to Production Partner". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr (July 21, 2015). "Author John Green Seals First-Look Deal With Fox 2000". Deadline. Retrieved April 8, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr (March 31, 2016). "'Fault In Our Stars' Author John Green Plots British Soccer Pic On AFC Wimbledon". Deadline. Retrieved April 8, 2017. McNary, Dave (March 31, 2016). "John Green Producing British Soccer Movie". Variety. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Galuppo, Mia (March 31, 2016). "John Green Producing AFC Wimbledon Movie for Fox 2000". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Cawley, Richard (May 21, 2021). ""I'm a bloke who has written an AFC Wimbledon book" – Erik Samuelson downplays efforts put into All Together Nowl". South London News. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Zipkin, Nina (November 7, 2018). "The Simple Question the Producers of the Wildly Popular 'Crash Course' Ask Themselves When Creating Content". Entrepreneur. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Gutelle, Sam (October 16, 2012). "Barack Obama Watches The Vlogbrothers". Tubefilter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012. Kirch, Claire (May 19, 2015). "John Green to Crash Course Fans: 'Read Your Boring Textbooks'". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Guthmann, Andrea; Cseke, Bianca (February 18, 2022). "Author John Green reflects on humanity by rating everything from Monopoly to hot dog stands". WBEZ Chicago. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Pham, Alex. "Patreon Acquires Subbable, Aligning the YouTube Stars". Forbes. Retrieved May 21, 2016. Buhr, Sarah. "Patreon Acquires Artist Subscription Competitor Subbable". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 21, 2016. Gutelle, Sam (July 22, 2013). "Vlogbrothers Launch Subbable, A 'Pay What You Want' Video Platform". Tubefilter. Retrieved May 21, 2016. Gutelle, Sam (August 1, 2013). "John & Hank Green's Subbable Already Has $30K In Monthly Subscriptions". Tubefilter. Retrieved May 21, 2016. Reid, Calvin (March 19, 2015). "Patreon Acquires Subbable, John and Hank Green's Crowdfunding Venture". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Wurst, Emily (September 28, 2022). "Pizzamas: How a Bad Mustache Became an Annual Fundraiser & Community Tradition". Good Good Good. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Gutelle, Sam (April 3, 2013). "'Mental Floss' Is Yet Another Vlogbrothers Channel You Should Watch". Tubefilter. Retrieved October 6, 2022. English, Jason (January 31, 2018). "Introducing 'Scatterbrained,' Our New Show on YouTube". Mental Floss. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Scatterbrained. Collins. October 13, 2009. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-06-088250-1. Retrieved April 2, 2021. Higgins, Chris (February 11, 2013). "11 Mental Floss Contributors Who Wrote Great Books". Mental Floss, LLC. Retrieved November 26, 2014. Peter Houston (May 11, 2021). "Mental Floss EIC Erin McCarthy on the title's 20-year mission to make readers smarter". Media Voices Podcast (Podcast). Retrieved October 13, 2022. Then we also took over the YouTube channel, which we had worked on in partnership with John and Hank Green's team, brought that production in-house. – Erin McCarthy Harry, Lou (February 1, 2014). "2014 Forty Under 40: Sarah Urist Green". Indianapolis Business Journal. Retrieved October 31, 2015. Lindquist, David (February 17, 2014). "Will you accept Sarah Urist Green's 'Art Assignment'?". Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 31, 2015. "PBS Digital Studios Announces New Collaboration with YouTube Star and Best-Selling Author John Green". September 24, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Robertson, Lindsay (September 24, 2013). "Interview: Sarah and John Green Talk About Their New Web Series 'The Art Assignment'". Tribeca. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Johnson, Steve (September 11, 2019). "How to reach people with poetry? 'Fault in Our Stars' author John Green, Chicago Poetry Foundation are trying YouTube". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "Poetry Foundation and Complexly announce new Ours Poetica Co-Curators". August 1, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Locker, Melissa (November 8, 2018). "Exclusive: John and Hank Green have a slate of podcasts coming to WNYC Studios". Fast Company. Archived from the original on August 2, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Bavender, Chris (March 2, 2020). "Dear Hank and John show set • Current Publishing". Retrieved December 16, 2021. Lindquist, David (April 6, 2016). "Soccer, auto racing and John Green's sporting side". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Owen, Lindsey (September 3, 2009). "Recession-resistant jobs". Missoula Independent. Archived from the original on August 8, 2010. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Green, Hank. "Changing Our Business a Bit". Vlogbrothers. YouTube. Retrieved March 12, 2018. Patel, Nilay (August 2, 2022). "Why Hank Green can't quit YouTube for TikTok". The Verge. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Erickson, David (December 18, 2018). "'A show about life': Missoula science communicators produce PBS show 'Eons'". missoulian.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. "About Us – Complexly". Complexly.com. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "Bestselling Author John Green to Deliver Commencement Address". Butler Newsroom. April 5, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2022. "John Green, 2013". NPR.org. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Carter, Allison (May 22, 2016). "John Green gives Mr. Rogers-inspired commencement speech". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Lee, Emily (May 15, 2020). "John Green Encourages 2020 Grads To Pursue Empathy Despite The Circumstances In Commencement Podcast". iHeart. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "The One Hundred Eighty-Eighth Commencement" (PDF). Kenyon.edu. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Bruce-Lockhart, Anna (January 20, 2016). "John Green on creativity, mental illness and economics". World Economic Forum. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Justice, Jessilyn (January 28, 2016). "Best-Selling Author Drops Faith Bombshell With Bible Tweet". Charisma News. Retrieved January 29, 2016. In a Twitter series advocating for refugee support, Green tweeted "And for those of you who share my faith, Jesus is awfully unambiguous about the poor, shelterless, and imprisoned," with a link to Matthew 25. Lindquist, David (March 8, 2016). "John Green cites 'empathy gap' after meeting refugees". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Green, John (September 6, 2021). "It's dehumanising to deprive refugees of an education | John Green". The Independent. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Green, John (November 16, 2014). "No. I'm trying to write. The thing I am trying to write has no title and will not come out next year". Tumblr. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Lindquist, David (November 9, 2017). "Here are 2 John Green books you'll never read". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Dwyer, Kate (September 14, 2015). "John Green Is Taking a Social Media Break For His New Book — and Mental Health". Teen Vogue. Retrieved March 23, 2023. McCluskey, Megan (October 12, 2017). "John Green on Mental Illness and Writing a Book That Mirrors His Own Life". Time. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Green, John. "My Body Is a Broken Temple". YouTube. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Briones, Isis (September 21, 2016). "The Fault in Our Stars Author John Green May No Longer Publish Books". Vogue. Retrieved September 23, 2016. Lee Lenker, Maureen (June 22, 2017). "John Green's next novel is coming in October". Entertainment Weekly. "Young Adult Hardcover Books – Best Sellers – October 29, 2017". The New York Times. October 10, 2017. Archived from the original on November 21, 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2018. Rampelli, Melissa (March 7, 2023). "Growing Up With Anxiety and OCD in "Turtles All the Way Down" | Psychology Today". www.psychologytoday.com. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Senior, Jennifer (October 10, 2017). "In John Green's 'Turtles All the Way Down,' a Teenager's Mind Is at War With Itself". The New York Times. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "10 things you need to know about John Green's Turtles All the Way Down". Penguin.co.uk. Penguin Books Ltd. June 22, 2017. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved June 22, 2017. Lindquist, David (June 18, 2017). "John Green returns to high school in upcoming novel". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 12, 2022. Puang, Serena (May 18, 2021). "6 things to know about John Green's newest book". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on October 2, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Lindquist, David (October 20, 2017). "John Green 'Turtles' book tour balances anxiety, laughs". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Lindquist, David (May 4, 2018). "5 insights from WFYI's Andrew Luck-John Green event, including the QB's anxious thoughts". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Lindquist, David. "John Green's 'Anthropocene Reviewed' podcast critiques the good, bad and fatal". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 9, 2021. Milliot, Jim (May 28, 2021). "Print Book Sales Rose 2.3% Last Week". PublishersWeekly.com. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "Hardcover Nonfiction Books – Best Sellers – Books – The New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021. "Hardcover Nonfiction Books – Best Sellers – Books – Aug. 8, 2021 – The New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Rebolini, Arianna. "Check Out The Cover Of John Green's Debut Essay Collection". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Nelson, Samantha. "The Anthropocene Reviewed appraises everything from plagues to Dr Pepper". AV Club. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Tuttle, Kate. "Author John Green explores the human experience through five-star reviews – The Boston Globe". BostonGlobe.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Frank, Adam. "Author John Green Explores How To Live In Uncertainty In 'The Anthropocene Reviewed'". NPR.org. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Pentland, Courtney (August 1, 2021). "The Anthropocene Reviewed: Essays on a Human-Centered Planet". Library Journal. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Green, John. "I did it!". YouTube.com. Vlogbrothers. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Green, John. "Icelandic Hot Dog Stand and Signing Your Name 250,000 Times". The Anthropocene Reviewed – Spotify. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Green, John. "It's My Birthday. I Gave Myself This Video". YouTube. Vlogbrothers. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. Green, John. "The Anthropocene Reviewed Podcast". NPR. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "Announcing The Anthropocene Reviewed Tour". John Green. April 29, 2021. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Garrett, Erin (April 14, 2022). ""The Anthropocene Reviewed" Selected as 2022 Common Read at Ole Miss". The Local Voice. Retrieved May 12, 2022. Smith, Edwin B. (August 25, 2022). "Author John Green Brings Hope for Humanity to Fall Convocation". Ole Miss News. Retrieved September 1, 2022. Jones, Will (August 29, 2022). "John Green provides words of wisdom at 2022 Ole Miss Convocation". The Daily Mississippian. Retrieved September 1, 2022. Lyons, Margaret (October 17, 2019). "Review: 'Looking For Alaska' but Finding Talky Teens". The New York Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. "Movie Questions". JohnGreenBooks.com. June 2010. Archived from the original on June 22, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013. Cowles, Gregory (July 29, 2012). "Best Sellers – Children's Paperback Books". The New York Times. Andreeva, Nellie (May 10, 2018). "Hulu Ordering 'Looking For Alaska' Limited Series From Josh Schwartz Based On John Green's Novel From Paramount TV". deadline.com. McHenry, Jackson (October 30, 2018). "The John Green Looking for Alaska Adaptation Has Finally Cast Its Stars". Vulture. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Framke, Caroline (October 15, 2019). "TV Review: 'Looking for Alaska'". Variety. Retrieved October 24, 2019. VanArendonk, Kathryn (October 8, 2019). "Looking for Alaska Is the Rare Adaptation That Improves on the Original". Vulture. Retrieved July 16, 2022. "Looking for Alaska: Season 1". Metacritic. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Looking for Alaska: Season 1 (2019)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Lindquist, David. "John Green's 'The Fault in Our Stars' is a play for the first time, and it's close to home". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Wiseman, Andreas (December 14, 2018). "Netflix Boards Christmas Rom-Com 'Let It Snow' From 'The Fault In Our Stars' Scribe & 'Planet Of The Apes' Producer". deadline.com. Corbett, Sue (November 7, 2019). "Q & A with Maureen Johnson". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "Let It Snow Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved October 1, 2020. "The Fault in Our Stars' Hindi Adaptation Titled Kizie Aur Manny". CNN-News18. July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. "'The Fault In Our Stars' Hindi remake 'Kizie Aur Manny' features a Rajinikanth twist". The Economic Times. July 9, 2018. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. "Dil Bechara, Sushant Singh Rajput's last film, to premiere on Disney+ Hotstar on 24 July". Firstpost. June 25, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. "Sushant Singh Rajput's Dil Bechara Postponed to 2020, Likely to Release on OTT". November 13, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2019. "The Fault In Our Stars remake: Sushant Singh Rajput, debutante Sanjana Sanghi in Mukesh Chhabra's directorial debut". Firstpost. March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Brzeski, Patrick (January 18, 2021). "China Box Office: 'A Little Red Flower' Wins Another Quiet Weekend". The Hollywood Reporter. Brzeski, Patrick; Masters, Kim (January 13, 2021). "Chinese Blockbuster's Similarity to Fox's Fault In Our Stars Ignites Debate Over Derivative Work (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Yau, Elaine (January 12, 2021). "New Jackson Yee movie A Little Red Flower is China's first box office hit of 2021 – how the terminal romance story won over audiences". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Ramos, Dino-Day (December 5, 2017). "Fox 2000 Options John Green's 'Turtles All The Way Down'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 3, 2018. Lindquist, David (May 3, 2018). "5 insights from WFYI's Andrew Luck-John Green event, including the QB's anxious thoughts". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved August 3, 2018. McNary, Dave (January 11, 2019). "Hannah Marks to Direct 'Turtles All the Way Down' Movie for Fox". Variety. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Kit, Borys (March 9, 2022). "Isabela Merced to Star in John Green's 'Turtles All the Way Down' for New Line, HBO Max (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Ramos, Dino-Ray (December 6, 2017). "Fox 2000 Options John Green's 'Turtles All The Way Down'". Deadline. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Previous Grants | Foundation to Decrease Worldsuck". www.fightworldsuck.org. Retrieved September 29, 2022. "PIH Chosen as Designated Charity by Project for Awesome 2016". www.pih.org (Press release). December 8, 2016. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Lindquist, David (December 9, 2016). "New John Green writing among Project for Awesome perks". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Maughan, Shannon (October 25, 2018). "A New Book Club from John Green and Rosianna Halse Rojas". Publishers Weekly. Publishers Weekly. Retrieved January 9, 2020. "About Life's Library – Free, Online Discussion Groups". Life's Library Book Club. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2020. "Life's Library on Instagram". Machemer, Theresa (November 4, 2019). "Famous Vloggers donate $6.5M to fight maternal mortality". The Hill. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Lindquist, David (October 23, 2019). "John Green and Hank Green want to raise $25 million to address Sierra Leone health crisis". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 29, 2022. "VlogBrothers Support Maternal Health in Sierra Leone". www.pih.org. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Rafford, Claire (March 25, 2022). "John and Hank Green's Awesome Coffee Club to help fight maternal mortality in Sierra Leone". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved March 25, 2022. Lindquist, David. "'Vlogbrothers' John and Hank Green plan tour stop in Carmel". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 11, 2021. "CANCELED: Dear Hank and John: Minotour 2020 in Ann Arbor, MI". Hank and John. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2021. Green, John (February 21, 2022). "Opinion | How Paul Farmer helped save the lives of millions of people". Washington Post. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Hale, James (October 31, 2022). "Hank and John Green reopen their sock-of-the-month club". Tubefilter. Retrieved November 2, 2022. Baker, Kamrin (April 26, 2023). "Sun Basin Soap: Hank & John Green Launch New Charity Project". Good Good Good. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Baker, Kamrin (August 28, 2023). "Good Store: Hank & John Green Launch New Charity Shop". Good Good Good. Retrieved September 28, 2023. Lindquist, David (December 22, 2016). "John Green working on new chapter of health, fitness". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Gutelle, Sam (September 14, 2016). "John Green Will Get Fit On A New YouTube Channel Called '100 Days'". Tubefilter. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Lindquist, David (December 11, 2018). "Why you won't see John Green on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram for at least 12 months". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Bahr, Sarah (January 13, 2019). "John Green swore off social media for a year. One month in, here are five things he's learned". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Green, John (January 23, 2019). "Opinion | I decided to take a year off from social media. Here's what I've learned so far.I decided to take a year off from social media. Here's what I've learned so far". Washington Post. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "John Green's TikTok". TikTok. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Bain, Elissa (June 23, 2020). "John Green is on TikTok – bestselling author and YouTube creator joins social media app!". HITC. Retrieved March 19, 2022. Squires, Bethy (September 11, 2022). "John Green: Don't Ban My Book at My Old School". Vulture. Retrieved September 22, 2022. De Loera, Carlos (December 17, 2022). "World Cup: For author John Green, TikToks are another way to show his love of soccer". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Porterfield, Carlie (December 12, 2022). "John Green Leaves Twitter: These Are All The Celebrities Departing After Elon Musk's Takeover". Forbes. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Spangler, Todd (February 27, 2019). "Michelle Obama Joins YouTube's Book Panel Discussion Special". Variety. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Lindquist, David (April 5, 2019). "John Green will talk 'Harry Potter' at live podcast event". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 23, 2022. "Author John Green kicks off Noble Lecture series". Harvard Gazette. September 29, 2022. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Rajeev, Rohan (October 16, 2022). "John Green Talks Climate Change and the Apocalypse at Memorial Church | News | The Harvard Crimson". www.thecrimson.com. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Leadership". PIH.org. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Mineo, Liz (October 18, 2022). "YA star John Green seeks co-authors for climate story that averts disaster". Harvard Gazette. Retrieved November 2, 2022. "PIH Annual Report 2022" (PDF). PIH.org. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Robertson, Rachael (July 14, 2023). "After Pushback, J&J Allows Generics of Its TB Drug". MedPageToday. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Green, John (May 16, 2023). "Opinion | Why is a curable disease still allowed to kill millions?". Washington Post. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Nolen, Stephanie; Gormalova, Natalija (November 6, 2023). "Ending TB Is Within Reach — So Why Are Millions Still Dying?". The New York Times. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Tu, Lucy (August 14, 2023). "How Advocates Pushed Big Pharma to Cut Tuberculosis Drug Prices". Scientific American. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Silverman, Abdullahi Tsanni, Jason Mast, Ed (July 14, 2023). "J&J expands global access to TB drug as popular novelist joins advocacy campaign". STAT. Retrieved July 17, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Johnson & Johnson shares tuberculosis drug after novelist's campaign". The Independent. July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Silverman, Lizzy Lawrence, Ed (September 14, 2023). "Novelist John Green launches attack on Cepheid over the price of its TB test". STAT. Retrieved September 15, 2023.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Mahdavi, Darius (September 19, 2023). "'Pure price-gouging': Advocates celebrate price drop of critical TB test but say Big Pharma needs to do more". CBC. Retrieved September 20, 2023. "Tuberculosis Could Be the Next Pandemic. Is the World Ready?". Time. September 26, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Lindquist, Dave (February 2, 2024). "Author John Green's current chapter is focused on a healthier human race". Indianapolis Business Journal. Retrieved March 5, 2024. MacPhail, Katherine (March 16, 2024). "The latest twist in John Green's anti-tuberculosis story: working with governments". STAT. Retrieved March 18, 2024. "USAID Secures $18 Million in New Funding to Accelerate Efforts to End Tuberculosis". U.S. Agency for International Development. March 14, 2024. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Baker, Kamrin (March 14, 2024). "John Green announces $1M annual donation to fight his (least) favorite disease". Good Good Good. Retrieved March 18, 2024. "2024 CDC U.S. TB Elimination Champions". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. March 15, 2024. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Green, John (March 21, 2024). "Opinion The deadliest infectious disease isn't a science problem. It's a money problem". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "Partnership between ASU, YouTube, Crash Course expands to offer courses for college credit". ASU News. January 24, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Stokel-Walker, Chris (January 25, 2023). "Vloggers Hank And John Green Want You To Take College Courses On YouTube". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved January 26, 2023. Tolentino, Daysia (January 25, 2023). "Hank and John Green launch program that allows people to earn college credit with YouTube courses". NBC News. Retrieved January 26, 2023. McCarthy, Lauren (May 20, 2023). "Hank Green, Novelist and YouTube Star, Announces He Has Cancer". The New York Times. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Green, John. "Reflections from a Terrible CEO". YouTube. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Green, John. "Breaking News: CEO Demoted". YouTube. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Spangler, Todd (October 17, 2023). "Hank and John Green's YouTube Studio Complexly Taps Julie Walsh Smith as Acting CEO, Gabriel Blanco as First Content Chief". Variety. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Young Adult Paperback Books – Best Sellers- Aug. 30, 2015". The New York Times. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Standiford, Natalie (January 15, 2012). "The Tenacity of Hope". The New York Times. Retrieved January 17, 2012. Grossman, Lev (December 4, 2012). "The Fault in Our Stars, John Green | Top 10 Everything: Arts & Entertainment". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Wertheim, Jon (February 2, 2020). "Author John Green: Reaching young adults and dealing with mental illness". CBS News. Retrieved October 7, 2022. Jacobs, A. J. (May 10, 2013). "Uneven Field". The New York Times. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Vineyard, Jennifer (June 5, 2014). "Who Is The Fault in Our Stars Author John Green, and Why Do So Many People Love Him?". Vulture. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Fitzpatrick, Anna (June 4, 2014). "Intro to Nerdfighters 101: A John Green Primer". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 7, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2022. Romano, Aja (February 20, 2014). "Young Adult publishing and the John Green effect". The Daily Dot. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Greco, Patti (May 29, 2014). "'Fault In Our Stars' Author John Green Has a 'Badass Feminist Mom'". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Grady, Constance (October 10, 2017). "John Green's new book is not a quirky sad romance. It's an existential teenage scream". Vox. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Haig, Matt (October 10, 2017). "Turtles All the Way Down by John Green review – a new modern classic". the Guardian. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Neumyer, Scott (May 18, 2021). "John Green Is Finally Writing for Himself". Shondaland. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Rabin, Nathan (January 25, 2007). "My Year Of Flops, Case File 1: Elizabethtown: The Bataan Death March of Whimsy". The A.V. Club. Retrieved January 5, 2010. Bruno, Audrey (May 25, 2015). "John Green on What He Would Change About His Novels If He Had the Chance". Vulture. Retrieved June 22, 2015. "John Green Lashes Out Against 'Accusations of Pedophilia'". People. June 12, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Malone, Clare; Thomson-Deveaux, Amelia (July–August 2014). "In the outsiders' club: the Fault in Our Stars writer John Green has built an avid Internet following with pep talks on how to be good". The American Prospect. 25 (4). Sarappo, Emma (February 1, 2022). "Read the Books That Schools Want to Ban". The Atlantic. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Coles, Amy (April 26, 2016). "John Green fights back against banning of Looking for Alaska". the Guardian. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Schaub, Michael (September 29, 2014). "John Green's 'The Fault in Our Stars' banned in Riverside". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Turco, Rebecca (September 8, 2022). "Orange County School Board candidates weigh in on library book choice". mynews13.com. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Michallon, Clémence (September 12, 2022). "John Green speaks out against effort to ban his book in his old school district". The Independent. Retrieved September 22, 2022. Fradette, Rachel (August 9, 2023). "'Ludicrous': John Green's 'Fault in Our Stars' pulled from young adult shelf in HamCo". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Tolentino, Daysia (August 10, 2023). "John Green criticizes public library for removing his novel from young adult section". NBC News. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Christy, Matt (August 10, 2023). "'You won't catch me alive or dead in Fishers': John Green quote slamming Hamilton East library turned into t-shirt". Fox 59. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Fradette, Rachel (August 31, 2023). "John Green says library controversy over teen books is bad for business, students". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved August 31, 2023. Fradette, Rachel (October 3, 2023). "John Green talks to Indy fans about banned books access and other things close to his heart". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 4, 2023. Gruber-Miller, Stephen (November 30, 2023). "Largest US publisher, bestselling authors sue over Iowa law banning K-12 books with sex acts". The Des Moines Register. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Lindquist, David (September 25, 2014). "John Green tells success story at ExactTarget event". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Eördögh, Fruzsina (December 22, 2011). "Dot 10: The 10 most important people on YouTube in 2011". The Daily Dot. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Young, Jeffrey R. (November 5, 2012). "Welcome to Star Scholar U., Where a Personal Brand Is the Credential". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Jaworski, Michelle (July 10, 2012). "How YouTube is revolutionizing education". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on March 10, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Quinn, Kate (October 30, 2014). "YouTube's educational side". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2014. Green, Hank. "OMG MY BROTHER HAD A BABY". YouTube. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "May 21st: Comment Bashing, Anniversaries and EBO Ladies". Vlogbrothers. May 21, 2007. Retrieved October 31, 2015. Fradette, Rachel (October 28, 2022). "Author John Green could live anywhere. This video explains why Indy is his 'somewhere'". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved November 2, 2022. VanTryon, Matthew (January 3, 2022). "An Atlanta sportswriter ripped 'cold, expensive' Indianapolis. He got roasted — and deserved it". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "John Green". wthr.com. July 14, 2015. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Lindquist, David (July 16, 2015). "Indianapolis shows local love to author John Green". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Boedeker, Hal (July 23, 2015). "John Green Day in Orange County: Hooray!". Orlando Sentinel. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Interview: John Green". Marc McEvoy. The Sydney Morning Herald. July 12, 2009. I was enrolled in divinity school and thought I was going to become a minister – I'm Episcopalian – but I was disavowed of that notion pretty quickly while working at the hospital. Green, John; Green, Hank (August 11, 2015). "010 – When Your Friend Likes Ayn Rand..." Dear Hank and John (Podcast). Event occurs at 19:19. Retrieved October 2, 2015. we got married in a Catholic church Cavin, Curt (February 16, 2016). "Roger Penske, John Green to chair 500 Festival Host Committee". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Cavin, Curt (May 14, 2016). "Author John Green overcomes 'blind panic' to drive pace car". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "John to sponsor Dons kit". July 9, 2014. Hattenstone, Simon (June 14, 2017). "Hashtag United, Wimbly Womblys and the virtual gamers striking it rich". The Guardian. Retrieved October 6, 2022. McConnell, Freddy (January 2, 2014). "Let's Play – the YouTube phenomenon that's bigger than One Direction". The Guardian. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Green, John (2005). Looking for Alaska. New York: Dutton Juvenile. ISBN 9781435249158. Green, John (2006). An Abundance of Katherines. New York, NY: Dutton Books. ISBN 0-525-47688-1. Green, John; Johnson, Maureen; Myracle, Lauren (2008). Let It Snow: Three Holiday Romances. New York: Speak. ISBN 978-0-14-241214-5. Green, John (2008). Paper Towns. New York, New York: Dutton Books. ISBN 978-0-525-47818-8. Green, John; Levithan, David (2010). Will Grayson, Will Grayson. New York: Dutton Juvenile. ISBN 978-0-525-42158-0. Green, John (2012). The Fault in Our Stars. New York: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-47881-2. Green, John (2017). Turtles All the Way Down. New York, NY: Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-55536-0. OCLC 992432937. Green, John (2021). The Anthropocene Reviewed: Essays on a Human-Centered Planet. New York, New York: Dutton Penguin. ISBN 978-0525555216. Hunt, Scott W.; Green, John (2006). Twice Told: Original Stories Inspired by Original Art (1st ed.). New York: Dutton. ISBN 0525468188. Levithan, David; Green, John (2007). 21 Proms. New York. ISBN 978-0439890298.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Black, Holly; Green, John (2009). Geektastic: Stories from the Nerd Herd (First ed.). New York. ISBN 978-0316008099.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) What You Wish For: A Book for Darfur. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 2011. ISBN 9780399254543. Green, John (January 1, 2010). "The Future of Reading: Don't Worry. It Might Be Better than You Think". School Library Journal. 56 (1): 24–28. ISSN 0362-8930. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "Didn't get your chance to get your hands on John Green's Zombie Apocalypse Novella?" Archived April 12, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. EffYeahNerdFighters.com. "John Green's NEW Exclusive Zombie Short Story eBook PRE-ORDER". DFTBA Records LLC. Archived from the original on December 19, 2011. Green, John (August 15, 2012). "I just finally finished THE WAR FOR BANKS ISLAND, the stupid (and very bad) zombie apocalypse story that's six months late". Twitter.com. Retrieved September 16, 2012. Lindquist, David (July 15, 2014). "John Green delivers new story to charity supporters". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Lindquist, David (December 10, 2014). "'Imperial' books among first Project for Awesome perks". The Indianapolis Star. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Earl, Esther; Earl, Lori; Earl, Wayne; Green, John (2014). This Star Won't Go Out: The Life and Words of Esther Grace Earl. New York, New York. ISBN 978-0525426363.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Shamsian, Jacob (August 12, 2014). "Read John Green's introduction to Hannah Hart's 'My Drunk Kitchen'". EW.com. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Cooper, Ilene (October 2019). Golden Rule Deluxe Edition. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 9781419740695. Johnson, Kurt (August 17, 2022). "'At first, I was cautious': Can a short book answer the world's biggest questions?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Yin, Maryann (March 15, 2014). "John Green to Serve as Executive Producer For 'Paper Towns' Film Adaptation". www.adweek.com. Retrieved December 15, 2022. "Malhação conta com participação especial de John Green". Cidades de Papel (in Brazilian Portuguese). July 6, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Falkner, Marshall (April 10, 2018). "Binge Bytes: "My Brother, My Brother and Me"". The Daily Utah Chronicle. Retrieved December 15, 2022. "Looking for Alaska". TVGuide.com. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Perez, Lexy (May 10, 2018). "John Green Celebrates 'Looking for Alaska' Hulu TV Series: "It's Been a Long Thirteen Years"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Evans, Arron (September 15, 2022). "Here's what we learnt from episodes 7 and 8 of Welcome to Wrexham". The Leader. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Playing a 72 Hr Game of Tag Across Europe – Ep 3. Jet Lag: The Game. December 15, 2022. "2006 Printz Award". Young Adult Library Services Association. American Library Association. Retrieved May 15, 2013. "Los Angeles Times Names Book Prize Winners for 2005". Los Angeles Times. April 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "Michael L. Printz Winners and Honor Books". Young Adult Library Association. American Library Association. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved May 15, 2013. "2007 Audie Awards® – APA (en-US)". Audio Publishers Association. Archived from the original on August 31, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "Paper Towns | Awards & Grants". ala.org. American Library Association. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "2009 Audie Awards® – APA (en-US)". Audio Publishers Association. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "Margos Spuren". Bayerische Buchpreis (in German). Bayerischen Staatsministerium für Wirtschaft und Medien, Energie und Technologie. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2014. "Will Grayson, Will Grayson | Awards & Grants – Odyssey". Ala.org. American Library Association. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "Will Grayson, Will Grayson | Awards & Grants – Stonewall". ala.org. American Library Association. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "Awards: Puddly and Indie Lit Winners". Shelf Awareness. February 8, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "The Shorty Awards – Honoring the best of Twitter and social media". 3rd.shortyawards.com. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "2011 Audie Awards® – APA (en-US)". Audio Publishers Association. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Johnson, Steve (May 18, 2012). "Author John Green wins Tribune's Young Adult Literary Prize". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "2012 Honorees". Indiana Authors Awards. Retrieved March 24, 2023. "ABA Indies Choice, E.B. White Winners Announced". Shelf Awareness. April 19, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Juris, Carolyn (May 16, 2013). "In Pictures: The 2013 Children's Choice Book Awards". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved March 23, 2023. "2013 Audie Awards® – APA (en-US)". Audio Publishers Association. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Pauli, Michelle (August 11, 2013). "US-UK showdown in Guardian children's fiction prize shortlist". The Guardian. Retrieved October 19, 2022. "The Shorty Awards – Honoring the best of social media". Short Awards. June 9, 2016. Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Ngak, Chenda (April 9, 2013). "Shorty Awards 2013 honors Michelle Obama, Jimmy Kimmel". CBS News. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Kellogg, Carolyn (April 11, 2014). "Jacket Copy: The winners of the Los Angeles Times Book Prizes are ..." LA Times. Retrieved April 14, 2014. "Awards: Ezra Jack Keats Winners; L.A. Times Book Finalists". Shelf Awareness. February 20, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Wickman, Kase (July 21, 2014). "John Green To Be Honored With 'The Visionary Award' At This Year's Fandom Awards". MTV. Retrieved August 7, 2014. "Awards: Wales Book of the Year; Queen of Teen". Shelf Awareness. July 15, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "PREMIADOS LIBRO DE ORO Y LEGIÓN DEL LIBRO 2014". Cámara Uruguaya del Libro (in Spanish). December 11, 2014. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Nickelodeon Announces Nominations for the '28th Annual Kids' Choice Awards'". Zap2it. February 20, 2015. Archived from the original on February 21, 2015. Retrieved February 21, 2015. "YRCA Three Division Winners 2011–2022". Pacific Northwest Library Association. March 5, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "And the winners of the 7th Annual Shorty Awards are..." Shorty Awards Blog. April 20, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "Mental Floss' John Green". Webby Awards. Retrieved January 24, 2016. "Webby Gallery + Index". Webby Awards. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "Author wins foundation award". The Herald-Times. August 25, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "Turtles All the Way Down | Awards & Grants". www.ala.org. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "Webby Gallery + Index". Webby Awards. Retrieved October 11, 2022. Roberts, Mary (October 16, 2020). "Arts Commission Names Governor's Arts Award Winners". Inside INdiana Business. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. "2022 Winners". Reference & User Services Association (RUSA). October 17, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. "Announcing the Goodreads Choice Winner in Best Nonfiction!". Goodreads. Retrieved December 9, 2021. Media related to John Green at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to John Green at Wikiquote