The Campbell Islands (or Campbell Island Group) are a group of subantarctic islands, belonging to New Zealand. They lie about 600 km south of Stewart Island. The islands have a total area of 113 km2 (44 sq mi), consisting of one big island, Campbell Island, and several small islets, notably Dent Island, Isle de Jeanette Marie, Folly Island (or Folly Islands), Jacquemart Island, and Monowai Island (also known as Lion Rock). Ecologically, they are part of the Antipodes Subantarctic Islands tundra ecoregion. The islands are one of five subantarctic island groups collectively designated as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The islands are relatively flat; due to tectonic pressure, however, there are mountains in the centre of each island. A sea stack at the southern tip of Jacquemart Island is – with the exception of the country's Antarctic claims – New Zealand's southernmost point. The following table includes named islands according to Land Information New Zealand. Since its discovery in 1810, the flora and fauna have been under threat from mammals introduced by humans. Cats (Felis catus) and Norway rats (Rattus novegicus) prey on native birds, and much of the vegetation was destroyed by sheep (Ovis aries) and cattle (Bos taurus). Restoration of the island began in 1970 with the removal of the feral cattle and sheep; subsequently the island's vegetation recovered, becoming denser. In 2001, four helicopters, under instruction from the New Zealand Department of Conservation (DOC) spread 120 tonnes of rodenticide-laced bait across the island over one month. Repeated monitoring has found no signs of rats since. This operation became a template for rat eradication on other islands around the world. The Campbell Islands have been identified as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because of its significance as a breeding site for several species of seabirds, as well as the endemic Campbell teal and Campbell snipe. The seabirds are southern rockhopper and yellow-eyed penguins, Antipodean, southern royal, light-mantled, black-browed, Campbell and grey-headed albatrosses, northern giant and white-chinned petrels, and the Campbell shag. Islands portal Desert island List of Antarctic and subantarctic islands List of islands List of islands of New Zealand New Zealand Subantarctic Islands "Campbell Island". doc.govt.nz. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "New Zealand Sub-Antarctic Islands". UNESCO. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "NZ Primary Parcels". linz.govt.nz. Retrieved 7 February 2024. BirdLife International. (2012). Important Bird Areas factsheet: Campbell Island (and outliers). Downloaded from "BirdLife International - conserving the world's birds". Archived from the original on 10 July 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2013. on 22 January 2012. Map of the Campbell Islands with several surrounding islets, including Jacquemart Island lying south of the main island and Dent island lying northwest of the main island