Viktor An (Russian: Виктор Ан; born Ahn Hyun-soo (Korean: 안현수) on November 23, 1985), is a South Korean-born Russian short-track speed skating coach and retired short-track speed skater. With a total of eight Olympic medals, six gold and two bronze, he is the only short track speed skater in Olympic history to win gold in every distance, and the first to win a medal in every distance at a single Games. He has the most Olympic gold medals in the sport, three of which he won in the 2006 Winter Olympics and the other three in the 2014 Winter Olympics. Considered to be the greatest short track speed skater of all time, he is a six-time overall World champion (2003-2007, 2014), two-time overall World Cup winner (2003–04, 2005–06), and the 2014 European champion. He holds the most overall titles at the World Short Track Speed Skating Championships, and is the only male short track skater to win five consecutive world titles. In 2008, Ahn suffered a knee injury and could not regain his health by the time the national qualifiers for Vancouver 2010 came around. His recovery being slow and his South Korean local team dissolved in 2010, Ahn, aiming for his second Olympics, became a Russian citizen the next year and began racing for the Russian team. After winning gold in Sochi, Ahn explained his reasons for joining the Russian team saying, "I wanted to train in the best possible environment and I proved my decision was not wrong." As expected, a gold-winning athlete leaving the national team caused public uproar in South Korea. However, it was aimed not at Ahn, but at the country's skating union. Most South Korean fans in a poll said they understood his decision. Ahn continued his skating career in his adopted nation until 2019 and declared his retirement in April 2020. In 2023, Ahn returned to Korea as a short track leader. Ahn returned to South Korea and applied to be a coach for Seongnam City's short track speed skating team, despite having renounced his South Korean citizenship when becoming Russian. However, since his change in 2014 he had been increasingly criticized for his work in Russia amid the Russo-Ukrainian War and his coaching position in the Chinese team at the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing. Some Korean coaches have formed The Korea Skating Coaches' Union and urged "Seongnam City to appoint a coach that meets the public eye level" and criticized Ahn that he "lied during the naturalization process and betrayed his country". and He was criticized by the public for betraying his country by transferring Korean sports skills to Russia and China. Ahn was eventually denied the coaching position due to significant public opposition. After being denied his position as Seongnam City Hall coach due to strong public opposition, Ahn explained the controversy he knew about his loss of nationality in advance and receives a full Olympic medal pension prior to Russian naturalization. he said: "I donated every pension I had received prior to naturalization". According to his explanation and a Korean ice skating official mentioned in Chosun Ilbo shortly thereafter, the entire lump sum pension he received was spent on rehabilitating "children who needed heart surgery and Korean junior players". And he make his first start as a Korean Sports leader, being named as a coach in the 2023-2024 national team trials at the request of his juniors. The Korea Skating Union officially announced this through Yonhap News Agency, and the Korean media reported it collectively. Ahn began skating in 1993 in his first year of primary school. The first time he watched the sport on television was during the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer where one of his heroes, Chae Ji-hoon, took gold in the 500 m and silver in the 1000 m for South Korea. Incidentally, these were the Games where Russia achieved a national record of 11 Olympic golds, a feat that he himself would help to repeat twenty years later. His coach, Kim Ki-hoon, was a three-time Olympic gold medalist who scouted Ahn and continued to train him. He trained ten hours every day from techniques, speed, and endurance to video analysis. Ahn made his international debut at the World Junior Short Track Speed Skating Championships in 2002. Finishing first in the 1500 m, 1000 m, and 5000 m relay events, he claimed the overall title. Ahn then participated in the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City. He made the finals for the 1000 m event but returned home without a medal, after a controversial fall involving Apolo Ohno, Li Jiajun, and Mathieu Turcotte that allowed Australian Steve Bradbury to sweep the gold medal. Ahn finished in fourth place, behind Ohno and Turcotte. After the 2002 Olympics, Ahn finished second to Kim Dong-sung at his first senior-level world championship competition the same year, almost duplicating Kim's feat of winning both the Junior and Senior World Championship titles in 1997. Ahn began dominating the sport from the 2002–2003 season. As well as claiming four overall and 1500 m World Championship titles in a row between 2003 and 2006, Ahn excelled himself at 1000 m and 3000 m during that period and also starred with the Republic of Korea's 5000 m relay team. In all, he won a total of 23 medals in that prolific spell, and took the 2004 and 2006 World Cup titles for good measure. He also set the world records for the 1500 m in 2003 at World Cup #2 in Marquette and the 3000 m at World Cup #4 in Beijing, which he held for the following eight years. South Korea has produced many outstanding short track speed skaters and is highly competitive in selecting the national team. Their key method of selecting players is to automatically select the best players in advance according to the comprehensive podium rankings of the World Championships. However, there is a system that has disappeared after much controversy and factional fight. It was the 'recommendation system'. South Korea's elite sports system was strictly a top-down relationship between leaders and athletes. and the factions were formed according to the leaders and the factions of the players were also determined by their universities and leaders. And the players was disadvantaged if he disobeyed the instructions from the factional leader. Viktor Ahn is one of these representative players. Ahn graduated from Korea National Sport University. His leaders were Kim Ki-hoon, a three-time Olympic champion, and Jun Myung-kyu, former vice president of the Korea Skating Union who was also the head coach of the Korean short track speed skating team from 1987 to 2002. Ahn as a junior, consistently excelled in Korea's domestic competitions and captured the Overall title at the Junior World Championships. Though he initially didn't participate in the national team trial, he was subsequently recommended to join the 2002 national team as a substitute for an injured player. This recommendation came from Park Seong-in, the president of the Korea Skating Union, and Yoo Tae-wook, the federation's director. After observing Ahn's stellar performance at the Junior World Championships, head coach Jun Myung-kyu chose him for the Olympic team. In a bold move, Jun opted for the 16-year-old, who lacked international experience, to compete in the 1000 m individual event, a decision that faced opposition from the Korea Skating Union and others. The 2002 Olympics was his Senior international debut. In addition to Ahn, many athletes and leaders were recommended by the Korea Skating Union. They were Chae Ji-hoon, Chun Lee-kyung, Kim So-hee, Choi Min-kyung Ko Gi-hyun, Lee Ho-suk, and Choi Eun-kyung, and also included were Kim Dong-sung and Kim Sun-tae, who were injured and failed to participate in the national team trials. This referral system was used to discover talented players and give opportunities to injured players. However, there were players who were alienated, which led to conflict. In 2006, the recommendation system for selection of representative players of the Korea Skating Union disappeared from the national team trials as the conflict of factional fighting was exposed to the public. Factional fight in south Korean ice skating was allegedly mentioned as a form of Korea National Sport University (KNSU) and non-Korea National Sport University. But it was far more complicated inside. The power struggle of first-generation ice skating leaders, which started in the 1990s, changed form and influenced leaders, their direct disciples and athletes and changed their relationship. In 2002, when Ahn became a member of the national team, it was the time when Korean society was noisy due to the corruption of the ice skating world. Athletes and parents, who were University entrance students, gave money to professors who were influential in the ice skating world, and the professor received it. And the person who reported the case and accused his senior of corruption is Jun Myung-Kyu who becomes professor at the Korea National Sport University. In June 2003, Ahn decided to enter the Korea National Sport University in spite of exceptional conditions, including the guarantee of professor posts in other universities. The recommendation system that selected Ahn for the national team in 2002 had been in place since 1995, even before Ahn's inclusion. but in the process, At 16, he became the emblematic figure of the Korea National Sport University and professor Jun. And those on the other side accused 16-year-old Ahn of being responsible for factional conflicts in Korea's skating world. In 2003-2004, when Ahn's heyday began, conflicts in the ice skating world and the tyranny of leaders were serious. In the national team Jun Myung-kyu stepped down from his post due to poor performance at the 2002 Salt Lake Olympics, and Olympic medalists Kim Ki-hoon took over the men's national team, but in 2004, Kim was forced to resign due to the controversy over forcing his athletes to wear skates made by the family-run skating company. In November 2004, Choi Eun-kyung, Byun Chun-sa etc six women's team members left the athletes' village due to the coach's habitual beating scandal. The coaches for the women's team have all been replaced. Two months later, Ahn was assaulted at the Winter Universiade in January 2005. The men's team coach Yoon had to resign after the World Team Championships in March due to controversy over match-fixing and assault allegations raised at the time. Kim Ki-hoon was reelected coach of the men's team for the Turin 2006 Olympics instead of Yoon Jae-Myung. However, in April 2005, seven other non-Korea National Sport University athletes, with the exception of Ahn Hyun-soo, declined to enter the athletes' village. They insisted, The main person is fixed. We can't trust a coach who favours a specific player. At the end of the day, Kim Ki-hoon resigns, saying, "I can't teach these players anymore." Kim Ki-hoon was professor Jun's direct disciple. Kim is known to have passed on special know-how skating skills to Ahn. Kim Ki-hoon mentioned in an interview in 2018: "Ahn hyun-soo was really outstanding. Teach him one thing and he really absorbs it in like a sponge. Ahn was not the only one to teach more. I coached everyone on the national team, but Ahn came to see me more often." Ahn was reported to be the victim of senior player Seo Ho-jin's assault at the 2005 Winter Universiade. Though Seo was expelled from the national team and Yoon Jae-myung, head coach for the event, was dismissed on charges of match-fixing, Seo returned to the national team for the 2006 Winter Olympics the next year. Ahn refused to join the national team and take training in 2005 and also confronted with the leaders of the Korea Skating Union. In July 2005, parents and coaches, including Ahn and Choi Eun-kyung, Sung Si-bak held a press conference and exposed coach Yoon Jae-myung's Aiding and abetting assault. It also called for the resignation of all federation leaders and announced its absence from the 2006 Turin Olympics. As a result, coach Yoon's appointment has been canceled. However, the conflict at that time was at its peak. At the height of the conflict, the Korea Skating Union dismissed the national team coach Chun Jae-Su, who had called for the resignation of the entire leadership, accusing him of stirring unrest among parents and athletes. He was subsequently suspended for six months. As a result, Ahn declined to train with the national team. Parents further alleged that there was political pressure exerted by a national assembly member associated with the Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism. This situation led Ahn to train with the women's team instead of the men's, presenting considerable challenges leading up to the 2006 Olympics. Prior to his naturalization in Russia in 2011, Ahn mentioned that during this difficult time, Sung Si-bak and Lee Seung-hoon, who weren't then part of the national team, supported him. The issue came back to the fore after Ahn's victory as a Russian in the 2014 Winter Olympics, as the South Korean public questioned the Korea Skating Union of losing their biggest Olympic star. Regarding the uproar against him, Seo argued that the incident was just a form of discipline from senior to junior, but Ahn revealed in 2015 that he and his junior were hit with helmets on. In 2014, some Korean media outlets criticized that there was a line that went down from Jun Myung-kyu - Kim Ki-hoon - Ahn Hyun-soo and it couldn't just blame the fact that the alienated players who became coaches held Ahn Hyun-soo in check to oppose Jun Myung-kyu, and Ahn Hyun-soo also wanted it or not, he also could not be free from the responsibility of factional fighting. However, in May 2005, The Hankyoreh newspaper reported: The officials of the Korea Skating Union were investigated by police for receiving money from the father of a player who was disqualified for hitting a junior player at a Universiade in Austria earlier this year to return his son to the national team. At the 2006 Winter Olympics, Ahn won gold medals in the 1500 m and 1000 m events. He set a new Olympic record time of 1:26.739 in the 1000 m, finishing ahead of teammate Lee Ho-suk and rival Ohno. Ahn also won gold in men's 5000 m relay along with teammates Lee Ho-suk, Seo Ho-jin, and Song Suk-woo. With his patented outside overtaking maneuver, he overtook defending champion Canada to get his third gold medal of the Games. Ahn became the second South Korean athlete ever to win three gold medals in one Olympics, following Jin Sun-yu who had accomplished this earlier on the same day. He also won a bronze medal in the 500 m event. Ahn was the only athlete in Turin to step on to the podium four times. Ahn became the first short track speed skater to win a medal in every distance at a single Games, a feat unprecedented by any athlete in his sport. He is the first South Korean man to win at least 3 medals in a single Winter Olympics. Following the 2006 Olympics, Ahn maintained his record at the 2006 World Championships in Minneapolis. Despite being disqualified in the finals of the 500 m and 3000 m events, his victories in both the 1000 m and 1500 m events helped him defend his title with 68 points, followed by countryman Lee Ho-suk with 60 points. He became the first male short track skater to win four consecutive world titles. After the 2006 World Championships, Ahn flew back to South Korea. At Incheon International Airport, Ahn's father had a loud quarrel with the vice president of the Korea Skating Union (KSU), claiming that the coach did not associate with Ahn and conspired with other skaters to prevent Ahn from winning the title of overall champion. Ahn collided with Lee Ho-suk and Oh Se-jong in the World Championship 3000m Super Final. The airport incident, which was reported on news screens, caused a stir in the media and the public along with factional issues. as a result, the Korea Skating Union said it would hold a committee meeting to consider disciplinary action. On April 26, 2006, the reward and punishment committee concluded that "it was not an intentional collision after playing the videos more than 100 times," and that Ahn Hyun-soo, Lee Ho-suk, and Oh Se-jong were all unintentional. The South Korean short track team was split into two groups, in one of which Ahn was being coached by the women's coach Park Sae-woo due to conflicts with the men's coach Song Jae-kun. even though Ahn was the main player winning the gold medal in the Turin Olympics 5000m relay, the men's team members held a ceremony to their mentor commentator Lee Joon-ho, excluding only Ahn Hyun-soo. The tensions had risen so high that the skaters refused to dine in the same room, sit next to each other on the plane, or even share the same floor with each other. Ahn and Lee Ho-suk used to attend the same high school together, and even shared a room the previous year in skating camps, but due to the conflict they had begun to rarely speak to each other. Ahn mentioned on his personal website that the pressure was too much for him and he contemplated quitting the sport. Due to the issue, KSU stated that starting next season, the team would be united under one head coach to prevent deleterious rivalries. In spite of the conflicts, Ahn continued to dominate the sport. At the 2007 World Championships held in Milan, Ahn won his fifth world championship, finishing first in the 1000 m and in the 5000 m relay with teammates Kim Byeong-jun, Sung Si-bak, Song Kyung-taek, and Kim Hyun-kon. He also won silver in the 3000 m behind Song, and won two bronze medals in the 500 m and the 1500 m. With this victory, Ahn became the first man to win five consecutive world championships. Ahn is the only male short track skater to have won at least three consecutive world championships; Canadian short track legend Marc Gagnon has won four times, but his titles did not come back to back. On January 16, 2008, the Korea Skating Union (KSU) reported that Ahn had injured his knee after colliding with a fence during national team training at the Korea Training Center in Taeneung. The skate blade got stuck on the ice then the Ahn fell and bumped his knee on the fence. The fence, placed to absorb the shock, froze hard like a rock, causing serious injury rather than absorbing the impact. After being sent to the hospital, the injury was diagnosed as a fractured knee. Due to the injury, KSU announced that Ahn would not be competing in the ISU Samsung World Cup Series #5 and #6 in Quebec City and Salt Lake City, respectively. It was also reported that he would not be competing in the 2008 World Championships in Gangneung or the 2008 World Team Championships in Harbin, China. As a result of the unexpected injury, it was clear that Ahn would be unable to defend his sixth World title, leaving his countrymen Lee Ho-suk, Song Kyung-taek, and Lee Seung-hoon to make up the ground. After undergoing three surgeries, his rehabilitation period was predicted to be around 2–3 months. After eight months off the ice, a South Korean news article reported on September 5, 2008, that Ahn was back training, undergoing approximately two hours of physical reinforcement and skating along with around five hours of rehabilitation accompanied by muscular power training. The article also reported that Ahn was eyeing the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver, Canada. However, his recovery from the injury was much slower than initially expected, and he had to undergo four surgeries in 15 months. In 2009, Ahn finished seventh overall at the Korean national team trials, which was not enough for him to qualify for the Olympic team. Not having fully recovered from his injury, he again was unable to qualify for the national team in the following season. In 2010-2011, Ahn served as a commentator for SBS Sports on the season's World Cup series and World Championships. After the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics, the Korean short track was embroiled in scandals such as match-fixing and internal factions. Deals for rights of Olympic and World Championship participation took place among athletes and coaches of the same faction. However, this soon caused divisions between the athletes leading to subsequent exposures. The word of these incidents spread among the athletes’ parents and was exposed by Ahn Hyun-soo's father. Ahn Hyun-Soo's father has decided to reveal the match-fixing of the national team trial for the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver due to the following reasons. A family of Lee Jung-su noticed that Lee lost his opportunity to participate individual event for the World Championship. Moreover, Lee Jung-Su had to forcefully write down an oath stating that he will not participate the World Championship as demanded by his coaches and head coach. The family of Lee has informed this event to theother parents of the athletes, and they have decided to report the Korea Skating Union to Korean Sports Council Investigation Committee for thorough investigation. They started a petition for the investigation and more than 200 people agreed to join the petition, yet more than 300 people’s engagement was needed in order to file the case to the committee. In this sense, they requested the father of Ahn who is influential to the public to post this scandal on his son’ s Fan Club Page and finally this scandal has been completely revealed to Korean society and the public. This incident had a huge impact. The players involved and the Vancouver Olympic coaches have all been disciplined. The leaders of the Korea Skating Union were all forced to resign. Ahn Ki-won, Ahn Hyun-soo's father, pointed out the Korea Skating Union's leadership, including the then-resigned vice president Yoo Tae-wook and Jun Myung-kyu, for exerting undue pressure on coaches and athletes. Ahn became a whistleblower who informed the South Korean society of the dark side of Korean shorttrack speed skating of factional fight and match-fixing regardless of his will. And it took a toll on him, officially or informally. The selection of the national team was suddenly postponed, and Ahn Hyun-soo, overlapped with the four-week basic military training period, disrupted his own training plan. Suspicions have also been raised that he missed an Olympic opportunity by disobeying the factional leader's words. Noise and controversy continued around him regarding factional issues and the way the national team was selected. And his team Seongnam City declared a moratorium in July 2010 and decided to dismantle the ice skating team in December 2010. But there was not a team to scouted Ahn Hyun-soo. Ahn last competed as a South Korean citizen at the national team trials in April 2011, where he took gold in the 500 m. Prior to the trials, his local team Seongnam City Hall dissolved due to financial reasons, and therefore Ahn had to train by himself. Shortly before this competition, he informed the South Korean media that it would be his farewell performance. Ahn finished fifth overall at the national team trials. After the trials, Ahn announced that he will be moving to Russia because he wanted to skate in an environment where he could concentrate in skating, apart from the issues surrounding him. He moved to Russia in June 2011 and decided to naturalize on July. On December 28, 2011, he was officially granted a Russian nationality by President Dmitry Medvedev. His Korean nationality was automatically extinguished by the South Korean nationality law, which does not allow dual nationality. Since then, South Korean media has reported that he received the full Olympic medal pension in July 2011, and decided to naturalized to Russia in August. Based on this, when the Korea skating coach union pointed out "pension receipt" due to "morality" issues in the process of hiring Seongnam City coach in 2023, Viktor Ahn said he decided on everything in July 2011 and donated the entire pension just before Russian naturalization for the first time in 12 years. In a 2015 documentary aired on South Korea's MBC, Ahn disclosed that there was pressure from Korea Skating Union an official just before his naturalization in Russia. The official warned. "This athlete is a problematic player in South Korea and should never be accepted." South Korean coaches and staff were already in Russia before Ahn decided to go to Russia. But in October 2011, the Russian Skating Union fired everyone, leaving Viktor Ahn alone. According to South Korean media reports at the time, 'internal conflicts between leaders', 'South Korean experts never notified Russian coaches how to prepare skating equipment accordingly in shorttrack speed skating', 'compulsory training ' and 'corporal punishment on athletes' were the reasons for the dismissal. At that time, however, there were rumors in South Korea that Ahn was reluctant to undergo Korean-style training again. After this incident, Ahn's wife Woo Nari and coach Hwang Ik-hwan who were coach of his team for Seongnam City just before his naturalization, were invited to Russia for Viktor Ahn's rehabilitation and psychotherapy. Along with this incident during the 2014 Sochi Olympics, the 2004 women's short track team assault incident was re-examined. This is because the assault incident of women player team in 2004, and one of the coaches who had a conflict with Viktor Ahn in Russia in 2011 was on the coaching staff of the South Korea national team. About this issue, coach Hwang Ik-hwan had an interview as follows. "Hyun-soo won first place in the 500m in the last national trial in Korea before going to Russia. In other words, his physical condition was not bad. However, he was in the worst slump when I met him after six months. Even after they were expelled from the Russian Skating Union, Hyun-soo could not easily get out of that wound for a while." In 2018, an official from the Korean skating world also revealed the following. "Viktor Ahn had to went through hard time in the early days of settling in Russia. And he was able to train normally only after the Russian Skating Union fired the coach." Ahn participated in the Russian national team trials for the 2011–2012 season and was selected as a relay member for the season. He made his debut as a Russian short track speed skater at World Cup #5 in Moscow. In the national trials for the 2012–2013 season, Ahn won the 1000 m and 3000 m events, successfully pulling off to the national team. At World Cup #1 in Calgary, he won his first individual gold in the international stage since his knee injury four years ago. He also contributed to Russia's first-ever relay gold at World Cup #5 in Sochi, making an inside pass that reminded of performances in his heyday. Ahn came through the Olympic season with flying colors, finishing second in the overall World Cup rankings and winning four golds at the 2014 European Championships. While his knee injury did not allow him to top the 1500 m races that he had dominated when representing Korea, his experience, technique, and exclusive training on the 500 m helped Ahn lead the distance in the World Cup rankings. At the 2014 Winter Olympics, Ahn won the bronze medal in the 1500 m event, which was the first short track speed skating medal that Russia had ever earned. Ahn then won the first Russian gold medal in short track, winning the 1000 m event by leading the first Russian 1–2 finish in short track with Vladimir Grigorev. On February 21, Ahn won his seventh overall and fifth Winter Olympic gold medal when he finished first in the 500 m men's final. With that gold medal, he became the first short track skater to win all four Olympic golds, the 500 m, 1000 m, 1500 m, and 5000 m relay. He also became the short track speed skater with the most Olympic gold medals, with five, which increased to six with a 5000 m relay win later the same day. With that gold, he became the short tracker with the most Olympic medals, at eight, tied with Apolo Ohno; he also became the short tracker with the most Olympic gold medals, at six. After his victory, Koreans came to an uproar questioning the Korea Skating Union of the reason for Ahn's naturalization, which eventually caused Korean President Park Geun-hye to order an investigation on the issue. Contrary to the public opinion in Korea, Ahn contended that he did not move to Russia because of factionalism. He also added that his father, who had argued Ahn was the victim of faction fight in Korea, was contradicting him, and going to the Olympics was the sole reason why he made the difficult decision to come to Russia. Ahn expressed his concern that though his relationship with the Korean athletes had no problems, the press was making them awkward. In the 2014 World Championships held a month after the Olympics, Ahn won the 1000 m and finished third in the 3000 m, grabbing his sixth world title by 63 points. He became the only man to win six world championships in the sport. After his prolific season, Ahn continued his skating career despite a part-move into coaching. He missed the 2015–2016 season due to knee problems and his wife's pregnancy. In an interview after the 2016 World Championships, which he did not take part in but did watch, he told the press that doctors have warned him undergoing extra surgery would jeopardize his career, and thus he is working on adding muscles to relieve the pain. Ahn continued to win medals at the World and European championships for Russia. He won bronze in the 500 m and silver in the 5000 m relay at the 2017 European Championships, and won silver in the 500 m race at the 2018 European Championships. Although Ahn had planned to retire after participating the 2018 Winter Olympics in his native South Korea, he missed out the Olympics in the wake of the alleged sports doping in Russia. The IOC did not disclose the specific reasons for banning Ahn, only mentioning "lingering suspicions" about doping use regarding the country. Ahn, who had never tested positive for drugs, challenged the decision writing an open letter to IOC President Thomas Bach, but he was not answered. Ahn decided to retire from the sport and return to his home country of South Korea after rejecting an offer to coach the Russian team in September 2018. After stepping off ice, Ahn starred in the South Korean variety-reality show Real Man 300. He was also noticed working as a player-coach at Korea National Sports University. In 2018, Ahn received an offer as a national team leader from the South Korea as well as the Russia national team. A senior South Korean official revealed in February of that year that there had been informal discussions and the final decision rested with Ahn. However, the Korea Skating Union was soon mired in controversy due to an assault on a female player and a related #MeToo incident involving a national team coach, which drew significant attention in South Korean society and led to government investigations. Amid the tumultuous events within the Korea Skating Union, Viktor Ahn's discussions to lead the South Korean national team were hindered by his controversies and lack of coaching experience. The offer ultimately dissolved when he rejoined the Russian national team for the 2019-2020 season. In February 2019, Ahn reversed his decision, announcing that he wanted to compete as an athlete. Aged 33, he won silver in the 500 m and 1000 m races respectively at the ISU Short Track Speed Skating World Cup in Salt Lake City and Shanghai before anchoring Russia to gold in the mixed gender 2,000 m relay and men's 5,000 m relay. In April 2020, Ahn revealed that knee problems were affecting his ability to train and that it was time for him to finally finish his skating career. In his retirement statement, he announced he will continue to work for the sport. In 2018, Ahn was offered a coaching position for China's national speed skating team by Wang Meng, who had been Ahn's acquaintance since 2002. Although Ahn declined the offer in 2018, he accepted the offer in late 2019. As the top assistant of Kim Sun-tae, head coach for China's short track team in the 2022 Winter Olympics and previous head coach for Korea's short track team in the 2018 Winter Olympics, Ahn helped Chinese players win two gold medals, one silver medal, and one bronze medal in Beijing. His training style was to skate with the athletes throughout the sessions, so that they could naturally learn how to make steps. When Korean skaters were disqualified during the men's 1000 m semifinals, arousing short track speed skating controversies, South Korean netizens directed anger and criticism towards Ahn, who was seen congratulating his team for winning gold in the 2000 m mixed relay. In addition, some Korean media and the public have remarked that he received an Olympic medal pension ('sports pension') just prior to his naturalization in Russia. Regarding the Olympic medal pension, he has already been confirmed to have received the most 'sports pension' among South Korean sports athletes through a parliamentary audit by the South Korean National Assembly in October 2012. During his career, he received a pension of more than 370 million won from the state. "The receipt of the Olympic medal pension" has been raised since his naturalization, but it has not been much controversy. However, in 2021, his junior Lin Xiaojun (Lim Hyo-jun), an Olympic gold medalist, was known to have decided to naturalize to China, and major South Korean media compared Lin XiaoJun, who was naturalized to China over the repeated naturalization of Korean ace athletes to other countries and pensions for the first time in 10 years. And anti-Chinese sentiment during the 2022 Beijing Olympics has raised criticism over his receipt of the Olympic medal pension. Not responding to interview requests during the Games, Ahn shared his thoughts on the issue in March in an interview with the Korean press by saying, "I kept a stiff upper lip because I didn't want to be an irresponsible person. Due to the nature of the sport, judgment problems can occur at any time. All players come to the game with the mindset that they should be careful about decision issues, but the unexpected often happens on ice." Regarding the accusations that were poured on not only him but also his family, Ahn said, "It suddenly occurred to me that if I gave up short track speed skating, this controversy would end," adding, "I thought I had been supported for my passion and games, but it was heartbreaking to see unexpected things lead to criticism." He yet stated that despite the adversities, he won't be leaving the sport. After the Olympics, Ahn rejected a four-year coaching position and returned to Korea, having not met his family for 19 months due to Covid-19 situations. Furthermore, Ahn declined long-term leadership offers from third countries outside of South Korea, China, and Russia. In 2023, Ahn returned to South Korea and applied to be a coach for Seongnam City's short track speed skating team. However, he is under huge criticism from the South Korean short track speed skating coaches as he has helped South Korean rival China to gain medals during the 2022 Beijing Olympics. The Korea skating coach union urged "Seongnam City to appoint a coach that meets the public eye level" and criticized Ahn that he "lied during the naturalization process and betrayed his country", avoiding the fact that Ahn was mistreated by the Korea Skating Union after his injuries. In late January, Seongnam City's short track speed skating team announced that no one is qualified to be a coach, meaning that Ahn is unlikely to be coach for his homeland. After Seongnam City has since announced that there are no successful candidates, and the city ultimately decided not to fill the vacant coaching position. since then, the Korea skating coach union has been known as a close aide to a specific candidate, and suspicions have been raised that the disciplinary history of a specific candidate has not been raised. As a result, some South Korean media outlets suggested that there was a factional power struggle and political involvement in the ice skating world. Following South Korea's rejection of Viktor Ahn, through TASS, Russian Skating Union president expressed that they would like to appoint Ahn. In 2022, Russia invited Viktor Ahn to become an advisor to the Skating Union, but he refused due to objections by Ahn's wife. While Russia sports media outlet Sport Express urged Ahn to return to Russia as a leader. On February 7, Viktor Ahn expressed his position on the controversy over Russian naturalization on his social network service (SNS) after "received a lump-sum payment of the athletes' pension," which the Korea skating coach union pointed out as a moral issue. At first, he thought dual citizenship was possible. However, when he found out that he had to give up his Korean nationality, he decided that it was right to return the Olympic medal pension he received. And before naturalization in Russia, he made a full donation to "children in need of heart surgery and junior athletes in need of rehabilitation and treatment." Since then, some of the pensions have been delivered to the family of Noh Jin-kyu, his junior athlete at the Korean National Sport University, according to a South Korean ice skating official. Ahn then said that he would humbly accept the criticism of choosing naturalization for any reason, but he said he would raise speak out when there is misunderstanding. On February 9, The Hankyoreh pointed out Seongnam City's negligence in administration in that Ahn's coaching support was exposed in advance in connection with the recruitment of the ice skating team at Seongnam City. While the Korea Skating Coaches Union pointed out that it was not the opinion of the Korean ice skating leaders as a whole, and that it was a serious problem for the media to report the opinions of certain unofficial organizations as the opinions of the entire leaders. On April 13, 2023, South Korean media reported as follows. Viktor Ahn will participate as a coach for multiple skaters in the 2023-24 season for the South Korean national team trials. He personally coached young skaters at the Korea National Sport University after the 2022 Beijing Olympics. Among them, seven players from high school and Korea National Sport University wrote him as a leader on the application form for participation in the national team trials. This is Ahn's first official South Korean leadership acitivity. According to JTBC, Ahn completed the Korea Skating Union's "leader's lesson" in Korea after the 2022 Beijing Olympics. According to the Korea Sports Association and the Korea Skating Union Registration Regulations, which have been changed since April 12, 2021 due to years of "violation of human rights of ice sports" and "ethical controversy of ice coaches" in Korea, even a leader who has obtained a "coach national license" must complete a leader course before he can serve as a leader of the Korea Skating Union. This issue that has been consistently mentioned due to Ahn's choice of naturalization in Russia is the issues of conflict with his mentor, Jun Myung-kyu, vice president of the Korea Skating Union. According to Korean medias, Professor Jun was the planner of all Ahn's career paths. Jun was Ahn's professor. And he was Ahn's personal coach in 2007. However, Ahn disobeyed the professor Jun's words. In 2014, his father and Lee Joon-ho, who was the former coach of the national team, said the following. : "Ahn, was set to graduate from Korea National Sport University in 2007. Ahn chose the Seongnam City Hall Short track team that Professor Jun did not want, and the relationship between Professor Jun and Ahn was estranged". During the Olympics, Chang Myung-hee, former president of the Korea Skating Union, also said that Vice-President Jun Myung-kyu had abused his authority, and Ahn was disadvantaged. In fact, the conflict with factional leaders was also mentioned by the South Korean media in 2010. In 2018, Another a Korean skating official commented, "A mere 16 days after Viktor Ahn joined the Seongnam City Hall skating team, he sustained a severe injury during training. Subsequently, Seongnam City Hall suspended the team's operations. Ahn's strained relationship with Jun Myung-kyu, the president of Korea Ice Skating, made it challenging for him to find a suitable place to train and compete within the country." In March 2014, Professor Jun stepped down as vice-president of the Korean Skaters Union. However, in 2014, Ahn and the Korea Skating Union denied any conflicts or factional issues. The assault of the women's short track team coach during the 2018 PyeongChang Olympics and the athletes' discord over women's speed skating factions raised the issue of the responsibility of Samsung, which had sponsored the Korea Skating Union and the Korea Skating Union. The Korea Skating Union was investigated by the government, including the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism. Viktor Ahn and Professor Jun have returned to the agenda. However, in February 2018, Viktor Ahn sent a text message to South Korean Culture, Sports and Tourism Committee Member of parliament Ahn Min-seok. Ahn Min-seok said that Ahn hyun-soo has a good relationship with Professor Jun Myung-kyu, and released it to the South Korean media. In March 2022, Viktor Ahn said Yonhap News Agency in an interview that he had never been disadvantaged by the Korea Skating Union. "Ahn is a master of short track speed skating, particularly in controlling the track during competition." - Wu Dajing "In terms of his racing strategy, when he's following the other skaters, he's not really just following. He's always waiting for that perfect chance to pass." - Chae Ji-hoon "Viktor Ahn, as he's now called, is the most beautiful short track skating athlete in the world in terms of his technique and the way he skates." "If there is any athlete that is designed for short track, body-type wise, it is him," "If you watch him stand and jog, his pelvic is tilted forward naturally, which is perfect for a skater. He has incredible technique, tons of experience." - Apolo Anton Ohno Representing Korea Ahn was awarded the Outstanding Player Award at the Sports Chosun Coca-Cola Sports Awards in January 2006. After his victory in Torino, he was selected as Player of the Month by the American Sports Academy. He was also named as honorary ambassador for the PyeongChang Winter Olympics bidding committee with Jin Sun-yu. In 2008, Ahn was selected as the Most Valuable Player with Lee Kyou-hyuk and Yuna Kim by the Korea Skating Union. In the same year, he also received the Men's Team Award at the Asian Sports Awards. with Lee Ho-seok, Song Suk-woo, Oh Se-jong, and Seo Ho-jin. Ahn was chosen as the ambassador for the Korea Sports Promotion Foundation in 2009. Representing Russia In March 2013, Ahn was named as Merited Master of Sport by the Russian Federation. After his feat in Sochi, Ahn was awarded the Order "For Merit to the Fatherland" from Russian President Vladimir Putin and the Medal "For Strengthening of Brotherhood in Arms"". He was also selected Most Valuable Player in the Sochi Winter Olympics by NBC, and 2014 Athlete of the Year by the Russian edition of 'GQ' magazine. In light of his status as a South Korean-born Russian, Ahn was further named as honorary ambassador for the 2014-2015 Korea-Russia Year of Mutual Visit in 2014. In 2016, Ahn received the Proud Alumnus Award at his alma mater. He was also inducted into the Korea National Sports University Ice Rink Hall of Fame as the 2006 Winter Olympics champion and the Sochi Walk of Fame as the 2014 Winter Olympics champion. Ahn is married to Woo Nari (Korean: 우나리), a Korean born in 1983. Nari was a member of Ahn's fan club. Ahn said that her presence and care helped him adapt to Russia. Their daughter was born in December 2015. But his wife, Woo Nari, couldn't endure the life in Russia and missed South Korea, so eventually left Russia. The Russian media reported that his wife wanted to raise their daughter in South Korea, and Viktor Ahn's choice to go to South Korea was influenced by his wife. Ahn's younger brother is speed skater Ahn Hyun-Jun. He made the Korean national speed skating team for the 2022–23 season. The younger Ahn switched from short track to speed skating in 2021. Ahn trained in Russia and received Russian citizenship to compete for Russia in the 2014 Winter Olympics. Ahn's father stated that the decision was due to lack of support from the South Korean skating association. Prior to moving to Russia, Ahn did not know the Russian language and had no familial ties to Russia. He had considered competing for the United States, but found that the process for gaining Russian citizenship was much easier. He chose "Viktor" as his Russian name as it derived from Victory, and to pay tribute to Viktor Tsoi, a Soviet rock star of ethnic Korean descent. In South Korea, fury erupted over the loss of Ahn to Team Russia, after his participation in the 2014 Winter Olympics. Several newspapers reported the scorn of the South Korean public and newspaper editors on the actions of the skating federation. Right after the Olympics, the Minister of Sports and President Park Geun-hye of South Korea both promised action in rooting out corruption and feuding at the organization that may have led to Ahn's "defection", in a bid to clean it up in preparation for the 2018 Winter Olympics in South Korea. In September 2018, Ahn announced his retirement from short track and moved back to South Korea. The South Korean public was generally supportive of Ahn in early 2014, but he also received online bashing amidst controversies at Sochi and in later years. In 2023, Ahn sought a coaching position in South Korea, despite having renounced his South Korean citizenship when becoming Russian. He was denied that position due to significant public opposition. In 2011, Ahn's decision to naturalize became a contentious political issue, with some attributing the responsibility to Seongnam Mayor at the time, Lee Jae-myung. By 2014, Lee defended himself by emphasizing that the state-supervised Korea Skating Union should be held accountable rather than the leaders of Local government. A significant development occurred in February 2022 when Won Hee-ryong, associated with Yoon Suk Yeol's People's Power presidential campaign, asserted that Viktor Ahn's choice to become a Russian national was influenced by Lee Jae-myung. Won Hee-ryong further claimed that the halting of operations for the Seongnam City Hall ice skating team was a disguise for bankruptcy and alleged that 30 billion won from Seongnam City's funds were diverted to acquire Seongnam FC in a bid to boost the mayor's re-election prospects. The Democratic Party of Korea refuted the allegations, deeming them false. Concurrently, Korean ice skating officials emphasized the difficulty in isolating a single cause, especially when injuries and team disbandments coincided with ongoing factional controversies within the ice skating community. As of 2022, Lee Jae-myung faces legal scrutiny for allegedly accepting 17 billion won in unauthorized bribes from companies, masked as donations to Seongnam FC. He can restore his South Korean nationality under the South Korean nationality law. In 2003, at the age of 17, he was exempted from military service by winning three gold medals at the Asian Games and finished his four-weeks of basic military training in 2010. For sports personnels who are exempted from active duty are recognized to have completed 34 months of military service if they have spent time as athletes in their field. In September 2018, A South Korean Ministry of National Defense official said in an interview with South Korean media. "Ahn hyun-soo has already completed his military service". But if Ahn gets his South Korean citizenship back, he has to renounce his Russian citizenship. South Korean nationality law Article 9 (Acquisition of Nationality through Reinstatement of Nationality) (1) A foreigner who was a national of the Republic of Korea may acquire the nationality of the Republic of Korea through obtaining permission of reinstatement of nationality by the Minister of Justice. (2) The Minister of Justice shall not allow the reinstatement of nationality to a person who falls under any of the following subparagraphs, after screening such person who has applied for the reinstatement of nationality. 1. A person who has inflicted harm on the State or society; 2. A person whose conduct is disorderly; 3. A person who lost or renounced his/her nationality of the Republic of Korea in order to evade military service; 4. A person for whom the Minister of Justice regards the reinstatement of his/her nationality as inappropriate, for the purposes of national security, sustainment of order or public welfare. In the 2010–2011 season, Ahn served as a short track commentator for SBS Sports. He covered the World Cup series (#3~#6) and the World Championships. From 2014 to 2016, he guest-starred in three episodes of Russia's late-night talk show Evening Urgant (episodes S3.E90, S4.E104, S5.E157). From 2017 to 2018, Ahn guest-starred in the South Korean variety-reality show The Return of Superman (episodes 202~204, 237, 241) with his daughter. In 2018, he starred in the South Korean variety-reality show Real Man 300 (episodes 1~15, 18). Other television appearances of Ahn are as follows: Han Su-jin's Sunday Click (South Korean talk show) - with Jin Sun-yu (episode 49) Human Docu Love (South Korean documentary) - with wife Woo Nari (episodes 44, 45) Live Talk Show Taxi (South Korean talk show) - with wife Woo Nari (episode 488) 2006 Winter Olympics – Men's 1000 m Former, (OR). 2006 Winter Olympics – Men's 5000 m relay Former, (OR). 2014 Winter Olympics – Men's 5000 m relay Former, (OR). Six-time Overall world champion. 20 world titles. 18 gold medals. super-final involving eight competitors with highest points after completion of other distances. 2002 (2nd), 2003 (1st), 2004 (1st), 2005 (2nd), 2006 (DSQ), 2007 (2nd), 2013 (7th), 2014 (3rd), 2017 (3rd). The 3000m Super Final is not awarded a medal, but the ranking and record are recognized. Overall points and medals results 42 points : 1000 m (21) + 3000 m (21) 89 points : 1000 m (21) + 1500 m (34) + 3000 m (34) 102 points : 1000 m (34) + 1500 m (34) + 3000 m (34) 89 points : 500 m (13) + 1000 m (21) + 1500 m (34) + 3000 m (21) 68 points : 1000 m (34) + 1500 m (34) 81 points : 500 m (13) + 1000 m (34) + 1500 m (13) + 3000 m (21) 23 points : 500 m (21) + 3000 m (2) 63 points : 500 m (8) + 1000 m (34) + 1500 m (8) + 3000 m (13) 23 points : 500 m (2) + 1500 m (8) + 3000 m (13) World Team Championships 2 times Overall World Cup winner, 6 time individual distances World Cup winner, 67 World Cup victories World Cup Ranking Podiums "Viktor An". Olympedia. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Biographical data for: Viktor An". shorttrackonline.info. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "1500m Men World Record Progression". International Skating Union. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "3000m Men World Record Progression". International Skating Union. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Victor An at the International Skating Union. International Olympic Committee (March 31, 2021). "Happier Ahn makes short track history". olympics.com. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Most Overall Titles at the World Short Track Speed Skating Championships (individual)". guinnessworldrecords.com. Guinness World Records. Retrieved April 3, 2023. OlympicTalk (April 27, 2020). "Viktor Ahn, greatest Olympic short track speed skater, retires again". NBC Sports. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Young-rok (January 9, 2012). "[집중기획] '쇼트트랙 황제'가 청년백수로…"안현수를 원하는 곳이 없었다"" [From 'short track emperor' to the unemployed - no team wanted to accept Ahn Hyun-soo]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Narae (February 16, 2014). "Ahn's gold hard for South Koreans to swallow". Reuters. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Inside the Games FISU (September 28, 2020). "Universiade Legends: Viktor Ahn". Inside the Games. Retrieved April 3, 2023. NBC OlympicTalk (August 25, 2020). "Viktor Ahn the latest Olympic star to coach Chinese athletes ahead of Beijing 2022". NBC Sports. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yonhap News Agency (January 12, 2023). "Victor An applies for coaching job in motherland". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Kim, So-hyun (January 11, 2023). "Viktor An seeks to return as coach in Korea". The Korea Herald. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Kim, Yumin (January 14, 2023). ""Ahn Hyun-soo, a Russian who abandoned Korea" - League of Leaders' Criticism of Determination' ("안현수, 한국 버린 러시아인" 지도자연맹 '작심 비판')" (in Korean). Seoul Shinmun. Retrieved 16 January 2023. Cho, Young-joon (January 13, 2023). "Ice Leaders Federation Statement Announced "Concerned about the return of leader Viktor Ahn"". SPOTV. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Yonhap News Agency (January 29, 2023). "Ex-Russian short tracker Victor An misses out on coaching position in native S. Korea". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Young-ji, Jeon (February 7, 2023). "Ahn Hyun-soo, who finally opened his mouth, said: "Right after receiving the Olympic medal pension, naturalization in Russia is not true... the pension was fully donated." (마침내 입 연 안현수"연금수령→러 귀화 사실 아냐...연금은 전액기부")" (in Korean). The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved February 7, 2023. Park, Dae-hyun (February 7, 2023). "'Can't return to Korea' Ahn Hyun-soo... "I donated all the pension I received"". SPOTV. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Yoo Ji-ho (April 13, 2023). "Ex-Russian short track star Victor An to coach at S. Korean nat'l team trials". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 14, 2023. Victor An at the International Skating Union. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Lee Young-ho (April 6, 2006). "쇼트트랙 파벌싸움, 해결책은 있나" [Short track faction fight, is there a solution?]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved July 28, 2023. Yoon, Jung-hyun (April 5, 2006). "'두솥밥' 쇼트트랙 내홍 심화 '상처로 얼룩진 영광.'" [The internal conflict between the two short track speed skating teams deepens. 'the honor stained with wounds']. The Korea Herald (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Kyunghyang Shinmun (April 5, 2006). "파벌싸움에 멍든 '쇼트트랙 코리아'" [Short Track Korea, bruise by factional fight]. Kyunghyang Shinmun (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Cho, Hyun-sam (April 23, 2010). "[쇼트트랙 파문]파벌·담합·방관이 빚어 낸 합작품" [Shorttrack scandal Collaboration created by factions, collusion, and bystanders.]. MBN (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kwon, Jong-oh (February 17, 2014). "전명규 부회장 이제는 말해야 한다" [Vice president Jun Myung-kyu, it is time to say.]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved July 29, 2023. Jung, Hoon-chae (February 1, 2022). "한국 쇼트트랙의 선구자 김기훈" [Kim Ki-hoon, a pioneer of Korean short track speed skating]. olympics.com (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Yoo, Jee-ho (April 11, 2018). "Senior skating official resigns while under gov't probe". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Lee, Dong-sup (January 25, 2019). "'플레잉 코치' 논란 빅토르 안 부친 안기원" [Interview:‘Player-coach’ Controversy Viktor Ahn’s Father]. ilyo (in Korean). Retrieved August 19, 2023. Park, Jeong-hwan (February 25, 2014). "'안'은 파벌 수혜자이자 피해자 - 안현수·전명규 빙상연맹 부회장 과거사 풀스토리" [‘Ahn’ is a faction beneficiary and victim - Ahn Hyun-soo and jun myung-kyu, Vice president of the Korea Skating Union (KSU), Full Story"]. ilyo (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Tencent sports (February 12, 2018). "Exclusive: How Viktor Ahn missed out on his chance for redemption in PyeongChang". Aips Media. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Cho, Yoo-bin (February 26, 2014). "더러운 파벌 싸움이 지어준 그 이름 '빅토르 안'" [The name 'Viktor Ann' was given by the dirty faction fight]. Sisa Journal (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Kim, Hak-joon (March 10, 1995). "빙상연맹 대표선발 갈팡질팡" [Selection of the national ice skating team, controversy]. Naver library The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Shin, Hyun-hoon (March 10, 1996). "쇼트트랙 채지훈 김윤미 2관왕" [Short track speed skater Chae Ji-hoon and Kim Yoon-mi won two gold medals]. Naver library The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Lee, Young-ho (September 9, 2005). "-쇼트트랙- 서호진.진선유, 남녀부 종합 1위(종합)" [Seo Ho-jin and Jin Sun-yu win national trials]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Yonhap News Agency (September 25, 1997). "<빙상> 채지훈.전이경 등 10명 올림픽대표로 확정" [Ten national team players, including Chae Ji-hoon and Chun Lee-kyung, have been confirmed.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Lee, Jeong-jin (April 11, 2003). "쇼트트랙 김동성, 진통 속 국가대표 선발" [Short track Kim Dong-Sung was selected recommended player.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved February 10, 2023. Moon, Gap-sik (December 8, 1993). "똘똘 뭉쳐 올림픽 대비할 판에 남자 쇼트트랙 내분" [conflict in the men's short track track team]. Naver library The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Kim, Hak-joon (August 9, 1994). "회장 퇴진 탄원 일파만파, 내분 빙상연맹 난파위기" [The internal conflict The petition for the resignation of the president has become a big issue, and the Korea Skating Union has been in conflict.]. Naver library The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Lee, Ga-young (May 25, 2001). "빙상스타 이영하 교수 특기생비리 3년 선고" [Ice skating star professor Lee Young-ha has been sentenced to three years of corruption.]. JoongAng Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. OhmyNews (March 20, 2002). ""전명규 감독 한체대 교수임용 결사반대"" [Protests against the appointment of Jun Myung-kyu as a professor at Korea National Sport University.]. OhmyNews (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Shim, Jae-hoon (June 27, 2003). "쇼트트랙 간판스타 안현수, 한체대 입학" [Short track star Ahn Hyun-soo enters Korea National Sport University.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Lee, Jung-jin (July 10, 2002). "'포스트 전명규' 체제 돌입" [Post Jun Myung-kyu's system is in place.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Sung, Yeon-chul (September 30, 2004). "김기훈 쇼트트랙 대표코치 사임" [Kim Ki-hoon, the coach of the short track national team, resigns.]. The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Kim, Sung-kyu (January 10, 2004). ""죽도록 두들겨 맞고…" 여자 쇼트트랙 '폭력의 얼음판'" ["beaten to death..." Female short track national team, "Ice of Violence."]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Brian Lee (November 12, 2004). "Short-track team to miss World Cup". Korea JoongAng Daily. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Lee, Soo-hwan (December 18, 2018). "변천사 폭로한 2004년 쇼트트랙 폭행 뭐길래, 외국서도 구타" [The assault case of short track in 2004 revealed by Byun Chun-sa]. The Kookje Daily News (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Jung, Kyu-jin (January 15, 2004). "여 쇼트트랙팀 새 코치 선임" [Appointed a new coach for the women's short track team]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. The Hankyoreh (March 31, 2005). "쇼트트랙 대표선발 담합의혹" [Suspicions of match-fixing in short track national trials]. The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Jong-sung (April 11, 2005). "'마피아와의 전면전', 쇼트트랙 男대표 입촌거부" [Refusing short track speed skating national team players to enter the village.]. Pressian (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Lee, Sang-hun (January 5, 2018). "김기훈 "날 들이밀기 대역전, 끝까지 포기 안해 얻은 승리"" [Kim Ki-hoon interview, the victory that I did not give up until the end]. Kukmin Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Kwak, Soo-geun (July 15, 2005). "쇼트트랙 폭행 방조 전 코치, 국가대표 감독 재선임" [Former coach instigating and abetting the short track assault, re-election of the national team coach.]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Jung, Kyu-jin (July 29, 2005). "쇼트트랙 대표선수 일부, 전지훈련 불참" [Some of the short track speed skating players are absent from training.]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Lee, Yeong-mi (April 26, 2011). "안현수 인터뷰, "러시아 귀화에 대한 솔직한 생각을 말한다면.."" [To Be Honest about Moving to Russia]. The Korea Herald (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kim, Dong-hyun (May 12, 2015). "'안현수 폭행 논란' 서호진, 과거 언급 재조명… "감금 및 폭행? 있을 수 없는 일"" ['Assault scandal' Seo-hojin's past comment comes back to the fore - "There was no such thing as confinement or assault"]. sportsworldi (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Park, Hyun-joo (May 18, 2015). "안현수 과거 폭행, 웃으며 담담히 공개 "헬멧 쓴 상태에서 나보다 후배가 더 맞아"" [Ahn Hyun-soo reveals his being victim of past assault, "My junior was hit more than me with helmets on"]. Segye Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim Min-seok (February 16, 2014). "안현수 귀화 누구 책임인가… '파벌 싸움' 원흉은 '에이스 밀어주기?'" [Who is responsible for Ahn Hyun-soo's naturalization?]. kukinews (in Korean). Retrieved July 28, 2023. Kim Nam-il (May 26, 2005). "쇼트트랙선발 뒷거래 빙상연맹 부회장 입건" [The vice president of the Korea Skating Union was booked due to a deal behind the short track selection.]. The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved July 28, 2023. "1,000 metres, Men 2006 shorttrack". olympedia.org. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "5,000 metres Relay, Men 2006 shorttrack". olympedia.org. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Ahn Hyun-soo Profile". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007. Retrieved March 12, 2007. Kim, Kyung-ho (April 3, 2006). "쇼트트랙, 남녀 동반 챔피언" [Koreans win both men's and women's world short track championships]. MBC (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yonhap News Agency (December 29, 2011). "Korean-born short tracker awarded Russian citizenship". The Korea Times. Retrieved February 9, 2023. International Olympic Committee (September 6, 2018). "Short track great Viktor Ahn retires from speed skating". Olympics.com. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Wohn, Dong-hee (April 5, 2006). "After quarrel, skaters to have just one coach". Korea Joongang Daily. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Jeong, Kyu-Jin (April 5, 2006). "뿌리부터 썩은' 쇼트트랙 파벌 싸움" [Rotted from the Root' Short Track Faction Fight']. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Baek, Gil-hyun (April 5, 2006). "빙상연맹 상벌위원회 열어 쇼트트랙 선수단 징계 검토" [Korea Skating Union's reward and punishment committee will be held to review disciplinary action for short track speed skating athletes.]. No Cut News (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Kim, Sung-Kyu (April 6, 2006). "Skating Team Discord". The Dong-a Ilbo. Retrieved February 8, 2023. "2007 ISU World Championships, Italy Results.pdf" (PDF). ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Cho, Yoon-jung (January 17, 2008). "안현수 부상 시즌 아웃" [Ahn Hyun-soo injured, season out.]. MBC (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Kang, Seung-woo (January 17, 2008). "Skating Champ Injures Knee While Training". The Korea Times. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Heo, Seung (February 16, 2014). "'빅토르 안'은 희생양인가, 모험가인가?" [Viktor An scapegoat or adventurer?]. The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Park, Jin-Kyu (March 5, 2014). "'쇼트트랙 황제, 안현수와 '빅토르 안' 사이" [Short track Emperor, between 'Ahn Hyun-soo' and 'Viktor An'.]. JTBC (in Korean). Retrieved February 8, 2023. Lee, Yeong-ho (September 5, 2008). "쇼트트랙 안현수, 빙판 훈련 재개 '재도약 준비'" [Ahn is back training]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Yeong-ho (February 9, 2014). "두 이름 안현수, 웃을까 울까" [Two names, Ahn Hyun-soo, will he laugh or cry?]. The Hankyoreh (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Park, Min-jung (February 17, 2014). "2011년 안현수-배성재 해설 영상" [2011, Commentator Ahn Hyun-soo and Bae Sung-jae]. WikiTree (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim Hyun-cheol (April 23, 2010). "Heavy Punishment Sought for Short Track Scandal". The Korea Times. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Duncan Mackay (May 6, 2010). "South Korean Olympic gold medallist banned in race-fixing scandal". Inside the Games. Retrieved September 30, 2023. "권금중 중고빙상경기연맹 부회장, 쇼트트랙 외압 조사위 합류". The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). April 15, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Ha Nam-jik, Jason Kim (March 31, 2010). "Favoritism controversy jars skaters". Korea JoongAng Daily. Retrieved September 30, 2023. "Triumphant Short Track Team Returns to Controversy". The Dong-a Ilbo. March 31, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Kim Hyun-jung (March 26, 2010). "안현수 父 "이정수 자필사유서? 강압,조작됐다"". No Cut News (in Korean). Retrieved December 19, 2023. "'이정수 파문' 진실게임, 2R로 넘어가나?". OSEN (in Korean). March 25, 2010. Retrieved December 19, 2023. Kim Eun-jin (March 26, 2010). "이정수, 미니홈피 통해 심경 토로". Kyunghyang Shinmun (in Korean). Retrieved December 19, 2023. Kim, Hyun-cheol (April 23, 2010). "Heavy Punishment Sought for Short Track Scandal". The Korea Times. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kim, Hyun-cheol (May 20, 2010). "Short track skaters given reprieve". The Korea Times. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Jin, Joong-eon (April 29, 2010). "'쇼트트랙 사태 책임' 빙상연맹 임원들 사퇴" [Executives of the Korea Skating Union resign to take responsibility for the short track speed skating scandal.]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Lim Ji-young (April 14, 2010). "쇼트트랙계를 움직이는 '유라인'과 '전라인'". Sisain (in Korean). Retrieved September 30, 2023. Jin Jung-eon (April 14, 2010). ""검은 쇼트트랙 눈감아온 빙상계 윗선 실체 밝혀야"". The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved September 30, 2023. "Arts and sports personnel, basic military training". Military Manpower Administration (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Kun (April 11, 2010). "쇼트트랙 대표선발전 9월 연기에 선수와 팬들 반발" ['Players and fans protested against the postponement of the short track speed skating national team trials in September.]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kim, Jong-hwa (April 12, 2010). "쇼트트랙 '나눠먹기' 후폭풍" [Shorttrack speed skating 'Sharing' aftermath.]. kyeongin (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kim, Jong-hwa (April 12, 2010). "파벌싸움의 끝, 어른들 갈등에 선수들 등 터진 쇼트트랙" [The end of factional fight, short track speed skating in which the players' backs burst due to adult conflicts.]. JoongAng Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kim, Kyung-yoon (March 20, 2022). "'영웅→귀화→비난' 안현수 "쇼트트랙 포기해야 논란 끝날 듯"" ['Hero → Naturalization → Criticism': Ahn Hyun-soo says 'I think the controversy will end if I give up short track']. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Kun (April 12, 2011). "안현수, 왜 러시아를 선택했나" [Ahn Hyun-soo, why did you choose Russia.]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Ko, Dong-wook (April 16, 2011). "-쇼트트랙- 안현수, 대표선발전 남자 500ｍ 1위" [Ahn claims 500 m title in Nationals]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Kyung-ho (December 30, 2011). "'쇼트트랙 황제' 안현수 이젠 러시아 대표선수" ["Short Track Emperor" Ahn Hyun-soo is now a member of Russia's national team]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved August 28, 2023. hankooki.com Issue Team (May 12, 2015). "'휴먼다큐' 안현수 우나리, 러 귀화 과정서 "절대 받지 말라" 한국 압력 있어…'충격'" ['Human Documentary' Ahn Hyun-soo and Woo Nari, during the naturalization process in Russia, "never accept it"]. sedaily (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Cheol-jong, Yoo (October 5, 2011). "안현수 소속 러' 쇼트트랙팀, 한국코치 해고" [Ahn Hyun-soo's Russian shorttrack speed skating team fires Korean coaches.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Hyun-woo, Kim (October 28, 2011). "[취재파일] 쇼트트랙의 계절이 돌아왔다" [The season of shorttrack speed skating has come back.]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Myung-shik, Choi (February 17, 2014). "안현수 귀화책임론 전명규, 소치서 '두문불출'" [Ahn Hyun-soo's naturalization responsibility controversy Jun Myung-kyu, 'staying at home' in Sochi.]. Munhwa Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Dong-seop, Lee (March 19, 2018). ""빙상계 문제가 파벌싸움? 본질은 독재다."" ["The issue of ice skating world is factional fight? The essence is dictatorship."]. spochoo (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Jung-young, Lee (May 19, 2015). "우나리 "남편 안현수, 러시아 귀화 초기에 고장나 있었다"" [Woo Na-ri said, "My husband, Ahn Hyun-soo, had a severe slump in the early days of naturalization in Russia."]. Maeil Business Newspaper (in Korean). Retrieved February 9, 2023. Hye-jin, Yoon (February 16, 2014). "안현수 金 후폭풍, 전명규-최광복-김소희 논란에 빙상연맹 홈피폭주" [Ahn Hyun-soo's gold medal storm, Jun Myung-kyu, Choi Kwang-bok, Kim So-hee, and the Korea Skating Union website are flooded with protests.]. Korea Economy TV (in Korean). Retrieved July 29, 2023. Young-mi, Lee (February 6, 2014). "안현수 네버엔딩스토리" [Ahn Hyun-soo never ending story]. sports.news.naver (in Korean). Retrieved July 28, 2023. Kim, Yeong-rok (February 1, 2012). "'빅토르 안' 안현수 "처음 국가대표 됐을 때의 기분"" ['Viktor An' Ahn Hyun-soo says, 'It's like how I felt when I first made it to the national team']. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Олег Евстифеев (March 22, 2012). "Виктор Ан - двукратный чемпион России" [Victor An - two golds in Russia]. sportsdaily.ru (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Park, Chan-jun (October 22, 2012). "'빅토르 안으로 첫 우승' 안현수의 화려한 귀환" ['First Gold as Viktor An' - Ahn Hyun-soo's triumphant return]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Nam, Joo-hyun (January 16, 2013). "빅토르 안의 역습! 안현수 짜릿한 우승 장면" [Viktor An's counterattack! Ahn Hyun-soo's thrilling scene of victory]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Hong, Jae-hyun (January 21, 2014). "왕년의 '쇼트트랙 황제' 안현수, 귀환을 알리다" [Former 'Short Track Emperor' rises again]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Results 2013/2014 World Cup Rankings". International Skating Union. Retrieved August 27, 2023. Mark Zeigler (February 10, 2014). "Viktor Ahn: For Russia, with love". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Beth Harris (February 15, 2014). "Viktor Ahn wins 1st Olympic gold and 2nd short track medal for his adopted Russia". Yahoo! Sports. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Gregory Sysoey (February 21, 2014). "Short Track: Russia's Viktor Ahn Storms to Second Gold in Sochi" (in Russian). RIA Novosti. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. "Russia's Ahn wins only short track gold that eluded him: 500m". Fox Sports. Associated Press. February 21, 2014. Archived from the original on March 20, 2014. Beth Harris (February 21, 2014). "Viktor Ahn of Russia wins 2 short track golds". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Sehun (February 22, 2014). "안현수 "귀화 결정 이유는 파벌싸움 아냐"" [Ahn Hyun-soo says, 'The reason behind my naturalization decision is not faction fight'] (in Korean). Kyunghyang Shinmun. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Peter Rutherford, Narae Kim (March 20, 2014). "Exclusive: More South Koreans set to follow Ahn abroad, says dad". Reuters. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Sarkar, Pritha (March 22, 2014). "Olympics-Short track-Ahn success sparks more questions than answers". Reuters. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Kim, Sehun (February 23, 2014). "안현수 "아버지가 없는 말 했다… 올림픽 나가려고 러시아 온 것"" [Ahn Hyun-soo, 'My father said the wrong thing; I came to Russia to go to the Olympics'] (in Korean). Kyunghyang Shinmun. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Aleksei Fomin (February 27, 2017). "Участников военных игр в Сочи согрело российское гостеприимство" [Participants of the military games in Sochi were warmed by Russian hospitality]. Izvestia (in Russian). Retrieved September 6, 2023. Park, Chang-hyeong (February 7, 2022). "中 공산당기관지 "안현수 사실상 공동감독"" [China reports say Ahn Hyun-soo is in fact a co-director]. MK Sports (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Yoon-il (December 9, 2015). "'황제' 안현수, 아내 출산 위해 귀국…국내서 훈련" ['Emperor' Ahn Hyun-soo returns to Korea for wife's childbirth]. Dailian (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yonhap News Agency (March 18, 2016). "Naturalized Russian short tracker to retire after Olympics in native land". The Korea Herald. Retrieved April 3, 2023. James Ellingworth, AP News (Jan 26, 2018). "Viktor Ahn wants IOC to explain why he can't go to Olympics". USA Today. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Almond, Florence (September 6, 2018). "Six-time Olympic champion Ahn turns down coaching role and announces retirement from short track". Inside the Games. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Real man 300 cast". Naver search (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Ryu, Hyo-lim (December 29, 2018). "MBC 연예대상 레드카펫 밟은 진짜사나이 팀" [The Real Man 300 team steps on the red carpet at the MBC Entertainment Awards] (in Korean). Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Dong-sup (January 18, 2019). "[단독] '쇼트 황제' 빅토르 안, 한국체대 빙상장 '플레잉 코치' 활동 의혹… 전명규의 마지막 히든카드?" ['Short Track Emperor' Viktor An suspected of 'Player-coach' activities at Korea National Sports University] (in Korean). Ilyo News. Retrieved April 3, 2023. schaatsen (August 24, 2020). "China haalt Viktor An binnen als bondscoach" [China brings in Viktor An as national coach] (in Dutch). schaatsen.nl. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Timur Ganeev, Aleksei Fomin (February 20, 2018). "Ан может войти в тренерский штаб сборной России" [An can enter the coaching staff of the Russian national team] (in Russian). Izvestia. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Yoonjung Seo, James Griffiths (January 23, 2019). "South Korea launches major investigation into abuse in sport after skating scandal". CNN. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Ko, Jin-hyun (August 24, 2020). "'쇼트트랙 황제' 빅토르 안 비밀리에 중국으로 출국…중국대표팀 코치 수락,연봉 5억원 초특급 대우" [(Exclusive) 'Short Track Emperor', Viktor An, He accepted an offer to coach the Chinese national team. 500 million won a year, super special treatment.] (in Korean). The Daily Sports Seoul. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Diamond, James (February 15, 2019). "South Korean-born Russian short track skater Ahn to come out of retirement for Beijing 2022". Inside the Games. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Choi, Yong-jae (April 29, 2020). "안현수 그리고 빅토르 안…역대 최고의 쇼트트랙 선수 은퇴" [Ahn Hyun-soo and Victor An - the greatest short track speed skater of all time retires] (in Korean). The Daily Sports. Retrieved April 3, 2023. RIA Novosti (April 27, 2020). "'Решил отойти от дел'- Открытое письмо Ана о завершении карьеры" ['I decided to retire' - An's open letter on retirement]. RIA Novosti (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Noh, Ki-wan (April 28, 2020). ""안현수도 빅토르 안도 쇼트트랙에 큰 빚" (은퇴성명 전문)" [Without short track, there is no Ahn Hyun-soo or Viktor An (full text)] (in Korean). MK Sports. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Jung, Yoon-sik (February 9, 2022). "[영상] 한국 선수 쓰다듬는 안현수 '갑론을박'…왕멍 "한국, 비판 자격 없어"" [Ahn Hyun-soo, stroking a Korean player, 'controversy'...Wang Meng said, "Korea is not qualified to criticize Ahn.]. SBS (in Korean). Retrieved August 27, 2023. Yoo, Jee-ho (February 2, 2022). "China: Olympic short track team of mystery". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yoo, Jee-ho (February 6, 2022). "With S. Korean-born coaches in charge, China throws down gauntlet early in short track". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Kyung-yoon (March 20, 2022). "'루머 해명' 안현수 "한국 대표팀 복귀? 아무런 접촉 없어"" [Ahn Hyun-soo clarifies rumors around him : No contact with the Korean national team]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Cyril Ip (February 8, 2022). "Winter Olympics: short-track speedskating coaches Kim Sun-tae, Viktor An showered with love by Chinese netizens, but spark South Korean anger online". South China Morning Post. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Song, Tae-hwa (February 7, 2022). "이젠 중국 영웅… 안현수 향해 '분노와 연민' 동시에" ['Anger and compassion' towards Ahn Hyun-soo]. Kukmin Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Park Rin, Kim Hyo-kyung (February 7, 2022). ""소설보다 찬란한 삶" 中 열광한 코치, 안셴주의 씁쓸한 정체" ["A life more splendid than a novel" Ahn Hyun-soo's bitter identity]. JoongAng Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Kim, Young-joon (February 17, 2014). "안현수, 귀화 순간 '평생 월 100만원 연금' 사라져" [Ahn Hyun-soo can't get a 'pension' because he's naturalized.]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Song, Won-hyung (March 14, 2021). "연금 챙긴 빅토르 안, 빈손 임효준… 같은 귀화인데, 무슨 차이?" [Viktor Ahn, received all the pensions, and Lim Hyo-jun, empty-handed... What's the difference?]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved March 29, 2023. Kang, Dae-ho (January 13, 2023). "中언론 "지도자 안현수, 중국쇼트트랙 강적 될 것"" [Chinese media said, "Leader Ahn Hyun-soo will be a strong enemy of the Chinese short track team."]. MK Sports (in Korean). Retrieved August 28, 2023. Houston, Michael (January 31, 2023). "Russian Skating Union head wants Olympic champion An back after South Korea rejection". Inside the Games. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Yoo, Jee-ho (January 31, 2023). "Seongnam city leaves controversial skating team coaching post vacant". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved February 1, 2023.} Kim, Ki-bum (January 31, 2023). "Faction fight, broken ice rink "no successful candidates"(밥그릇 싸움에 또 다시 망가진 빙상 "합격자 없음")" (in Korean). KBS. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Ko, Jin-hyun (February 7, 2023). "The essence of Seongnam coach's saying "no successful candidates" is the sports system ruined by politics. (성남사태의 본질 …정치가 망친 체육시스템)" (in Korean). The Daily Sports Seoul. Retrieved February 8, 2023. TASS (January 30, 2023). "Глава Союза конькобежцев Гуляев намерен предложить Виктору Ану вернуться в Россию" (in Russian). TASS. Retrieved February 9, 2023. TASS (July 4, 2022). "Виктор Ан может стать советником в Союзе конькобежцев России" (in Russian). TASS. Retrieved February 1, 2023. TASS (July 4, 2022). "Николай Гуляев: главная задача — вернуть былую славу российских коньков" (in Russian). TASS. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Плетнева, Анастасия (31 January 2023). "Виктор Ан снова не нужен на родине. Почему он не возвращается в Россию?" (in Russian). Sport Express. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Heon-Jae, Lee (February 3, 2023). "Russia implores Viktor An to come back". The Dong-a Ilbo. Retrieved August 27, 2023. Chang-geum, Kim (February 9, 2023). "Seongnam City failed to hire a coach. Korea Skating Coaches Union, and the media. (성남시의 코치 채용 불발, 빙상지도자연맹, 그리고 미디어)" (in Korean). The Hankyoreh. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Lee soo-jin (April 13, 2023). "빅토르 안, 쇼트트랙 국대 선발전에 '개인 코치'로 참가…복수 선수 지도" [Viktor Ahn will participate as a coach for multiple skaters in the South Korean national team trials.] (in Korean). news1. Retrieved April 14, 2023. Lee soo-jin (April 13, 2023). "빅토르 안, '국가대표 선발전 코치'로 국내 첫 지도자 행보" [Viktor An South Korea's first coaching career, South Korean national team trials] (in Korean). JTBC. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "지도자 등록 및 활동 자격 기준 변경안내_적용기간(21.04.12 변경)" [Guidelines for Registration of Ice Skating Leaders and Change of Activity Qualification Standards]. skating.or.kr (in Korean). Korea Skating Union. 29 October 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Kwon, Sang-soo (March 17, 2014). "As Ahn shines again, ex-mentor leaves KSU". Korea JoongAng Daily. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Kim, Hyun-jung (February 22, 2018). "안민석 "구악 vs 신악, 빙상연맹은 총성없는 전쟁중"" [Ahn Min-seok said, "Old evil vs new evil, the Korea Skating Union is at war."]. No Cut News (in Korean). Retrieved April 2, 2023. Lee, Claire (April 11, 2018). "[Newsmaker] Scandal sheds light on skating union's mistreatment". The Korea Herald. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Kim, Nam-kwon (February 26, 2018). "'확산 미투운동의 여파, 빙상계의 파벌싸움'" [The aftermath of the Me Too movement, and factional fight in the ice skating.]. KBS (in Korean). Retrieved April 2, 2023. Kim, Nam-kwon (February 28, 2018). "안현수, 안민석에 '귀화, 전명규 때문 아니다' 문자 보내" [Ahn Hyun-soo, 'not because of my naturalization, Jun Myung-kyu'.]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 2, 2023. The Moscow Times (January 2, 2015). "Move to Russia Wins Speedskater Viktor Ahn His Olympic Legacy". The Moscow Times. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Zaccardi, Nick (January 16, 2014). "Apolo Ohno breaks down international short track contenders". NBC Sports. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yahoo! Sports (February 14, 2014). "New country for old Olympic champion". yahoo. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Sports Chosun Ilbo (January 22, 200). "24일 '제11회 코카콜라 체육대상 시상식' 개최" [The 11th Coca-Cola Sports Awards Ceremony to be held in the 24th]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kwon, In-ha (March 14, 200). "안현수, 美스포츠아카데미 '이달의 선수' 선정" [Ahn Hyun-soo selected as 'Player of the Month' by the American Sports Academy]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Han, Yoon-sik (October 2, 2006). "2014동계오륜유치위, 쇼트트렉 '안현수, 진선유' 명예홍보대사 위촉" [Ahn Hyun-soo and Jin Sun-yu as ambassadors for 2014 Pyeongchang Winter Olympics bidding committee]. Newsis (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Dong-wook (January 30, 2008). "이규혁·안현수·김연아, 대한빙상경기연맹 최우수 선수" [Lee Kyu-hyuk, Ahn Hyun-soo, and Yuna Kim chosen as the Best Athletes of KSU]. Newsis (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Min, Chang-gi (March 23, 2008). "25일 아시아체육기자상 전달식" [Asian Sports Awards to be delivered on the 25th]. The Chosun Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Hae-won, Oh (March 24, 2009). "체육진흥공단, 올림픽스타 20명 홍보대사 위촉" [20 Olympic Stars selected as ambassadors for the Korea Sports Promotion Foundation]. Newsis (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Sportbox.ru (March 26, 2013). "Фаткулина, Юсков и Ан стали заслуженными мастерами спорта России" [Fatkulina, Yuskov and An became Honored Masters of Sports of Russia]. Sportbox.ru (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Ан Виктор". cska.ru (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. TASS (February 24, 2014). "Russia's Olympic athletes receive state awards". TASS. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "At the Cultural Center of the Armed Forces, the Minister of Defense met with champions and medalists of the XXII Olympic Winter Games in Sochi". Минобороны России (in Russian). Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Chosunilbo (February 25, 2014). "Viktor Ahn Hailed as Hero of Sochi Games by NBC". The Chosun Ilbo. Retrieved August 27, 2023. Кирьянов, Олег (February 24, 2014). "Американские СМИ назвали Виктора Ана лучшим спортсменом Олимпиады" [American media names Victor An the best athlete of the Olympics]. Rossiyskaya Gazeta (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Калинина, Наталья (September 16, 2014). "Спортсмен года 2014: Виктор Ан". gq.ru (in Russian). Retrieved April 1, 2023. Kim, Yeong-hyun (June 6, 2014). "안현수, 한러 상호방문의 해 명예홍보대사 위촉" [Ahn Hyun-soo becomes ambassador for the 2014-2015 Korea-Russia Year of Mutual Visit]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yonhap News Agency (March 18, 2016). "Russia's Ahn wins alumnus award from alma mater". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Choi, Dong-joon (March 18, 2016). "안현수, '이승훈-심석희' 후배들과" [Ahn Hyun-soo with juniors Lee Seung-hoon and Shim Suk-hee]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Бондаренко, Ольга (July 9, 2016). "В Сочи заложат именную звезду в честь шорт-трекиста Виктора Ана" [A star to be laid in Sochi named after Viktor An in honor of short track skater]. Rossiyskaya Gazeta (in Russian). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Jeong, Hee-jeong (August 1, 2016). "안현수, 러시아 올림픽 챔피언 스타 '명예의 전당' 입성" [Ahn Hyun-soo, a Russian Olympic champion star, enters the Hall of Fame]. insight.co (in Korean). Retrieved April 1, 2023. 우나리 was born in 1983.9.10. search.daum.net. in Korean. Retrieved on April 3, 2023. Jeong, Si-nae (February 14, 2022). "안현수 아내, 국적 루머에 '러시아 귀화? 내 국적 대한민국'" [Ahn Hyun-soo's wife makes rumors on nationality clear: "Naturalized in Russia? My nationality is Korea"]. edaily (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Кирьянов, Олег (February 9, 2014). "Корейцы в восторге от девушки Виктора Ана" [South Koreans are thrilled by Ahn's girl] (in Russian). Rossiyskaya Gazeta. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Чаушьян, Степан (February 22, 2014). "Виктор Ан: все свои победы я посвящаю любимой" [Viktor Ahn: All my triumphs I dedicate to my darling] (in Russian). Argumenty i Fakty. Retrieved April 3, 2023. J Конов-мл, Василий (December 30, 2015). "Шестикратный чемпион ОИ по шорт-треку Виктор Ан стал отцом" [Viktor An has a daughter]. RIA Novosti (in Russian). Retrieved April 1, 2023. The Dong-a Ilbo (January 8, 2016). "안현수-우나리 부부, 득녀… 출산 전부터 만반의 준비" [Ahn Hyun-soo-Woo Nari couple, got a daughter.]. The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 1, 2023. "2022 National Speed Skating Team". skating.or.kr (in Korean). Korea Skating Union. May 9, 2022. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Ryu, Hyun-joo (January 20, 2023). "김민선-안현준, 스피드스케이팅 혼성계주 경기 금메달" [Kim Min-sun and Ahn Hyun-joon won the gold medal in the mixed relay race in speed skating] (in Korean). Retrieved August 27, 2023. Kim, Se-jung (February 21, 2020). "'3000M 은메달' 획득한 '빅토르 안' 동생 안현준" [Ahn Hyun-Jun, the younger brother of 'Viktor An', grabs silver in 3000 m] (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yoon, Chul (August 17, 2011). "Ahn likely to skate for Russia in Sochi Olympics". The Korea Times. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Russia Beyond the Headlines (RBTH) (April 18, 2013). "Korean ice skating champion on why he became Russian". youtube.com. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Sam Borden (February 9, 2014). "Rejecting the U.S. to Skate for Russia". The New York Times. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Agence France-Presse (February 17, 2014). "Fury over Viktor Ahn's 'Russian' gold aimed at Korea Skating Union". South China Morning Post. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Dong Sun-hwa (September 7, 2018). "Koreans tell skater Viktor Ahn to go back to Russia". The Korea Times. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Yoon Bo-ri (February 9, 2022). "안현수 귀화, 이재명 탓?..."올림픽, 정치에 이용 말라"" [Is Ahn Hyun-soo's naturalization responsible for Lee Jae-myung? "Olympics, don't use it in politics]. YTN (in Korean). Retrieved August 19, 2023. Yoon Bo-ri (February 9, 2022). "'이재명-안현수'의 악연?…원희룡 "러시아 귀화, 李 때문"" ['Lee Jae-myung and Ahn Hyun-soo' bad relationship...? Won Hee-ryong "Russian naturalization, because of Lee"]. MBN (in Korean). Retrieved August 19, 2023. Yoo Cheong-mo (September 13, 2022). "Police transfer opposition leader Lee's alleged third-party bribery case to prosecution". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Kim Na-young (January 10, 2023). "(LEAD) Opposition leader to appear for questioning in bribery probe". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved August 19, 2023. "NATIONALITY ACT - Statutes of the Republic of Korea". Ministry of Justice. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Kang Dae-ho (January 8, 2016). "[오피셜] 안현수 국적 회복해도 병역 無…군사훈련 시점과 무관" [Ahn Hyun-soo has no more military service, even if he regains his nationality.]. MK Sports (in Korean). Retrieved April 5, 2023. "2010 ISU 쇼트트랙 월드컵 5차 대회 1500m 준결승, 결승 [습츠_쇼트트랙]" [2010-11 ISU Short Track Speed Skating World Cup #5 Men's 1500 m Semifinals, Finals]. youtube.com (in Korean). SBS Sports. May 14, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2011 ISU 쇼트트랙 세계선수권 1500m 준결, 결승 [습츠_쇼트트랙]" [2011 ISU Short Track Speed Skating World Championships Men's 1500 m Semifinals, Finals]. youtube.com (in Korean). SBS Sports. May 14, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Viktor Ahn IMDb biography". IMDb. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Hong, C. (October 15, 2017). "Olympic Short-Track Speed-Skater Viktor Ahn Is The Newest Family On "The Return Of Superman"". Soompi. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Real man 300". IMDb. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "한수진의 선데이클릭 49회" [Han Su-jin's Sunday Click Ep.49]. SBS (in Korean). March 5, 2006. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "휴먼다큐 사랑 44회" [Human Docu Love Ep.44]. MBC (in Korean). May 11, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "휴먼다큐 사랑 45회" [Human Docu Love Ep.45]. MBC (in Korean). May 18, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Ahn, Ha-na (July 27, 2017). "택시 안현수-우나리, 출연 인증 "즐거운 시간이었습니다"" [Taxi Ahn Hyun-soo-Unari, "It was a good time“]. Maeil Business TV (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "OLYMPIC DEBUTS: Controversial crash ends An medal hopes". olympics.com. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Ahn Hyun-soo, Men's 1500m, Short Track, Speed Skating Torino 2006". Olympics. May 17, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2006 토리노 올림픽 쇼트트랙 1000m, 1500m, 5000m 계주 안현수 습츠_명승부 리턴즈" [Ahn Hyun-soo, Men's 1000m, 1500m, 5000 m relay Short Track, Speed Skating Torino 2006]. SBS YouTube (in Korean). 2020-01-06. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Ahn Hyun-soo, Men's 1000m, Short Track, Speed Skating Torino 2006". Olympics.com. May 19, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Team Korea, Men's 5000m relay, Short Track, Speed Skating Torino 2006". olympics.com. May 16, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Victor An Wins 1000m Gold - Full Short Track Speed Skating Final Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics". Olympics YouTube. February 15, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Home glory for Viktor Ahn in 500m". Olympics.com. May 9, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "올림픽 메달만 8개?!...'빅토르 안' 안현수가 두 국기 품고 세운 영광의 순간들 / 추억스환 #25 / 스포츠머그" [8 Olympic medals?!...'Viktor An' Ahn Hyun-soo, moments of glory]. SBS YouTube (in Korean). July 3, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "5000m Relay Men's Final Short Track Speed Skating - Sochi 2014 Replays". Olympics.com. May 16, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "5000m Relay Men's Semi-Final ST Speed Skating - Sochi 2014 Replays". Olympics.com. May 17, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2002 World Championships Results". ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2003 World Championships Poland Results". ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2004 World Championships Sweden Results". ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2005 World Championships, China Results". ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "2006 World Championships, USA Results.pdf" (PDF). ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "ISU World Short Track Speed Skating Championships 2013 Results.pdf" (PDF). ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "ISU World Short Track Speed Skating Championships 2014 Results.pdf" (PDF). ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "ISU World Short Track Speed Skating Championships 2017 Results.pdf" (PDF). ISU shorttrack.sportresult. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Young-ho (October 21, 2007). "쇼트트랙월드컵 안현수, 3관왕" [Ahn Hyun-Soo wins 3 gold medals at short track World Cup]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "World Cup Results Harbin2007/2008". International Skating Union. Retrieved August 27, 2023. Jeon, Gwang-yeol (October 28, 2007). "안현수, 대회연속 3관왕…쇼트트랙월드컵 1차이어 2차서도 '싹쓸이'" [Ahn Hyun-Soo wins 3 gold medals at short track World Cup]. Kyunghyang Shinmun (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "World Cup Results Kobe 2007/2008". International Skating Union. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "국내종합경기대회 메달집계" [National Competition - Medal Count] (in Korean). Korean Sport & Olympic Committee. Kim, Ji-han (February 10, 2010). "[동계올림픽 영웅 (4)] 아직 남은 꿈을 향해…'쇼트트랙의 황제' 안현수" [Ahn Hyun-Soo, the emperor of short track: toward a still left dream]. xportsnews (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Bong-seok (April 18, 2002). "-쇼트트랙- 안현수, 남자 1500ｍ 우승" [Ahn Hyun-Soo wins men's 1500 m]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Jeong-jin (April 1, 2003). "쇼트트랙선수권- 변천사, 500ｍ 우승 파란" [-Short Track Championships- Byun Chun-sa, 500m win]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Sang-soo (April 2, 2003). "스포츠종합 :안현수-최은경 쇼트트랙 우승" [Ahn hyun-soo and Choi Eun-kyung win National Team Trials.]. Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Hong, Seon-gi (April 15, 2006). "쇼트트랙, 출발선에서 새로 시작" [Short track starts anew at the starting line]. YTN (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Lee, Young-ho (April 16, 2006). "-쇼트트랙종합선수권- 진선유.성시백, 남녀부 우승" [Jin Sun-yu and Sung Si-bak win National Team Trials]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Hong, Seon-gi (September 27, 2006). "쇼트트랙 대표선발전 안현수·진선유 1위" [Ahn Hyun-soo and Jin Sun-yu win National Team Trials]. YTN (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Park, Seong-min (January 6, 2007). "-회장배쇼트트랙- 안현수.전지수, 2관왕" [Ahn Hyun-Soo and Jeon Ji-soo win two titles in Korea Industrial Skating Federation President's Cup]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Koh, Dong-wook (October 18, 2009). "쇼트트랙 안현수, 실업대회서 복귀 시동" [Ahn Hyun-soo seeks comeback at industrial contest]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Koh, Dong-wook (February 2, 2010). "-동계체전- 안현수, 대회 첫 3관왕(종합)" [Ahn Hyun-Soo wins 3 gold medals at Winter Sports Festival]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. Kim, Yeong-hyun (March 27, 2011). "안현수, 종합선수권 1,000m 1위" [Ahn Hyun-soo marks his return as 'short track emperor' at the national short track championships 1000 m race]. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Ан проиграл Кургиняну" [An lost to Kurginyan]. sportbox.ru (in Russian). March 21, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Владимир Григорьев – победитель всероссийских соревнований по шорт-треку на 500 м" [Vladimir Grigoriev - 500m winner at the national short track championships]. allsportinfo.ru. (in Russian). September 28, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан одержал вторую победу на всероссийских соревнованиях по шорт-треку" [Victor An wins second victory at the national championships]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 28, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан первенствовал на 1500 м на всероссийских соревнованиях по шорт-треку" [Victor An excels in the 1500 m at the national short track championships]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 28, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Семён Елистратов первенствовал во втором старте на 1500 м на всероссийских соревнованиях по шорт-треку" [Semen Elistratov tops the second 1500 m race at national short track championships]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 29, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Захаров, Григорьев, Ан и Елистратов победили в эстафете на 5000 м на всероссийском турнире по шорт-треку; Бородулина, Белякова, Баранок и Степанова – первые в эстафете на 3000 м" [Zakharov, Grigoriev, An and Elistratov win 5000m relay at the national short track championships; Borodulina, Belyakova, Baranok and Stepanova win 3000 m relay]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 30, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан: передо мной поставлена задача успешно выступить на Олимпиаде в Сочи, и я стремлюсь именно к этому" [Victor Ahn: my task is to perform successfully at the Olympics in Sochi, and I am striving for it]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 1, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Новости конькобежного спорта за 22 декабря" [Speed skating news for December 22]. rusbiathlon.ru (in Russian). December 22, 2012. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан – лучший на первой дистанции 500 м на Кубке СКР по шорт-треку" [Victor An wins 500 m at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 16, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – сильнейшие во втором старте на дистанции 500 м на Кубке СКР" [Victor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win second 500 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 18, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан – лучший в первом старте на 1000 м на Кубке СКР по шорт-треку" [Victor An wins 1000 m at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 17, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Руслан Захаров и Софья Просвирнова – сильнейшие во втором старте на дистанции 1000 м на Кубке СКР" [Ruslan Zakharov and Sofia Prosvirnova win the second 1000 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 18, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – сильнейшие на первой дистанции 1500 м на Кубке СКР по шорт-треку" [Ruslan Zakharov wins 1500 m at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 16, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан стал лучшим в Коломне" [Viktor An becomes champion in Kolomna]. 360tv.ru (in Russian). October 20, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – лидеры Кубка СКР по шорт-треку после двух дней соревнований" [Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova are the leaders of the SKR Short Track Cup after two days of competition]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). October 17, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – первые на 1000 м на чемпионате России в Коломне" [Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova are the first in the 1000 m at the Russian Championships in Kolomna]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). December 29, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан победил на дистанции 1500 м на чемпионате России по шорт-треку в Коломне". allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). December 27, 201. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – чемпионы России по шорт-треку в многоборье" [Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova are the overall champions in short track speed skating]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). December 29, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан стал чемпионом России по шорт-треку в многоборье" [Viktor An becomes the overall champion in Russian nationals]. RIA Novosti (in Russian). December 29, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан доволен титулом чемпиона России и результатом в Коломне" [Viktor An is pleased with his Russian champion title and the result in Kolomna]. RIA Novosti (in Russian). December 29, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Новости конькобежного спорта за 9 сентября" [Speed skating news for September 9]. rusbiathlon.ru (in Russian). September 9, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Новости конькобежного спорта за 10 сентября" [Speed skating news for September 9]. rusbiathlon.ru (in Russian). September 10, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова выиграли первый старт на 500 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win the first 500 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 23, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Олимпийский чемпион Семён Елистратов и Софья Просвирнова выиграли второй старт на 500 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Olympic champion Semen Elistratov and Sofia Prosvirnova win the second 500 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 25, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Екатерина Константинова выиграли первый старт на 1500 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win the first 1500 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 23, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова выиграли второй старт на 1500 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win the second 1500 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 24, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Екатерина Константинова выиграли первый старт на 1000 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win the first 1000 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 24, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Екатерина Константинова выиграли второй старт на 1000 м на этапе Кубка СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova win the second 1000 m race at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 25, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан и Софья Просвирнова – первые по итогам отбора на Кубок мира" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An and Sofia Prosvirnova qualify first to the World Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). September 25, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан победил на 500 и 1500 м, захватив лидерство на многоборном чемпионате России" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An wins the 500 and 1500 m, taking the lead in the Russian national championships]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). December 28, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан и Екатерина Константинова – чемпионы России по шорт-треку в многоборье" [Victor Ahn and Ekaterina Konstantinova are overall Russian champions in short track speed skating]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). December 29, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Шестикратный олимпийский чемпион Виктор Ан уступил олимпийскому чемпиону Семену Елистратову на Кубке СКР" [Six-time Olympic champion Viktor An lost to Olympic champion Semyon Elistratov at the SKR Short Track Cup]. allsportinfo.ru (in Russian). August 14, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Виктор Ан заработал 9 млн. рублей в Петербурге" [Viktor An earned 9 million rubles in St. Petersburg]. sportsdaily.ru (in Russian). April 2, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Новости конькобежного спорта за 2 октября" [Speed skating news for October 2]. rusbiathlon.ru (in Russian). October 2, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "National League Russia Cup 1 - Overall Classification Men". shorttrackonline.info. September 29, 2019. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Viktor Ahn. Victor An at the International Skating Union Victor An at ShorttrackOnLine.info Victor An at Olympics.com Victor An at Olympedia Victor An at IMDb