The men's ice hockey tournament at the 1984 Winter Olympics in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, was the 15th Olympic Championship. The Soviet Union won its sixth gold medal. Games were held mostly in the arena portion of the Olympic Hall Zetra, with some played in the arena portion of the Skenderija Olympic Hall. The IIHF did not run a championship in Olympic years at this time. Nations that did not participate in the Sarejevo Olympics were invited to compete in the Thayer Tutt Trophy. Source: Gold – "Team members USSR". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2009-07-29. Silver – "Team members CZECHOSLOVAKIA". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2009-07-29. Bronze – "Team members SWEDEN". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2009-07-29. The final standings of the 1983 championships were used to establish qualification. All pool 'A' teams were included however the German Democratic Republic declined to send a team. The host Yugoslavians as well as the top pool 'B' teams were added. A play-off between the fourth placed pool 'B' team and the pool 'C' champion was used to determine the final place at the Olympics. The Norwegian team proceeded to compete at the Olympics. Top two teams (shaded ones) advanced to the medal round. Source:[citation needed] Top two teams (shaded ones) advanced to the medal round. Source:[citation needed] The top two teams from each group play the top two teams from the other group once. Head to head results from the preliminary round (Soviet Union defeated Sweden 10–1, Czechoslovakia defeated Canada 4–0) were carried over. Source:[citation needed] Those countries that finished 3rd and 4th in their groups then played a further game to define their classification Team Italy was the oldest team in the tournament, averaging 27 years and 8 months. Team Canada was the youngest team in the tournament, averaging 21 years and 6 months. Gold medalists team USSR averaged 26 years and 1 months. Tournament average was 24 years and 9 months.  Soviet Union  Czechoslovakia  Sweden  Canada  West Germany  Finland  United States  Poland  Italy  Austria  Yugoslavia  Norway "Ice Hockey at the 1984 Sarajevo Winter Games". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2019. "Team Canada - Olympics - Sarajevo 1984 - Player Stats". Jeux Olympiques 1984 Sport Statistics – International Competitions Archive