The UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying tournament was a football competition that was played from September 2014 to November 2015 to determine the 23 UEFA member men's national teams joining the automatically qualified host team France in the UEFA Euro 2016 final tournament. A total of 53 national teams participated in this qualifying process, with Gibraltar taking part for the first time. The draw took place at the Palais des Congrès Acropolis, Nice, on 23 February 2014. Bold indicates champion for that year. Italic indicates host for that year. From 1960 to 1980, the Czech Republic and Slovakia competed as Czechoslovakia. From 1972 to 1988, Germany competed as West Germany. From 1960 to 1988, Russia competed as the Soviet Union, and in 1992 as CIS. All UEFA member associations were eligible to compete in the qualifying competition, with the host team France qualifying directly to the finals tournament. The other 53 teams were drawn into eight groups of six teams (Groups A–H) and one group of five teams (Group I). The group winners, runners-up, and the best third-placed team (with the results against the sixth-placed team discarded) directly qualified to the finals. The eight remaining third-placed teams contested two-legged play-offs to determine the last four qualifiers for the finals. Sides were seeded according to the UEFA national team coefficient rankings, which were announced along with the draw procedure and final tournament match schedule after the 23–24 January Executive Committee meeting in Nyon. For the qualifying group stage, the teams were seeded into six pots (Pots 1–5 with 9 teams and Pot 6 with 8 teams) for the qualifying group stage draw according to the UEFA national team coefficient rankings, with the title holders (Spain) automatically seeded into Pot 1. Each nation's coefficient was generated by calculating: 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying stage. 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying stage and final tournament. 20% of the average ranking points per game earned in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying stage and final tournament. UEFA stated that nations with the largest markets in terms of contribution to the European Qualifiers revenue would be drawn into one of the groups containing six teams. They included England, Spain, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. UEFA also stated in their regulations that "the teams drawn into the group of five teams will have France added to their group for the purpose of playing centralized friendlies". However, these friendlies did not count in the qualifying group standings. For the play-offs the four ties were determined by draw, including the order of the two legs of each tie. The teams were seeded for the play-off draw according to the UEFA national team coefficient rankings updated after the completion of the group stage. Each nation's coefficient was generated by calculating: 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying group stage. 40% of the average ranking points per game earned in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying stage and final tournament. 20% of the average ranking points per game earned in the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying stage and final tournament. If two or more teams were equal on points on completion of the group matches, the following tie-breaking criteria were applied: Higher number of points obtained in the matches played among the teams in question; Superior goal difference in matches played among the teams in question; Higher number of goals scored in the matches played among the teams in question; Higher number of goals scored away from home in the matches played among the teams in question; If, after having applied criteria 1 to 4, teams still had an equal ranking, criteria 1 to 4 were reapplied exclusively to the matches between the teams in question to determine their final rankings. If this procedure did not lead to a decision, criteria 6 to 10 applied; Superior goal difference in all group matches; Higher number of goals scored in all group matches; Higher number of away goals scored in all group matches; Fair play conduct in all group matches (1 point for a single yellow card, 3 points for a red card as a consequence of two yellow cards, 3 points for a direct red card, 4 points for a yellow card followed by a direct red card); Position in the UEFA national team coefficient ranking system; To determine the best third-placed team, the results against the teams in sixth place were discarded. The following criteria were applied: Higher number of points obtained; Superior goal difference; Higher number of goals scored; Higher number of away goals scored; Fair play conduct in all group matches; Position in the UEFA national team coefficient ranking system; For each play-off tie, the team that scored more goals on aggregate over the two legs qualified for the final tournament. If the aggregate score was level, the away goals rule was applied, i.e., the team that scored more goals away from home over the two legs advanced. If away goals were also equal, then thirty minutes of extra time was played, divided into two fifteen-minutes halves. The away goals rule was again applied after extra time, i.e., if there were goals scored during extra time and the aggregate score was still level, the visiting team advanced by virtue of more away goals scored. If no goals were scored during extra time, the tie was decided by penalty shoot-out. Notes When there were two or more teams tied in points, criteria 1 to 4 were applied. After these criteria were applied, they could define the position of some of the teams involved, but not all of them. For example, if there was a three-way tie on points, the application of the first four criteria could only break the tie for one of the teams, leaving the other two teams still tied. In this case, the tiebreaking procedure was resumed, from the beginning, for those teams that were still tied. This was the first qualifying tournament after UEFA announced centralised rights deals for both UEFA Euro and FIFA World Cup qualifying. UEFA had proposed the "Week of Football" concept for the scheduling of qualifying matches: Matches took place from Thursday to Tuesday. Kick-off times were largely set at 18:00 and 20:45 CET on Saturdays and Sundays, and 20:45 CET on Thursdays, Fridays, Mondays and Tuesdays. On double-header matchweeks, teams played on Thursday and Sunday, or Friday and Monday, or Saturday and Tuesday. Matches in the same group were played on the same day. There were ten matchdays for the qualifying group stage, and two matchdays for the play-offs: Unlike previous qualifying campaigns where group fixtures were determined by negotiation between the national federations, UEFA themselves decided each group's fixture list, released the same day as the draw. The draw took place at the Palais des Congrès Acropolis, Nice, on 23 February 2014, 12:00 CET. Groups A–H each contain one team from each of Pots 1–6, while Group I contains one team from each of Pots 1–5. For television rights reasons, England, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the Netherlands were drawn into groups of six teams. Before the draw UEFA confirmed that, for political reasons, Armenia would not be drawn against Azerbaijan (due to the dispute concerning territory of Nagorno-Karabakh) and Gibraltar would not be drawn against Spain (due to the disputed status of Gibraltar). France (Coeff: 30,992; Rank: 11), the 2016 tournament hosts, were partnered with the five-team Group I, allowing them to play friendlies against these countries on their 'spare' dates that did not count in the qualifying group standings. The seeding pots were announced on 24 January 2014. The teams in bold qualified to the final tournament.   Group winners, runners-up and the best ranked third-placed team qualified directly for UEFA Euro 2016   The remaining third-placed teams advanced to the play-offs   Other teams were eliminated after the qualifying group stage Source: UEFA Notes: Head-to-head points: Kazakhstan 4, Latvia 1. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Tied on head-to-head points (3) and head-to-head goal difference (0). Head-to-head away goals: Luxembourg 2, Macedonia 0. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Tied on head-to-head results. Overall goal difference was used as the tiebreaker. Source: UEFA Notes: Head-to-head points: Faroe Islands 6, Greece 0. Source: UEFA Notes: The Montenegro v Russia match was awarded as a 3–0 win to Russia after being abandoned at 0–0 due to crowd violence and a scuffle between players. Source: UEFA Notes: Croatia were deducted one point after charges for racist behaviour in the home match against Italy. Source: UEFA Notes: The Serbia v Albania match was awarded as a 3–0 win to Albania, and Serbia were also deducted three points, after the match was abandoned at 0–0 because home fans invaded the pitch and attacked Albania players when a drone carried a pro-Albanian flag over the stadium. The highest ranked third-placed team from the groups directly qualified for the tournament, while the remainder entered the play-offs. As Group I contained five teams and the rest contained six, matches against any sixth-placed team in each group were not included in this ranking. As a result, a total of eight matches played by each team count toward the purpose of the third-placed ranking table. Turkey became the best third-placed team, after winning against Iceland in its last match, while at the same time Kazakhstan beat Latvia to finish fifth in Group A. Source: UEFA Rules for classification: Counting only matches against teams ranked first to fifth in the group, 1) Points; 2) Goal difference; 3) Goals scored; 4) Away goals scored; 5) Lower disciplinary points total; 6) UEFA national team coefficient ranking; 7) Drawing of lots. The eight remaining third-placed teams contested two-legged play-offs to determine the last four qualifiers for the finals. The teams were seeded for the play-off draw according to the UEFA national team coefficient rankings updated after the completion of the qualifying group stage. The draw for the play-offs was held on 18 October 2015, 11:20 CEST, at the UEFA headquarters in Nyon. The seedings were as follows: The first legs were played on 12–14 November, and the second legs were played on 15–17 November 2015. The four play-off winners (Ukraine, Sweden, Republic of Ireland and Hungary) qualified for the final tournament. There were 694 goals scored in 268 matches, for an average of 2.59 goals per match. 13 goals Robert Lewandowski 11 goals Zlatan Ibrahimović 9 goals Thomas Müller 8 goals Edin Džeko Artem Dzyuba 7 goals Marc Janko Wayne Rooney Kyle Lafferty Steven Fletcher Gareth Bale 6 goals Ivan Perišić Danny Welbeck Gylfi Sigurðsson Arkadiusz Milik Milivoje Novaković Andriy Yarmolenko 5 goals Kevin De Bruyne Eden Hazard Omer Damari Klaas-Jan Huntelaar Cristiano Ronaldo Robbie Keane Jonathan Walters Shaun Maloney Marek Hamšík Paco Alcácer 4 goals David Alaba Marouane Fellaini Nestoras Mitidis Bořek Dočkal Kamil Grosicki Xherdan Shaqiri Burak Yılmaz 3 goals Ildefons Lima Marko Arnautović Martin Harnik Dimitrij Nazarov Dries Mertens Demetris Christofi Georgios Efrem Harry Kane Theo Walcott Joel Pohjanpalo Tornike Okriashvili Mario Götze Max Kruse André Schürrle Kolbeinn Sigþórsson Tomer Hemed Graziano Pellè Yuriy Logvinenko Valērijs Šabala Robin van Persie Gareth McAuley Alexander Tettey Shane Long Aleksandr Kokorin Steven Naismith Zoran Tošić Adam Nemec Boštjan Cesar David Silva Erkan Zengin Josip Drmić Haris Seferović Selçuk İnan Artem Kravets 2 goals Zlatko Junuzović Rubin Okotie Rahid Amirguliyev Stanislaw Drahun Mikhail Gordeichuk Timofei Kalachev Sergei Kornilenko Radja Nainggolan Milan Đurić Vedad Ibišević Haris Medunjanin Edin Višća Iliyan Mitsanski Ivelin Popov Marcelo Brozović Andrej Kramarić Luka Modrić Pavel Kadeřábek Václav Pilař Milan Škoda Nicklas Bendtner Yussuf Poulsen Ross Barkley Raheem Sterling Jack Wilshere Sergei Zenjov Jóan Símun Edmundsson Riku Riski Jaba Kankava Valeri Qazaishvili Mate Vatsadze İlkay Gündoğan Dániel Böde Krisztián Németh Tamás Priskin Birkir Bjarnason Aron Gunnarsson Tal Ben Haim II Nir Bitton Eran Zahavi Antonio Candreva Giorgio Chiellini Éder Islambek Kuat Fedor Černych Arvydas Novikovas Lars Krogh Gerson Aleksandar Trajkovski Fatos Bećiraj Stevan Jovetić Mirko Vučinić Arjen Robben Georginio Wijnaldum Steven Davis Joshua King Grzegorz Krychowiak Sebastian Mila João Moutinho James McClean Aiden McGeady Constantin Budescu Paul Papp Bogdan Stancu Adem Ljajić Juraj Kucka Róbert Mak Nejc Pečnik Sergio Busquets Santi Cazorla Pedro Marcus Berg Fabian Schär Arda Turan Yevhen Konoplyanka Yevhen Seleznyov Serhiy Sydorchuk Aaron Ramsey 1 goal Bekim Balaj Berat Djimsiti Shkëlzen Gashi Ermir Lenjani Mërgim Mavraj Armando Sadiku Robert Arzumanyan Henrikh Mkhitaryan Hrayr Mkoyan Marcos Pizzelli Marcel Sabitzer Javid Huseynov Michy Batshuayi Christian Benteke Nacer Chadli Laurent Depoitre Divock Origi Ermin Bičakčić Senad Lulić Mihail Aleksandrov Nikolay Bodurov Andrey Galabinov Ventsislav Hristov Dimitar Rangelov Nikola Kalinić Mario Mandžukić Ivica Olić Danijel Pranjić Ivan Rakitić Gordon Schildenfeld Constantinos Charalambidis Jason Demetriou Dossa Júnior Vincent Laban Constantinos Makrides Giorgos Merkis Vladimír Darida Ladislav Krejčí David Lafata David Limberský Tomáš Necid Tomáš Sivok Josef Šural Pierre-Emile Højbjerg Nicolai Jørgensen Thomas Kahlenberg Simon Kjær Jakob Poulsen Jannik Vestergaard Lasse Vibe Phil Jagielka Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain Andros Townsend Ats Purje Konstantin Vassiljev Hallur Hansson Christian Holst Róaldur Jakobsen Brandur Olsen Paulus Arajuuri Roman Eremenko Jarkko Hurme Berat Sadik Nikoloz Gelashvili Karim Bellarabi Toni Kroos Marco Reus Lee Casciaro Jake Gosling Christos Aravidis Nikos Karelis Panagiotis Kone Kostas Mitroglou Sokratis Papastathopoulos Kostas Stafylidis Panagiotis Tachtsidis Balázs Dzsudzsák Zoltán Gera Richárd Guzmics László Kleinheisler Gergő Lovrencsics Zoltán Stieber Ádám Szalai Jón Daði Böðvarsson Rúrik Gíslason Eiður Guðjohnsen Ragnar Sigurðsson Moanes Dabour Gil Vermouth Leonardo Bonucci Matteo Darmian Daniele De Rossi Stephan El Shaarawy Alessandro Florenzi Simone Zaza Rinat Abdulin Samat Smakov Aleksandrs Cauņa Aleksejs Višņakovs Artūrs Zjuzins Franz Burgmeier Sandro Wieser Deivydas Matulevičius Saulius Mikoliūnas Lukas Spalvis Stefano Bensi Mario Mutsch Sébastien Thill David Turpel Besart Abdurahimi Arijan Ademi Agim Ibraimi Adis Jahović Alfred Effiong Clayton Failla Michael Mifsud Gheorghe Boghiu Eugeniu Cebotaru Alexandru Dedov Alexandru Epureanu Dejan Damjanović Stefan Savić Žarko Tomašević Ibrahim Afellay Jeffrey Bruma Stefan de Vrij Luciano Narsingh Wesley Sneijder Craig Cathcart Josh Magennis Niall McGinn Jamie Ward Jo Inge Berget Mats Møller Dæhli Tarik Elyounoussi Vegard Forren Markus Henriksen Håvard Nielsen Håvard Nordtveit Alexander Søderlund Jakub Błaszczykowski Kamil Glik Bartosz Kapustka Krzysztof Mączyński Sławomir Peszko Łukasz Szukała Ricardo Carvalho Fábio Coentrão Nani Miguel Veloso Robbie Brady Cyrus Christie Wes Hoolahan John O'Shea Ovidiu Hoban Claudiu Keșerü Ciprian Marica Alexandru Maxim Raul Rusescu Alan Dzagoev Sergei Ignashevich Dmitri Kombarov Oleg Kuzmin Fyodor Smolov Matteo Vitaioli Ikechi Anya Chris Martin James McArthur Matt Ritchie Aleksandar Kolarov Nemanja Matić Peter Pekarík Kornel Saláta Stanislav Šesták Miroslav Stoch Vladimír Weiss Robert Berić Valter Birsa Branko Ilić Josip Iličić Kevin Kampl Dejan Lazarević Andraž Struna Jordi Alba Juan Bernat Diego Costa Andrés Iniesta Isco Mario Gaspar Álvaro Morata Sergio Ramos Jimmy Durmaz Emil Forsberg Ola Toivonen Eren Derdiyok Johan Djourou Blerim Džemaili Breel Embolo Gökhan Inler Pajtim Kasami Michael Lang Admir Mehmedi Valentin Stocker Granit Xhaka Serdar Aziz Umut Bulut Hakan Çalhanoğlu Bilal Kısa Oğuzhan Özyakup Denys Harmash David Cotterill Hal Robson-Kanu 1 own goal Mërgim Mavraj (against Armenia) Levon Hayrapetyan (against Serbia) Kamo Hovhannisyan (against Albania) Rashad Sadygov (against Croatia) Alyaksandr Martynovich (against Ukraine) Nikolay Bodurov (against Croatia) Yordan Minev (against Italy) Vedran Ćorluka (against Norway) Dossa Júnior (against Andorra) Jordan Henderson (against Slovenia) Ragnar Klavan (against Switzerland) Akaki Khubutia (against Scotland) Mats Hummels (against Scotland) Jordan Perez (against Republic of Ireland) Yogan Santos (against Germany) Jón Daði Böðvarsson (against Czech Republic) Giorgio Chiellini (against Azerbaijan) Martin Büchel (against Russia) Franz Burgmeier (against Russia) Tome Pachovski (against Spain) Petru Racu (against Montenegro) Robin van Persie (against Czech Republic) Markus Henriksen (against Hungary) John O'Shea (against Scotland) Cristian Brolli (against England) Alessandro Della Valle (against England) 2 own goals Giedrius Arlauskis (against England & Switzerland) UEFA unveiled the branding for the qualifiers on 15 April 2013. It shows a national jersey inside a heart, and represents Europe, honour and ambition. The same branding was also used for the European qualifiers for the 2018 World Cup. The goal tally takes into account the original result of fixtures that were subsequently forfeited, not the awarded scoreline. "UEFA European Football Championship Final Tournament 2016: Tournament Requirements" (PDF). UEFA. June 2009. p. 3, sec. 3; p. 6, sec. 1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2009. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "France beat Turkey and Italy to stage Euro 2016". British Broadcasting Corporation. 28 May 2010. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Qualifying draw". UEFA.com. Retrieved 23 February 2014. "Nice to get the ball rolling for EURO 2016". UEFA.com. 13 December 2013. "UEFA EURO 2016: How all the teams qualified". UEFA. 17 November 2015. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "European Championship – France 2016". Romanian Football Association. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. "UEFA EURO 2016 regulations published". UEFA.com. 18 December 2013. "UEFA EURO 2016 qualifying format". UEFA.com. "Regulations of the UEFA European Football Championship 2014–16" (PDF). UEFA.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2013. "Centralised friendlies" (PDF). UEFA.com. "UEFA sets fixture list of Euro 2016 host France". FOX Sports. Retrieved 21 February 2024. UEFA.com (18 December 2013). "UEFA EURO 2016 regulations published | UEFA EURO". UEFA.com. Retrieved 21 February 2024. Association, Press (23 January 2014). "European Championship hosts France to take part in qualification stages". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Euro 2016: Hosts France to feature in qualifying". BBC Sport. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "UEFA announces deals for European qualifiers". UEFA.org. 10 April 2013. Collett, Mike (9 October 2014). "Infantino defends 'Week of Football' and Euro 2016 format". Reuters. Retrieved 19 February 2024. McPherson, Ian (8 November 2013). "Uefa sells handful of European qualifiers". SportsPro. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "UEFA EURO 2016 qualifying draw procedure" (PDF). UEFA.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 February 2014. "Pots announced for EURO qualifying draw". UEFA.com. 24 January 2014. "National Team Coefficients Overview" (PDF). UEFA.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 29 January 2014. "Croatia, Turkey qualify: how the groups ended". UEFA.com. 13 October 2015. "Play-off draw". UEFA.com. Retrieved 18 October 2015. "Sweden v Denmark highlight of play-off draw". UEFA.com. 18 October 2015. "EURO 2016 play-off draw seedings confirmed". UEFA. 14 October 2015. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "UEFA − National Team Coefficients Overview − Matches considered up to 14/10/2015" (PDF). UEFA.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2015. "Lewandowski equals Healy's scoring record". UEFA.com. 11 October 2015. "European qualifiers branding launched". UEFA. 15 April 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2014. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Qualification for the 2016 UEFA European Championship. UEFA Euro 2016 at UEFA.com