The Iran Men's National Volleyball Team is the official national men's volleyball team of Iran. It is governed by the Islamic Republic of Iran Volleyball Federation (I.R.I.V.F.) and takes part in international volleyball competitions. As of 11 September 2022, Team Melli is considered as the second team in Asia, as it ranks 10th in the FIVB World Rankings. The national team won the Asian Volleyball Championship four times: in 2011 Tehran, 2013 Dubai, 2019 Tehran and 2021 Chiba & Funabashi In its first appearance in the competition since joining the 2013 World League, Iran has been a dominant force in Group 1.[citation needed] In 2014 World League campaign, Iran's national team reached fourth place in Group 1 after a straight-set defeat to their Italian hosts in the bronze medal match. In these games, Iran had already defeated Brazil, Italy and Poland.[citation needed] Iran has also competed in the World Championship four times, with their best result obtained in 2014 Poland where they ended up in 6th place. In those games Iran qualified from the first and second rounds with, respectively, four and five wins; their only defeat was against France.[citation needed] Iran defeated Japan to win the gold medal at the Asian Games Korea in 2014. Consecutively, in the 2018 Asian Games in Indonesia, Iran cruised past Japan and South Korea to win the gold medal.[citation needed] Iran made it to the Olympic Games for the first time in their history in 2016 as the top-ranked Asian squad at the World Olympic Qualification Tournament in Japan. Iran finished in 5th place in the competition.[citation needed] The history of Iran's national volleyball team dates back to around 1920 when Mir Mehdi Varzandeh brought volleyball regulations to Iran. During World War II, Allied forces occupied Iran, and Iranians participated in sports, including volleyball, with soldiers. At that time a friendly match was arranged between the Iranian and Russian Army teams. In 1958, for the first time, national men's team of Pakistan was invited to Tehran for some friendly matches with the national team, club teams and the Army team. Iran's national team first attended an international competition at the 1958 Asian Games, where they won the silver medal.   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place   Champions    Runners up    Third place    Fourth place 2007 – Runners-up 2010 – Champions 2022 – Runners-up 2023 – Champions Representing Iran at the 2022 FIVB Volleyball Men's World Championship. Head coach: Behrouz Ataei Note: The following list may not be complete. Last updated: 17 July 2023 Source:[citation needed] The team's home arena are Azadi Indoor Stadium, Azadi Volleyball Hall, Rezazadeh Stadium and Ghadir Stadium. The table below shows the history of kit providers for the Iran national volleyball team. Primary sponsors include: main sponsors like MCI and Tourism Bank, Refah Stores other sponsors: Roamer.[citation needed] Iran played with their "B" team. Iran played with their "U23" team. Iran played with their "U21" team. Iran played with their "Club" team. Iran played with their "U19" team. "FIVB Senior World Ranking - Men". FIVB website. FIVB. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "Brief History of Iran Men's Volleyball". I.R Iran VolleyBall Foundation. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2021. Daily Bulletin Slovenia "خارجی‌های والیبال؛ از سردار تا ولاسکو". Archived from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2015. "کسب سهمیه المپیک والیبال قطعی است". (in Persian) Asian Volleyball Championship (in Persian) Volleyball at the Asian Games (in Persian) Iran Volleyball History Wikimedia Commons has media related to Iran men's national volleyball team. Volleyball portal Official website FIVB profile