Lodeynopolsky District (Russian: Лодейнопо́льский райо́н) is an administrative and municipal district (raion), one of the seventeen in Leningrad Oblast, Russia. It is located in the northeast of the oblast and borders with Olonetsky District of the Republic of Karelia in the north, Podporozhsky District in the east, Tikhvinsky District in the south, and Volkhovsky District in the west. The area of the district is 4,900 square kilometers (1,900 sq mi). Its administrative center is the town of Lodeynoye Pole. Population (excluding the administrative center): 9,795 (2010 Census); 12,185 (2002 Census); 13,426 (1989 Census). The district is adjacent to Lake Ladoga, the largest freshwater lake in Europe, and the whole area of the district belongs to the catchment area of Lake Ladoge. The most important river in the district is the Svir, which connects Lake Onega and Lake Ladoga. The Svir is dammed by the Lower Svir Hydroelectric Station. The biggest tributary of the Svir within the district is the Oyat (right). The central part of the district belongs to the river basin of the Oyat, whereas some areas in the southern part of the district belong to the basin of the Kapsha, a tributary of the Pasha, another major tributary of the Oyat. The largest lake in the district (behind Lake Ladoga) is Lake Savozero, in the basin of the Oyat. Almost the whole area of the district is covered by forests. The northwestern part of the district, limited by the Svir in the south, by Lake Ladoga in the west, and by the Republic of Karelia in the north, is allocated to Nizhnesvirsky Nature Reserve, a protected natural area. The area was populated by Balto-Finnic peoples, and later, since it was on one of the main waterways connecting Novgorod with the Russian North, it became a part of the Novgorod Republic. In 1478, Alexander Svirsky, a monk formerly at the Valaam Monastery, founded Alexander-Svirsky Monastery not far from the mouth of the Svir. In the 15th century, the area, as a part of Novgorod, was annexed by the Grand Duchy of Moscow. In 1702, Tsar Peter the Great founded the Olonets Shipyard on the Svir River and resettled peasants along the banks of the Svir. The settlement at the shipyard became known as Lodeynoye Pole. In the course of the administrative reform carried out in 1708 by Peter the Great, the area was included into Ingermanland Governorate (known from 1710 as Saint Petersburg Governorate). In 1727, it was transferred to the newly established Novgorod Governorate. In 1773, the northern part of the current area of the district was transferred into newly established Olonets Oblast and included into Lodeynopolsky Uyezd. The southern part of the current area of the district remained in Tikhvinsky Uyezd of Novgorod Governorate. A sequence of administrative reforms followed. In 1781, Olonets Oblast was transferred to Saint Petersburg Governorate, and in 1784, it was transformed into an independent administrative unit, Olonets Viceroyalty. In 1785, Lodeynoye Pole was granted town status. In 1799, Olonets Viceroyalty was abolished and divided between Novgorod and Arkhangelsk Governorates. Lodeynopolsky Uyezd was merged into Olonetsky Uyezd. In 1801, Olonets Governorate was established, and in 1802, Lodeynopolsky Uyezd was restored. The northern part of the district belonged to Lodeynopolsky Uyezd of Olonets Governorate. In 1922, Olonets Governorate was abolished, and Lodeynopolsky Uyezd was transferred to Petrograd Governorate (later Leningrad Oblast). In June 1918, five uyezds of Novgorod Governorate, including Tikhvinsky Uyezd, were split off to form Cherepovets Governorate, with the administrative center in Cherepovets. On August 1, 1927, Cherepovets Governorate was abolished and merged into Leningrad Oblast. On August 1, 1927, the uyezds in Leningrad Oblast were abolished, and Lodeynopolsky District with the administrative center in the town of Lodeynoye Pole was established. It was a part of Lodeynoye Pole Okrug of Leningrad Oblast and included areas formerly belonging to Lodeynopolsky Uyezd. In the 1927, a large-scale construction of the Lower Svir Hydroelectric Station started, predominantly by using prisoners. For this purpose, in 1931 the concentration camp Svirlag was established, with the headquarters in the settlement of Svirstroy. In 1931, Svirstroy was granted urban-type settlement status. Between September 1941 and June 1944, during World War II, the northern part of the district was occupied by Finnish troops. Due to the damage cause by the war two of the selsoviets (Kanomsky and Mandrogsky Selsoviets) were abolished in 1950. On August 1, 1927, Shapshinsky District District with the administrative center in the village of Gonginichi was established as well. It was a part of Lodeynoye Pole Okrug of Leningrad Oblast and included areas formerly belonging to Lodeynopolsky and Tikhvinsky Uyezds. On November 14, of the same year, the district was renamed Oyatsky, and its administrative center was transferred to the village of Alyokhovshchina. On December 14, 1955 Oyatsky District was abolished and merged into Lodeynopolsky District. The economy of the district is based on timber industry. There are also food industry enterprises. The agriculture of Lodeynopolsky District specializes in cattle breeding with milk and meat production. There is also trout farming. The railroad connecting Saint Petersburg and Murmansk crosses the district from southwest to northeast. The largest railway station within the district is Lodeynoye Pole. The M18 highway, connecting Saint Petersburg and Murmansk, crosses the district as well. In Lodeynoye Pole, it turns north and enters the Republic of Karelia. A paved road branches off east in Lodeynoye Pole and continues to Vytegra in Vologda Oblast via Podporozhye. There are also local roads. The Volga–Baltic Waterway, connecting the basins of the Volga and the Neva Rivers, crosses the district from east to west, following the Svir River. There is regular cruise and cargo traffic along the waterway. The district contains forty-two cultural heritage monuments of federal significance and additionally forty-two objects classified as cultural and historical heritage of local significance. The federal monuments include the buildings of the Alexander-Svirsky Monastery, founded in 1487 century and located in the village of Staraya Sloboda. The Lodeynoye Pole District Museum, located in the town of Lodeynoye Pole, is the only state museum in the district. Oblast Law #32-oz История (in Russian). Администрация Лодейнопольского района Ленинградской области. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1 [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года [2010 All-Russia Population Census] (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. "26. Численность постоянного населения Российской Федерации по муниципальным образованиям на 1 января 2018 года". Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 23, 2019. The count of urban-type settlements may include the work settlements, the resort settlements, the suburban (dacha) settlements, as well as urban-type settlements proper. Law #63-oz "Об исчислении времени". Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации (in Russian). June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Russian Federal State Statistics Service (May 21, 2004). Численность населения России, субъектов Российской Федерации в составе федеральных округов, районов, городских поселений, сельских населённых пунктов – районных центров и сельских населённых пунктов с населением 3 тысячи и более человек [Population of Russia, Its Federal Districts, Federal Subjects, Districts, Urban Localities, Rural Localities—Administrative Centers, and Rural Localities with Population of Over 3,000] (XLS). Всероссийская перепись населения 2002 года [All-Russia Population Census of 2002] (in Russian). Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 г. Численность наличного населения союзных и автономных республик, автономных областей и округов, краёв, областей, районов, городских поселений и сёл-райцентров [All Union Population Census of 1989: Present Population of Union and Autonomous Republics, Autonomous Oblasts and Okrugs, Krais, Oblasts, Districts, Urban Settlements, and Villages Serving as District Administrative Centers]. Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 года [All-Union Population Census of 1989] (in Russian). Институт демографии Национального исследовательского университета: Высшая школа экономики [Institute of Demography at the National Research University: Higher School of Economics]. 1989 – via Demoscope Weekly. Лодейнопольский район (с августа 1927) (in Russian). Система классификаторов исполнительных органов государственной власти Санкт-Петербурга. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2012. Шапшинский район (авг. 1927 - нояб. 1927) - Оятский район (нояб. 1927 - дек. 1955) (in Russian). Система классификаторов исполнительных органов государственной власти Санкт-Петербурга. Retrieved December 8, 2012. Экономика (in Russian). Администрация Лодейнопольского муниципального района Ленинградской области. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Памятники истории и культуры народов Российской Федерации (in Russian). Russian Ministry of Culture. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Лодейнопольский историко-краеведческий музей (in Russian). Российская сеть культурного наследия. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Законодательное собрание Ленинградской области. Областной закон №32-оз от 15 июня 2010 г. «Об административно-территориальном устройстве Ленинградской области и порядке его изменения», в ред. Областного закона №23-оз от 8 мая 2014 г. «Об объединении муниципальных образований "Приморское городское поселение" Выборгского района Ленинградской области и "Глебычевское сельское поселение" Выборгского района Ленинградской области и о внесении изменений в отдельные Областные законы». Вступил в силу со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Вести", №112, 23 июня 2010 г. (Legislative Assembly of Leningrad Oblast. Oblast Law #32-oz of June 15, 2010 On the Administrative-Territorial Structure of Leningrad Oblast and on the Procedures for Its Change, as amended by the Oblast Law #23-oz of May 8, 2014 On Merging the Municipal Formations of "Primorskoye Urban Settlement" in Vyborgsky District of Leningrad Oblast and "Glebychevskoye Rural Settlement" in Vyborgsky District of Leningrad Oblast and on Amending Various Oblast Laws. Effective as of the day of the official publication.). Законодательное собрание Ленинградской области. Областной закон №63-оз от 20 сентября 2004 г. «Об установлении границ и наделении соответствующим статусом муниципального образования Лодейнопольский муниципальный район и муниципальных образований в его составе», в ред. Областного закона №34-оз от 15 мая 2012 г. «О внесении изменений в некоторые Областные законы в сфере административно-территориального устройства Ленинградской области». Вступил в силу через 10 дней со дня официального опубликования (15  октября 2004 г.). Опубликован: "Вестник Правительства Ленинградской области", №30, 5 октября 2004 г. (Legislative Assembly of Leningrad Oblast. Oblast Law #63-oz of September 20, 2004 On Establishing the Borders of and Granting an Appropriate Status to the Municipal Formation of Lodeynopolsky Municipal District and to the Municipal Formations Comprising It, as amended by the Oblast Law #34-oz of May 15, 2012 On Amending Various Oblast Laws Dealing with the Administrative-Territorial Structure of Leningrad Oblast. Effective as of after 10 days from the day of the official publication (October 15, 2004).).