The Dreamers is a 2003 romantic drama film directed by Bernardo Bertolucci. The screenplay is by Gilbert Adair, based on his 1988 novel The Holy Innocents. An international co-production by companies from France, the United Kingdom, and Italy, the film tells the story of an American university student in Paris who, after meeting a peculiar brother and sister who are fellow film enthusiasts, becomes entangled in an erotic triangle. It is set against the backdrop of the 1968 Paris student riots. The film makes several references to various movies of classical and French New Wave cinema, incorporating clips from films that are often imitated by the actors in particular scenes. There are two versions: an uncut NC-17-rated version, and an R-rated version that is about three minutes shorter. Matthew is an American exchange student who has come to Paris to study French. While at the Cinémathèque Française protesting the firing of Henri Langlois, he meets the free-spirited twins Théo and Isabelle. The three bond over a shared love of film. After dinner with their parents, Théo and Isabelle offer Matthew the chance to stay with them while their parents are on a trip. Matthew accepts, considering them his first French friends. Matthew becomes suspicious of their relationship after seeing them sleeping nude together; he soon discovers that they accept nudity and sexuality liberally. Matthew begins to accept Théo and Isabelle's sexuality and his time living with them soon becomes idyllic. The three re-enact a memorable scene from Bande à part by "breaking the world record for running through the Louvre", and Matthew and Théo engage in playful arguments about Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, Eric Clapton and Jimi Hendrix, as well as the subject of Maoism, which Théo fervently believes in. After Théo loses at a trivia game, Isabelle sentences him to masturbate to a Marlene Dietrich poster in front of them. After Matthew loses at another game, he is dared by Théo to take Isabelle's virginity in front of him. Matthew and Isabelle then become lovers. During this time, Matthew begins to pursue a relationship with Isabelle, separate from Théo. Matthew and Isabelle leave the house and go on a regular date, which she has not experienced before. Théo retaliates by inviting a companion up to his room, upsetting Isabelle. She distances herself from both Théo and Matthew, only to find them next to each other on Théo's bed when an argument between the two turns erotic. She then surprises them with a makeshift bedsheet fort and the three fall asleep in each others' arms. The next morning, Théo and Isabelle's parents arrive home and find the sleeping trio naked in bed together. They are startled by what they find, but let them be, departing after leaving a cheque. Isabelle wakes up and discovers the cheque, realising that their parents have found them out. Wordlessly, she attaches a hose to the gas outlet and lies back down with the still-asleep Théo and Matthew, attempting to commit murder-suicide. After a few moments, however, they are awakened by a brick being hurled through the window; they discover hundreds of students rioting in the streets. All three of them are overjoyed and proceed to join the protesters. Théo then joins a small team of protesters preparing Molotov cocktails. Matthew tries to stop Théo by kissing him and his sister, arguing against violence, but he is shunned by both Théo and Isabelle. As Matthew walks away through the chaos, Théo takes Isabelle's hand and hurls a Molotov cocktail at a line of police. The police charge the crowd. Michael Pitt as Matthew Eva Green as Isabelle Louis Garrel as Théo Anna Chancellor as Mother Robin Renucci as Father Jean-Pierre Kalfon as Himself Jean-Pierre Léaud as Himself Florian Cadiou as Patrick Pierre Hancisse as First buff Valentin Merlet as Second buff Lola Peploe as The Usherette Ingy Fillion as Théo's girlfriend The first draft of the screenplay was an adaptation by Gilbert Adair of his own novel, The Holy Innocents (1988), inspired by the novel Les Enfants terribles (1929) by Jean Cocteau and the eponymous film directed by Jean-Pierre Melville in 1950. During pre-production, Bertolucci made changes to it: he "peppered the narrative with clips from the films he loves" and dropped homosexual content – including scenes from the novel that depict Matthew and Théo having sex – which he felt was "just too much." After the film was released, he said that it was "faithful to the spirit of the book but not the letter." Eva Green told The Guardian that her agent and her parents begged her not to take the role of Isabelle, concerned that the film – which features full frontal nudity and full rear nudity along with graphic sex scenes – would cause her career to "have the same destiny as Maria Schneider." Jake Gyllenhaal screen tested for the role of Matthew alongside Green, but eventually removed himself from consideration due to concerns about the film’s nudity. Michael Pitt was cast instead. When Green saw a rough cut of the film, she said she was "quite shocked" and had to look away during the sex scenes; she later told an interviewer that for her, "it was as though I was wearing a costume while we were making the film. It was as if I had another story in my mind. So I was left speechless." Fox Searchlight Pictures gave the uncut version a limited theatrical release in the United States in 2004; it played in 116 theaters at its peak. In the United States, the film was released theatrically with an NC-17 rating, whereas in Italy it was rated VM14. Even with its NC-17 rating, it grossed $2.5 million in its United States theatrical release – a respectable result for a specialized film with a targeted audience. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a positive score of 60% based on 161 reviews, with an average rating of 6.18/10. The site's consensus reads, "Though lushly atmospheric, The Dreamers doesn't engage or provoke as much as it should." The 40 reviews gathered by Metacritic gave it an average score of 62/100, which places the film in the website's "generally favorable" category. A.O. Scott of The New York Times said the film was "disarmingly sweet and completely enchanting" and described it as "fus[ing] sexual discovery with political tumult by means of a heady, heedless romanticism that nearly obscures the film's patient, skeptical intelligence." The Times called it a "heady blend of Last Tango and Stealing Beauty, but one that combines the grubbily voyeuristic elements of each film rather than their relative strengths." Roger Ebert gave the film four stars, his highest rating, describing the film as "poignant" and "extraordinarily beautiful". The music advisors were Julien Civange and Charles Henri de Pierrefeu. Janice Ginsberg is credited as music supervisor and Nick Laird-Clowes as music consultant. The soundtrack was released in February 2004; Allmusic gave it three out of five, noting that "while its juxtapositions of French tradition and counterculture are jarring at times, Dreamers still does a worthy job of capturing the film's personal and political revolutions through music." "Third Stone from the Sun" – The Jimi Hendrix Experience "Hey Joe" (cover version) – Michael Pitt & The Twins of Evil "Quatre Cents Coups" (from the score of "Les Quatre Cents Coups") – Jean Constantin "New York Herald Tribune" (from Breathless) – Martial Solal "Love Me Please Love Me" – Michel Polnareff "La Mer" – Charles Trenet "Song For Our Ancestors" – Steve Miller Band "The Spy" – The Doors "Tous les garçons et les filles" – Françoise Hardy "Ferdinand" (from Antoine Duhamel's score of "Pierrot Le Fou") "Dark Star" (special band edit) – Grateful Dead "Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien" – Edith Piaf Though the music of Janis Joplin and Big Brother and the Holding Company was featured prominently in the film, none of the songs were included on the soundtrack. All of the songs used in the film were from the album Live at Winterland '68. Bob Dylan's song "Queen Jane Approximately", from the album Highway 61 Revisited, is also used in the film but is not included on the soundtrack. The Doors song "Maggie M'Gill" can be heard in the movie, but is not included on the soundtrack either. The Dreamers was released on DVD in 2004. It includes a BBC film directed by David M. Thompson, Bertolucci Makes The Dreamers, narrated by Zoë Wanamaker, and a documentary Outside the Window: Events in France, May 1968 with contributions from Robin Blackburn, Adair, and Bertolucci. Bertolucci says that 1968 was about cinema, politics, music, journalism, sex and philosophy dreaming together. Eros and Civilization The Dreamers at Box Office Mojo Stealing beauty, a February 2004 article from The Guardian "CONFESSIONS OF A NERVOUS MUSE: Eva Green, interviewed. | Neil Young's Film Lounge". www.jigsawlounge.co.uk. 30 December 2003. Retrieved 8 July 2022. NC-17 comes out from hiding, an April 2004 article from the Los Angeles Times "The Dreamers (2004) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "The Dreamers". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 14 June 2014. "The Dreamers". Metacritic. Retrieved 14 June 2014. When to Be Young Was Very Sexy, a review from The New York Times Ide, Wendy (4 November 2003). "The Times bfi London Film Festival: The Dreamers". The Times. London. Retrieved 14 June 2014. (subscription required) Ebert, Roger (13 February 2004). "The Dreamers". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 14 June 2014. The Dreamers (Original Soundtrack) at AllMusic Wikiquote has quotations related to The Dreamers (2003 film). The Dreamers at IMDb The Dreamers at the TCM Movie Database The Dreamers at AllMovie The Dreamers at Box Office Mojo The Dreamers at Rotten Tomatoes