George Harrison MBE (25 February 1943 – 29 November 2001) was an English musician, singer and songwriter who achieved international fame as the lead guitarist of the Beatles. Sometimes called "the quiet Beatle", Harrison embraced Indian culture and helped broaden the scope of popular music through his incorporation of Indian instrumentation and Hindu-aligned spirituality in the Beatles' work. Although the majority of the band's songs were written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney, most Beatles albums from 1965 onwards contained at least two Harrison compositions. His songs for the group include "Taxman", "Within You Without You", "While My Guitar Gently Weeps", "Here Comes the Sun" and "Something". Harrison's earliest musical influences included George Formby and Django Reinhardt; subsequent influences were Carl Perkins, Chet Atkins and Chuck Berry. By 1965, he had begun to lead the Beatles into folk rock through his interest in Bob Dylan and the Byrds, and towards Indian classical music through his use of Indian instruments, such as the sitar, which he had become acquainted with on the set of the film Help! He played sitar on numerous Beatles songs, starting with "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)". Having initiated the band's embrace of Transcendental Meditation in 1967, he subsequently developed an association with the Hare Krishna movement. After the band's break-up in 1970, Harrison released the triple album All Things Must Pass, a critically acclaimed work that produced his most successful hit single, "My Sweet Lord", and introduced his signature sound as a solo artist, the slide guitar. He also organised the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh with Indian musician Ravi Shankar, a precursor to later benefit concerts such as Live Aid. In his role as a music and film producer, Harrison produced acts signed to the Beatles' Apple record label before founding Dark Horse Records in 1974. He co-founded HandMade Films in 1978, initially to produce the Monty Python troupe's comedy film The Life of Brian (1979). Harrison released several best-selling singles and albums as a solo performer. In 1988, he co-founded the platinum-selling supergroup the Traveling Wilburys. A prolific recording artist, he was featured as a guest guitarist on tracks by Badfinger, Ronnie Wood, and Billy Preston, and collaborated on songs and music with Dylan, Eric Clapton, Ringo Starr, and Tom Petty. Rolling Stone magazine ranked him number 31 in their 2023 list of greatest guitarists of all time. He is a two-time Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee – as a member of the Beatles in 1988, and posthumously for his solo career in 2004. Harrison's first marriage to model Pattie Boyd in 1966 ended in divorce in 1977. In the following year he married Olivia Arias, with whom he had a son, Dhani. A lifelong cigarette smoker, Harrison died of numerous cancers in 2001 at the age of 58, two years after surviving a knife attack by an intruder at his home, Friar Park. His remains were cremated, and the ashes were scattered according to Hindu tradition in a private ceremony in the Ganges and Yamuna rivers in India. He left an estate of almost £100 million. Harrison was born at 12 Arnold Grove in Wavertree, Liverpool, on 25 February 1943. He was the youngest of four children of Harold Hargreaves (or Hargrove) Harrison (1909–1978) and Louise (née French; 1911–1970). Harold was a bus conductor who had worked as a ship's steward on the White Star Line, and Louise was a shop assistant of Irish Catholic descent. He had one sister, Louise (16 August 1931 – 29 January 2023), and two brothers, Harold (born 1934) and Peter (20 July 1940 – 1 June 2007). According to Boyd, Harrison's mother was particularly supportive: "All she wanted for her children is that they should be happy, and she recognised that nothing made George quite as happy as making music." Louise was an enthusiastic music fan, and she was known among friends for her loud singing voice, which at times startled visitors by rattling the Harrisons' windows. When Louise was pregnant with George, she often listened to the weekly broadcast Radio India. Harrison's biographer Joshua Greene wrote, "Every Sunday she tuned in to mystical sounds evoked by sitars and tablas, hoping that the exotic music would bring peace and calm to the baby in the womb." Harrison lived at 12 Arnold Grove for the first four years of his life. A terraced house on a cul-de-sac, it had an outdoor toilet, and its only heat came from a single coal fire. In 1949, the family was offered a council house and moved to 25 Upton Green, Speke. In 1948, at the age of five, Harrison enrolled at Dovedale Primary School. He passed the eleven-plus exam and attended Liverpool Institute High School for Boys from 1954 to 1959. Though the institute did offer a music course, Harrison was disappointed with the absence of guitars, and felt that the school "moulded [students] into being frightened". Harrison's earliest musical influences included George Formby, Cab Calloway, Django Reinhardt and Hoagy Carmichael; by the 1950s, Carl Perkins and Lonnie Donegan were significant influences. In early 1956, he had an epiphany: while riding his bicycle, he heard Elvis Presley's "Heartbreak Hotel" playing from a nearby house, and the song piqued his interest in rock and roll. He often sat at the back of the class drawing guitars in his schoolbooks, and later commented, "I was totally into guitars." Harrison cited Slim Whitman as another early influence: "The first person I ever saw playing a guitar was Slim Whitman, either a photo of him in a magazine or live on television. Guitars were definitely coming in." At first, Harold Harrison was apprehensive about his son's interest in pursuing a music career. However, in 1956, he bought George a Dutch Egmond flat-top acoustic guitar, which according to Harold, cost £3.10s.– (equivalent to £90 in 2024). One of his father's friends taught Harrison how to play "Whispering", "Sweet Sue" and "Dinah". Inspired by Donegan's music, Harrison formed a skiffle group, the Rebels, with his brother Peter and a friend, Arthur Kelly. On the bus to school, Harrison met Paul McCartney, who also attended the Liverpool Institute, and the pair bonded over their shared love of music. McCartney and his friend John Lennon were in a skiffle group called the Quarrymen. In March 1958, at McCartney's urging, Harrison auditioned for the Quarrymen at Rory Storm's Morgue Skiffle Club, playing Arthur "Guitar Boogie" Smith's "Guitar Boogie Shuffle", but Lennon felt that Harrison, having just turned 15, was too young to join the band. McCartney arranged a second meeting, on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus, during which Harrison impressed Lennon by performing the lead guitar part for the instrumental "Raunchy". He began socialising with the group, filling in on guitar as needed, and then became accepted as a member. Although his father wanted him to continue his education, Harrison left school at 16 and worked for several months as an apprentice electrician at Blacklers, a local department store. During the group's first tour of Scotland, in 1960, Harrison used the pseudonym "Carl Harrison", in reference to Carl Perkins. In 1960, promoter Allan Williams arranged for the band, now calling themselves the Beatles, to play at the Indra and Kaiserkeller clubs in Hamburg, both owned by Bruno Koschmider. Their first residency in Hamburg ended prematurely when Harrison was deported for being too young to work in nightclubs. When Brian Epstein became their manager in December 1961, he polished up their image and later secured them a recording contract with EMI. The group's first single, "Love Me Do", peaked at number 17 on the Record Retailer chart, and by the time their debut album, Please Please Me, was released in early 1963, Beatlemania had arrived. Often serious and focused while on stage with the band, Harrison was known as "the quiet Beatle". That moniker arose when the Beatles arrived in the United States in early 1964, and Harrison was ill with a case of Strep throat and a fever and was medically advised to limit speaking as much as possible until he performed on The Ed Sullivan Show as scheduled. As such, the press noticed Harrison's apparent laconic nature in public appearances on that tour and the subsequent nickname stuck, much to Harrison's amusement. He had two lead vocal credits on the LP, including the Lennon–McCartney song "Do You Want to Know a Secret?", and three on their second album, With the Beatles (1963). The latter included "Don't Bother Me", Harrison's first solo writing credit. Harrison served as the Beatles' scout for new American releases, being especially knowledgeable about soul music. By 1965's Rubber Soul, he had begun to lead the other Beatles into folk rock through his interest in the Byrds and Bob Dylan, and towards Indian classical music through his use of the sitar on "Norwegian Wood (This Bird Has Flown)". He later called Rubber Soul his "favourite [Beatles] album". Revolver (1966) included three of his compositions: "Taxman", selected as the album's opening track, "Love You To" and "I Want to Tell You". His drone-like tambura part on Lennon's "Tomorrow Never Knows" exemplified the band's ongoing exploration of non-Western instruments, while the sitar- and tabla-based "Love You To" represented the Beatles' first genuine foray into Indian music. According to the ethnomusicologist David Reck, the latter song set a precedent in popular music as an example of Asian culture being represented by Westerners respectfully and without parody. Author Nicholas Schaffner wrote in 1978 that following Harrison's increased association with the sitar after "Norwegian Wood", he became known as "the maharaja of raga-rock". Harrison continued to develop his interest in non-Western instrumentation, playing swarmandal on "Strawberry Fields Forever". By late 1966, Harrison's interests had moved away from the Beatles. This was reflected in his choice of Eastern gurus and religious leaders for inclusion on the album cover for Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band in 1967. His sole composition on the album was the Indian-inspired "Within You Without You", to which no other Beatle contributed. He played sitar and tambura on the track, backed by musicians from the London Asian Music Circle on dilruba, swarmandal and tabla. He later commented on the Sgt. Pepper album: "It was a millstone and a milestone in the music industry ... There's about half the songs I like and the other half I can't stand." In January 1968, he recorded the basic track for his song "The Inner Light" at EMI's studio in Bombay, using a group of local musicians playing traditional Indian instruments. Released as the B-side to McCartney's "Lady Madonna", it was the first Harrison composition to appear on a Beatles single. Derived from a quotation from the Tao Te Ching, the song's lyric reflected Harrison's deepening interest in Hinduism and meditation. During the recording of The Beatles that same year, tensions within the group ran high, and drummer Ringo Starr quit briefly. Harrison's four songwriting contributions to the double album included "While My Guitar Gently Weeps", which featured Eric Clapton on lead guitar, and the horn-driven "Savoy Truffle". Dylan and the Band were a major musical influence on Harrison at the end of his career with the Beatles. While on a visit to Woodstock in late 1968, he established a friendship with Dylan and found himself drawn to the Band's sense of communal music-making and to the creative equality among the band members, which contrasted with Lennon and McCartney's domination of the Beatles' songwriting and creative direction. This coincided with a prolific period in his songwriting and a growing desire to assert his independence from the Beatles. Tensions among the group surfaced again in January 1969, at Twickenham Studios, during the filmed rehearsals that became the 1970 documentary Let It Be. Frustrated by the cold and sterile film studio, by Lennon's creative disengagement from the Beatles, and by what he perceived as a domineering attitude from McCartney, Harrison quit the group on 10 January. He returned 12 days later, after his bandmates had agreed to move the film project to their own Apple Studio and to abandon McCartney's plan for making a return to public performance. Something The love ballad "Something" from the Beatles' 1969 studio album Abbey Road is widely praised as one of Harrison's greatest songwriting achievements Problems playing this file? See media help. Relations among the Beatles were more cordial, though still strained, when the band recorded their 1969 album Abbey Road. The LP included what Lavezzoli describes as "two classic contributions" from Harrison – "Here Comes the Sun" and "Something" – that saw him "finally achieve equal songwriting status" with Lennon and McCartney. During the album's recording, Harrison asserted more creative control than before, rejecting suggestions for changes to his music, particularly from McCartney. "Something" became his first A-side when issued on a double A-side single with "Come Together"; the song was number one in Canada, Australia, New Zealand and West Germany, and the combined sides topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the United States. In the 1970s Frank Sinatra recorded "Something" twice (1970 and 1979) and later dubbed it "the greatest love song of the past fifty years". Lennon considered it the best song on Abbey Road, and it became the Beatles' second most covered song after "Yesterday". In May 1970, Harrison's song "For You Blue" was coupled on a US single with McCartney's "The Long and Winding Road" and became Harrison's second chart-topper when the sides were listed together at number one on the Hot 100. His increased productivity meant that by the time of their break-up he had amassed a stockpile of unreleased compositions. While Harrison grew as a songwriter, his compositional presence on Beatles albums remained limited to two or three songs, increasing his frustration, and significantly contributing to the band's break-up. Harrison's last recording session with the Beatles was on 4 January 1970, when he, McCartney and Starr recorded overdubs to the song "Let It Be" for the soundtrack album of the same name. Before the Beatles' break-up, Harrison had already recorded and released two solo albums: Wonderwall Music and Electronic Sound, both of which contain mainly instrumental compositions. Wonderwall Music, a soundtrack to the 1968 film Wonderwall, blends Indian and Western instrumentation, while Electronic Sound is an experimental album that prominently features a Moog synthesizer. Released in November 1968, Wonderwall Music was the first solo album by a Beatle and the first LP released by Apple Records. Indian musicians Aashish Khan and Shivkumar Sharma performed on the album, which contains the experimental sound collage "Dream Scene", recorded several months before Lennon's "Revolution 9". In December 1969, Harrison participated in a brief tour of Europe with the American group Delaney & Bonnie and Friends. During the tour, which included Clapton, Bobby Whitlock, drummer Jim Gordon and band leaders Delaney and Bonnie Bramlett, Harrison began to play slide guitar, and also began to write "My Sweet Lord", which became his first single as a solo artist. For many years, Harrison was restricted in his songwriting contributions to the Beatles' albums, but he released All Things Must Pass, a triple album with two discs of his songs and the third of recordings of Harrison jamming with friends. The album was regarded by many as his best work, and it topped the charts on both sides of the Atlantic. The number-one hit single "My Sweet Lord" and the top-ten single "What Is Life" were taken from the album, which was co-produced by Phil Spector using his "Wall of Sound" approach; the musicians included Starr, Clapton, Gary Wright, Billy Preston, Klaus Voormann, the whole of Delaney and Bonnie's Friends band, and the Apple group Badfinger. On its release, All Things Must Pass was received with critical acclaim; Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone described it as being "of classic Spectorian proportions, Wagnerian, Brucknerian, the music of mountain tops and vast horizons". Author and musicologist Ian Inglis considers the lyrics of the album's title track "a recognition of the impermanence of human existence ... a simple and poignant conclusion" to Harrison's former band. In 1971, Bright Tunes sued Harrison for copyright infringement over "My Sweet Lord", owing to its similarity to the 1963 Chiffons hit "He's So Fine". When the case was heard in the United States district court in 1976, he denied deliberately plagiarising the song, but lost the case, as the judge ruled that he had done so subconsciously. In 2000, Apple Records released a thirtieth-anniversary edition of the album, and Harrison actively participated in its promotion. In an interview, he reflected on the work: "It's just something that was like my continuation from the Beatles, really. It was me sort of getting out of the Beatles and just going my own way ... it was a very happy occasion." He commented on the production: "Well, in those days it was like the reverb was kind of used a bit more than what I would do now. In fact, I don't use reverb at all. I can't stand it ... You know, it's hard to go back to anything thirty years later and expect it to be how you would want it now." Harrison responded to a request from Ravi Shankar by organising a charity event, the Concert for Bangladesh, which took place on 1 August 1971. The event drew over 40,000 people to two shows in New York's Madison Square Garden. The goal of the event was to raise money to aid starving refugees during the Bangladesh Liberation War. Shankar opened the show, which featured popular musicians such as Dylan, Clapton, Leon Russell, Badfinger, Preston and Starr. A triple album, The Concert for Bangladesh, was released by Apple in December, followed by a concert film in 1972. Credited to "George Harrison and Friends", the album topped the UK chart and peaked at number 2 in the US, and went on to win the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. Tax troubles and questionable expenses later tied up many of the proceeds, but Harrison commented: "Mainly the concert was to attract attention to the situation ... The money we raised was secondary, and although we had some money problems ... they still got plenty ... even though it was a drop in the ocean. The main thing was, we spread the word and helped get the war ended." Harrison's 1973 album Living in the Material World held the number one spot on the Billboard albums chart for five weeks, and the album's single, "Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)", also reached number one in the US. In the UK, the LP peaked at number two and the single reached number 8. The album was lavishly produced and packaged, and its dominant message was Harrison's Hindu beliefs. In Greene's opinion it "contained many of the strongest compositions of his career". Stephen Holden, writing in Rolling Stone, felt the album was "vastly appealing" and "profoundly seductive", and that it stood "alone as an article of faith, miraculous in its radiance". Other reviewers were less enthusiastic, describing the release as awkward, sanctimonious and overly sentimental. In November 1974, Harrison became the first ex-Beatle to tour North America when he began his 45-date Dark Horse Tour. The shows included guest spots by his band members Billy Preston and Tom Scott, and traditional and contemporary Indian music performed by "Ravi Shankar, Family and Friends". Despite numerous positive reviews, the consensus reaction to the tour was negative. Some fans found Shankar's significant presence to be a bizarre disappointment, and many were affronted by what Inglis described as Harrison's "sermonizing". Further, he reworked the lyrics to several Beatles songs, and his laryngitis-affected vocals led to some critics calling the tour "dark hoarse". The author Robert Rodriguez commented: "While the Dark Horse tour might be considered a noble failure, there were a number of fans who were tuned-in to what was being attempted. They went away ecstatic, conscious that they had just witnessed something so uplifting that it could never be repeated." Simon Leng called the tour "groundbreaking" and "revolutionary in its presentation of Indian Music". On 16 November 1974, Harrison and several others involved in the tour visited the White House. They were invited by President Gerald Ford's son, Jack. In December, Harrison released Dark Horse, which was an album that earned him the least favourable reviews of his career. Rolling Stone called it "the chronicle of a performer out of his element, working to a deadline, enfeebling his overtaxed talents by a rush to deliver a new 'LP product', rehearse a band, and assemble a cross-country tour, all within three weeks". The album reached number 4 on the Billboard chart and the single "Dark Horse" reached number 15, but they failed to make an impact in the UK. The music critic Mikal Gilmore described Dark Horse as "one of Harrison's most fascinating works – a record about change and loss". Harrison's final studio album for EMI and Apple Records, the soul music-inspired Extra Texture (Read All About It) (1975), peaked at number 8 on the Billboard chart and number 16 in the UK. Harrison considered it the least satisfactory of the three albums he had recorded since All Things Must Pass. Leng identified "bitterness and dismay" in many of the tracks; his long-time friend Klaus Voormann commented: "He wasn't up for it ... It was a terrible time because I think there was a lot of cocaine going around, and that's when I got out of the picture ... I didn't like his frame of mind". He released two singles from the LP: "You", which reached the Billboard top 20, and "This Guitar (Can't Keep from Crying)", Apple's final original single release. Thirty Three & 1/3 (1976), Harrison's first album release on his own Dark Horse Records label, produced the hit singles "This Song" and "Crackerbox Palace", both of which reached the top 25 in the US. The surreal humour of "Crackerbox Palace" reflected Harrison's association with Monty Python's Eric Idle, who directed a comical music video for the song. With an emphasis on melody and musicianship, and a more subtle subject matter than the pious message of his earlier works, Thirty Three & 1/3 earned Harrison his most favourable critical notices in the US since All Things Must Pass. The album peaked just outside the top ten there, but outsold his previous two LPs. As part of his promotion for the release, Harrison performed on Saturday Night Live with Paul Simon. In 1979, Harrison released George Harrison, which followed his second marriage and the birth of his son Dhani. Co-produced by Russ Titelman, the album and the single "Blow Away" both made the Billboard top 20. The album marked the beginning of Harrison's gradual retreat from the music business, with several of the songs having been written in the tranquil setting of Maui in the Hawaiian archipelago. Leng described George Harrison as "melodic and lush ... peaceful ... the work of a man who had lived the rock and roll dream twice over and was now embracing domestic as well as spiritual bliss". The murder of John Lennon on 8 December 1980 disturbed Harrison and reinforced his decades-long concern about stalkers. The tragedy was also a deep personal loss, although Harrison and Lennon had little contact in the years before Lennon was killed. Following the murder, Harrison commented: "After all we went through together I had and still have great love and respect for John Lennon. I am shocked and stunned." Harrison modified the lyrics of a song he had written for Starr to make the song a tribute to Lennon. "All Those Years Ago", which included vocal contributions from Paul and Linda McCartney, as well as Starr's original drum part, peaked at number two in the US charts. The single was included on the album Somewhere in England in 1981. Harrison did not release any new albums for five years after 1982's Gone Troppo received little notice from critics or the public. During this period he made several guest appearances, including a 1985 performance at a tribute to Carl Perkins titled Blue Suede Shoes: A Rockabilly Session. In March 1986 he made a surprise appearance during the finale of the Birmingham Heart Beat Charity Concert, an event organised to raise money for the Birmingham Children's Hospital. The following year, he appeared at The Prince's Trust concert at London's Wembley Arena, performing "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" and "Here Comes the Sun". In February 1987 he joined Dylan, John Fogerty and Jesse Ed Davis on stage for a two-hour performance with the blues musician Taj Mahal. Harrison recalled: "Bob rang me up and asked if I wanted to come out for the evening and see Taj Mahal ... So we went there and had a few of these Mexican beers – and had a few more ... Bob says, 'Hey, why don't we all get up and play, and you can sing?' But every time I got near the microphone, Dylan comes up and just starts singing this rubbish in my ear, trying to throw me." In November 1987, Harrison released the platinum album Cloud Nine. Co-produced with Jeff Lynne of Electric Light Orchestra (ELO), the album included Harrison's rendition of James Ray's "Got My Mind Set on You", which went to number one in the US and number two in the UK. The accompanying music video received substantial airplay, and another single, "When We Was Fab", a retrospective of the Beatles' career, earned two MTV Music Video Awards nominations in 1988. Recorded at his estate in Friar Park, Harrison's slide guitar playing featured prominently on the album, which included several of his long-time musical collaborators, including Clapton, Jim Keltner and Jim Horn. Cloud Nine reached number eight and number ten on the US and UK charts respectively, and several tracks from the album achieved placement on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart – "Devil's Radio", "This Is Love" and "Cloud 9". In 1988, Harrison formed the Traveling Wilburys with Jeff Lynne, Roy Orbison, Bob Dylan and Tom Petty. The band had gathered in Dylan's garage to record a song for a Harrison European single release. Harrison's record company decided the track, "Handle with Care", was too good for its original purpose as a B-side and asked for a full album. The LP, Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1, was released in October 1988 and recorded under pseudonyms as half-brothers, supposed sons of Charles Truscott Wilbury Sr. It reached number 16 in the UK and number 3 in the US, where it was certified triple platinum. Harrison's pseudonym on the album was "Nelson Wilbury"; he used the name "Spike Wilbury" for their second album. In 1989, Harrison and Starr appeared in the music video for Petty's song "I Won't Back Down". In October that year, Harrison assembled and released Best of Dark Horse 1976–1989, a compilation of his later solo work. The album included three new songs, including "Cheer Down", which Harrison had recently contributed to the Lethal Weapon 2 film soundtrack. Following Orbison's death in December 1988, the Wilburys recorded as a four-piece. Their second album, issued in October 1990, was mischievously titled Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3. According to Lynne, "That was George's idea. He said, 'Let's confuse the buggers.'" It peaked at number 14 in the UK and number 11 in the US, where it was certified platinum. The Wilburys never performed live, and the group did not record together again following the release of their second album. In December 1991, Harrison joined Clapton for a tour of Japan. It was Harrison's first since 1974 and no others followed. On 6 April 1992, Harrison held a benefit concert for the Natural Law Party at the Royal Albert Hall, his first London performance since the Beatles' 1969 rooftop concert. In October 1992, he performed at a Bob Dylan tribute concert at Madison Square Garden in New York City, playing alongside Dylan, Clapton, McGuinn, Petty and Neil Young. In 1994, Harrison began a collaboration with McCartney, Starr and producer Jeff Lynne for the Beatles Anthology project. This included the recording of two new Beatles songs built around solo vocal and piano tapes recorded by Lennon as well as lengthy interviews about the Beatles' career. Released in December 1995, "Free as a Bird" was the first new Beatles single since 1970. In March 1996, they released a second single, "Real Love". They also attempted to finish a third single, "Now and Then", but did not finish it because the audio quality of the cassette was, according to Harrison, "fucking rubbish." The song was later finished by McCartney and Starr and released in 2023. He later commented on the project: "I hope somebody does this to all my crap demos when I'm dead, make them into hit songs." After the Anthology project, Harrison collaborated with Ravi Shankar on the latter's Chants of India. Harrison's final television appearance was a VH-1 special to promote the album, taped in May 1997. Soon afterwards, Harrison was diagnosed with throat cancer; he was treated with radiotherapy, which was thought at the time to be successful. He publicly blamed years of smoking for the illness. In January 1998, Harrison attended Carl Perkins' funeral in Jackson, Tennessee, where he performed a brief rendition of Perkins' song "Your True Love". In May, he represented the Beatles at London's High Court in their successful bid to gain control of unauthorised recordings made of a 1962 performance by the band at the Star-Club in Hamburg. The following year, he was the most active of the former Beatles in promoting the reissue of their 1968 animated film Yellow Submarine. On 30 December 1999, Harrison and his wife Olivia were attacked at their home, Friar Park. Michael Abram, a 34-year-old paranoid schizophrenic, broke in and attacked Harrison with a kitchen knife, puncturing a lung and causing head injuries before his wife incapacitated the assailant by striking him repeatedly with a fireplace poker and a lamp. Harrison later commented, "I felt exhausted and could feel the strength draining from me. I vividly remember a deliberate thrust to my chest. I could hear my lung exhaling and had blood in my mouth. I believed I had been fatally stabbed." Following the attack, Harrison was hospitalised with more than 40 stab wounds, and part of his punctured lung was removed. He released a statement soon afterwards regarding his assailant: "He wasn't a burglar, and he certainly wasn't auditioning for the Traveling Wilburys. Adi Shankara, an Indian historical, spiritual and groovy-type person, once said, 'Life is fragile like a raindrop on a lotus leaf.' And you'd better believe it." Upon being released from a mental hospital in 2002, Abram said: "If I could turn back the clock, I would give anything not to have done what I did in attacking George Harrison, but looking back on it now, I have come to understand that I was at the time not in control of my actions. I can only hope the Harrison family might somehow find it in their hearts to accept my apologies." The injuries inflicted on Harrison during the home invasion were downplayed by his family in their comments to the press. Having seen Harrison looking so healthy beforehand, those in his social circle believed that the attack brought about a change in him and was the cause for his cancer's return. In May 2001, it was revealed that Harrison had undergone an operation to remove a cancerous growth from one of his lungs, and in July, it was reported that he was being treated for a brain tumour at a clinic in Switzerland. While in Switzerland, Starr visited him but had to cut short his stay to travel to Boston, where his daughter was undergoing emergency brain surgery. Harrison, who was very weak, quipped: "Do you want me to come with you?" In November 2001, he began radiotherapy at Staten Island University Hospital in New York City for non–small cell lung cancer that had spread to his brain. When the news was made public, Harrison bemoaned his physician's breach of privacy, and his estate later claimed damages. On 29 November 2001, Harrison died at a property belonging to McCartney, on Heather Road in Beverly Hills, Los Angeles. He was 58 years old. He died in the company of Olivia, Dhani, Shankar and the latter's wife Sukanya and daughter Anoushka, and Hare Krishna devotees Shyamasundar Das and Mukunda Goswami, who chanted verses from the Bhagavad Gita. His final message to the world, as relayed in a statement by Olivia and Dhani, was: "Everything else can wait, but the search for God cannot wait, and love one another." He was cremated at Hollywood Forever Cemetery, and his funeral was held at the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine in Pacific Palisades, California. His close family scattered his ashes according to Hindu tradition in a private ceremony in the Ganges and Yamuna rivers near Varanasi, India. He left almost £100 million in his will. Harrison's final studio album, Brainwashed (2002), was released posthumously after it was completed by his son Dhani and Jeff Lynne. A quotation from the Bhagavad Gita is included in the album's liner notes: "There never was a time when you or I did not exist. Nor will there be any future when we shall cease to be." A media-only single, "Stuck Inside a Cloud", which Leng describes as "a uniquely candid reaction to illness and mortality", achieved number 27 on Billboard's Adult Contemporary chart. The single "Any Road", released in May 2003, peaked at number 37 on the UK Singles Chart. "Marwa Blues" went on to receive the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Pop Instrumental Performance, while "Any Road" was nominated for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance. Harrison's guitar work with the Beatles was varied and flexible. Although not fast or flashy, his lead guitar playing was solid and typified the more subdued lead guitar style of the early 1960s. His rhythm guitar playing was innovative, for example when he used a capo to shorten the strings on an acoustic guitar, as on the Rubber Soul (1965) album and "Here Comes the Sun", to create a bright, sweet sound. Eric Clapton felt that Harrison was "clearly an innovator" as he was "taking certain elements of R&B and rock and rockabilly and creating something unique". Rolling Stone founder Jann Wenner described Harrison as "a guitarist who was never showy but who had an innate, eloquent melodic sense. He played exquisitely in the service of the song". The guitar picking style of Chet Atkins and Carl Perkins influenced Harrison, giving a country music feel to many of the Beatles' recordings. He identified Chuck Berry as another early influence. In 1961, the Beatles recorded "Cry for a Shadow", a blues-inspired instrumental co-written by Lennon and Harrison, who is credited with composing the song's lead guitar part, building on unusual chord voicings and imitating the style of other English groups such as the Shadows. Harrison's liberal use of the diatonic scale in his guitar playing reveals the influence of Buddy Holly, and his interest in Berry inspired him to compose songs based on the blues scale while incorporating a rockabilly feel in the style of Perkins. Another of Harrison's musical techniques was the use of guitar lines written in octaves, as on "I'll Be on My Way". By 1964, he had begun to develop a distinctive personal style as a guitarist, writing parts that featured the use of nonresolving tones, as with the ending chord arpeggios on "A Hard Day's Night". On this and other songs from the period, he used a Rickenbacker 360/12 – an electric guitar with twelve strings, the low eight of which are tuned in pairs, one octave apart, with the higher four being pairs tuned in unison. His use of the Rickenbacker on A Hard Day's Night helped to popularise the model, and the jangly sound became so prominent that Melody Maker termed it the Beatles' "secret weapon". In 1965, Harrison used an expression pedal to control his guitar's volume on "I Need You", creating a syncopated flautando effect with the melody resolving its dissonance through tonal displacements. He used the same volume-swell technique on "Yes It Is", applying what Everett described as "ghostly articulation" to the song's natural harmonics. In 1966, Harrison contributed innovative musical ideas to Revolver. He played backwards guitar on Lennon's composition "I'm Only Sleeping" and a guitar counter-melody on "And Your Bird Can Sing" that moved in parallel octaves above McCartney's bass downbeats. His guitar playing on "I Want to Tell You" exemplified the pairing of altered chordal colours with descending chromatic lines and his guitar part for Sgt Pepper's "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" mirrors Lennon's vocal line in much the same way that a sarangi player accompanies a khyal singer in a Hindu devotional song. "Old Brown Shoe" Harrison's guitar solo from "Old Brown Shoe", April 1969 "Something" An excerpt from Harrison's guitar solo to "Something", May 1969 "How Do You Sleep?" An excerpt from Harrison's slide guitar solo from Lennon's "How Do You Sleep?", 1971 Problems playing these files? See media help. Everett described Harrison's guitar solo from "Old Brown Shoe" as "stinging [and] highly Claptonesque". He identified two of the composition's significant motifs: a bluesy trichord and a diminished triad with roots in A and E. Huntley called the song "a sizzling rocker with a ferocious ... solo". In Greene's opinion, Harrison's demo for "Old Brown Shoe" contains "one of the most complex lead guitar solos on any Beatles song". Harrison's playing on Abbey Road, and in particular on "Something", marked a significant moment in his development as a guitarist. The song's guitar solo shows a varied range of influences, incorporating the blues guitar style of Clapton and the styles of Indian gamakas. According to author and musicologist Kenneth Womack: "'Something' meanders toward the most unforgettable of Harrison's guitar solos ... A masterpiece in simplicity, [it] reaches toward the sublime". After Delaney Bramlett inspired him to learn slide guitar, Harrison began to incorporate it into his solo work, which allowed him to mimic many traditional Indian instruments, including the sarangi and the dilruba. Leng described Harrison's slide guitar solo on Lennon's "How Do You Sleep?" as a departure for "the sweet soloist of 'Something'", calling his playing "rightly famed ... one of Harrison's greatest guitar statements". Lennon commented: "That's the best he's ever fucking played in his life." A Hawaiian influence is notable in much of Harrison's music, ranging from his slide guitar work on Gone Troppo (1982) to his televised performance of the Cab Calloway standard "Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea" on ukulele in 1992. Lavezzoli described Harrison's slide playing on the Grammy-winning instrumental "Marwa Blues" (2002) as demonstrating Hawaiian influences while comparing the melody to an Indian sarod or veena, calling it "yet another demonstration of Harrison's unique slide approach". Harrison was an admirer of George Formby and a member of the Ukulele Society of Great Britain, and played a ukulele solo in the style of Formby at the end of "Free as a Bird". He performed at a Formby convention in 1991, and served as the honorary president of the George Formby Appreciation Society. Harrison played bass guitar on a few tracks, including the Beatles songs "She Said She Said", "Golden Slumbers", "Birthday" and "Honey Pie". He also played bass on several solo recordings, including "Faster", "Wake Up My Love" and "Bye Bye Love". During the Beatles' American tour in August 1965, Harrison's friend David Crosby of the Byrds introduced him to Indian classical music and the work of sitar maestro Ravi Shankar. Harrison described Shankar as "the first person who ever impressed me in my life ... and he was the only person who didn't try to impress me." Harrison became fascinated with the sitar and immersed himself in Indian music. According to Lavezzoli, Harrison's introduction of the instrument on the Beatles' song "Norwegian Wood" "opened the floodgates for Indian instrumentation in rock music, triggering what Shankar would call 'The Great Sitar Explosion' of 1966–67". Lavezzoli recognises Harrison as "the man most responsible for this phenomenon". In June 1966, Harrison met Shankar at the home of Mrs Angadi of the Asian Music Circle, asked to be his student, and was accepted. Before this meeting, Harrison had recorded his Revolver track "Love You To", contributing a sitar part that Lavezzoli describes as an "astonishing improvement" over "Norwegian Wood" and "the most accomplished performance on sitar by any rock musician". On 6 July, Harrison travelled to India to buy a sitar from Rikhi Ram & Sons in New Delhi. In September, following the Beatles' final tour, he returned to India to study sitar for six weeks with Shankar. He initially stayed in Bombay until fans learned of his arrival, then moved to a houseboat on a remote lake in Kashmir. During this visit, he also received tutelage from Shambhu Das, Shankar's protégé. Harrison studied the instrument until 1968, when, following a discussion with Shankar about the need to find his "roots", an encounter with Clapton and Jimi Hendrix at a hotel in New York convinced him to return to guitar playing. Harrison commented: "I decided ... I'm not going to be a great sitar player ... because I should have started at least fifteen years earlier." Harrison continued to use Indian instrumentation occasionally on his solo albums and remained strongly associated with the genre. Lavezzoli groups him with Paul Simon and Peter Gabriel as the three rock musicians who have given the most "mainstream exposure to non-Western musics, or the concept of 'world music'". Harrison wrote his first song, "Don't Bother Me", while sick in a hotel bed in Bournemouth during August 1963, as "an exercise to see if I could write a song", as he remembered. His songwriting ability improved throughout the Beatles' career, but his material did not earn full respect from Lennon, McCartney and producer George Martin until near the group's break-up. In 1969, McCartney told Lennon: "Until this year, our songs have been better than George's. Now this year his songs are at least as good as ours". Harrison often had difficulty getting the band to record his songs. Most Beatles albums from 1965 onwards contain at least two Harrison compositions; three of his songs appear on Revolver, "the album on which Harrison came of age as a songwriter", according to Inglis. "Within You Without You" An audio sample of Harrison's "Within You Without You", 1967 Problems playing this file? See media help. Harrison wrote the chord progression of "Don't Bother Me" almost exclusively in the Dorian mode, demonstrating an interest in exotic tones that eventually culminated in his embrace of Indian music. The latter proved a strong influence on his songwriting and contributed to his innovation within the Beatles. According to Mikal Gilmore of Rolling Stone, "Harrison's openness to new sounds and textures cleared new paths for his rock and roll compositions. His use of dissonance on ... 'Taxman' and 'I Want to Tell You' was revolutionary in popular music – and perhaps more originally creative than the avant-garde mannerisms that Lennon and McCartney borrowed from the music of Karlheinz Stockhausen, Luciano Berio, Edgard Varèse and Igor Stravinsky ..." Of the 1967 Harrison song "Within You Without You", author Gerry Farrell said that Harrison had created a "new form", calling the composition "a quintessential fusion of pop and Indian music". Lennon called the song one of Harrison's best: "His mind and his music are clear. There is his innate talent, he brought that sound together." In his next fully Indian-styled song, "The Inner Light", Harrison embraced the Karnatak discipline of Indian music, rather than the Hindustani style he had used in "Love You To" and "Within You Without You". Writing in 1997, Farrell commented: "It is a mark of Harrison's sincere involvement with Indian music that, nearly thirty years on, the Beatles' 'Indian' songs remain the most imaginative and successful examples of this type of fusion – for example, 'Blue Jay Way' and 'The Inner Light'." Beatles biographer Bob Spitz described "Something" as a masterpiece, and "an intensely stirring romantic ballad that would challenge 'Yesterday' and 'Michelle' as one of the most recognizable songs they ever produced". Inglis considered Abbey Road a turning point in Harrison's development as a songwriter and musician. He described Harrison's two contributions to the LP, "Here Comes the Sun" and "Something", as "exquisite", declaring them equal to any previous Beatles songs. From 1968 onwards, Harrison collaborated with other musicians; he brought in Eric Clapton to play lead guitar on "While My Guitar Gently Weeps" for the 1968 Beatles' White Album, and collaborated with John Barham on his 1968 debut solo album, Wonderwall Music, which included contributions from Clapton again, as well as Peter Tork from the Monkees. He played on tracks by Dave Mason, Nicky Hopkins, Alvin Lee, Ronnie Wood, Billy Preston and Tom Scott. Harrison co-wrote songs and music with Dylan, Clapton, Preston, Doris Troy, David Bromberg, Gary Wright, Wood, Jeff Lynne and Tom Petty, among others. Harrison's music projects during the final years of the Beatles included producing Apple Records artists Doris Troy, Jackie Lomax and Billy Preston. Harrison co-wrote the song "Badge" with Clapton, which was included on Cream's 1969 album, Goodbye. Harrison played rhythm guitar on the track, using the pseudonym "L'Angelo Misterioso" for contractual reasons. In May 1970, he played guitar on several songs during a recording session for Dylan's album New Morning. Between 1971 and 1973, he co-wrote and/or produced three top ten hits for Starr: "It Don't Come Easy", "Back Off Boogaloo" and "Photograph". Aside from "How Do You Sleep?", his contributions to Lennon's 1971 album Imagine included a slide guitar solo on "Gimme Some Truth" and dobro on "Crippled Inside". Also that year, he produced and played slide guitar on Badfinger's top ten hit "Day After Day", and a dobro on Preston's "I Wrote a Simple Song". He worked with Harry Nilsson on "You're Breakin' My Heart" (1972) and with Cheech & Chong on "Basketball Jones" (1973). In 1974, Harrison founded Dark Horse Records as an avenue for collaboration with other musicians. He wanted Dark Horse to serve as a creative outlet for artists, as Apple Records had for the Beatles. Eric Idle commented: "He's extremely generous, and he backs and supports all sorts of people that you'll never, ever hear of." The first acts signed to the new label were Ravi Shankar and the duo Splinter. Harrison produced and made multiple musical contributions to Splinter's debut album, The Place I Love, which provided Dark Horse with its first hit, "Costafine Town". He also produced and played guitar and autoharp on Shankar's Shankar Family & Friends, the label's other inaugural release. Other artists signed by Dark Horse include Attitudes, Henry McCullough, Jiva and Stairsteps. Harrison collaborated with Tom Scott on Scott's 1975 album New York Connection, and in 1981 he played guitar on "Walk a Thin Line", from Mick Fleetwood's The Visitor. His contributions to Starr's solo career continued with "Wrack My Brain", a 1981 US top 40 hit written and produced by Harrison, and guitar overdubs to two tracks on Vertical Man (1998). In 1996, Harrison recorded "Distance Makes No Difference With Love" with Carl Perkins for the latter's album Go Cat Go!, and, in 1990, he played slide guitar on the title track of Dylan's Under the Red Sky album. In 2001, he performed as a guest musician on Jeff Lynne and Electric Light Orchestra's comeback album Zoom, and on the song "Love Letters" for Bill Wyman's Rhythm Kings. He also co-wrote a new song with his son Dhani, "Horse to the Water", which was recorded on 2 October, eight weeks before his death. It appeared on Jools Holland's album Small World, Big Band. When Harrison joined the Quarrymen in 1958, his main guitar was a Höfner President Acoustic, which he soon traded for a Höfner Club 40 model. His first solid-body electric guitar was a Czech-built Jolana Futurama/Grazioso. The guitars he used on early recordings were mainly Gretsch models, played through a Vox amplifier, including a Gretsch Duo Jet that he bought secondhand in 1961 and posed with on the album cover for Cloud Nine (1987). He also bought a Gretsch Tennessean and a Gretsch Country Gentleman, which he played on "She Loves You", and during the Beatles' 1964 appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show. In 1963, he bought a Rickenbacker 425 Fireglo, and in 1964 he acquired a Rickenbacker 360/12 guitar, which was the second of its kind to be manufactured. Harrison obtained his first Fender Stratocaster in 1965 and first used it during the recording of the Help! album that February; he also used it when recording Rubber Soul later that year, most notably on the song "Nowhere Man". In early 1966, Harrison and Lennon each purchased Epiphone Casinos, which they used on Revolver. Harrison also used a Gibson J-160E and a Gibson SG Standard while recording the album. He later painted his Stratocaster in a psychedelic design that included the word "Bebopalula" above the pickguard and the guitar's nickname, "Rocky", on the headstock. He played this guitar in the Magical Mystery Tour (1967) film and throughout his solo career. In July 1968, Clapton gave him a Gibson Les Paul that had been stripped of its original finish and stained cherry red, which Harrison nicknamed "Lucy". Around this time, he obtained a Gibson Jumbo J-200 acoustic guitar, which he subsequently gave to Dylan to use at the 1969 Isle of Wight Festival. In late 1968, Fender Musical Instruments Corporation gave Harrison a custom-made Fender Telecaster Rosewood prototype, made especially for him by Philip Kubicki. In August 2017, Fender released a "Limited Edition George Harrison Rosewood Telecaster" modelled after a Telecaster that Roger Rossmeisl originally created for Harrison. Harrison helped finance Ravi Shankar's documentary Raga and released it through Apple Films in 1971. He also produced, with Apple manager Allen Klein, the Concert for Bangladesh film. In 1973, he produced the feature film Little Malcolm, but the project was lost amid the litigation surrounding the former Beatles ending their business ties with Klein. In 1973, Peter Sellers introduced Harrison to Denis O'Brien. Soon after, the two went into business together. In 1978, to produce Monty Python's Life of Brian, they formed the film production and distribution company HandMade Films. Their opportunity for investment came after EMI Films withdrew funding at the demand of their chief executive, Bernard Delfont. Harrison financed the production of Life of Brian in part by mortgaging his home, which Idle later called "the most anybody's ever paid for a cinema ticket in history". The film grossed $21 million at the box office in the US. The first film distributed by HandMade Films was The Long Good Friday (1980), and the first they produced was Time Bandits (1981), a co-scripted project by Monty Python's Terry Gilliam and Michael Palin. The film featured a new song by Harrison, "Dream Away", in the closing credits. Time Bandits became one of HandMade's most successful and acclaimed efforts; with a budget of $5 million, it earned $35 million in the US within ten weeks of its release. Harrison served as executive producer for 23 films with HandMade, including A Private Function (1984), Mona Lisa (1986), Shanghai Surprise (1986), Withnail and I (1987) and How to Get Ahead in Advertising (1989). He made cameo appearances in several of these films, including a role as a nightclub singer in Shanghai Surprise, for which he recorded five new songs. According to Ian Inglis, "[Harrison's] executive role in HandMade Films helped to sustain British cinema at a time of crisis, producing some of the country's most memorable movies of the 1980s." Following a series of box office bombs in the late 1980s, and excessive debt incurred by O'Brien which was guaranteed by Harrison, HandMade's financial situation became precarious. The company ceased operations in 1991 and was sold three years later to Paragon Entertainment, a Canadian corporation. Afterwards, Harrison sued O'Brien for $25 million for fraud and negligence, resulting in an $11.6 million judgement in 1996. Harrison was involved in humanitarian and political activism throughout his life. In the 1960s, the Beatles supported the civil rights movement and protested against the Vietnam War. In early 1971, Ravi Shankar consulted Harrison about how to provide aid to the people of Bangladesh after the 1970 Bhola cyclone and the Bangladesh Liberation War. Harrison hastily wrote and recorded the song "Bangla Desh", which became pop music's first charity single when issued by Apple Records in late July. He also pushed Apple to release Shankar's Joi Bangla EP in an effort to raise further awareness for the cause. Shankar asked for Harrison's advice about planning a small charity event in the US. Harrison responded by organising the Concert for Bangladesh, which raised more than $240,000. Around $13.5 million was generated through the album and film releases, although most of the funds were frozen in an Internal Revenue Service audit for ten years, due to Klein's failure to register the event as a UNICEF benefit beforehand. In June 1972, UNICEF honoured Harrison and Shankar, and Klein, with the "Child Is the Father of Man" award at an annual ceremony in recognition of their fundraising efforts for Bangladesh. From 1980, Harrison became a vocal supporter of Greenpeace and CND. He also protested against the use of nuclear energy with Friends of the Earth, and helped finance Vole, a green magazine launched by Monty Python member Terry Jones. In 1990, he helped promote his wife Olivia's Romanian Angel Appeal on behalf of the thousands of Romanian orphans left abandoned by the state following the fall of Communism in Eastern Europe. Harrison recorded a benefit single, "Nobody's Child", with the Traveling Wilburys, and assembled a fundraising album with contributions from other artists including Clapton, Starr, Elton John, Stevie Wonder, Donovan and Van Morrison. The Concert for Bangladesh has been described as an innovative precursor for the large-scale charity rock shows that followed, including Live Aid. The George Harrison Humanitarian Fund for UNICEF, a joint effort between the Harrison family and the US Fund for UNICEF, aims to support programmes that help children caught in humanitarian emergencies. In December 2007, they donated $450,000 to help the victims of Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh. On 13 October 2009, the first George Harrison Humanitarian Award went to Ravi Shankar for his efforts in saving the lives of children, and his involvement with the Concert for Bangladesh. By the mid-1960s, Harrison had become an admirer of Indian culture and mysticism, introducing it to the other Beatles. During the filming of Help! in the Bahamas, they met the founder of Sivananda Yoga, Swami Vishnu-devananda, who gave each of them a signed copy of his book, The Complete Illustrated Book of Yoga. Between the end of the last Beatles tour in 1966 and the beginning of the Sgt Pepper recording sessions, he made a pilgrimage to India with his first wife, Pattie Boyd; there, he studied sitar with Ravi Shankar, met several gurus, and visited various holy places. In 1968, he travelled with the other Beatles to Rishikesh in northern India to study meditation with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. Harrison's experiences with LSD in the mid-1960s served as a catalyst for his early pursuance of Hinduism. In a 1977 interview, George recalled: For me, it was like a flash. The first time I had acid, it just opened up something in my head that was inside of me, and I realized a lot of things. I didn't learn them because I already knew them, but that happened to be the key that opened the door to reveal them. From the moment I had that, I wanted to have it all the time – these thoughts about the yogis and the Himalayas, and Ravi's music. However, Harrison stopped using LSD after a disenchanting experience in San Francisco's Haight-Ashbury neighborhood. He recounted in The Beatles Anthology: That was the turning point for me – that's when I went right off the whole drug cult and stopped taking the dreaded lysergic acid. I had some in a little bottle – it was liquid. I put it under a microscope, and it looked like bits of old rope. I thought that I couldn't put that into my brain any more. In line with the Hindu yoga tradition, Harrison became a vegetarian in the late 1960s. After being given various religious texts by Shankar in 1966, he remained a lifelong advocate of the teachings of Swami Vivekananda and Paramahansa Yogananda – yogis and authors, respectively, of Raja Yoga and Autobiography of a Yogi. In mid-1969, he produced the single "Hare Krishna Mantra", performed by members of the London Radha Krishna Temple. Having also helped the Temple devotees become established in Britain, Harrison then met their leader, A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, whom he described as "my friend ... my master" and "a perfect example of everything he preached". Harrison embraced the Hare Krishna tradition, particularly japa-yoga chanting with beads, and became a lifelong devotee. In 1972 he donated his Letchmore Heath mansion north of London to the devotees. It was later converted to a temple and renamed Bhaktivedanta Manor. Regarding other faiths, he once remarked: "All religions are branches of one big tree. It doesn't matter what you call Him just as long as you call." He commented on his beliefs: Krishna actually was in a body as a person ... What makes it complicated is, if he's God, what's he doing fighting on a battlefield? It took me ages to try to figure that out, and again it was Yogananda's spiritual interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita that made me realise what it was. Our idea of Krishna and Arjuna on the battlefield in the chariot. So this is the point – that we're in these bodies, which is like a kind of chariot, and we're going through this incarnation, this life, which is kind of a battlefield. The senses of the body ... are the horses pulling the chariot, and we have to get control over the chariot by getting control over the reins. And Arjuna in the end says, "Please Krishna, you drive the chariot" because unless we bring Christ or Krishna or Buddha or whichever of our spiritual guides ... we're going to crash our chariot, and we're going to turn over, and we're going to get killed in the battlefield. That's why we say "Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna", asking Krishna to come and take over the chariot. Inglis comments that, in contrast to Cliff Richard's conversion to Christianity in 1966: "Harrison's spiritual journey was seen as a serious and important development that reflected popular music's increasing maturity ... what he, and the Beatles, had managed to overturn was the paternalistic assumption that popular musicians had no role other than to stand on stage and sing their hit songs." Harrison married model Pattie Boyd on 21 January 1966, with McCartney serving as best man. Harrison and Boyd had met on set in 1964 during the production of the film A Hard Day's Night, in which the 19-year-old Boyd had been cast as a schoolgirl. During a lunch break, George 'playfully' proposed to her. They separated in 1974 and their divorce was finalised in 1977. Boyd said her decision to end the marriage was due largely to George's repeated infidelities. The last infidelity culminated in an affair with Ringo's wife Maureen, which Boyd called "the final straw". She characterised the last year of their marriage as "fuelled by alcohol and cocaine", and she stated: "George used coke excessively, and I think it changed him ... it froze his emotions and hardened his heart." She subsequently moved in with Eric Clapton, and they married in 1979. On 2 September 1978, Harrison married Olivia Trinidad Arias, who was a marketing executive for A&M Records, and later Dark Horse Records. As Dark Horse was a subsidiary of A&M, the couple had first met over the phone working on record company business, and then in person at the A&M Records offices in Los Angeles in 1974. Together they had one son, Dhani Harrison, born on 1 August 1978. Harrison restored the English manor house and grounds of Friar Park, his home in Henley-on-Thames, where several of his music videos, including "Crackerbox Palace", were filmed; the grounds also served as the background for the cover of All Things Must Pass. He employed ten workers to maintain the 36-acre (15 ha) garden. Harrison commented on gardening as a form of escapism: "Sometimes I feel like I'm actually on the wrong planet, and it's great when I'm in my garden, but the minute I go out the gate I think: 'What the hell am I doing here?'" His autobiography, I, Me, Mine, is dedicated "to gardeners everywhere". The former Beatles publicist Derek Taylor helped Harrison write the book, which said little about the Beatles, focusing instead on Harrison's hobbies, music and lyrics. Taylor commented: "George is not disowning the Beatles ... but it was a long time ago and actually a short part of his life." Harrison had an interest in sports cars and motor racing; he was one of the 100 people who purchased the McLaren F1 road car. He had collected photos of racing drivers and their cars since he was young; at 12, he had attended his first race, the 1955 British Grand Prix at Aintree. He wrote "Faster" as a tribute to the Formula One racing drivers Jackie Stewart and Ronnie Peterson. Proceeds from its release went to the Gunnar Nilsson cancer charity, set up after the Swedish driver's death from the disease in 1978. Harrison's first extravagant car, a 1964 Aston Martin DB5, was sold at auction on 7 December 2011 in London. An anonymous Beatles collector paid £350,000 for the vehicle that Harrison had bought new in January 1965. For most of the Beatles' career, the relationships in the group were close. According to Hunter Davies, "the Beatles spent their lives not living a communal life, but communally living the same life. They were each other's greatest friends." Harrison's ex-wife Pattie Boyd described how the Beatles "all belonged to each other" and admitted, "George has a lot with the others that I can never know about. Nobody, not even the wives, can break through or even comprehend it." Starr said, "We really looked out for each other and we had so many laughs together. In the old days we'd have the biggest hotel suites, the whole floor of the hotel, and the four of us would end up in the bathroom, just to be with each other." He added, "there were some really loving, caring moments between four people: a hotel room here and there – a really amazing closeness. Just four guys who loved each other. It was pretty sensational." Lennon stated that his relationship with Harrison was "one of young follower and older guy ... [he] was like a disciple of mine when we started." The two later bonded over their LSD experiences, finding common ground as seekers of spirituality. They took radically different paths thereafter, with, according to biographer Gary Tillery, Harrison finding God and Lennon coming to the conclusion that people are the creators of their own lives. In 1974, Harrison said of his former bandmate: "John Lennon is a saint and he's heavy-duty, and he's great and I love him. But at the same time, he's such a bastard – but that's the great thing about him, you see?" Harrison and McCartney were the first of the Beatles to meet, having shared a school bus, and often learned and rehearsed new guitar chords together. McCartney said that he and Harrison usually shared a bedroom while touring. McCartney has referred to Harrison as his "baby brother". In a 1974 BBC radio interview with Alan Freeman, Harrison stated: "[McCartney] ruined me as a guitar player". In the same interview, however, Harrison stated that "I just know that whatever we've been through, there's always been something that's tied us together." Perhaps the most significant obstacle to a Beatles reunion after the death of Lennon was Harrison and McCartney's personal relationship, as both men admitted that they often got on each other's nerves. Rodriguez commented: "Even to the end of George's days, theirs was a volatile relationship". When, in a Yahoo! online chat in February 2001, he was asked if Paul "[pisses] you off", Harrison replied "Scan not a friend with a microscopic glass -- You know his faults -- Then let his foibles pass. Old Victorian Proverb. I'm sure there's enough about me that pisses him off, but I think we have now grown old enough to realize that we're both pretty damn cute!" In June 1965, Harrison and the other Beatles were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE). They received their insignia from the Queen at an investiture at Buckingham Palace on 26 October. In 1971, the Beatles received an Academy Award for the best Original Song Score for the film Let It Be. The minor planet 4149 Harrison, discovered in 1984, was named after him, as was a variety of Dahlia flower. In December 1992, he became the first recipient of the Billboard Century Award, an honour presented to music artists for significant bodies of work. The award recognised Harrison's "critical role in laying the groundwork for the modern concept of world music" and for his having "advanced society's comprehension of the spiritual and altruistic power of popular music". Rolling Stone magazine ranked him number 11 in their list of the "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time". He is also in number 65 in the list of "100 greatest songwriters of all time" by the same magazine. In 2002, on the first anniversary of his death, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall. Eric Clapton organised the event, which included performances by many of Harrison's friends and musical collaborators, including McCartney and Starr. Eric Idle, who described Harrison as "one of the few morally good people that rock and roll has produced", was among the performers of Monty Python's "Lumberjack Song". The profits from the concert went to Harrison's charity, the Material World Charitable Foundation. In 2004, Harrison was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist by his former bandmates Lynne and Petty, and into the Madison Square Garden Walk of Fame in 2006 for the Concert for Bangladesh. On 14 April 2009, the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce awarded Harrison a star on the Walk of Fame in front of the Capitol Records Building. McCartney, Lynne and Petty were present when the star was unveiled. Harrison's widow Olivia, the actor Tom Hanks and Idle made speeches at the ceremony, and Harrison's son Dhani spoke the Hare Krishna mantra. A documentary film titled George Harrison: Living in the Material World, directed by Martin Scorsese, was released in October 2011. The film features interviews with Olivia and Dhani Harrison, Klaus Voormann, Terry Gilliam, Starr, Clapton, McCartney, Keltner and Astrid Kirchherr. Harrison was posthumously honoured with The Recording Academy's Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at the Grammy Awards in February 2015. An Illinois State Historical Society marker in Benton, Illinois, commemorates Harrison's visit in the town in 1963 to see his sister, making him the first Beatle to visit the United States. In 2017, a mural instillation was unveiled in the town of Harrison painted by artist John Cerney. Statues of Harrison can be found around the world, including several across his native Liverpool and a bust in the Shadhinotar Shagram Triangle Sculpture Garden in Dhaka, Bangladesh, commemorating Harrison's contributions to Bangladeshi culture. Wonderwall Music (1968) Electronic Sound (1969) All Things Must Pass (1970) Living in the Material World (1973) Dark Horse (1974) Extra Texture (Read All About It) (1975) Thirty Three & 1/3 (1976) George Harrison (1979) Somewhere in England (1981) Gone Troppo (1982) Cloud Nine (1987) Brainwashed (2002) Outline of the Beatles The Beatles timeline List of peace activists Some published sources give Harold as Harrison's middle name; despite the absence of any middle name on his birth certificate. Author Barry Miles writes that Harrison was born at 11:42 pm on 24 February. Author Mark Lewisohn writes that it was 12:10 am on 25 February, with that date provided on both Harrison's birth and baptism certificates. Harrison had recognised 25 February as his birthday for most of his life before stating in a 1992 Billboard article that he recently learned it was 24 February. Harrison also contributed the songs "If I Needed Someone" and "Think for Yourself" to Rubber Soul. The Self-Realization Fellowship gurus Mahavatar Babaji, Lahiri Mahasaya, Sri Yukteswar and Paramahansa Yogananda appear on the Sgt Pepper cover at his request. Further examples of Indian instrumentation from Harrison during his Beatles years include his tambura parts on McCartney's "Getting Better" and Lennon's "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" (both 1967), and sitar and tambura on Lennon's "Across the Universe" (1968). Harrison received an Ivor Novello award in July 1970 for "Something", as "The Best Song Musically and Lyrically of the Year". In July 2006, it was determined that All Things Must Pass should have been credited as a number one album in the United Kingdom when first released in 1970–71. Because some sales were not properly counted, the album originally peaked at number four in Britain. Early in the sessions, Clapton, Whitlock, Gordon and Carl Radle formed the short-lived band Derek and the Dominos. In November 1971 Harrison appeared on The Dick Cavett Show, performing "Two-Faced Man" with Gary Wright. In his subsequent interview with Cavett, he used the opportunity to complain about Capitol's delay in releasing the live album and seeking a percentage of the funds intended for the Bangladeshi refugees. In December 1974 the single, "Ding Dong, Ding Dong", reached number 38 in the UK. Released during the same month, The Best of George Harrison combined several of his Beatles songs with a selection of his solo Apple work. After Harrison's departure from the label, Capitol was able to license releases featuring Beatles and post-Beatles work on the same album. Their estrangement had been marked by Harrison's longstanding dislike of Lennon's wife Yoko Ono, his refusal to allow her to participate in the Concert for Bangladesh, and, during the last year of Lennon's life, by Harrison's scant mention of Lennon in his autobiography, I, Me, Mine. Harrison's set included "That's Alright Mama", "Glad All Over" and "Blue Suede Shoes". In 1992, Dark Horse Records released an album of recorded material from the shows titled Live in Japan. Abram, who believed he was possessed by Harrison and that he was on a mission from God to kill him, was later acquitted of attempted murder on grounds of insanity and was detained for treatment in a secure mental hospital. He was released in 2002. Harrison's estate complained that during a round of experimental radiotherapy at Staten Island University Hospital, the oncologist Dr Gilbert Lederman repeatedly revealed Harrison's confidential medical information during television interviews and forced him to autograph a guitar. The suit was ultimately settled out of court under the condition that the guitar be "disposed of". Another of his last messages was to actor and comedian Mike Myers on the set of Austin Powers in Goldmember. Harrison thanked Myers for the Austin Powers films and said that he had searched throughout Europe before finding his bedside companion, a Dr. Evil doll. Within this framework he often used syncopation, as during his guitar solos for the Beatles' covers of Berry's "Roll Over Beethoven" and "Too Much Monkey Business". Roger McGuinn liked the effect so much that it became his signature guitar sound with the Byrds. Harrison was influential in the decision to have Shankar included on the bill at the Monterey Pop Festival in 1967, and at Woodstock in 1969. Musician David Bromberg introduced Harrison to the dobro, an instrument that soon became one of his favourites. Harrison subsequently gave the Rosewood Telecaster to Delaney Bramlett during the 1969 Delaney & Bonnie tour. He similarly gifted his Gibson SG to Pete Ham of Badfinger. In 1985, Harrison contributed a new version of his Somewhere in England track "Save the World" to the fundraising compilation Greenpeace – The Album. Harrison credited English sculptor David Wynne as the person who first recommended the Mararishi as a "remarkable" yogi, after which the Beatles attended a lecture he gave in London in August 1967. Harrison had formed a close friendship with Clapton in the late 1960s; he wrote one of his compositions for the Abbey Road album, "Here Comes the Sun", in Clapton's back garden, and he played guitar on Cream's song "Badge", which he co-wrote with Clapton. The house had once belonged to the Victorian eccentric Sir Frank Crisp. Purchased in 1970, it is the basis for the song "Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp (Let It Roll)". Harrison also owned homes on Hamilton Island, Australia, and in Nahiku, Hawaii. Everett 2001, p. 36; Giuliano & Giuliano 1998, p. 246 Gilmore 2002, pp. 34, 36. Schaal, Eric (17 August 2019). "The First Beatles Song George Harrison Played the Sitar on". Showbiz Cheat Sheet. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "The 250 Greatest Guitarists of All Time". Rolling Stone. 13 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "2015 Rock Hall inductees". Radio.com. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. Retrieved 16 December 2014. Harrison 2002, p. 20. Miles 2001, p. 6. Lewisohn 2013, pp. 34, 805n11. Anon. (5 December 1992). "This Week in Billboard" (PDF). Billboard. p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2021 – via worldradiohistory.com. Lewisohn 2013, p. 805n11. "Beatles Ireland – George Harrison Irish Heritage". Beatlesireland.info. Archived from the original on 14 December 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Gould 2007, p. 55. Harry 2000, p. 492. Leng 2006, p. 24. Boyd 2007, p. 82. Spitz 2005, p. 120. Greene 2006, p. 2. Harrison 2002, pp. 20–21. Miles 2001, p. 7. Inglis 2010, p. xiii. Everett 2001, p. 36 Greene 2006, p. 7 Harrison 2002, pp. 22–23. Leng 2006, pp. 302, 303–04. "Rock & Roll Hall of Fame: George Harrison Biography". rockhall.com. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Laing, Dave (30 November 2001). "George Harrison, 1943–2001: Former Beatle George Harrison dies from cancer aged 58". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2012.; Leng 2006, pp. 302–304: Harrison's earliest musical influences. Lange 2001, p. 6. The Beatles 2000, p. 28. UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017). "The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)". MeasuringWorth. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Babiuk 2002, p. 17: Dutch Egmond; Boyd 2007, p. 82: His father was apprehensive about his interest in pursuing a music career. "The Beatles Browser: Part Four – Bill Harry – Mersey Beat". Triumphpc.com. 12 August 1964. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2018. I heard about this kid at school who had a guitar at £3.10 ... Babiuk 2002, p. 17; Everett 2001, p. 36: A friend of his father's taught Harrison some chords; Spitz 2005, p. 120; Gray, Sadie (20 July 2007). "Lives in Brief: Peter Harrison". The Times. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2007. (subscription required) Inglis 2010, pp. xiii–xiv; Miles 2001, p. 13. Spitz 2005, pp. 125–126. Miles 1997, p. 47; Spitz 2005, p. 127. Davies 2009, pp. 44–45. Lewisohn 1992, p. 13. Boyd 2007, p. 82: (secondary source); Davies 2009, p. 55: (secondary source); Harrison 2002, p. 29: (primary source). Lewisohn 2013, p. 309. Miles 1997, pp. 57–58. Miles 2001, p. 27. Babiuk 2002, p. 59; Miles 1997, pp. 84–88. Greene 2006, p. 34; Lewisohn 1992, pp. 59–60. Laing, Dave (30 November 2001). "George Harrison 1943–2001". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "George Harrison: The quiet Beatle". BBC News. 30 November 2001. Archived from the original on 3 March 2008. Retrieved 18 August 2018. O'Relly, Terry. "How the Spanish Flu wasn't Spanish at all". No. 11 June 2020. CBC Radio One. Pirate Radio. Archived from the original on 1 August 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2020. MacDonald 1998, pp. 66, 79, 82, 87. Everett 2001, p. 193. MacDonald 1998, p. 148fn. Unterberger 2002, pp. 180–181; Leng 2006, p. 19; Everett 2001, pp. 313–315. Womack 2007, pp. 124–125. The Beatles 2000, p. 194. Leng 2006, p. 19; Schaffner 1980, pp. 75–78. Everett 1999, pp. 35–36. Everett 1999, pp. 40–42. Leng 2006, p. 22: (secondary source); Reck, D.B. (1985). "Beatles Orientalis: Influences from Asia in a Popular Song Form". Asian Music. XVI (1): 83–150. doi:10.2307/834014. JSTOR 834014.: (primary source) Schaffner 1978, p. 66. Winn 2009, p. 74. Tillery 2011, pp. 59–60. Tillery 2011, p. 81. Everett 1999, pp. 111–112; Leng 2006, pp. 29–30. Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 178–179. Everett 1999, pp. 103–06, 156–58. Clayson 2003, pp. 214–15. Tillery 2011, p. 63. Harrison 2002, p. 118; Tillery 2011, p. 87. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 295–296. Schaffner 1978, p. 115. Leng 2006, p. 52. Leng 2006, pp. 39–52. Doggett 2009, pp. 60–63. Miles 2001, p. 354. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 185. Inglis 2010, p. 15. Sullivan 2013, p. 563. Bronson 1992, p. 262. Fricke 2002, p. 178. Spignesi & Lewis 2009, p. 97: "Something" is the Beatles' second most covered song after "Yesterday"; Gilmore 2002, p. 39: Lennon considered "Something" the best song on Abbey Road. Badman 2001, p. 12. Bronson 1992, p. 275. Howard 2004, pp. 36–37. George-Warren 2001, p. 413. Lewisohn 1988, p. 195. Bogdanov, Woodstra & Erlewine 2002, p. 508: Electronic Sound; Lavezzoli 2006, p. 182: Wonderwall Music. Harry 2003, p. 393: Wonderwall Music as first LP released by Apple Records; Strong 2004, p. 481: Wonderwall Music as first solo album released by a Beatle. Harry 2003, p. 393: Khan and Sharma; Leng 2006, pp. 49–50: "Dream Scene". Leng 2006, pp. 63–65. Leng 2006, pp. 64, 67, 84. Schaffner 1980, p. 155. Bogdanov, Woodstra & Erlewine 2002, p. 508. Bogdanov, Woodstra & Erlewine 2002, p. 181. Inglis 2010, pp. xv, 23. "Number one for Harrison at last". Liverpool Echo. 31 July 2006 [Updated 8 May 2013]. Archived from the original on 31 May 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Roberts 2005, p. 227. Schaffner 1978, p. 142. Leng 2006, p. 78. Leng 2006, p. 101. Frontani 2009, pp. 158, 266. Gerson, Ben (21 January 1971). "George Harrison – All Things Must Pass". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 28 April 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2013. Inglis 2010, p. 30. Doggett 2009, pp. 147–148. Doggett 2009, pp. 251–252. Harry 2003, p. 16. Harry 2003, pp. 12–13. "Concert for Bangladesh". Concert For Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2013. Harry 2003, pp. 132–136. Rodriguez 2010, pp. 319–20. Tillery 2011, p. 100. Dooley, Sean Patrick (1 August 2011). "This Day in Music Spotlight: George Harrison's Concert for Bangladesh". Gibson. Archived from the original on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2013. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 194. Doggett 2009, pp. 181–206; Harry 2003, pp. 132–138; Harry 2003, p. 135: "Mainly the concert was to attract attention to the situation". Bronson 1992, p. 336: Peak US chart position for "Give Me Love (Give Me Peace on Earth)"; Rosen 1996, p. 162: US chart data on Living in the Material World. Schaffner 1978, pp. 158–159. Greene 2006, p. 194. Leng 2006, p. 195. Inglis 2010, p. 43. Leng 2006, pp. 166, 195. Inglis 2010, pp. 48–49; Leng 2006, p. 167. Doggett 2009, pp. 224–228; Greene 2006, p. 213; Huntley 2006, p. 115; Inglis 2010, p. 49; Leng 2006, p. 162: "an excellent show"; Tillery 2011, pp. 114–115. Inglis 2010, p. 49. Greene 2006, pp. 213–214; Doggett 2009, pp. 224–226. Rodriguez 2010, p. 258. Leng 2006, pp. 173, 177. Phifer, Evan. "An Ex-Beatle at the White House". The White House Historical Association. Retrieved 25 January 2024. Greene 2006, p. 213. Huntley 2006, p. 114. Greene 2006, p. 213: failed to reach the UK top 30; Harry 2003, pp. 142–143: Peak US chart positions, failure to impact UK charts. Gilmore 2002, p. 46. Leng 2006, p. 180. Huntley 2006, p. 129. Inglis 2010, pp. 54–55. Leng 2006, p. 179. Schaffner 1978, pp. 209–210. Leng 2006, p. 187. Harry 2003, pp. 28–29. Schaffner 1978, p. 188. Schaffner 1978, p. 192. Schaffner 1978, pp. 192, 195. Woffinden 1981, pp. 103–04. Glazer 1977, p. 41. Rodriguez 2010, p. 175. Huntley 2006, p. 164. "George Harrison – George Harrison". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 22 September 2012. Retrieved 31 December 2012. Clayson 2003, pp. 367–68. Leng 2006, p. 210. Harry 2003, p. 247. Doggett 2009, pp. 9–10. Harry 2003, p. 246. Doggett 2009, p. 273. George-Warren 2001, p. 414. Harry 2003, pp. 17–18. Harry 2003, pp. 17–18, 349–350, 367. Inglis 2010, p. 84; Leng 2006, pp. 212, 236. Doggett 2009, p. 287. Badman 2001, pp. 259–260. Badman 2001, p. 368. Huntley 2006, pp. 202–203. Badman 2001, p. 386. Harry 2003, p. 92. Leng 2006, pp. 251–253. "RIAA – Gold & Platinum Searchable Database". Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2012. "Cloud Nine – George Harrison : Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2013. "George Harrison". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2012. Planer, Lindsay. "Got My Mind Set on You". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2013. Voland, John (14 July 1988). "Pop/rock". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 2 January 2013. Leng 2006, pp. 246–247. Doggett 2009, pp. 294–295; Williams 2004, pp. 129–138. Greene 2006, p. 240; Tillery 2011, p. 133. "RIAA – Gold & Platinum Searchable Database". Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2013. Leng 2006, p. 267. Harry 2003, p. 98. Harry 2003, pp. 28, 98. Harry 2003, pp. 28, 98–99. Harry 2003, p. 379. Hurwitz, Matt (11 June 2007). "Wilburys set to travel again". USA Today. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2013. Doggett 2009, p. 295: the Wilburys never performed live; Harry 2003, p. 381: the Wilburys did not record together again following the release of their second album. Harry 2003, pp. 374–375. Harry 2003, pp. 374–378. Harry 2003, pp. 250–252. Welch, Chris (1 December 2001). "George Harrison". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. Retrieved 29 December 2012. Harry 2003, p. 150; Leng 2006, pp. 273–274. Everett 1999, p. 286. Harry 2000, p. 428; Everett 1999, pp. 287–292. Huntley 2006, p. 259. Badman 2001, p. 568. Greene 2006, p. 260. Lyall, Sarah (31 December 1999). "George Harrison Stabbed in Chest by an Intruder". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 22 February 2010. Thorpe, Vanessa (28 June 1998). "George Harrison tells of battle with cancer". The Independent. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Badman 2001, p. 586. Clayson 2003, p. 444. Doggett 2009, pp. 326–27. Huntley 2006, p. 279. Idle 2005, pp. 277–278. Haviland, Lou (29 November 2019). "The Horrifying Night When Former Beatle George Harrison Was Stabbed by a Crazed Fan". Showbiz Cheat Sheet. Archived from the original on 28 January 2020. Retrieved 29 November 2019. Doggett 2009, pp. 328–29. Greene 2006, p. 266. "Beatle's attacker says sorry". BBC News. 16 November 2000. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012. Retrieved 31 December 2012. Morris, Steve (14 November 2000). "The night George Harrison thought he was dying". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2012. "Freed Beatle's attacker sorry". BBC News. 5 July 2002. Archived from the original on 8 May 2009. Retrieved 13 December 2008. Carter, Helen (5 July 2002). "George Harrison's attacker released from hospital". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Jury, Louise (4 May 2001). "George Harrison undergoes surgery for cancer". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 July 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2012. Fleck, Fiona; Laville, Sandra (9 July 2001). "George Harrison being treated in cancer clinic". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. Retrieved 27 December 2008. Thorpe, Vanessa; Dowell, Ben (3 September 2011). "George Harrison and his women – Martin Scorsese's new documentary reveals the candid truth". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Carpenter, Jeff (9 November 2001). "George Harrison Receives Radiation Treatment". ABC News. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2010. Doggett 2009, pp. 330–331. Civil Action CV040033 (NGG) Archived 18 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine (PDF), Complaint, United States District Court, Eastern District of New York, The Estate of George Harrison v Gilbert Lederman. The allegations about the autograph appear on page 10 of the Complaint. Goldman, Andrew (21 May 2005). "The Doctor Can't Help Himself". New York. Archived from the original on 20 August 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2010. Doggett 2009, p. 331. Glaberson, William (17 January 2004). "Harrison Estate Settles Suit Over Guitar Autographed by Dying Beatle". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2010. Fleming, E.J. (2015). Hollywood Death and Scandal Sites. McFarland. p. 125. ISBN 978-0786496440. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Harry 2003, p. 119: Harrison's date of death Norman 2017, p. 733. Tillery 2011, p. 148. Kahn 2020, p. 543. Kahn 2020, pp. 542–43. O'Connor, Anne-Marie (25 March 2004). "Inner-peace movement: Many in L.A. turn to Eastern spiritualism to be 'interior designers' of their minds. It's a tonic for frenzied lives". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2015. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 198; Doggett 2009, p. 332 "Harrison leaves £99m will". BBC News. 29 November 2002. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2009. Harrison left £99,226,700, reduced to £98,916,400 after expenses, a High Court spokeswoman confirmed. Inglis 2010, p. 118; Leng 2006, p. 293. Inglis 2010, p. 118. Leng 2006, p. 300. "Brainwashed – George Harrison: Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 31 December 2012. "Grammy Award Winners". The New York Times. 16 January 2013. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. Retrieved 24 December 2008. Simons, David (February 2003). "The Unsung Beatle: George Harrison's behind-the-scenes contributions to the world's greatest band". Acoustic Guitar. p. 60. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2015. Womack & Davis 2012, p. 80. Harrison 2011, p. 194. Harrison 2002, p. 15. Kitts 2002, p. 17. Harry 2003, pp. 294–95: Perkins; Harry 2000, pp. 140–41: Berry. Leng 2006, pp. 4–5. Everett 1999, p. 13. Everett 2001, pp. 62–63, 136. Everett 2001, pp. 134–135. Babiuk 2002, p. 120: "secret weapon"; Leng 2006, p. 14: Harrison helped to popularise the model. Doggett & Hodgson 2004, p. 82. Everett 2001, pp. 284–285. Everett 1999, pp. 47, 49–51. Everett 1999, p. 58: "I Want to Tell You"; Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 179–180: Harrison's guitar part for "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds", Everett 1999, p. 243. Everett 1999, p. 244. Huntley 2006, p. 35. Greene 2006, p. 140. Leng 2006, p. 42. Womack 2006, p. 189. Leng 2006, pp. 84–85. Leng 2006, p. 109. Harry 2003, pp. 29–30: Performing "Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea" with Holland; Leng 2006, p. 232: Hawaiian influence on Gone Troppo. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 198. Leng 2006, p. 279. Huntley 2006, pp. 149, 232. Everett 1999, pp. 65: "She Said She Said", 268: "Golden Slumbers", 196: "Birthday", 190: "Honey Pie" Leng 2006, p. 205: "Faster", 230: "Wake Up My Love", 152: "Bye Bye Love". Leng 2006, p. 20. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 147. Harrison 2011, p. 216. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 172. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 171. Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 171–172. Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 106, 172. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 176. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 175. Clayson 2003, p. 206. Everett 1999, p. 71. Harrison 2002, p. 57: (primary source); Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 184–185: (secondary source). Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 172–173, 197. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 81. Harrison 2002, p. 84. Gilmore 2002, pp. 38–39. Miles 1997, p. 554: (primary source); Fawcett 1977, p. 96: (secondary source). Schinder & Schwartz 2008, p. 174. Inglis 2010, pp. xv: most Beatles albums contain at least two Harrison compositions, 7:Revolver. Everett 2001, pp. 193–94. Gilmore 2002, p. 37. Leng 2006, p. 31. The Beatles 2000, p. 243. Harrison 2002, p. 118; Lavezzoli 2006, p. 183; Tillery 2011, p. 87. Leng 2006, p. 316. Spitz 2005, p. 837. Zolten 2009, p. 55. Leng 2006, pp. 49–50. Inglis 2010, p. 55. Harry 2003, pp. 162–163: Dylan, 121–125: Eric Clapton, 303–304: Billy Preston, 381–382: Doris Troy, 41: David Bromberg, 171: Ronnie Wood, 395: Gary Wright, 257–258: Jeff Lynne, 295–296: Tom Petty. Leng 2006, p. 55: Lomax; 59: Preston; 60–62: Troy. Leng 2006, p. 53. Winn 2009, p. 229. Harry 2003, p. 283. Schaffner 1980, p. 164. Leng 2006, pp. 108–109. Leng 2006, p. 108: "I Wrote a Simple Song"; Matovina 2000, p. 136. Leng 2006, pp. 73, 108. Leng 2006, p. 140. Harry 2003, p. 147. Doggett 2009, p. 224; Inglis 2010, p. 59. Doggett 2009, p. 262. Harry 2003, p. 147; Huntley 2006, p. 106. Leng 2006, pp. 138, 148, 169, 171, 328. Harry 2003, pp. 146, 149. Kot 2002, p. 194: "Walk a Thin Line"; Leng 2006, p. 187: New York Connection. Huntley 2006, pp. 172–73. Badman 2001, pp. 581–82. Harry 2003, pp. 109: "Distance Makes No Difference With Love" 384: Under the Red Sky. Huntley 2006, pp. 303–304. Harry 2003, p. 119. Babiuk 2002, pp. 18–19: Höfner President Acoustic, 22: Höfner Club 40 model. Babiuk 2002, pp. 25–27. Babiuk 2002, pp. 110–112: Harrison used Gretsch models played through a Vox amplifier; Bacon 2005, p. 65: the Gretsch Duo Jet featured on the album cover for Cloud Nine. Bacon 2005, p. 65. Babiuk 2002, pp. 52–55: Gretsch 6128 Duo Jet, 89–91, 99–101: Gretsch 6122 Country Gentleman, 105–106: Gretsch 6119–62 Tennessee Rose. Babiuk 2002, pp. 94–97: Rickenbacker 425 Fireglo; Smith 1987, pp. 77–79: Harrison acquired his first Rickenbacker 360/12 in New York in February 1964. It was the second of its kind to be manufactured. Babiuk 2002, p. 157. Babiuk 2002, pp. 180–182, 198: Epiphone Casino. Babiuk 2002, pp. 72–75: Gibson J-160E, 180–183: Fender Stratocaster and Gibson SG. Babiuk 2002, pp. 156–157, 206–207: Fender Stratocaster "Rocky". Babiuk 2002, pp. 224–225. Winn 2009, p. 210. Babiuk 2002, pp. 224–225: Gibson Les Paul "Lucy". Babiuk 2002, pp. 223–224: Gibson Jumbo J-200. Harrison 2011, pp. 202–03. "Newscaster – Fender Experience". Fender News. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Babiuk 2002, pp. 237–239: Fender Telecaster. Leng 2006, p. 65. Hall, Russell (3 November 2014). "Badfinger: Straight Up and the Famous 'George Harrison/Pete Ham' Cherry Red SG Standard". Gibson. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. "Fender Limited Edition George Harrison Rosewood Telecaster with Case". American Musical. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2017. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 187. Dawtrey 2002, p. 204. Badman 2001, p. 90. Clayson 2003, p. 346, 370. Harry 2003, p. 211. Davies 2009, pp. 362–363; Doggett 2009, p. 262. Harry 2003, pp. 211–212. Barber, Nicholas (3 April 2019). "How George Harrison – and a very naughty boy – saved British cinema". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2019. Harry 2003, p. 212. Inglis 2010, p. 83. Leng 2006, p. 244. Inglis 2010, p. xvi. Sellers 2013, p. [page needed]. Dawtrey 2002, p. 207. Harry 2003, pp. 214–15. Morris, Chris. "George Harrison Wins $11.6 Mill. In Suit Vs. Ex-Partner" Billboard 3 February 1996: 13 "The Concert For Bangladesh". The Concert For Bangladesh. Archived from the original on 12 October 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011. Leng 2006, p. 112. Frontani 2009, pp. 158–59. Doggett 2009, pp. 173–174; "Cinema: Sweet Sounds". Time. 17 April 1972. Archived from the original on 25 November 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011. Harry 2003, p. 137. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 193. Badman 2001, p. 274. Leng 2006, p. 214. Badman 2001, p. 248. Harry 2003, p. 85. Clayson 2003, p. 388. Huntley 2006, p. 196. Harry 2003, pp. 99–100. Tillery 2011, p. 135. Clayson 2003, p. 424. Tillery 2011, pp. 135–36. Harry 2003, p. 135. "The George Harrison Fund for UNICEF". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 29 September 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011. "Ravi Shankar Receives First-Ever George Harrison Humanitarian Award". georgeharrison.com. 13 October 2009. Archived from the original on 12 October 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011. Schaffner 1980, pp. 77–78. Lavezzoli 2006, p. 173. Doggett 2009, p. 33. The Beatles 2000, p. 260. The Beatles 2000. Greene 2006, p. 69: In line with the Hindu yoga tradition; Clayson 2003, p. 208; Greene 2006, p. 158: Harrison became a vegetarian in the late 1960s. Greene 2006, pp. 68–73; Tillery 2011, pp. 56–58. Partridge 2004, p. 153. Clayson 2003, pp. 267–70; Cremo 1997, pp. 26–27. Huntley 2006, p. 87; Tillery 2011, p. 111. Tillery 2011, p. 78. Glazer 1977, pp. 39–40. Inglis 2010, p. 11. Miles 2007, p. 210. Boyd 2007, p. 60. "CBS The Musical". Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2022 – via YouTube. Badman 2001, p. 210: Divorce date; Doggett 2009, p. 209: separated in 1974. Boyd 2007, pp. 179–180. Boyd 2007, p. 181. Doggett 2009, p. 261. Harry 2003, p. 227; Leng 2006, p. 53. Huntley 2006, p. 120. Rodriguez 2010, p. 424. Greene 2006, pp. 220–21. Harrison, Olivia (2004). "The History of Dark Horse 1976–1992". The Dark Horse Years 1976–1992 (DVD booklet). George Harrison. Dark Horse Records/EMI. pp. 4, 7. Harry 2003, pp. 217–218, 223–224; Inglis 2010, pp. 50, 82. Greene 2006, pp. 226–227. Leng 2006, p. 94. Tillery 2011, p. 128. Huntley 2006, p. 283. Davies 2009, p. 360. Harrison 2011, p. 357. Huntley 2006, p. 170; Tillery 2011, p. 121. Doggett 2009, pp. 265–266: I, Me, Mine said little about the Beatles; Huntley 2006, p. 170: Derek Taylor helped Harrison write the book; Tillery 2011, p. 121: I, Me, Mine included the lyrics, with comments by Harrison. Doggett 2009, p. 266. Buckley 2004, p. 127. "BBC On This Day 1955: Moss claims first Grand Prix victory". BBC News. 17 July 1955. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 23 December 2008. Huntley 2006, p. 167. Knapman, Chris (12 December 2011). "Ex-Beatles Aston Martin sells at auction". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 January 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2012.; "Mystery Texas Collector to Give Beatle George Harrison's Aston Martin DB5 its U.S. Debut at The Concours d'Elegance of Texas". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2012. Davies 2009, p. 325. The Beatles 2000, p. 357. Sheff 1981, p. 148. Tillery 2011, p. 122. Harrison 1975, p. event occurs at 30 minutes 3–15 seconds. Inglis 2010, pp. xiii–xiv. Goodman, Joan (December 1984). "Playboy interview: Paul and Linda McCartney". Playboy. p. 84. Poole, Oliver; Davies, Hugh (1 December 2001). "I'll always love him, he's my baby brother, says tearful McCartney". The Daily Telegraph. London, England. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Badman 2001, pp. 138–139. Gilmore 2002, p. 48. Rodriguez 2010, p. 24. "George Harrison Yahoo! Chat Transcript - 02/15/2001". Steve Hoffman Music Forums. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Most Excellent Order of the British Empire". The London Gazette (supplement). 4 June 1965. pp. 5487–5489. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 11 May 2010. Lewisohn 1992, pp. 203–204. "Results Page – Academy Awards Database". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2012. "(4149) Harrison". Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Archived from the original on 9 April 2010. "Dahlia Name Origins". Dahlia World. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. "Billboard Century Awards  Music Artists Biography – Music Artist Interviews". Billboard. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2008. White, Timothy (5 December 1992). "George Harrison, First Recipient of the Century Award". Billboard. p. 21. Petty 2011, p. 58. Harry 2003, pp. 138–139. Doggett 2009, p. 262: "one of the few morally good people"; Harry 2003, pp. 138–139: Eric Idle performed Python's "Lumberjack Song". For his posthumous induction into the Madison Square Garden Walk of Fame see: Carter, Rachel Bonham (1 August 2006). "George Harrison honoured on 35th anniversary of 'Concert for Bangladesh'". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 19 December 2008.; For his posthumous induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a solo artist see: "George Harrison". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2013. "George Harrison honoured on Hollywood Walk of Fame". CBC News. 15 April 2009. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2012. "Scorsese's George Harrison film gets Liverpool premiere". BBC News. 15 September 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2011. Retrieved 10 October 2011. "George Harrison Honored with Lifetime Achievement Grammy". jambands.com. 28 December 2014. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "2015 Lifetime Achievement Award: George Harrison". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 29 September 2015. Retrieved 28 September 2015. "Marker Details". www.historyillinois.org. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "George Harrison Commemorative Mural | Welcome to the City of Benton". Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. George Harrison Mural by John Cerney [Beatles Tribute on Interstate 57 in the United States], archived from the original on 16 March 2023, retrieved 16 March 2023 Babiuk, Andy (2002). Bacon, Tony (ed.). Beatles Gear: All the Fab Four's Instruments, from Stage to Studio (revised ed.). Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-731-8. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. The Beatles (2000). The Beatles Anthology. Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-3636-4. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Bacon, Tony (2005). 50 Years of Gretsch Electrics. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-822-3. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Badman, Keith (2001) [1999]. The Beatles Diary: Volume 2: After the Break-Up: 1970–2001. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-8307-6. Bogdanov, Vladimir; Woodstra, Chris; Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (2002). All Music Guide to Rock. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-653-3. Boyd, Pattie; with Junor, Penny (2007). Wonderful Today: The Autobiography. London: Headline Review. ISBN 978-0-7553-1646-5. Bronson, Fred (1992). Weiler, Fred (ed.). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits (3rd revised ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8298-8. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Buckley, Martin (2004). Cars of the Super Rich. MotorBooks/MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-1953-6. Clayson, Alan (2003). George Harrison. London: Sanctuary. ISBN 978-1-86074-489-1. Cremo, Michael A., ed. (1997). Chant and Be Happy: The Power of Mantra Meditation. Los Angeles, CA: Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. ISBN 978-0-89213-118-1. Davies, Hunter (2009) [1968]. The Beatles: The Authorized Biography (3rd revised ed.). W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-33874-4. Dawtrey, Adam (2002). "Adventures on Screen". In Fine, Jason (ed.). Harrison: By the Editors of Rolling Stone. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5. Doggett, Peter (2009). You Never Give Me Your Money: The Beatles After the Breakup. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-177418-8. Doggett, Peter; Hodgson, Sarah (2004). Christie's Rock and Pop Memorabilia. Pavilion. ISBN 978-0-8230-0649-6. Everett, Walter (1999). The Beatles as Musicians: Revolver through the Anthology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512941-0. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Everett, Walter (2001). The Beatles as Musicians: The Quarry Men Through Rubber Soul. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514105-4. Fawcett, Anthony (1977). John Lennon: One Day at a Time: A Personal Biography of the Seventies. New English Library. ISBN 978-0-450-03073-4. Fricke, David (2002). "The Stories Behind the Songs". In Fine, Jason (ed.). Harrison: By the Editors of Rolling Stone. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5. Frontani, Michael (2009). "The Solo Years". In Womack, Kenneth (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles. Cambridge Companions to Music. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-1398-2806-2. George-Warren, Holly, ed. (2001). The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll (2005 revised and updated ed.). Fireside. ISBN 978-0-7432-9201-6. Gilmore, Mikal (2002). "The Mystery Inside George". In Fine, Jason (ed.). Harrison: By the Editors of Rolling Stone. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5. Giuliano, Geoffrey; Giuliano, Brenda (1998). The Lost Lennon Interviews. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-6470-9. Glazer, Mitchell (1977). "Growing Up at 33⅓: The George Harrison Interview". Crawdaddy (February). Gould, Jonathan (2007). Can't Buy Me Love: The Beatles, Britain and America (First Paperback ed.). Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-307-35338-2. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Greene, Joshua M. (2006). Here Comes the Sun: The Spiritual and Musical Journey of George Harrison. John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-12780-3. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Harrison, George (2002) [1980]. I, Me, Mine. Phoenix. ISBN 978-0-7538-1734-6. Harrison, Olivia (2011). George Harrison: Living in the Material World. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-0220-4. Harrison, George (5 October 1975). "Rock Around the World". 61 (Interview). Interviewed by Alan Freeman. Harry, Bill (2000). The Beatles Encyclopedia: Revised and Updated. Virgin Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7535-0481-9. Harry, Bill (2003). The George Harrison Encyclopedia. Virgin Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7535-0822-0. Howard, David (2004). Sonic Alchemy: Visionary Music Producers and Their Maverick Recordings. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 978-0-634-05560-7. Huntley, Elliot (2006) [2004]. Mystical One: George Harrison: After the Break-up of the Beatles. Guernica Editions. ISBN 978-1-55071-197-4. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Idle, Eric (2005). The Greedy Bastard Diary: A Comic Tour of America. Harper Entertainment. ISBN 978-0-06-075864-6. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Inglis, Ian (2010). The Words and Music of George Harrison. Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-37532-3. Keltner, Jim (2002). "Remembering George". In Fine, Jason (ed.). Harrison: By the Editors of Rolling Stone. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5. Kahn, Ashley, ed. (2020). George Harrison on George Harrison: Interviews and Encounters. Chicago, IL: Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-64160-051-4. Kitts, Jeff (2002). Guitar World Presents the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 978-0-634-04619-3. Kot, Greg (2002). "Other Recordings". In Fine, Jason (ed.). Harrison: By the Editors of Rolling Stone. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5. Lange, Larry (2001). The Beatles Way: Fab Wisdom for Everyday Life. Atria Books. ISBN 978-1-58270-061-8. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Lavezzoli, Peter (2006). The Dawn of Indian Music in the West. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1815-9. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Leng, Simon (2006) [2003]. While My Guitar Gently Weeps: The Music of George Harrison. SAF Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-1-4234-0609-9. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Lewisohn, Mark (1992). The Complete Beatles Chronicle:The Definitive Day-By-Day Guide to the Beatles' Entire Career (2010 ed.). Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-56976-534-0. Lewisohn, Mark (1988). The Complete Beatles Recording Sessions. Harmony. ISBN 978-0-517-57066-1. Lewisohn, Mark (2013). The Beatles: All These Years: Volume I: Tune In. New York: Crown Archetype. ISBN 978-1-4000-8305-3. Li, Christopher (2019). George Harrison und die Komplementarität von 'Ost' und 'West'. Baden-Baden: Tectum Verlag. ISBN 978-3-8288-4411-7. MacDonald, Ian (1998). Revolution in the Head: The Beatles' Records and the Sixties. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6697-8. Matovina, Dan (2000). Without You: The Tragic Story of Badfinger. Frances Glover Books. ISBN 978-0-9657122-2-4. Miles, Barry (1997). Many Years From Now. Vintage-Random House. ISBN 978-0-436-28022-1. Miles, Barry (2007). The Beatles Diary: An Intimate Day by Day History. World Publications Group. ISBN 978-1-57215-010-2. Miles, Barry (2001). The Beatles Diary: Volume 1: The Beatles Years. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-8308-3. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Norman, Philip (2017). Paul McCartney, the Biography. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-1-780-22640-8. Partridge, Christopher (2004). The Re-enchantment of the West: Alternative Spiritualities, Sacralisation, Popular Culture, and Occulture, Vol. 1 (illustrated ed.). Continuum. ISBN 978-0-567-08408-8. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Petty, Tom (8 December 2011). Wenner, Jann (ed.). "Rolling Stone: The 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time: George Harrison". Rolling Stone. No. 1145. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2017. Roberts, David, ed. (2005). British Hit Singles & Albums (18 ed.). Guinness World Records Limited. ISBN 978-1-904994-00-8. Rodriguez, Robert (2010). Fab Four FAQ 2.0: The Beatles' Solo Years, 1970–1980. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-4165-9093-4. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Rosen, Craig (1996). Lukas, Paul (ed.). "The Billboard Book of Number One Albums". Billboard. ISBN 978-0-8230-7586-7. Schaffner, Nicholas (1978). The Beatles Forever. Mcgraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-055087-2. Schaffner, Nicholas (1980). The Boys from Liverpool: John, Paul, George, and Ringo. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-416-30661-3. Schinder, Scott; Schwartz, Andy (2008). Icons of Rock: An Encyclopedia of the Legends who Changed Music Forever. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33845-8. Sellers, Robert (2013). Very Naughty Boys: The Amazing True Stories of HandMade Films. London: Titan Books. ISBN 978-1-78116-708-3. Sheff, David (1981). Golson, G. Barry (ed.). All We Are Saying: The Last Major Interview with John Lennon and Yoko Ono (2000 ed.). St Martin's Griffin. ISBN 978-0-312-25464-3. Smith, Richard (1987). The History of Rickenbacker Guitars. Centerstream Publications. ISBN 978-0-931759-15-4. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Spignesi, Stephen; Lewis, Michael (2009). 100 Best Beatles Songs: A Passionate Fan's Guide. Black Dog & Leventhal. ISBN 978-1-57912-842-5. Spitz, Bob (2005). The Beatles: The Biography. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-01331-4. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Strong, Martin (2004). The Great Rock Discography (7th ed.). Canongate. ISBN 978-1-84195-615-2. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Sullivan, Steve (2013). Encyclopedia of Great Popular Song Recordings, Volume 2. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-8296-6. Tillery, Gary (2011). Working Class Mystic: A Spiritual Biography of George Harrison. Quest. ISBN 978-0-8356-0900-5. Unterberger, Richie (2002). Turn! Turn! Turn!: The '60s Folk-rock Revolution. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-703-5. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Williams, Paul (2004). Bob Dylan: Performing Artist 1986–1990 & Beyond: Mind Out of Time. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-281-7. Winn, John (2009). That Magic Feeling: The Beatles' Recorded Legacy, Volume Two, 1966–1970. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-307-45239-9. Woffinden, Bob (1981). The Beatles Apart. London: Proteus. ISBN 978-0-906071-89-2. Womack, Kenneth (2007). Long and Winding Roads: The Evolving Artistry of the Beatles. Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1746-6. Womack, Kenneth (2006) [2002]. "Ten Great Beatles Moments". In Skinner Sawyers, June (ed.). Read the Beatles: Classic and New Writings on the Beatles, Their Legacy, and Why They Still Matter. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-303732-3. Womack, Kenneth; Davis, Todd F. (2012). Reading the Beatles: Cultural Studies, Literary Criticism, and the Fab Four. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-8196-7. Zolten, Jerry (2009). "The Beatles as recording artists". In Womack, Kenneth (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles. Cambridge Companions to Music. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-1398-2806-2. Barrow, Tony (2005). John, Paul, George, Ringo & Me: The Real Beatles Story. Thunder's Mouth. ISBN 978-1-56025-882-7. Ingham, Chris (2009). The Rough Guide to the Beatles: The Story, the Songs, the Solo Years (3rd ed.). Rough Guides. ISBN 978-1-84353-140-1. Kirchherr, Astrid; Voormann, Klaus (1999). Hamburg Days. Genesis Publications. ISBN 978-0-904351-73-6. Martin, George (1979). All You Need Is Ears. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-11482-4. Martin, George; Pearson, William (1994). Summer of Love: The Making of Sgt. Pepper. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-60398-7. Unterberger, Richie (2006). The Unreleased Beatles: Music & Film. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-892-6. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Badgley, Aaron (2023). Dark Horse Records: The Story of George Harrison's Post-Beatles Record Label. Sonicbond. ISBN 978-1-78952-287-7. Scorsese, Martin (2012). George Harrison: Living in the Material World (Anamorphic, Color, Dolby, NTSC, Surround Sound, Widescreen) (DVD). UMe. ASIN B007JWKLMO. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to George Harrison. Wikiquote has quotations related to George Harrison. George Harrison 1974 concert in Fort Worth from Texas Archive of the Moving Image George Harrison at AllMusic "George Harrison's Greatest Musical Moments" Archived 4 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine – Rolling Stone "George Harrison". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. "George Harrison" – Daily Telegraph obituary George Harrison in the Hollywood Walk of Fame Directory George Harrison at IMDb George Harrison at the TCM Movie Database BBC News: "George Harrison dies" "George Harrison: Life in pictures" "George Harrison: The quiet Beatle" Portals:  Music  Biography  Hinduism  England  United States