Johannes Thingnes Bø (born 16 May 1993) is a Norwegian biathlete. He is the younger brother of biathlete Tarjei Bø. At the Olympic Games in Beijing 2022, they became the first siblings to have individual medals in the same biathlon event. Thingnes Bø has won the Biathlon World Cup in 2018/19, 2019/20, 2020/21, 2022/23 and 2023/24. Thingnes Bø is the second most successful male biathlete of all time in the World Cup with 85 individual World Cup victories, including victories at the Winter Olympic Games. Thingnes Bø won several international medals in 2010 and 2011. In 2012, he became a junior world champion for the third time. In April 2012, he was drafted for the Norwegian senior National Team. 18 years old at the time, he is one of the youngest Norwegians ever to be drafted for the national biathlon team. Having come very close to beating Martin Fourcade in the previous World Cup season, Thingnes Bø was widely considered the prime contender to Fourcade for the overall World Cup in 2018/19. Before the onset of the next season, he had an injury-marred autumn with a back injury. However, Thingnes Bø found himself as the winner of the opening sprint race in Sjusjøen (not a part of the IBU World Cup calendar). In the initial World Cup events, Thingnes Bø won six of eight individual races before Christmas. Having scored 428 points in eight races, Thingnes Bø lead the World Cup by 116 points over Russian and former doping offender Alexander Loginov. Meanwhile, rival Martin Fourcade was in fifth place and trailing Thingnes Bø with 165 points. Thingnes Bø was the favourite for winning the overall World Cup despite having only raced 8 out of a season-total of 26 individual races. After Christmas break, Thingnes Bø continued to succeed in the World Cup events. From and including the first world cup events in Oberhof until the world cup events in Soldier Hollow, Thingnes Bø placed between 1st and 3rd in every individual race. At this point, Thingnes Bø had won 12 out 16 individual races (with one sprint race in Canmore being cancelled), while there were still nine more individual races to go. However, Thingnes Bø did not extend his streak of podium finishes in Soldier Hollow, where sub-par standing shooting cost him the victory in the initial sprint race. The following pursuit race saw Thingnes Bø finish fourth. In an act of sportsmanship, Thingnes Bø admitted that he had not fired all five shots at the last standing shooting. As a penalty for his offense, he agreed with the IBU to receive 0 instead of the 43 world cup points that his fourth-place finish would otherwise have netted him. The poor standing shooting in Soldier Hollow quickly fuelled considerations among experts and fans about whether Thingnes Bø would run into the same shooting problems in the upcoming World Championships in Östersund, where wind conditions are generally very difficult. Thingnes Bø strongly started the 2019 World Championships as he outskied everyone to take home the title as World Champion in the sprint race – despite one missed shot (everyone else in the top eight shot clean), Thingnes Bø comfortably won the sprint race ahead of new rival Alexander Loginov, who was, at the time, still in second position in the overall world cup. The next race was the pursuit race, where Thingnes Bø was, by a large time advantage from the sprint race, the overwhelming favourite to take a second consecutive gold medal. Thingnes Bø lived up to his favourite status in the initial part of the race and led the race with almost one minute coming into the last standing shooting. However, another breakdown on the shooting range meant that Ukrainian underdog Dmytro Pidruchnyi left the shooting range in first place, Thingnes Bø following in second place 15 seconds behind. Thingnes Bø, surprisingly, did not catch Pidruchnyi on the final loop and had to settle for a silver medal after a dramatic last-loop chase. Thingnes Bø then delivered two disappointing performances in the Individual 20k (9th place) and the mass start (13th place). However, Thingnes Bø won three additional gold medals in the team events. Having won 13 races throughout the season and effectively securing himself the crystal globe as the winner of the Overall World Cup, Thingnes Bø had only three more races left on home soil in Holmenkollen before the season ended. The last World Cup event in Holmenkollen turned out great for Thingnes Bø, who won in all three races. With 16 individual victories, he thus became the record holder of the most individual world cup races won in a single season, surpassing the previous 14 victories set by Martin Fourcade two years earlier in the 2016/17 season. Arguably the main talking point coming into the new season (2019/20) was whether Thingnes Bø could retain his dominance from the previous season. Most bookmakers, experts and fans predicted another Thingnes Bø-victory in the world cup, although his favourite status had diminished with the knowledge that Thingnes Bø would have to leave for multiple World Cup events in January because he had to go on parental leave. Thingnes Bø dismissed the idea that he would even fight for the overall world cup title because of his January absence, and he instead insisted that his goals were instead the World Championships, which were held in one of Biathlon's most iconic places, Antholz-Anterselva. The non-official season-opening in Sjusjøen was not a success for Thingnes Bø, who felt heavy on the tracks and only managed fourth in the sprint race, beaten by rival Fourcade, who finished third with similar shooting. In the first world cup competitions in Östersund, Thingnes Bø turned things around in his own favour, and he convincingly took the yellow bib with an emphatic victory in the sprint race ahead of his elder brother, Tarjei. Just as Thingnes Bø looked like he was back to his best, disaster struck in the Individual 20k, where relatively poor Norwegian skis ruined Thingnes Bø's competition. The French waxing team had found the perfect formula for the tricky snow conditions, and as a result, Thingnes Bø was passed by Fourcade, who went on to take the yellow jersey from Thingnes Bø in an all-French podium. Casting aside the equipment failure in Östersund, Thingnes Bø found himself back on the top in the next World Cup stage in Hochfilzen, where he won both individual competitions. In the following world cup stage, Thingnes Bø once again spoiled the French party in Le Grand-Bornand, Annecy. The outstanding ski speed of the previous season was starting to manifest itself again, with Thingnes Bø taking an impressive fourth-place finish in the sprint race despite shooting two misses. The pursuit race saw Thingnes Bø take another world cup victory, and the following mass start, where Thingnes Bø won by over 40 seconds to Emilien Jacquelin, cemented his status as the best biathlete in the world. Going into the Christmas break, Thingnes Bø had won five of seven individual competitions and secured an advantage of 61 points to his brother Tarjei who was second in the overall world cup. Thingnes Bø was the most successful male athlete at the World Championships, with six total medals, including three in individual competitions. The success did not come immediately for Thingnes Bø, however. Still not in top shape after his absence in January, Thingnes Bø delivered a sub-par sprint race to only finish fifth. The pursuit race indicated an increase in form, as Thingnes Bø took the silver medal. Despite his status as the best skier in biathlon, Thingnes Bø lost the fight with Frenchman Emilien Jacquelin on the last loop, where a tactical blunder in the finale left Thingnes Bø vulnerable to Jacquelin's explosive sprint. Thingnes Bø took another silver medal in the Individual 20k, where rival Fourcade beat him. A missed shot at the last standing shooting likely cost Thingnes Bø the gold medal since a clean shooting would have sent him out on the last loop ahead of Fourcade. With no individual gold medals to his name, the pressure was high on Thingnes Bø in the last individual race of the championships, the men's mass start. Thingnes Bø duly delivered and secured the gold medal with clean 20/20 shooting and fast skiing. Having also won medals in all team events he entered, Thingnes Bø managed to win six out of seven possible medals in the championships. In early March, Thingnes Bø was in even better ski shape in the next World Cup events in Nové Město na Moravě, Czech Republic (held with no spectators at the venue as a security measure against the COVID-19 pandemic). Thingnes Bø skied incredibly fast and shot clean in the opening sprint race, which automatically catapulted him to another World Cup victory. The following mass start race saw Thingnes Bø deliver another masterclass performance, winning the race with three missed shots and out-skiing French nemesis Emilien Jacquelin on the final loop. Much like the Individual 20k in Östersund the same season, the race was unusual, as the Norwegian and German waxing teams were unusually successful in their ski-waxing strategy. However, poor shooting from Thingnes Bø throughout the race meant that Thingnes Bø had to catch up after each shooting, and so he eventually managed to catch and pass Emilien Jacquelin on the final loop. The competitions in Kontiolahti, the penultimate World Cup stage on the calendar, were also held with no spectators because of the fear of COVID-19 spreading. The mixed events were eventually cancelled. For similar reasons, the competitions in Holmenkollen were also cancelled leaving only two races in Kontiolahti left in the season. Before these races, Thingnes Bø had already managed to overtake Fourcade in the overall World Cup, courtesy of the points system that subtracts the two worst scores of the season (Thingnes Bø could subtract 0 points because he did not start in two (four) competitions in January). However, Thingnes Bø only led the World Cup with a slim advantage, and he had to deliver two top results to keep the lead. Thingnes Bø did as expected and won the sprint race with Fourcade in second place. It was then made public that Fourcade planned to retire after the following pursuit race, and suddenly the pursuit race was looking to set the stage for a last battle between the two rivals. Thingnes Bø secured his second overall world cup title with a fourth place in the pursuit, while Fourcade won the race and missed out on the overall world cup by two points. He was awarded the Holmenkollen Medal in 2021. All results are sourced from the International Biathlon Union. 8 medals (5 gold, 2 silver, 1 bronze) *The mixed relay was added as an event in 2014. 38 medals (20 gold, 13 silver, 5 bronze) *During Olympic seasons competitions are only held for those events not included in the Olympic program. **The single mixed relay was added as an event in 2019. Standings through 17 March 2024 85 victories – (37 Sp, 24 Pu, 16 MS, 6 Ind, 2 Short Ind) 128 podiums *Results are from UIPMB and IBU races which include the Biathlon World Cup, Biathlon World Championships. 42 victories – (27 Relays, 12 Mixed relays, 3 Single mixed relays) 69 podiums 2012 – Karolineprisen – awarded national talents within culture and sports. He married Hedda Kløvstad Dæhli on 30 June 2018. They have a son together, named Gustav (born January 2020) and daughter Sofia (born summer 2023). Davies, Will (18 February 2022). "Tarjei Boe: Norway's Beijing 2022 biathlon star sharing the stage with his younger brother". "International Biathlon Union – Athlete profile for Johannes Thingnes BOE". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Tarjei Bø får med lillebror Johannes på landslaget". 24 April 2012. "– Trodde det var helt urealistisk at jeg ble satset på nå". 24 April 2012. "Sponsors and Successes: The Biathlon Stars of Winter 2018/19". "Nye problemer for Johannes Thingnes Bø". Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Thingnes Bø tok åpningsseieren på Sjusjøen". Retrieved 2 January 2024. Men's World Cup Total Score Men's World Cup Total Score "IBU and Johannes Thingnes Boe agree removal of points from World Cup Pursuit in Soldier Hollow". "Ekspert om Thingnes Bø: – Litt krise". 16 February 2019. Men's World Cup Total Score "Bø avsluttet sesongen med perfekt løp: – Det går ikke an å få en flottere avslutning". 24 March 2019. "Biathlon 2019–2020 season preview and schedule". "Punkterer en baby alle tiders tvekamp? – TV 2". 30 November 2019. "Thingnes Bø tror ikke på drømmereprise, mister trolig verdenscuprenn". 10 November 2019. "Thingnes Bø gikk seg svimmel: – Det var grusomt". 16 November 2019. "Thingnes Bø knust av Fourcade i sporet: – Dårlegaste på mange år". 4 December 2019. World cup results "Johannes Bø knuser rivalerne og sætter VM-rekord – TV 2". 23 February 2020. "16.02.2020 - Jacquelin outdoes the superstar - Biathlon Antholz - Anterselva". "Erkerivalen til topps da VM-gullet glapp for Bø: – Irriterende". 19 February 2020. "Coronavirus. The event in Nove Mesto will be without spectators". "Nove Mesto Hat Trick: Johannes Thingnes Boe powers to mass start win". "Update: IBU Statement on World Cup in Oslo, Kontiolahti and Junior OECH". "real biathlon: World Cup scoring system – when have you actually won?". www.realbiathlon.com. Archived from the original on 21 March 2017. "Martin Fourcade announces surprise retirement from biathlon". "Fourcade wins his last ever biathlon race as Thingnes Boe takes overall 2019/2020 World Cup title". Bryhn, Rolf; Sundby, Jørn. "Holmenkollmedaljen". In Bolstad, Erik (ed.). Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian). Oslo: Norsk nettleksikon. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "DATACENTER". biathlonresults.com. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Johannes Thingnes Boe". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "menu-competitions-world-cup". International Biathlon Union – IBU. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Karolineprisen til Johannes Thingnes Bø – Norges Skiskytterforbund". skiskyting.no. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Biathlon : Johannes Thingnes Bœ s'est marié". Nordic Magazine. 2 July 2018. Retrieved 27 March 2019. Media related to Johannes Thingnes Bø at Wikimedia Commons Johannes Thingnes Bø at IBU Johannes Thingnes Bø at FIS (cross-country) Johannes Thingnes Bø at Olympics.com Johannes Thingnes Bø at Olympedia Johannes Thingnes Bø at Team Norway (in Norwegian) Johannes Thingnes Bø at NRKs Fylkesleksikon at the Wayback Machine (archived 3 November 2013) (in Norwegian)