The province of Málaga (Spanish: Provincia de Málaga [ˈmalaɣa]) is located in Andalusia, Spain. It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the south and by the provinces of Cádiz to the west, Seville to the northwest, Córdoba to the north, and Granada to the east. The province is subject to extreme water stress in the wake of the proliferation of avocado plantations in the Axarquía region, with the arid local climate being unsuitable to the plant's large water demands. With an area of 7,308 square kilometres (2,822 sq mi) and a population of 1,652,999 (2013), concentrated mainly in the metropolitan area of Málaga, the provincial capital, and throughout the coastal area. The population density surpasses both the Andalusia and Spanish averages, reaching 222.53 inhabitants per km2. Málaga contains 102 municipalities. Besides the capital, the main cities are Marbella, Mijas, Fuengirola, Vélez-Málaga, Torremolinos, Estepona, and Benalmádena, all in the coastal zone. The towns of Antequera and Ronda are located in the interior. The prevailing climate is a warm Mediterranean, with dry and warm long summers with short mild winters. The geographical relief varies greatly from zone to zone. In general, the coastal zone has a subtropical Mediterranean climate. To the north, a continental Mediterranean climate exists with cold, dry winters and warm summers. The main industry and claim to fame are tourist resorts, particularly those on the beaches along the Costa del Sol. These beaches are visited by millions of European tourists; other attractions include the gorge of El Chorro near Álora, El Torcal de Antequera, the Moorish-Mudéjar district of Frigiliana, the Dolmen of Menga, and the Caves of Nerja. The historical population is given in the following chart: Málaga Costa del Sol Valle del Guadalhorce Axarquía Serranía de Ronda Antequera Los Alcornocales Natural Park Sierra de las Nieves National Park Montes de Málaga Natural Park Sierras of Tejeda, Almijara and Alhama Natural Park List of municipalities in Málaga Population Figures referring to Municipal Register 1 January 2013 Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine - Instituto Nacional de Estadística Sánchez, Nacho (17 November 2020). "La provincia que produce más aguacates y mangos de Europa busca agua". El País. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Province of Málaga. The Caminito del Rey tourist information in English[permanent dead link] Video about Malaga province Malaga Metropolitan Transport Consortium Website Malaga Tourism (in English) Portal:  Spain