Karkinit, Karkinitski, Carcinites, or Karkinitsky Bay (Ukrainian: Каркінітська затока, Karkinits'ka zatoka; Russian: Каркинитский залив, Karkinitskiy zaliv, Crimean Tatar: Karkinit körfezi) is a bay of the Black Sea that separates the northwestern Crimean Peninsula from the mainland Ukraine. It was named after the early Greek settlement of Kerkinitis (Κερκινίτης) on the Crimean coast in place of modern Yevpatoria. The northeastern tip of the Karkinitis Bay, by the Isthmus of Perekop, is known as the Perekop Bay or Gulf of Perekop. The bay contains the preserve Karkinits'ka Zatoka State Zakaznik. On the Mercator 1569 world map, the bay is named as Golfo de Nigropoli after the city on north shores of the Pontus Euxeinus. Nigropoli was a city, which, as an 18th century source says "was located on the Silch River that flows into Pontus Euxeinus to the west of the Crimea and forms its own gulf"; the mentioned river most probably being Dnieper. According to Strabo, another name for the Gulf of Carcinites was the Gulf of Tamyraca. It is part of the Karkinitska and Dzharylgatska Bays RAMSAR site. On Mercator's map it is named as Golfo de Nigropoli "Karkinitska and Dzharylgatska Bays". Ramsar Sites Information Service. Retrieved 10 September 2019. The Commission on the Protection of the Black Sea against Pollution. "Geography: BSIMAP". 2009. Accessed 18 Mar 2014. These names are also sometimes translated as the Karkinite or Karkinitian "Gulf" or "Bight". Charles Raymond Beazley. The Dawn of Modern Geography. J. Murray, 1901. page 477 (Nigropoli, Nigropolis, anciennement, Carcina, Carcine. Ville de la petite Tartarie.) Charles Maty. Nigropoli. Dictionnaire géographique universel. National Library of the Netherlands, 1750. (Città situata sul fiume Silch che sgorgano in un seno del Mar Eusino al ponente della Crimea forma il proprio Golfo). Silvio Grandi. Sistema del mondo terracqueo geograficamente descritto. nella Stamperia Bragadina, 1716. page 269 Strabo. The Geography of Strabo. Volume 1. G. Bell & sons, 1903. page 473 The Mercator map. Barry Lawrence Ruderman, Antique Maps Inc. v t e v t e