Law is a set of rules that are created and are enforceable by social or governmental institutions to regulate behavior, with its precise definition a matter of longstanding debate. It has been variously described as a science and as the art of justice. State-enforced laws can be made by a group legislature or by a single legislator, resulting in statutes; by the executive through decrees and regulations; or established by judges through precedent, usually in common law jurisdictions. Private individuals may create legally binding contracts, including arbitration agreements that adopt alternative ways of resolving disputes to standard court litigation. The creation of laws themselves may be influenced by a constitution, written or tacit, and the rights encoded therein. The law shapes politics, economics, history and society in various ways and also serves as a mediator of relations between people. Legal systems vary between jurisdictions, with their differences analysed in comparative law. In civil law jurisdictions, a legislature or other central body codifies and consolidates the law. In common law systems, judges may make binding case law through precedent, although on occasion this may be overturned by a higher court or the legislature. Historically, religious law has influenced secular matters and is, as of the 21st century, still in use in some religious communities. Sharia law based on Islamic principles is used as the primary legal system in several countries, including Iran and Saudi Arabia. The scope of law can be divided into two domains: public law concerns government and society, including constitutional law, administrative law, and criminal law; while private law deals with legal disputes between parties in areas such as contracts, property, torts, delicts and commercial law. This distinction is stronger in civil law countries, particularly those with a separate system of administrative courts; by contrast, the public-private law divide is less pronounced in common law jurisdictions. Law provides a source of scholarly inquiry into legal history, philosophy, economic analysis and sociology. Law also raises important and complex issues concerning equality, fairness, and justice. The word law, attested in Old English as lagu, comes from the Old Icelandic word lǫg. The singular form lag meant 'something laid or fixed' while its plural meant 'law'. But what, after all, is a law? [...] When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that law considers subjects en masse and actions in the abstract, and never a particular person or action. [...] On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will; nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to himself; nor how we can be both free and subject to the laws, since they are but registers of our wills. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract, II, 6. The philosophy of law is commonly known as jurisprudence. Normative jurisprudence asks "what should law be?", while analytic jurisprudence asks "what is law?" There have been several attempts to produce "a universally acceptable definition of law". In 1972, Baron Hampstead suggested that no such definition could be produced. McCoubrey and White said that the question "what is law?" has no simple answer. Glanville Williams said that the meaning of the word "law" depends on the context in which that word is used. He said that, for example, "early customary law" and "municipal law" were contexts where the word "law" had two different and irreconcilable meanings. Thurman Arnold said that it is obvious that it is impossible to define the word "law" and that it is also equally obvious that the struggle to define that word should not ever be abandoned. It is possible to take the view that there is no need to define the word "law" (e.g. "let's forget about generalities and get down to cases"). One definition is that law is a system of rules and guidelines which are enforced through social institutions to govern behaviour. In The Concept of Law, H. L. A. Hart argued that law is a "system of rules"; John Austin said law was "the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction"; Ronald Dworkin describes law as an "interpretive concept" to achieve justice in his text titled Law's Empire; and Joseph Raz argues law is an "authority" to mediate people's interests. Oliver Wendell Holmes defined law as "the prophecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious." In his Treatise on Law, Thomas Aquinas argues that law is a rational ordering of things, which concern the common good, that is promulgated by whoever is charged with the care of the community. This definition has both positivist and naturalist elements. Definitions of law often raise the question of the extent to which law incorporates morality. John Austin's utilitarian answer was that law is "commands, backed by threat of sanctions, from a sovereign, to whom people have a habit of obedience". Natural lawyers, on the other hand, such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, argue that law reflects essentially moral and unchangeable laws of nature. The concept of "natural law" emerged in ancient Greek philosophy concurrently and in connection with the notion of justice, and re-entered the mainstream of Western culture through the writings of Thomas Aquinas, notably his Treatise on Law. Hugo Grotius, the founder of a purely rationalistic system of natural law, argued that law arises from both a social impulse—as Aristotle had indicated—and reason. Immanuel Kant believed a moral imperative requires laws "be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature". Jeremy Bentham and his student Austin, following David Hume, believed that this conflated the "is" and what "ought to be" problem. Bentham and Austin argued for law's positivism; that real law is entirely separate from "morality". Kant was also criticised by Friedrich Nietzsche, who rejected the principle of equality, and believed that law emanates from the will to power, and cannot be labeled as "moral" or "immoral". In 1934, the Austrian philosopher Hans Kelsen continued the positivist tradition in his book the Pure Theory of Law. Kelsen believed that although law is separate from morality, it is endowed with "normativity", meaning we ought to obey it. While laws are positive "is" statements (e.g. the fine for reversing on a highway is €500); law tells us what we "should" do. Thus, each legal system can be hypothesised to have a 'basic norm' (German: Grundnorm) instructing us to obey. Kelsen's major opponent, Carl Schmitt, rejected both positivism and the idea of the rule of law because he did not accept the primacy of abstract normative principles over concrete political positions and decisions. Therefore, Schmitt advocated a jurisprudence of the exception (state of emergency), which denied that legal norms could encompass all of the political experience. Later in the 20th century, H. L. A. Hart attacked Austin for his simplifications and Kelsen for his fictions in The Concept of Law. Hart argued law is a system of rules, divided into primary (rules of conduct) and secondary ones (rules addressed to officials to administer primary rules). Secondary rules are further divided into rules of adjudication (to resolve legal disputes), rules of change (allowing laws to be varied) and the rule of recognition (allowing laws to be identified as valid). Two of Hart's students continued the debate: In his book Law's Empire, Ronald Dworkin attacked Hart and the positivists for their refusal to treat law as a moral issue. Dworkin argues that law is an "interpretive concept" that requires judges to find the best fitting and most just solution to a legal dispute, given their Anglo-American constitutional traditions. Joseph Raz, on the other hand, defended the positivist outlook and criticised Hart's "soft social thesis" approach in The Authority of Law. Raz argues that law is authority, identifiable purely through social sources and without reference to moral reasoning. In his view, any categorisation of rules beyond their role as authoritative instruments in mediation are best left to sociology, rather than jurisprudence. The history of law links closely to the development of civilization. Ancient Egyptian law, dating as far back as 3000 BC, was based on the concept of Ma'at and characterised by tradition, rhetorical speech, social equality and impartiality. By the 22nd century BC, the ancient Sumerian ruler Ur-Nammu had formulated the first law code, which consisted of casuistic statements ("if … then ..."). Around 1760 BC, King Hammurabi further developed Babylonian law, by codifying and inscribing it in stone. Hammurabi placed several copies of his law code throughout the kingdom of Babylon as stelae, for the entire public to see; this became known as the Codex Hammurabi. The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists, and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, Italian, German, and French. The Old Testament dates back to 1280 BC and takes the form of moral imperatives as recommendations for a good society. The small Greek city-state, ancient Athens, from about the 8th century BC was the first society to be based on broad inclusion of its citizenry, excluding women and enslaved people. However, Athens had no legal science or single word for "law", relying instead on the three-way distinction between divine law (thémis), human decree (nomos) and custom (díkē). Yet Ancient Greek law contained major constitutional innovations in the development of democracy. Roman law was heavily influenced by Greek philosophy, but its detailed rules were developed by professional jurists and were highly sophisticated. Over the centuries between the rise and decline of the Roman Empire, law was adapted to cope with the changing social situations and underwent major codification under Theodosius II and Justinian I. Although codes were replaced by custom and case law during the Early Middle Ages, Roman law was rediscovered around the 11th century when medieval legal scholars began to research Roman codes and adapt their concepts to the canon law, giving birth to the jus commune. Latin legal maxims (called brocards) were compiled for guidance. In medieval England, royal courts developed a body of precedent which later became the common law. A Europe-wide Law Merchant was formed so that merchants could trade with common standards of practice rather than with the many splintered facets of local laws. The Law Merchant, a precursor to modern commercial law, emphasised the freedom to contract and alienability of property. As nationalism grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, the Law Merchant was incorporated into countries' local law under new civil codes. The Napoleonic and German Codes became the most influential. In contrast to English common law, which consists of enormous tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and easy for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging. EU law is codified in treaties, but develops through de facto precedent laid down by the European Court of Justice. Ancient India and China represent distinct traditions of law, and have historically had independent schools of legal theory and practice. The Arthashastra, probably compiled around 100 AD (although it contains older material), and the Manusmriti (c. 100–300 AD) were foundational treatises in India, and comprise texts considered authoritative legal guidance. Manu's central philosophy was tolerance and pluralism, and was cited across Southeast Asia. During the Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent, sharia was established by the Muslim sultanates and empires, most notably Mughal Empire's Fatawa-e-Alamgiri, compiled by emperor Aurangzeb and various scholars of Islam. In India, the Hindu legal tradition, along with Islamic law, were both supplanted by common law when India became part of the British Empire. Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong also adopted the common law system. The eastern Asia legal tradition reflects a unique blend of secular and religious influences. Japan was the first country to begin modernising its legal system along western lines, by importing parts of the French, but mostly the German Civil Code. This partly reflected Germany's status as a rising power in the late 19th century. Similarly, traditional Chinese law gave way to westernisation towards the final years of the Qing Dynasty in the form of six private law codes based mainly on the Japanese model of German law. Today Taiwanese law retains the closest affinity to the codifications from that period, because of the split between Chiang Kai-shek's nationalists, who fled there, and Mao Zedong's communists who won control of the mainland in 1949. The current legal infrastructure in the People's Republic of China was heavily influenced by Soviet Socialist law, which essentially prioritises administrative law at the expense of private law rights. Due to rapid industrialisation, today China is undergoing a process of reform, at least in terms of economic, if not social and political, rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a move away from administrative domination. Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organization. In general, legal systems can be split between civil law and common law systems. Modern scholars argue that the significance of this distinction has progressively declined. The numerous legal transplants, typical of modern law, result in the sharing of many features traditionally considered typical of either common law or civil law. The third type of legal system is religious law, based on scriptures. The specific system that a country is ruled by is often determined by its history, connections with other countries, or its adherence to international standards. The sources that jurisdictions adopt as authoritatively binding are the defining features of any legal system. Civil law is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. In civil law the sources recognised as authoritative are, primarily, legislation—especially codifications in constitutions or statutes passed by government—and custom. Codifications date back millennia, with one early example being the Babylonian Codex Hammurabi. Modern civil law systems essentially derive from legal codes issued by Byzantine Emperor Justinian I in the 6th century, which were rediscovered by 11th century Italy. Roman law in the days of the Roman Republic and Empire was heavily procedural, and lacked a professional legal class. Instead a lay magistrate, iudex, was chosen to adjudicate. Decisions were not published in any systematic way, so any case law that developed was disguised and almost unrecognised. Each case was to be decided afresh from the laws of the State, which mirrors the (theoretical) unimportance of judges' decisions for future cases in civil law systems today. From 529 to 534 AD the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I codified and consolidated Roman law up until that point, so that what remained was one-twentieth of the mass of legal texts from before. This became known as the Corpus Juris Civilis. As one legal historian wrote, "Justinian consciously looked back to the golden age of Roman law and aimed to restore it to the peak it had reached three centuries before." The Justinian Code remained in force in the East until the fall of the Byzantine Empire. Western Europe, meanwhile, relied on a mix of the Theodosian Code and Germanic customary law until the Justinian Code was rediscovered in the 11th century, which scholars at the University of Bologna used to interpret their own laws. Civil law codifications based closely on Roman law, alongside some influences from religious laws such as canon law, continued to spread throughout Europe until the Enlightenment. Then, in the 19th century, both France, with the Code Civil, and Germany, with the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, modernised their legal codes. Both these codes heavily influenced not only the law systems of the countries in continental Europe, but also the Japanese and Korean legal traditions. Today, countries that have civil law systems range from Russia and Turkey to most of Central and Latin America. Anarchist law primarily deals with how anarchism is implemented upon a society, the framework based on decentralized organizations and mutual aid, with representation through a form of direct democracy. Laws being based upon their need. A large portion of anarchist ideologies such as anarcho-syndicalism and anarcho-communism primarily focuses on decentralized worker unions, cooperatives and syndicates as the main instrument of society. Socialist law is the legal systems in communist states such as the former Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. Academic opinion is divided on whether it is a separate system from civil law, given major deviations based on Marxist–Leninist ideology, such as subordinating the judiciary to the executive ruling party. In common law legal systems, decisions by courts are explicitly acknowledged as "law" on equal footing with legislative statutes and executive regulations. The "doctrine of precedent", or stare decisis (Latin for "to stand by decisions") means that decisions by higher courts bind lower courts to assure that similar cases reach similar results. In contrast, in civil law systems, legislative statutes are typically more detailed, and judicial decisions are shorter and less detailed, because the adjudicator is only writing to decide the single case, rather than to set out reasoning that will guide future courts. Common law originated from England and has been inherited by almost every country once tied to the British Empire (except Malta, Scotland, the U.S. state of Louisiana, and the Canadian province of Quebec). In medieval England during the Norman conquest, the law varied shire-to-shire based on disparate tribal customs. The concept of a "common law" developed during the reign of Henry II during the late 12th century, when Henry appointed judges that had authority to create an institutionalised and unified system of law common to the country. The next major step in the evolution of the common law came when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document limiting his authority to pass laws. This "great charter" or Magna Carta of 1215 also required that the King's entourage of judges hold their courts and judgments at "a certain place" rather than dispensing autocratic justice in unpredictable places about the country. A concentrated and elite group of judges acquired a dominant role in law-making under this system, and compared to its European counterparts the English judiciary became highly centralised. In 1297, for instance, while the highest court in France had fifty-one judges, the English Court of Common Pleas had five. This powerful and tight-knit judiciary gave rise to a systematised process of developing common law. As time went on, many felt that the common law was overly systematised and inflexible, and increasing numbers of citizens petitioned the King to override the common law. On the King's behalf, the Lord Chancellor started giving judgments to do what was equitable in a case. From the time of Sir Thomas More, the first lawyer to be appointed as Lord Chancellor, a systematic body of equity grew up alongside the rigid common law, and developed its own Court of Chancery. At first, equity was often criticised as erratic. Over time, courts of equity developed solid principles, especially under Lord Eldon. In the 19th century in England, and in 1937 in the U.S., the two systems were merged. In developing the common law, academic writings have always played an important part, both to collect overarching principles from dispersed case law, and to argue for change. William Blackstone, from around 1760, was the first scholar to collect, describe, and teach the common law. But merely in describing, scholars who sought explanations and underlying structures slowly changed the way the law actually worked. Religious law is explicitly based on religious precepts. Examples include the Jewish Halakha and Islamic Sharia—both of which translate as the "path to follow". Christian canon law also survives in some church communities. Often the implication of religion for law is unalterability, because the word of God cannot be amended or legislated against by judges or governments. Nonetheless, most religious jurisdictions rely on further human elaboration to provide for thorough and detailed legal systems. For instance, the Quran has some law, and it acts as a source of further law through interpretation, Qiyas (reasoning by analogy), Ijma (consensus) and precedent. This is mainly contained in a body of law and jurisprudence known as Sharia and Fiqh respectively. Another example is the Torah or Old Testament, in the Pentateuch or Five Books of Moses. This contains the basic code of Jewish law, which some Israeli communities choose to use. The Halakha is a code of Jewish law that summarizes some of the Talmud's interpretations. A number of countries are sharia jurisdictions. Israeli law allows litigants to use religious laws only if they choose. Canon law is only in use by members of the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion. Canon law (Ancient Greek: κανών, romanized: kanon, lit. 'a straight measuring rod; a ruler') is a set of ordinances and regulations made by ecclesiastical authority, for the government of a Christian organisation or church and its members. It is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, and the individual national churches within the Anglican Communion. The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was originally a rule adopted by a church council; these canons formed the foundation of canon law. The Catholic Church has the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the western world, predating the evolution of modern European civil law and common law systems. The 1983 Code of Canon Law governs the Latin Church sui juris. The Eastern Catholic Churches, which developed different disciplines and practices, are governed by the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches. The canon law of the Catholic Church influenced the common law during the medieval period through its preservation of Roman law doctrine such as the presumption of innocence. Until the 18th century, Sharia law was practiced throughout the Muslim world in a non-codified form, with the Ottoman Empire's Mecelle code in the 19th century being a first attempt at codifying elements of Sharia law. Since the mid-1940s, efforts have been made, in country after country, to bring Sharia law more into line with modern conditions and conceptions. In modern times, the legal systems of many Muslim countries draw upon both civil and common law traditions as well as Islamic law and custom. The constitutions of certain Muslim states, such as Egypt and Afghanistan, recognise Islam as the religion of the state, obliging legislature to adhere to Sharia. Saudi Arabia recognises the Quran as its constitution, and is governed on the basis of Islamic law. Iran has also witnessed a reiteration of Islamic law into its legal system after 1979. During the last few decades, one of the fundamental features of the movement of Islamic resurgence has been the call to restore the Sharia, which has generated a vast amount of literature and affected world politics. There are distinguished methods of legal reasoning (applying the law) and methods of interpreting (construing) the law. The former are legal syllogism, which holds sway in civil law legal systems, analogy, which is present in common law legal systems, especially in the US, and argumentative theories that occur in both systems. The latter are different rules (directives) of legal interpretation such as directives of linguistic interpretation, teleological interpretation or systemic interpretation as well as more specific rules, for instance, golden rule or mischief rule. There are also many other arguments and cannons of interpretation which altogether make statutory interpretation possible. Law professor and former United States Attorney General Edward H. Levi noted that the "basic pattern of legal reasoning is reasoning by example"—that is, reasoning by comparing outcomes in cases resolving similar legal questions. In a U.S. Supreme Court case regarding procedural efforts taken by a debt collection company to avoid errors, Justice Sotomayor cautioned that "legal reasoning is not a mechanical or strictly linear process". Jurimetrics is the formal application of quantitative methods, especially probability and statistics, to legal questions. The use of statistical methods in court cases and law review articles has grown massively in importance in the last few decades. It is a real unity of them all in one and the same person, made by covenant of every man with every man, in such manner as if every man should say to every man: I authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man, or to this assembly of men, on this condition; that thou givest up, thy right to him, and authorise all his actions in like manner. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, XVII The main institutions of law in industrialised countries are independent courts, representative parliaments, an accountable executive, the military and police, bureaucratic organisation, the legal profession and civil society itself. John Locke, in his Two Treatises of Government, and Baron de Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws, advocated for a separation of powers between the political, legislature and executive bodies. Their principle was that no person should be able to usurp all powers of the state, in contrast to the absolutist theory of Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan. Sun Yat-sen's Five Power Constitution for the Republic of China took the separation of powers further by having two additional branches of government—a Control Yuan for auditing oversight and an Examination Yuan to manage the employment of public officials. Max Weber and others reshaped thinking on the extension of state. Modern military, policing and bureaucratic power over ordinary citizens' daily lives pose special problems for accountability that earlier writers such as Locke or Montesquieu could not have foreseen. The custom and practice of the legal profession is an important part of people's access to justice, whilst civil society is a term used to refer to the social institutions, communities and partnerships that form law's political basis. A judiciary is a number of judges mediating disputes to determine outcome. Most countries have systems of appeal courts, with an apex court as the ultimate judicial authority. In the United States, this authority is the Supreme Court; in Australia, the High Court; in India, the Supreme Court of India; in the UK, the Supreme Court; in Germany, the Bundesverfassungsgericht; and in France, the Cour de Cassation. For most European countries the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg can overrule national law, when EU law is relevant. The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg allows citizens of the Council of Europe member states to bring cases relating to human rights issues before it. Some countries allow their highest judicial authority to overrule legislation they determine to be unconstitutional. For example, in Brown v. Board of Education, the United States Supreme Court nullified many state statutes that had established racially segregated schools, finding such statutes to be incompatible with the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. A judiciary is theoretically bound by the constitution, just as all other government bodies are. In most countries judges may only interpret the constitution and all other laws. But in common law countries, where matters are not constitutional, the judiciary may also create law under the doctrine of precedent. The UK, Finland and New Zealand assert the ideal of parliamentary sovereignty, whereby the unelected judiciary may not overturn law passed by a democratic legislature. In communist states, such as China, the courts are often regarded as parts of the executive, or subservient to the legislature; governmental institutions and actors exert thus various forms of influence on the judiciary. In Muslim countries, courts often examine whether state laws adhere to the Sharia: the Supreme Constitutional Court of Egypt may invalidate such laws, and in Iran the Guardian Council ensures the compatibility of the legislation with the "criteria of Islam". Prominent examples of legislatures are the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington, D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow, the Parlamento Italiano in Rome and the Assemblée nationale in Paris. By the principle of representative government people vote for politicians to carry out their wishes. Although countries like Israel, Greece, Sweden and China are unicameral, most countries are bicameral, meaning they have two separately appointed legislative houses. In the 'lower house' politicians are elected to represent smaller constituencies. The 'upper house' is usually elected to represent states in a federal system (as in Australia, Germany or the United States) or different voting configuration in a unitary system (as in France). In the UK the upper house is appointed by the government as a house of review. One criticism of bicameral systems with two elected chambers is that the upper and lower houses may simply mirror one another. The traditional justification of bicameralism is that an upper chamber acts as a house of review. This can minimise arbitrariness and injustice in governmental action. To pass legislation, a majority of the members of a legislature must vote for a bill (proposed law) in each house. Normally there will be several readings and amendments proposed by the different political factions. If a country has an entrenched constitution, a special majority for changes to the constitution may be required, making changes to the law more difficult. A government usually leads the process, which can be formed from Members of Parliament (e.g. the UK or Germany). However, in a presidential system, the government is usually formed by an executive and his or her appointed cabinet officials (e.g. the United States or Brazil). The executive in a legal system serves as the centre of political authority of the State. In a parliamentary system, as with Britain, Italy, Germany, India, and Japan, the executive is known as the cabinet, and composed of members of the legislature. The executive is led by the head of government, whose office holds power under the confidence of the legislature. Because popular elections appoint political parties to govern, the leader of a party can change in between elections. The head of state is apart from the executive, and symbolically enacts laws and acts as representative of the nation. Examples include the President of Germany (appointed by members of federal and state legislatures), the Queen of the United Kingdom (an hereditary office), and the President of Austria (elected by popular vote). The other important model is the presidential system, found in the United States and in Brazil. In presidential systems, the executive acts as both head of state and head of government, and has power to appoint an unelected cabinet. Under a presidential system, the executive branch is separate from the legislature to which it is not accountable. Although the role of the executive varies from country to country, usually it will propose the majority of legislation, and propose government agenda. In presidential systems, the executive often has the power to veto legislation. Most executives in both systems are responsible for foreign relations, the military and police, and the bureaucracy. Ministers or other officials head a country's public offices, such as a foreign ministry or defence ministry. The election of a different executive is therefore capable of revolutionising an entire country's approach to government. While military organisations have existed as long as government itself, the idea of a standing police force is a relatively modern concept. For example, Medieval England's system of travelling criminal courts, or assizes, used show trials and public executions to instill communities with fear to maintain control. The first modern police were probably those in 17th-century Paris, in the court of Louis XIV, although the Paris Prefecture of Police claim they were the world's first uniformed policemen. Max Weber famously argued that the state is that which controls the monopoly on the legitimate use of force. The military and police carry out enforcement at the request of the government or the courts. The term failed state refers to states that cannot implement or enforce policies; their police and military no longer control security and order and society moves into anarchy, the absence of government. The etymology of bureaucracy derives from the French word for office (bureau) and the Ancient Greek for word power (kratos).[better source needed] Like the military and police, a legal system's government servants and bodies that make up its bureaucracy carry out the directives of the executive. One of the earliest references to the concept was made by Baron de Grimm, a German author who lived in France. In 1765, he wrote: The real spirit of the laws in France is that bureaucracy of which the late Monsieur de Gournay used to complain so greatly; here the offices, clerks, secretaries, inspectors and intendants are not appointed to benefit the public interest, indeed the public interest appears to have been established so that offices might exist. Cynicism over "officialdom" is still common, and the workings of public servants is typically contrasted to private enterprise motivated by profit. In fact private companies, especially large ones, also have bureaucracies. Negative perceptions of "red tape" aside, public services such as schooling, health care, policing or public transport are considered a crucial state function making public bureaucratic action the locus of government power. Writing in the early 20th century, Max Weber believed that a definitive feature of a developed state had come to be its bureaucratic support. Weber wrote that the typical characteristics of modern bureaucracy are that officials define its mission, the scope of work is bound by rules, and management is composed of career experts who manage top down, communicating through writing and binding public servants' discretion with rules. A corollary of the rule of law is the existence of a legal profession sufficiently autonomous to invoke the authority of the independent judiciary; the right to assistance of a barrister in a court proceeding emanates from this corollary—in England the function of barrister or advocate is distinguished from legal counselor. As the European Court of Human Rights has stated, the law should be adequately accessible to everyone and people should be able to foresee how the law affects them. In order to maintain professionalism, the practice of law is typically overseen by either a government or independent regulating body such as a bar association, bar council or law society. Modern lawyers achieve distinct professional identity through specified legal procedures (e.g. successfully passing a qualifying examination), are required by law to have a special qualification (a legal education earning the student a Bachelor of Laws, a Bachelor of Civil Law, or a Juris Doctor degree. Higher academic degrees may also be pursued. Examples include a Master of Laws, a Master of Legal Studies, a Bar Professional Training Course or a Doctor of Laws.), and are constituted in office by legal forms of appointment (being admitted to the bar). There are few titles of respect to signify famous lawyers, such as Esquire, to indicate barristers of greater dignity, and Doctor of law, to indicate a person who obtained a PhD in Law. Many Muslim countries have developed similar rules about legal education and the legal profession, but some still allow lawyers with training in traditional Islamic law to practice law before personal status law courts. In China and other developing countries there are not sufficient professionally trained people to staff the existing judicial systems, and, accordingly, formal standards are more relaxed. Once accredited, a lawyer will often work in a law firm, in a chambers as a sole practitioner, in a government post or in a private corporation as an internal counsel. In addition a lawyer may become a legal researcher who provides on-demand legal research through a library, a commercial service or freelance work. Many people trained in law put their skills to use outside the legal field entirely. Significant to the practice of law in the common law tradition is the legal research to determine the current state of the law. This usually entails exploring case-law reports, legal periodicals and legislation. Law practice also involves drafting documents such as court pleadings, persuasive briefs, contracts, or wills and trusts. Negotiation and dispute resolution skills (including ADR techniques) are also important to legal practice, depending on the field. The Classical republican concept of "civil society" dates back to Hobbes and Locke. Locke saw civil society as people who have "a common established law and judicature to appeal to, with authority to decide controversies between them." German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel distinguished the "state" from "civil society" (German: bürgerliche Gesellschaft) in Elements of the Philosophy of Right. Hegel believed that civil society and the state were polar opposites, within the scheme of his dialectic theory of history. The modern dipole state–civil society was reproduced in the theories of Alexis de Tocqueville and Karl Marx. In post-modern theory, civil society is necessarily a source of law, by being the basis from which people form opinions and lobby for what they believe law should be. As Australian barrister and author Geoffrey Robertson QC wrote of international law, "one of its primary modern sources is found in the responses of ordinary men and women, and of the non-governmental organizations which many of them support, to the human rights abuses they see on the television screen in their living rooms." Freedom of speech, freedom of association and many other individual rights allow people to gather, discuss, criticise and hold to account their governments, from which the basis of a deliberative democracy is formed. The more people are involved with, concerned by and capable of changing how political power is exercised over their lives, the more acceptable and legitimate the law becomes to the people. The most familiar institutions of civil society include economic markets, profit-oriented firms, families, trade unions, hospitals, universities, schools, charities, debating clubs, non-governmental organisations, neighbourhoods, churches, and religious associations. There is no clear legal definition of the civil society, and of the institutions it includes. Most of the institutions and bodies who try to give a list of institutions (such as the European Economic and Social Committee) exclude the political parties. All legal systems deal with the same basic issues, but jurisdictions categorise and identify their legal topics in different ways. A common distinction is that between "public law" (a term related closely to the state, and including constitutional, administrative and criminal law), and "private law" (which covers contract, tort and property). In civil law systems, contract and tort fall under a general law of obligations, while trusts law is dealt with under statutory regimes or international conventions. International, constitutional and administrative law, criminal law, contract, tort, property law and trusts are regarded as the "traditional core subjects", although there are many further disciplines. Wikisource has original text related to this article: Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union International law can refer to three things: public international law, private international law or conflict of laws and the law of supranational organisations. Public international law concerns relationships between sovereign nations. The sources for public international law development are custom, practice and treaties between sovereign nations, such as the Geneva Conventions. Public international law can be formed by international organisations, such as the United Nations (which was established after the failure of the League of Nations to prevent World War II), the International Labour Organisation, the World Trade Organisation (WTO), or the International Monetary Fund. Public international law has a special status as law because there is no international police force, and courts (e.g. the International Court of Justice as the primary UN judicial organ) lack the capacity to penalise disobedience. The prevailing manner of enforcing international law is still essentially "self help"; that is the reaction by states to alleged breaches of international obligations by other states. However, a few bodies, such as the WTO, have effective systems of binding arbitration and dispute resolution backed up by trade sanctions. Conflict of laws, or private international law in civil law countries, concerns which jurisdiction a legal dispute between private parties should be heard in and which jurisdiction's law should be applied. Today, businesses are increasingly capable of shifting capital and labour supply chains across borders, as well as trading with overseas businesses, making the question of which country has jurisdiction even more pressing. Increasing numbers of businesses opt for commercial arbitration under the New York Convention 1958. European Union law is the first and so far the only example of a supranational law, i.e. an internationally accepted legal system, other than the United Nations and the World Trade Organization. Given the trend of increasing global economic integration, many regional agreements—especially the African Union—seek to follow a similar model. In the EU, sovereign nations have gathered their authority in a system of courts and the European Parliament. These institutions are allowed the ability to enforce legal norms both against or for member states and citizens in a manner which is not possible through public international law. As the European Court of Justice noted in its 1963 Van Gend en Loos decision, European Union law constitutes "a new legal order of international law" for the mutual social and economic benefit of the member states. Constitutional and administrative law govern the affairs of the state. Constitutional law concerns both the relationships between the executive, legislature and judiciary and the human rights or civil liberties of individuals against the state. Most jurisdictions, like the United States and France, have a single codified constitution with a bill of rights. A few, like the United Kingdom, have no such document. A "constitution" is simply those laws which constitute the body politic, from statute, case law and convention. The fundamental constitutional principle, inspired by John Locke, holds that the individual can do anything except that which is forbidden by law, and the state may do nothing except that which is authorised by law. Administrative law is the chief method for people to hold state bodies to account. People can sue an agency, local council, public service, or government ministry for judicial review of actions or decisions, to ensure that they comply with the law, and that the government entity observed required procedure. The first specialist administrative court was the Conseil d'État set up in 1799, as Napoleon assumed power in France. A subdiscipline of constitutional law is election law. It deals with rules governing elections. These rules enable the translation of the will of the people into functioning democracies. Election law addresses issues who is entitled to vote, voter registration, ballot access, campaign finance and party funding, redistricting, apportionment, electronic voting and voting machines, accessibility of elections, election systems and formulas, vote counting, election disputes, referendums, and issues such as electoral fraud and electoral silence. Criminal law, also known as penal law, pertains to crimes and punishment. It thus regulates the definition of and penalties for offences found to have a sufficiently deleterious social impact but, in itself, makes no moral judgment on an offender nor imposes restrictions on society that physically prevent people from committing a crime in the first place. Investigating, apprehending, charging, and trying suspected offenders is regulated by the law of criminal procedure. The paradigm case of a crime lies in the proof, beyond reasonable doubt, that a person is guilty of two things. First, the accused must commit an act which is deemed by society to be criminal, or actus reus (guilty act). Second, the accused must have the requisite malicious intent to do a criminal act, or mens rea (guilty mind). However, for so called "strict liability" crimes, an actus reus is enough. Criminal systems of the civil law tradition distinguish between intention in the broad sense (dolus directus and dolus eventualis), and negligence. Negligence does not carry criminal responsibility unless a particular crime provides for its punishment. Examples of crimes include murder, assault, fraud and theft. In exceptional circumstances defences can apply to specific acts, such as killing in self defence, or pleading insanity. Another example is in the 19th-century English case of R v Dudley and Stephens, which tested a defence of "necessity". Criminal law offences are viewed as offences against not just individual victims, but the community as well. The state, usually with the help of police, takes the lead in prosecution, which is why in common law countries cases are cited as "The People v ..." or "R (for Rex or Regina) v ...". Also, lay juries are often used to determine the guilt of defendants on points of fact: juries cannot change legal rules. Some developed countries still condone capital punishment for criminal activity, but the normal punishment for a crime will be imprisonment, fines, state supervision (such as probation), or community service. Modern criminal law has been affected considerably by the social sciences, especially with respect to sentencing, legal research, legislation, and rehabilitation. On the international field, 111 countries are members of the International Criminal Court, which was established to try people for crimes against humanity. Contract law concerns enforceable promises, and can be summed up in the Latin phrase pacta sunt servanda (agreements must be kept). In common law jurisdictions, three key elements to the creation of a contract are necessary: offer and acceptance, consideration and the intention to create legal relations. Consideration indicates the fact that all parties to a contract have exchanged something of value. Some common law systems, including Australia, are moving away from the idea of consideration as a requirement. The idea of estoppel or culpa in contrahendo, can be used to create obligations during pre-contractual negotiations. Civil law jurisdictions treat contracts differently in a number of respects, with a more interventionist role for the state in both the formation and enforcement of contracts. Compared to common law jurisdictions, civil law systems incorporate more mandatory terms into contracts, allow greater latitude for courts to interpret and revise contract terms and impose a stronger duty of good faith, but are also more likely to enforce penalty clauses and specific performance of contracts. They also do not require consideration for a contract to be binding. In France, an ordinary contract is said to form simply on the basis of a "meeting of the minds" or a "concurrence of wills". Germany has a special approach to contracts, which ties into property law. Their 'abstraction principle' (Abstraktionsprinzip) means that the personal obligation of contract forms separately from the title of property being conferred. When contracts are invalidated for some reason (e.g. a car buyer is so drunk that he lacks legal capacity to contract) the contractual obligation to pay can be invalidated separately from the proprietary title of the car. Unjust enrichment law, rather than contract law, is then used to restore title to the rightful owner. Certain civil wrongs are grouped together as torts under common law systems and delicts under civil law systems. To have acted tortiously, one must have breached a duty to another person, or infringed some pre-existing legal right. A simple example might be unintentionally hitting someone with a ball. Under the law of negligence, the most common form of tort, the injured party could potentially claim compensation for their injuries from the party responsible. The principles of negligence are illustrated by Donoghue v Stevenson. A friend of Donoghue ordered an opaque bottle of ginger beer (intended for the consumption of Donoghue) in a café in Paisley. Having consumed half of it, Donoghue poured the remainder into a tumbler. The decomposing remains of a snail floated out. She claimed to have suffered from shock, fell ill with gastroenteritis and sued the manufacturer for carelessly allowing the drink to be contaminated. The House of Lords decided that the manufacturer was liable for Mrs Donoghue's illness. Lord Atkin took a distinctly moral approach and said: The liability for negligence [...] is no doubt based upon a general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing for which the offender must pay. [...] The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law, you must not injure your neighbour; and the lawyer's question, Who is my neighbour? receives a restricted reply. You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. This became the basis for the four principles of negligence, namely that: Stevenson owed Donoghue a duty of care to provide safe drinks; he breached his duty of care; the harm would not have occurred but for his breach; and his act was the proximate cause of her harm. Another example of tort might be a neighbour making excessively loud noises with machinery on his property. Under a nuisance claim the noise could be stopped. Torts can also involve intentional acts such as assault, battery or trespass. A better known tort is defamation, which occurs, for example, when a newspaper makes unsupportable allegations that damage a politician's reputation. More infamous are economic torts, which form the basis of labour law in some countries by making trade unions liable for strikes, when statute does not provide immunity. Property law governs ownership and possession. Real property, sometimes called 'real estate', refers to ownership of land and things attached to it. Personal property, refers to everything else; movable objects, such as computers, cars, jewelry or intangible rights, such as stocks and shares. A right in rem is a right to a specific piece of property, contrasting to a right in personam which allows compensation for a loss, but not a particular thing back. Land law forms the basis for most kinds of property law, and is the most complex. It concerns mortgages, rental agreements, licences, covenants, easements and the statutory systems for land registration. Regulations on the use of personal property fall under intellectual property, company law, trusts and commercial law. An example of a basic case of most property law is Armory v Delamirie [1722]. A chimney sweep's boy found a jewel encrusted with precious stones. He took it to a goldsmith to have it valued. The goldsmith's apprentice looked at it, sneakily removed the stones, told the boy it was worth three halfpence and that he would buy it. The boy said he would prefer the jewel back, so the apprentice gave it to him, but without the stones. The boy sued the goldsmith for his apprentice's attempt to cheat him. Lord Chief Justice Pratt ruled that even though the boy could not be said to own the jewel, he should be considered the rightful keeper ("finders keepers") until the original owner is found. In fact the apprentice and the boy both had a right of possession in the jewel (a technical concept, meaning evidence that something could belong to someone), but the boy's possessory interest was considered better, because it could be shown to be first in time. Possession may be nine-tenths of the law, but not all. This case is used to support the view of property in common law jurisdictions, that the person who can show the best claim to a piece of property, against any contesting party, is the owner. By contrast, the classic civil law approach to property, propounded by Friedrich Carl von Savigny, is that it is a right good against the world. Obligations, like contracts and torts, are conceptualised as rights good between individuals. The idea of property raises many further philosophical and political issues. Locke argued that our "lives, liberties and estates" are our property because we own our bodies and mix our labour with our surroundings. Equity is a body of rules that developed in England separately from the "common law". The common law was administered by judges and barristers. The Lord Chancellor on the other hand, as the King's keeper of conscience, could overrule the judge-made law if he thought it equitable to do so. This meant equity came to operate more through principles than rigid rules. Whereas neither the common law nor civil law systems allow people to split the ownership from the control of one piece of property, equity allows this through an arrangement known as a trust. Trustees control property whereas the beneficial, or equitable, ownership of trust property is held by people known as beneficiaries. Trustees owe duties to their beneficiaries to take good care of the entrusted property. Another example of a trustee's duty might be to invest property wisely or sell it. This is especially the case for pension funds, the most important form of trust, where investors are trustees for people's savings until retirement. But trusts can also be set up for charitable purposes. Law and society Labour law is the study of a tripartite industrial relationship between worker, employer and trade union. This involves collective bargaining regulation, and the right to strike. Individual employment law refers to workplace rights, such as job security, health and safety or a minimum wage. Human rights, civil rights and human rights law. These are laid down in codes such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the European Convention on Human Rights (which founded the European Court of Human Rights) and the U.S. Bill of Rights. The Treaty of Lisbon makes the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union legally binding in all member states except Poland and the United Kingdom. Civil procedure and criminal procedure concern the rules that courts must follow as a trial and appeals proceed. Both concern a citizen's right to a fair trial or hearing. Evidence law involves which materials are admissible in courts for a case to be built. Immigration law and nationality law concern the rights of foreigners to live and work in a nation-state that is not their own and to acquire or lose citizenship. Both also involve the right of asylum and the problem of stateless individuals. Family law covers marriage and divorce proceedings, the rights of children and rights to property and money in the event of separation. Transactional law is the practice of law concerning business and money. Biolaw focuses on the intersection of law and the biosciences. Law and commerce Company law sprang from the law of trusts, on the principle of separating ownership of property and control. The law of the modern company began with the Joint Stock Companies Act 1856, passed in the United Kingdom, which provided investors with a simple registration procedure to gain limited liability under the separate legal personality of the corporation. Commercial law covers complex contract and property law. The law of agency, insurance law, bills of exchange, insolvency and bankruptcy law and sales law trace back to the medieval Lex Mercatoria. The UK Sale of Goods Act 1979 and the US Uniform Commercial Code are examples of codified common law commercial principles. Admiralty law and the sea law lay a basic framework for free trade and commerce across the world's oceans and seas, where outside of a country's zone of control. Shipping companies operate through ordinary principles of commercial law, generalised for a global market. Admiralty law also encompasses specialised issues such as salvage, maritime liens, and injuries to passengers. Intellectual property law aims at safeguarding creators and other producers of intellectual goods and services. These are legal rights (copyrights, trademarks, patents, and related rights) which result from intellectual activity in the industrial, literary and artistic fields. Space law is a relatively new field dealing with aspects of international law regarding human activities in Earth orbit and outer space. While at first addressing space relations of countries via treaties, increasingly it is addressing areas such as space commercialisation, property, liability, and other issues. Law and regulation Tax law involves regulations that concern value added tax, corporate tax, and income tax. Banking law and financial regulation set minimum standards on the amounts of capital banks must hold, and rules about best practice for investment. This is to insure against the risk of economic crises, such as the Wall Street Crash of 1929. Regulation deals with the provision of public services and utilities. Water law is one example. Especially since privatisation became popular and took management of services away from public law, private companies doing the jobs previously controlled by government have been bound by varying degrees of social responsibility. Energy, gas, telecomms and water are regulated industries in most OECD countries. Competition law, known in the United States as antitrust law, is an evolving field that traces as far back as Roman decrees against price fixing and the English restraint of trade doctrine. Modern competition law derives from the U.S. anti-cartel and anti-monopoly statutes (the Sherman Act and Clayton Act) of the turn of the 20th century. It is used to control businesses who attempt to use their economic influence to distort market prices at the expense of consumer welfare. Consumer law could include anything from regulations on unfair contractual terms and clauses to directives on airline baggage insurance. Environmental law is increasingly important, especially in light of the Kyoto Protocol and the potential danger of climate change. Environmental protection also serves to penalise polluters within domestic legal systems. Aviation law deals with all regulations and technical standards applicable to the safe operation of aircraft, and is an essential part both of pilots' training and pilot's operations. It is framed by national civil aviation acts (or laws), themselves mostly aligned with the recommendations or mandatory standards of the International Civil Aviation Organisation or ICAO. In the 18th century, Adam Smith presented a philosophical foundation for explaining the relationship between law and economics. The discipline arose partly out of a critique of trade unions and U.S. antitrust law. The most influential proponents, such as Richard Posner and Oliver Williamson and the so-called Chicago School of economists and lawyers including Milton Friedman and Gary Becker, are generally advocates of deregulation and privatisation, and are hostile to state regulation or what they see as restrictions on the operation of free markets. The most prominent economic analyst of law is 1991 Nobel Prize winner Ronald Coase, whose first major article, The Nature of the Firm (1937), argued that the reason for the existence of firms (companies, partnerships, etc.) is the existence of transaction costs. Rational individuals trade through bilateral contracts on open markets until the costs of transactions mean that using corporations to produce things is more cost-effective. His second major article, The Problem of Social Cost (1960), argued that if we lived in a world without transaction costs, people would bargain with one another to create the same allocation of resources, regardless of the way a court might rule in property disputes. Coase used the example of a nuisance case named Sturges v Bridgman, where a noisy sweetmaker and a quiet doctor were neighbours and went to court to see who should have to move. Coase said that regardless of whether the judge ruled that the sweetmaker had to stop using his machinery, or that the doctor had to put up with it, they could strike a mutually beneficial bargain about who moves that reaches the same outcome of resource distribution. Only the existence of transaction costs may prevent this. So the law ought to pre-empt what would happen, and be guided by the most efficient solution. The idea is that law and regulation are not as important or effective at helping people as lawyers and government planners believe. Coase and others like him wanted a change of approach, to put the burden of proof for positive effects on a government that was intervening in the market, by analysing the costs of action. The sociology of law examines the interaction of law with society and overlaps with jurisprudence, philosophy of law, social theory and more specialised subjects such as criminology. It is a transdisciplinary and multidisciplinary study focused on the theorisation and empirical study of legal practices and experiences as social phenomena. The institutions of social construction, social norms, dispute processing and legal culture are key areas for inquiry in this knowledge field. In the United States, the field is usually called law and society studies; in Europe, it is more often referred to as socio-legal studies. At first, jurists and legal philosophers were suspicious of sociology of law. Kelsen attacked one of its founders, Eugen Ehrlich, who sought to make clear the differences and connections between positive law, which lawyers learn and apply, and other forms of 'law' or social norms that regulate everyday life, generally preventing conflicts from reaching lawyers and courts. Contemporary research in the sociology of law is concerned with the way that law develops outside discrete state jurisdictions, being produced through social interaction in social arenas, and acquiring a diversity of sources of authority in national and transnational communal networks. Around 1900, Max Weber defined his "scientific" approach to law, identifying the "legal rational form" as a type of domination, not attributable to personal authority but to the authority of abstract norms. Formal legal rationality was his term for the key characteristic of the kind of coherent and calculable law that was a precondition for modern political developments and the modern bureaucratic state. Weber saw this law as having developed in parallel with the growth of capitalism. Another leading sociologist, Émile Durkheim, wrote in his classic work The Division of Labour in Society that as society becomes more complex, the body of civil law concerned primarily with restitution and compensation grows at the expense of criminal laws and penal sanctions. Other notable early legal sociologists included Hugo Sinzheimer, Theodor Geiger, Georges Gurvitch and Leon Petrażycki in Europe, and William Graham Sumner in the U.S. Law portal Library resources about Law Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By-law Law dictionary Legal research in the United States Legal treatise Legislation Natural law Outline of law Political science Pseudolaw Public interest law Social law Sources of law Translating "law" to other European languages Robertson 2006, p. 90. Willis 1926. Gibbs, Jack P. (1968). "Definitions of Law and Empirical Questions". Law & Society Review. 2 (3): 429–446. doi:10.2307/3052897. ISSN 0023-9216. JSTOR 3052897. Akers, Ronald L. (1965). "Toward a Comparative Definition of Law". Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology. 56 (3): 301–306. doi:10.2307/1141239. JSTOR 1141239. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Spooner, Lysander (1882). Natural Law; or The Science of Justice: A Treatise on Natural Law, Natural Justice, Natural Rights, Natural Liberty, and Natural Society; Showing that All Legislation Whatsoever is an Absurdity, a Usurpation, and a Crime. Part First. A. Williams & Co. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Núñez Vaquero, Álvaro (10 June 2013). "Five Models of Legal Science". Revus. Journal for Constitutional Theory and Philosophy of Law / Revija za ustavno teorijo in filozofijo prava (19): 53–81. doi:10.4000/revus.2449. ISSN 1581-7652. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Cohen 1992. Rubin, Basha (13 January 2015). "Is Law an Art or a Science?: A Bit of Both". Forbes. Archived from the original on 3 November 2018. Berger 1953, p. 525. Mason, Anthony (1996). "The Judge as Law-maker" (PDF). James Cook University Mayo Lecture. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Devins, Neal (2008). "Congressional Responses to Judicial Decisions". Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court. Gale MacMillan. pp. 400–403. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Berman, Harold J. (1983). "Religious Foundations of Law in the West: An Historical Perspective". Journal of Law and Religion. 1 (1). Cambridge University Press: 3–43. doi:10.2307/1051071. JSTOR 1051071. S2CID 146933872. Fox, Jonathan; Sandler, Shmuel (1 April 2005). "Separation of Religion and State in the Twenty-First Century: Comparing the Middle East and Western Democracies". Comparative Politics. 37 (3): 317. doi:10.2307/20072892. JSTOR 20072892. Cox, Noel (2001). "Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of the Province of Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia". Deakin Law Review. 6 (2): 262. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Otto, Jan Michiel, ed. (2010). Sharia incorporated: a comparative overview of the legal systems of twelve Muslim countries in past and present. Leiden University Press. ISBN 9789087280574. Raisch, Marylin Johnson. "Religious Legal Systems in Comparative Law: A Guide to Introductory Research – GlobaLex". Hauser Global Law School Program. New York University School of Law. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Horwitz, Morton J. (1 June 1982). "The History of the Public/Private Distinction". University of Pennsylvania Law Review. 130 (6): 1423–1428. doi:10.2307/3311976. JSTOR 3311976. S2CID 51854776. Retrieved 3 January 2020.[dead link] Merryman, John Henry (1968). "The Public Law-Private Law Distinction in European and American Law". Journal of Public Law. 17: 3. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Saiman, Chaim N. (6 July 2008). "Public Law, Private Law, and Legal Science". American Journal of Comparative Law. 56 (961). Social Science Research Network: 691–702. doi:10.5131/ajcl.2007.0023. Archived from the original on 28 April 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Harlow, Carol (1 May 1980). ""Public" and "private" law: definition without distinction". The Modern Law Review. 43 (3): 241–265. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2230.1980.tb01592.x. ISSN 1468-2230. Samuel, Geoffrey (1 September 1983). "Public And Private Law: A Private Lawyer's Response". The Modern Law Review. 46 (5): 558–583. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2230.1983.tb02534.x. ISSN 1468-2230. Gordley, James (16 November 2006). Reimann, Mathias; Zimmermann, Reinhard (eds.). "Comparative Law and Legal History". The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Law: 752–774. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199296064.013.0024. ISBN 9780199296064. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Bor, Fredric L. (1974). "The nexus between philosophy and law". Journal of Legal Education. 26 (4): 539–543. ISSN 0022-2208. JSTOR 42896964. Rubin, Paul H. "Law and Economics". The Library of Economics and Liberty. Liberty Fund, Inc. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Banakar, Reza (2003). Merging law and sociology : beyond the dichotomies in socio-legal research. Berlin/Wisconsin: Galda and Wilch Publishing. ISBN 1-931255-13-X. Pound, Roscoe (1914). "The End of Law as Developed in Legal Rules and Doctrines". Harvard Law Review. 27 (3): 195–234. doi:10.2307/1325958. ISSN 0017-811X. JSTOR 1325958. Sarat, Austin; Kearns, Thomas, eds. (1996). Justice and Injustice in Law and Legal Theory. University of Michigan Press. pp. 18–19. doi:10.3998/mpub.10283. ISBN 9780472096251. JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.10283. "law, n.". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/OED/4864419306. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) Rousseau, The Social Contract, Book II: Chapter 6 (Law) Dennis Lloyd, Baron Lloyd of Hampstead. Introduction to Jurisprudence. Third Edition. Stevens & Sons. London. 1972. Second Impression. 1975. p. 39. Mc Coubrey, Hilaire and White, Nigel D. Textbook on Jurisprudence. Second Edition. Blackstone Press Limited. 1996. ISBN 1-85431-582-X. p. 2. Williams, Glanville. International Law and the Controversy Concerning the Meaning of the Word "Law". Revised version published in Laslett (Editor), Philosophy, Politics and Society (1956) p. 134 et seq. The original was published in (1945) 22 BYBIL 146. Arnold 1935, p. 36. Baron Lloyd of Hampstead. Introduction to Jurisprudence. Third Edition. Stevens & Sons. London. 1972. Second Impression. 1975. Campbell 1993, p. 184. Bix 2022. Dworkin 1986, p. 410. Raz 1979, pp. 3–36. Holmes, Oliver Wendell. "The Path of Law" (1897) 10 Harvard Law Review 457 at 461. Aquinas, St Thomas. Summa Theologica. 1a2ae, 90.4. Translated by J G Dawson. Ed d'Entreves. (Basil Blackwell). Latin: "nihil est aliud qau edam rationis ordinatio ad bonum commune, ab eo qi curam communitatis habet, promulgata". McCoubrey, Hilaire and White, Nigel D. Textbook on Jurisprudence. Second Edition. Blackstone Press Limited. 1996. ISBN 1-85431-582-X. p. 73. Taylor, T. W. (January 1896). "The Conception of Morality in Jurisprudence". The Philosophical Review. 5 (1): 36–50. doi:10.2307/2176104. JSTOR 2176104. Fritz Berolzheimer, The World's Legal Philosophies, 115–116 Kant, Immanuel, Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, 42 (par. 434) Green, Leslie. "Legal Positivism". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 10 December 2006. Nietzsche, Zur Genealogie der Moral, Second Essay, 11 Kazantzakis, Friedrich Nietzsche and the Philosophy of Law, 97–98 Linarelli, Nietzsche in Law's Cathedral, 23–26 Marmor, Andrei (1934). "The Pure Theory of Law". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 9 February 2007. Bielefeldt, Carl Schmitt's Critique of Liberalism, 25–26 Finn 1991, pp. 170–171. Bayles 1992, p. 21. Raz 1979, p. 37. Théodoridés. "law". Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. VerSteeg, Law in ancient Egypt Lippert, Sandra (11 February 2016). "Egyptian Law, Saite to Roman Periods". Oxford Handbooks Online. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935390.013.48. ISBN 978-0-19-993539-0. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Richardson 2004, p. 11. Kelly 1992, pp. 5–6. Mallory 1997, p. 346. Ober 1996, p. 121. Kelly 1992, p. 39. Stein 1999, p. 1. Clarke, M. A.; Hooley, R. J. A.; Munday, R. J. C.; Sealy, L. S.; Tettenborn, A. M.; Turner, P. G. (2017). Commercial Law. Oxford University Press. p. 14. ISBN 9780199692088. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2020. Mattei 1997, p. 71. McAuliffe, Karen (21 February 2013). "Precedent at the Court of Justice of the European Union: The Linguistic Aspect". Law and Language: Current Legal Issues. 15 (29). Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780199673667. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. For discussion of the composition and dating of these sources, see Olivelle, Manu's Code of Law, 18–25. Glenn 2000, p. 276. Chapra, Muhammad Umer (2014). Morality and Justice in Islamic Economics and Finance. Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 62–63. ISBN 9781783475728. Jackson, Roy (2010). Mawlana Mawdudi and Political Islam: Authority and the Islamic State. Routledge. ISBN 9781136950360. Glenn 2000, p. 273. Glenn 2000, p. 287. Glenn 2000, p. 304. Glenn 2000, p. 305. Glenn 2000, p. 307. Glenn 2000, p. 309. Farah 2006, pp. 263–304. Pejovic, Caslav (2001). "Civil Law and Common Law: Two Different Paths Leading to the Same Goal". Victoria University of Wellington Law Review. 32 (3): 817. doi:10.26686/vuwlr.v32i3.5873. Archived from the original on 8 September 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. "Introduction to Civil Law Legal Systems" (PDF). Federal Judicial Center. INPROL. May 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. "Alphabetical Index of the 192 United Nations Member States and Corresponding Legal Systems". JuriGlobe. University of Ottawa. Archived from the original on 22 July 2016. Retrieved 1 January 2020. "The Economist explains: What is the difference between common and civil law?". The Economist. 17 July 2013. Archived from the original on 22 December 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Gordley & von Mehren 2006, p. 18. Gordley & von Mehren 2006, p. 21. Stein 1999, p. 32. Stein 1999, p. 35. Stein 1999, p. 43. Hatzis 2002, pp. 253–263. Demirgüç-Kunt & Levine 2001, p. 204. "The World Factbook – Field Listing – Legal system". CIA. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2007. Tamblyn, Nathan (April 2019). "The Common Ground of Law and Anarchism". Liverpool Law Review. 40 (1): 65–78. doi:10.1007/s10991-019-09223-1. hdl:10871/36939. ISSN 1572-8625. S2CID 155131683. Rocker, Rudolf (1938). "Anarcho-Syndicalism: Theory and Practice. An Introduction to a Subject Which the Spanish War Has Brought into Overwhelming Prominence" Archived 30 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 17 October 2020 – via The Anarchist Mirror! Markovits 2007. Quigley, J. (1989). "Socialist Law and the Civil Law Tradition". The American Journal of Comparative Law. 37 (4): 781–808. doi:10.2307/840224. JSTOR 840224. Smith, G. B. (1988). "Socialist Legality and the Soviet Legal System". Soviet Politics. Palgrave. pp. 137–162. doi:10.1007/978-1-349-19172-7_7. ISBN 978-0-333-45919-5. "Magna Carta". Fordham University. Archived from the original on 10 September 2014. Retrieved 10 November 2006. Gordley & von Mehren 2006, p. 4. Gordley & von Mehren 2006, p. 3. Pollock (ed) Table Talk of John Selden (1927) 43; "Equity is a roguish thing. For law we have a measure... equity is according to the conscience of him that is Chancellor, and as that is longer or narrower, so is equity. 'Tis all one as if they should make the standard for the measure a Chancellor's foot." Gee v Pritchard (1818) 2 Swans. 402, 414 Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, Book the First – Chapter the First Archived 5 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Gordley & von Mehren 2006, p. 17. Ferrari, Silvio (2012). "Chapter 4: Canon Law as a Religious Legal System". In Huxley, Andrew (ed.). Religion, Law and Tradition: Comparative Studies in Religious Law. Routledge. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-136-13250-6. Divine law... is eternal and cannot be changed by any human authority. Glenn 2000, p. 159. Boudinhon, Auguste (1910). "Canon Law". The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2013. Wiesner-Hanks, Merry (2011). Gender in History: Global Perspectives. Wiley Blackwell. p. 37. Raymond Wacks, Law: A Very Short Introduction, 2nd Ed. (Oxford University Press, 2015) pg. 13. Peters, Edward. "Home Page". CanonLaw.info. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 24 September 2019. Blessed John Paul II, Ap. Const. (1990). "Apostolic Constitution Sacri Canones John Paul II 1990". Archived from the original on 24 March 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2019. Friedman, Lawrence M., American Law: An Introduction (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1984), pg. 70. William Wirt Howe, Studies in the Civil Law, and its Relation to the Law of England and America (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1896), pg. 51. Anderson 1956, p. 43. Giannoulatos 1975, pp. 274–275. Sherif 2005, pp. 157–158. "Saudi Arabia". JURIST. Archived from the original on 30 August 2006. Retrieved 2 September 2006. Akhlaghi 2005, p. 127. Hallaq 2005, p. 1. Edward H. Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (2013), p. 1-2. Jerman v. Carlisle, 130 S.Ct. 1605, 1614, 559 U.S. 573, 587 (2010), Sotomayor, J. Heise, Michael (1999). "The Importance of Being Empirical". Pepperdine Law Review. 26 (4): 807–834. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Posner, Eric (24 July 2015). "The rise of statistics in law". ERIC POSNER. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty, with Regard to the Constitution, Chapters 6–7 Archived 3 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, XVII Caldwell, Ernest (2016). "Chinese Constitutionalism: Five-Power Constitution". Max Planck Encyclopedia of Comparative Constitutional Law. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2020. "A Brief Overview of the Supreme Court" (PDF). Supreme Court of the United States. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2006. "The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom". The Supreme Court. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Entscheidungen des Bundesverfassungsgerichts (Decisions of the Federal Constitutional Court)" (in German). Bundesverfassungsgericht. Archived from the original on 21 November 2006. Retrieved 10 November 2006. "Jurisprudence, publications, documentation" (in French). Cour de cassation. Archived from the original on 9 February 2007. Retrieved 11 February 2007. Goldhaber 2007, pp. 1–2. Patterson 2001. Dicey 2005, pp. 37–82. Sherif 2005, p. 158. Rasekh 2005, pp. 115–116. Riker 1992, p. 101. Haggard & Shugart 2001, p. 71. Olson, The New Parliaments of Central and Eastern Europe, 7 See, e.g. Tuberville v Savage (1669), 1 Mod. Rep. 3, 86 Eng. Rep. 684, where a knight said in a threatening tone to a layperson, "If it were not assize time, I would not take such language from you." "History of Police Forces". History.com Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 29 December 2006. Retrieved 10 December 2006. ["Des Sergents de Ville et Gardiens de la Paix à la Police de Proximité : la Préfecture de Police au Service des Citoyens" (in French). La Préfecture de Police de Paris. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008. Retrieved 24 January 2007. Weber, Politics as a Vocation Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation, 154 "bureaucracy". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 2 September 2007. Albrow 1970, p. 16. Mises, Bureaucracy, II, Bureaucratic Management Archived 14 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine Kettl 2006, p. 367. Weber, Economy and Society, I, 393 Kettl 2006, p. 371. Hazard & Dondi 2004, p. 1. The Sunday Times v The United Kingdom [1979] ECHR 1 at 49 Archived 16 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine Case no. 6538/74 "British English: Esquire". Collins Dictionary. n.d. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 23 September 2014. "American English: Esquire". Collins Dictionary. n.d. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 23 September 2014. Ahmad 2009. Hazard & Dondi 2004, pp. 22–23. Fine, The Globalisation of Legal Education, 364 Warren, Civil Society, 3–4 Locke, Second Treatise, Chap. VII, Of Political or Civil_Society. Chapter 7, section 87 Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right, 3, II, 182 Archived 1 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine Karkatsoulis 2004, pp. 277–278. (Pelczynski, The State and Civil Society, 1–13; Warren, Civil Society, 5–9) Zaleski, Pawel (2008). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality". Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte. 50. Robertson, Crimes Against Humanity, 98–99 Jakobs 2004, pp. 5–6. Kaldor–Anheier–Glasius, Global Civil Society, passim Archived 17 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine Karkatsoulis 2004, pp. 282–283. "History of the UN". About the United Nations/History. Archived from the original on 18 February 2010. Retrieved 1 September 2008. D'Amato, Anthony (11 November 2010). "Is International Law Really 'Law'?". Northwestern University Law Review. 79. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Schermers-Blokker, International Institutional Law, 900–901 Petersmann, The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System International Criminal Court Archived 23 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, 32 Redfem, International Commercial Arbitration, 68–69 Gaffey, Conor (4 May 2016). "Why the African Union wants to be more like the EU". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Babarinde, Olufemi (April 2007). "The EU as a Model for the African Union: the Limits of Imitation" (PDF). Jean Monnet/Robert Schuman Paper Series. 7 (2). Miami – Florida European Union Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Schermers–Blokker, International Institutional Law, 943 "C-26/62 Van Gend en Loos v Nederlandse Administratie der Belastingen". Eur-Lex. Archived from the original on 21 March 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2007. "C-6/64 Flaminio Costa v ENEL". Eur-Lex. Archived from the original on 9 January 2009. Retrieved 1 September 2007. Chalmers, D.; Barroso, L. (7 April 2014). "What Van Gend en Loos stands for". International Journal of Constitutional Law. 12 (1): 105–134. doi:10.1093/icon/mou003. Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Locke, The Second Treatise, Chapter 9, section 124 Tamanaha, On the Rule of Law, 47 Auby 2002, p. 75. Cesare Beccaria's seminal treatise of 1763–1764 is titled On Crimes and Punishments (Dei delitti e delle pene). Brody, Acker & Logan 2001, p. 2. Wilson 2003, p. 2. Dennis J. Baker, Glanville Williams Textbook of Criminal Law (London: 2012), 2 See e.g. Brody, Acker & Logan 2001, p. 205 about Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660 (1962). See e.g. Feinman, Law 111, 260–261 about Powell v. Texas, 392 U.S. 514 (1968). Dörmann, Doswald-Beck & Kolb 2003, p. 491. Kaiser 2005, p. 333. About R v Dudley and Stephens [1884] 14 QBD 273 DC Archived 28 February 2005 at the Wayback Machine, see Simpson, Cannibalism and the Common Law, 212–217, 229–237 Pelser, Criminal Legislation, 198 "The States Parties to the Rome Statute". International Criminal Court. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 10 February 2007. Wehberg, Pacta Sunt Servanda, 775 Austotel v Franklins (1989) 16 NSWLR 582 Pargendler 2018. e.g. in Germany, § 311 Abs. II Archived 11 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine BGB "§ 105 BGB Nichtigkeit der Willenserklärung". dejure.org. Archived from the original on 9 December 2006. Retrieved 5 December 2006. Smith, The Structure of Unjust Enrichment Law, 1037 Lee, R. W. (April 1918). "Torts and Delicts". Yale Law Journal. 27 (6): 721–730. doi:10.2307/786478. ISSN 0044-0094. JSTOR 786478. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Bolton v Stone [1951] AC 850 Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 532, 580 Sturges v Bridgman (1879) 11 Ch D 852 e.g. concerning a British politician and the Iraq War, George Galloway v Telegraph Group Ltd [2004] EWHC 2786 Taff Vale Railway Co v Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants [1901] AC 426 Harris 1994, pp. 610–627. e.g. Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd [1997] 2 All ER 426 Archived 22 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Armory v Delamirie (1722) 93 ER 664, 1 Strange 505 Matthews 1995, pp. 251–274. Savigny 1803, p. 25. Locke 1689, Section 123. McGhee 2000, p. 7. Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew (1998). Nestlé v National Westminster Bank plc [1993] 1 WLR 1260 "A Guide to the Treaty of Lisbon" (PDF). The Law Society. January 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008. Berle 1932. WIPO, Intellectual Property, 3 "The Becker-Posner Blog". Archived from the original on 19 May 2010. Retrieved 20 May 2010. Jakoby 2005, p. 53. Coase 1937, pp. 386–405. Coase 1960, pp. 1–44. Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, IV, 7 Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, V, 9 Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, VIII, 23 Cotterrell 1992. Jary & Jary 1995, p. 636. Ehrlich, Fundamental Principles, Hertogh, Living Law, Rottleuthner, La Sociologie du Droit en Allemagne, 109, Rottleuthner, Rechtstheoritische Probleme der Sociologie des Rechts, 521 Cotterrell 2006. Rheinstein 1954, p. 336. Cotterrell 1999. Johnson 1995, p. 156. Gurvitch & Hunt 2001, p. 142. Papachristou 1999, pp. 81–82. As a legal system, Roman law has affected the development of law worldwide. It also forms the basis for the law codes of most countries of continental Europe and has played an important role in the creation of the idea of a common European culture (Stein, Roman Law in European History, 2, 104–107). Civil law jurisdictions recognise custom as "the other source of law"; hence, scholars tend to divide the civil law into the broad categories of "written law" (ius scriptum) or legislation, and "unwritten law" (ius non-scriptum) or custom. Yet they tend to dismiss custom as being of slight importance compared to legislation (Georgiadis, General Principles of Civil Law, 19; Washofsky, Taking Precedent Seriously, 7). «In one of his elaborate orations in the United States Senate Mr. Charles Sumner spoke of "the generous presumption of the common law in favor of the innocence of an accused person;" yet it must be admitted that such a presumption cannot be found in Anglo-Saxon law, where sometimes the presumption seems to have been the other way. And in a very recent case in the Supreme Court of the United States, the case of Coffin, 156 U. S. 432, it is pointed out that this presumption was fully established in the Roman law, and was preserved in the canon law.» E.g., the court president is a political appointee (Jensen–Heller, Introduction, 11–12). About the notion of "judicial independence" in China, see Findlay, Judiciary in the PRC, 282–284 About "cabinet accountability" in both presidential and parliamentary systems, see Shugart–Haggard, Presidential Systems, 67 etc. In these cases sovereignty is eroded, and often warlords acquire excessive powers (Fukuyama, State-Building, 166–167). Although many scholars argue that "the boundaries between public and private law are becoming blurred", and that this distinction has become mere "folklore" (Bergkamp, Liability and Environment, 1–2). E.g. in England these seven subjects, with EU law substituted for international law, make up a "qualifying law degree". For criticism, see Peter Birks' poignant comments attached to a previous version of the Notice to Law Schools Archived 20 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Winston Churchill (The Hinge of Fate, 719) comments on the League of Nations' failure: "It was wrong to say that the League failed. It was rather the member states who had failed the League." Donoghue v Stevenson ([1932] A.C. 532, 1932 S.C. (H.L.) 31, [1932] All ER Rep 1). See the original text of the case in UK Law Online Archived 16 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine. In the UK, Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992; c.f. in the U.S., National Labor Relations Act According to Malloy , Smith established "a classical liberal philosophy that made individuals the key referential sign while acknowledging that we live not alone but in community with others".(Law and Economics, 114) Ahmad, Ahmad Atif (2009). "Lawyers: Islamic Law" (PDF). Oxford Encyclopedia of Legal History. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009. Akhlaghi, Behrooz (2005). "Iranian Commercial Law and the New Investment Law FIPPA". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.). The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3. Albrow, Martin (1970). Bureaucracy (Key Concepts in Political Science). London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-11262-5. Anderson, J.N.D. (January 1956). "Law Reform in the Middle East". International Affairs. 32 (1): 43–51. doi:10.2307/2607811. JSTOR 2607811. Aristotle. Athenian Constitution . Translated by Frederic George Kenyon – via Wikisource. See original text in Perseus program Archived 8 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Arnold, Thurman W. (1935). "The Symbols of Government". American Political Science Review. New Haven: Yale University Press: 379. Auby, Jean-Bernard (2002). "Administrative Law in France". In Stroink, F.A.M.; Seerden, René (eds.). Administrative Law of the European Union, its Member States and the United States. Intersentia. ISBN 978-90-5095-251-4. Barzilai, Gad (2003). Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities. The University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-11315-6. Bayles, Michael D. (1992). "A Critique of Austin". Hart's Legal Philosophy. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-1981-8. Beale, Hugh; Tallon, Denis (2002). "English Law: Consideration". Contract Law. Hart Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84113-237-2. Berger, Adolf (1953). Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law. American Philosophical Society. ISBN 978-0-87169-432-4. Roman ars boni et aequi. Bergkamp, Lucas (2001). "Introduction". Liability and Environment. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1645-1. Berle, Adolf (1932). Modern Corporation and Private Property. New York, Chicago, Commerce Clearing House, Loose leaf Service division of the Corporation Trust Co. Bix, Brian (2022). "John Austin". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 4 August 2023. Blackstone, William (1765–69). Commentaries on the Laws of England. Archived from the original on 5 July 2011. Retrieved 20 May 2010. Brody, David C.; Acker, James R.; Logan, Wayne A. (2001). "Introduction to the Study of Criminal Law". Criminal Law. Jones & Bartlett Publishers. ISBN 978-0-8342-1083-7. Campbell, Tom D. (1993). "The Contribution of Legal Studies". In Robert E. Goodin; Philip Pettit (eds.). A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-19951-9. Churchill, Winston (1986). "Problems of War and Peace". The Hinge of Fate. Houghton Mifflin Books. ISBN 978-0-395-41058-5. Clarke, Paul A. B.; Linzey, Andrew (1996). Dictionary of Ethics, Theology and Society. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-06212-1. Coase, Ronald H. (November 1937). "The Nature of the Firm". Economica. 4 (16): 386–405. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x. Coase, Ronald H. (October 1960). "The Problem of Social Cost (this online version excludes some parts)" (PDF). Journal of Law and Economics. 3: 1–44. doi:10.1086/466560. S2CID 222331226. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018. Cohen, Morris L. (1992). Law : the Art of Justice. Beaux Arts Editions. ISBN 9780883633120. Cotterrell, Roger (1992). The Sociology of Law: An Introduction. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-406-51770-8. Cotterrell, Roger (1999). Emile Durkheim: Law in a Moral Domain. Edinburgh University Press/ Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-1339-7. Cotterrell, Roger (2006). Law, Culture and Society: Legal Ideas in the Mirror of Social Theory. Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-2511-7. Curtin, Deirdre; Wessel, Ramses A. (2005). "A Survey of the Content of Good Governance for some International Organisations". Good Governance and the European Union: Reflections on Concepts, Institutions and Substance. Intersentia nv. ISBN 978-90-5095-381-8. Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross (2001). Financial Structures and Economic Growth. MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-54179-4. Dicey, Albert Venn (2005). "Parliamentary Sovereignty and Federalism". Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution. Adamant Media Corporation. ISBN 978-1-4021-8555-7. Dörmann, Knut; Doswald-Beck, Louise; Kolb, Robert (2003). "Appendix". Elements of War Crimes. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81852-0. Durkheim, Émile (1893). The Division of Labor in Society. The Free Press reprint. ISBN 978-0-684-83638-6. Dworkin, Ronald (1986). Law's Empire. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-51836-0. Ehrlich, Eugen (2002) [1936]. Fundamental Principles of the Sociology of Law. Transaction Books reprint. Farah, Paolo (August 2006). "Five Years of China WTO Membership. EU and US Perspectives about China's Compliance with Transparency Commitments and the Transitional Review Mechanism". Legal Issues of Economic Integration. 33 (3): 263–304. doi:10.54648/LEIE2006016. S2CID 153128973. SSRN 916768. Feinman, Jay M. (2006). "Criminal Responsibility and Criminal Law". Law 101. Oxford University Press US. ISBN 978-0-19-517957-6. Findlay, Marc (1999). "'Independence' and the Judiciary in the PRC". In Jayasuriya, Kanishka (ed.). Law, Capitalism and Power in Asia. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-19742-7. Fine, Tony F. (2001). "The Globalization of Legal Education in the United States". In Drolshammer, Jens I.; Pfeifer, Michael (eds.). The Internationalization of the Practice of Law. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1620-8. Finn, John E. (1991). "Constitutional Dissolution in the Weimar Republic". Constitutions in Crisis: Political Violence and the Rule of Law. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505738-6. France, Anatole (1894). The Red Lily (Le lys rouge). Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2007. Fukuyama, Francis (2005). State-Building (First edition in English 2004 ed.). Editions Livanis. ISBN 978-960-14-1159-0. Georgiadis, Apostolos S. (1997). "Sources of Law". General Principles of Civil Law (in Greek). Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers. ISBN 978-960-232-715-9. Giannoulatos, Anastasios (1975). "Characteristics of Modern Islam". Islam – A General Survey (in Greek). Athens: Poreuthentes. Glenn, H. Patrick (2000). Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-876575-2. Goldhaber, Michael D. (2007). "Europe's Supreme Court". A People's History of the European Court of Human Rights. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-3983-6. Gordley, James R.; von Mehren, Arthur Taylor (2006). An Introduction to the Comparative Study of Private Law. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-68185-8. Gurvitch, Georges; Hunt, Alan (2001) [1942]. "Max Weber and Eugen Ehrlich". Sociology of Law. Athens: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7658-0704-5. Haggard, Stephan; Shugart, Matthew Soberg (2001). "Institutions and Public Policy in Presidential Systems". In Haggard, Stephan; McCubbins, Mathew Daniel (eds.). Presidents, Parliaments and Policy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-77485-7. Hallaq, Wael Bahjat (2005). "Introduction". The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-00580-7. Hamilton, Michael S., and George W. Spiro (2008). The Dynamics of Law, 4th ed. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc. ISBN 978-0-7656-2086-6. Harris, Ron (September 1994). "The Bubble Act: Its Passage and Its Effects on Business Organization". The Journal of Economic History. 54 (3): 610–627. doi:10.1017/S0022050700015059. JSTOR 2123870?. S2CID 154429555. Hart, H.L.A. (1961). The Concept of Law. Oxford University Press. Hatzis, Aristides N. (November 2002). "The Nature of the Firm". European Journal of Law and Economics. 14 (3): 253–263. doi:10.1023/A:1020749518104. S2CID 142679220. Hayek, Friedrich (1978). The Constitution of Liberty. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-32084-7. Hazard, Geoffrey C.; Dondi, Angelo (2004). Legal Ethics. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4882-7. Hegel, Georg (1820). Elements of the Philosophy of Right (in German). Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 9 January 2007. Heinze, Eric (2013). The Concept of Injustice. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-52441-4. Hertogh, Marc, ed. (2009). Living Law: Reconsidering Eugen Ehrlich. Hart. ISBN 978-1-84113-898-5. Hobbes, Thomas (1651). "Chapter XVII: Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a Commonwealth". Leviathan. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Jakobs, Lesley A. (2004). "Retrieving Equality of Opportunity". Pursuing Equal Opportunities. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-53021-7. Jakoby, Stanford M. (2005). "Economic Ideas and the Labour Market – Chapter: Cycles of Economic Thought" (PDF). Comparative Labor Law and Policy Journal. 25 (1): 43–78. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 12 February 2007. Jary, David; Jary, Julia (1995). Collins Dictionary of Sociology. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-470804-1. Jensen, Eric G.; Heller, Thomas C. (2003). "Introduction". In Jensen, Eric G.; Heller, Thomas C. (eds.). Beyond Common Knowledge. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4803-2. Johnson, Alan (1995). The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology. Blackwells. ISBN 978-1-55786-116-0. Kaiser, Dagmar (2005). "Leistungsstōrungen". In Staudinger, Julius von; Martinek, Michael; Beckmann, Roland Michael (eds.). Eckpfeiler Des Zivilrechts. Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-8059-1019-4. Kaldor, Mary; Anheier, Helmut; Glasius, Marlies (2003). "Global Civil Society in an Era of Regressive Globalisation". In Kaldor, Mary; Anheier, Helmut; Glasius, Marlies (eds.). Global Civil Society Yearbook 2003. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926655-5. Kant, Immanuel (1998) [1785]. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Translated by Mary Gregor). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-62695-8. Karkatsoulis, Panagioti (2004). "Civil Society and New Public Management". The State in Transitions (PDF) (in Greek). Athens: I. Sideris. ISBN 978-960-08-0333-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 August 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2008. Kazantzakis, Nikos (1998) [1909]. "Law". Friedrich Nietzsche and the Philosophy of Law and Polity (in Greek). Athens: Editions Kazantzakis. Kelly, J.M. (1992). A Short History of Western Legal Theory. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-876244-7. Kettl, Don (November 2006). "Public Bureaucracies". In R. A. W. Rhodes; Sarah A. Binder; Bert A. Rockman (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Political Institutions. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-927569-4. Linarelli, John (2004). "Nietzsche in Law's Cathedral: Beyond Reason and Postmodernism – Chapter: Cycles of Economic Thought" (PDF). Catholic University Law Review. 53: 413–457. doi:10.2139/ssrn.421040. S2CID 54617575. SSRN 421040. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2019. Locke, John (1689). "Second Treatise of Government" . Two Treatises of Government – via Wikisource. Luban, David (2001). "Law's Blindfold". Conflict of Interest in the Professions. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512863-5. Mallory, J.P. (1997). "Law". Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture. Malloy, Robin Paul (1994). "Adam Smith and the Modern Discourse of Law and Economics". In Paul Malloy, Robin; Evensky, Jerry (eds.). Adam Smith and the Philosophy of Law and Economics. Springer. ISBN 978-0-7923-2796-7. Markovits, I. (December 2007). "The Death of Socialist Law?". Annual Review of Law and Social Science. 3: 233–253. doi:10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.3.081806.112849. Mattei, Ugo (1997). "The Distinction between Common Law and Civil Law". Comparative Law and Economics. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-06649-0. Matthews, Paul (1995). "The Man of Property". Medical Law Review. 3 (3): 251–274. doi:10.1093/medlaw/3.3.251. PMID 11657690. S2CID 41659603. McGhee, John (2000). Snell's Equity. London: Sweet and Maxwell. ISBN 978-0-421-85260-0. Mises, Ludwig von (1962) [1944]. Bureaucracy (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 10 November 2006. Montesquieu, Baron de (1748). "Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty, with Regard to the Constitution, Chapters 6–7". The Spirit of Laws (translated in English by Thomas Nugent, revised by J. V. Prichard). Archived from the original on 18 January 2009. Retrieved 14 January 2007. Nietzsche, Friedrich (1887). "Zweite Abhandlung: "Schuld", "schlechtes Gewissen" und Verwandtes". Zur Genealogie der Moral – Eine Streitschrift (in German). Ober, Josiah (1996). "The Nature of Athenian Democracy". The Athenian Revolution: Essays on Ancient Greek Democracy and Political Theory. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00190-6. Olivelle, Patrick (2005). Manu's Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the Manava-Dharmasastra. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-517146-4. Olson, David M.; Norton, Philip (1996). "Legislatures in Democratic Transition". The New Parliaments of Central and Eastern Europe. Frank Cass (UK). ISBN 978-0-7146-4261-1. Papachristou, T.K. (1999). "The Sociological Approach of Law". Sociology of Law (in Greek). Athens: A.N. Sakkoulas Publishers. ISBN 978-960-15-0106-2. Pargendler, Maria (2018). "The Role of the State in Contract Law: The Common-Civil Law Divide" (PDF). Yale Journal of International Law. 43 (1): 143–189. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2848886. S2CID 3548111. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. Patterson, James T. (2001). Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-515632-4. Pelczynski, A.Z. (1984). The State and Civil Society. Cambridge University Press. Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich (1997). "Rule of Law and Constitutionalism". The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-0933-0. Rasekh, Mohammad (2005). "Are Islamism and Republicanism Compatible?". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.). The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3. Raz, Joseph (1979). The Authority of Law, Essays on Law and Morality. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-825493-5. Redfem, Alan (2004). "Regulation of International Arbitration". Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration. Sweet & Maxwell. ISBN 978-0-421-86240-1. Rheinstein, M. (1954). Max Weber on Law and Economy in Society. Harvard University Press. Richardson, W.E.J. (2004). "Introduction". Hammurabi's Laws. Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-567-08158-2. Riker, William H. (January 1992). "The Justification of Bicameralism". International Political Science Review. 13 (1): 101–116. doi:10.1177/019251219201300107. JSTOR 1601440. S2CID 154483653. Robertson, Geoffrey (2006). Crimes Against Humanity. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-102463-9. Roeber, A. G. (October 2001). "What the Law Requires Is Written on Their Hearts: Noachic and Natural Law among German-Speakers in Early Modern North America". William and Mary Quarterly. Third Series. 58 (4): 883–912. doi:10.2307/2674504. JSTOR 2674504. Rottleuthner, Hubert (December 1989). "La Sociologie du Droit en Allemagne" (PDF). Droit et Société (in French). 11: 101–120. doi:10.3406/dreso.1989.1026. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2006. Retrieved 10 February 2007. Rottleuthner, Hubert (1984). "Rechtstheoritische Probleme der Sociologie des Rechts. Die Kontroverse zwischen Hans Kelsen und Eugen Ehrlich (1915/17)". Rechtstheorie (in German). 5: 521–551. Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1762). "Book II: Chapter 6 (Law)". The Social Contract (translated in English by G. D. H. Cole) (in French). Archived from the original on 22 February 2008. Retrieved 8 November 2007. Salazar, Philippe-Joseph (2019). Air Law. Juta. ISBN 9781485133148. Savigny, Friedrich Carl von (1803). "Zu welcher Classe von Rechten gehört der Besitz?". Das Recht des Besitzes (in German). Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 11 October 2008. Schermers, Henry G.; Blokker, Niels M. (1995). "Supervision and Sanctions". International Institutional Law. The Hague/London/Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publisher. Sealy, L.S.; Hooley, R.J.A. (2003). Commercial Law. LexisNexis Butterworths. Sherif, Adel Omar (2005). "Constitutions of Arab Countries and the Position of Sharia". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.). The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3. Simpson, A.W.B. (1984). Cannibalism and the Common Law. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-75942-5. Smith, Stephen A. (2003). "The Structure of Unjust Enrichment Law: Is Restitution a Right or a Remedy" (PDF). Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review. 36 (2): 1037–1062. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2007. Stein, Peter (1999). Roman Law in European History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-64372-6. Stone, Julius (1965). "Early Horizons of Justice in the West". Human Law and Human Justice. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-0215-7. Tamanaha, Brian Z. (2004). "Locke, Montesquieu the Federalist Papers". On the Rule of Law. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-60465-9. Théodoridés, Aristide (1999). "law". Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt. Routledge (UK). 0-415-18589-0. VerSteeg, Russ (2002). Law in Ancient Egypt. Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic Press. ISBN 978-0-89089-978-6. Warren, Mark E. (1999). Civil Society and Good Governance (PDF). Washington DC: Center for the Study of Voluntary Organisations and Services, Georgetown University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2008. Washofsky, Mark (2002). "Taking Precedent Seriously". Re-Examining Progressive Halakhah edited by Walter Jacob, Moshe Zemer. Berghahn Books. ISBN 978-1-57181-404-3. Weber, Max (1978). "Bureaucracy and Political Leadership". Economy and Society, Volume I (Translated and edited by Claus Wittich, Ephraim Fischoff, and Guenther Roth). University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-03500-3. Weber, Max (1919). Politics as a Vocation  – via Wikisource. Weber, Max (1964). The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (Edited with Introduction by Talcott Parsons – Translated in English by A. M. Henderson). The Free Press of Glencoe. ASIN B-000-LRHAX-2. Wehberg, Hans (October 1959). "Pacta Sunt Servanda". The American Journal of International Law. 53 (4): 775–786. doi:10.2307/2195750. JSTOR 2195750. S2CID 147466309. Wilson, William (2003). "Understanding Criminal Law". Criminal Law. Pearson Education. ISBN 978-0-582-47301-0. Willis, Hugh Evander (January 1926). "A Definition of Law". Virginia Law Review. 12 (3): 203–214. doi:10.2307/1065717. JSTOR 1065717. Archived from the original on 12 February 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. World Intellectual Property Organization (1997). "The System of Intellectual Property". Introduction to Intellectual Property. Kluwer Law International. ISBN 978-90-411-0938-5. Paolo, Silvestri (11 June 2014). "The ideal of good government in Luigi Einaudi's Thought and Life: Between Law and Freedom". SSRN 2447898. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. "House of Lords Judgments". House of Lords. Archived from the original on 10 November 2006. Retrieved 10 November 2006. Opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States "law". Law.com Dictionary. Archived from the original on 5 January 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2007. "law". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2007. "legal". Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary. Archived from the original on 26 December 2005. Retrieved 9 February 2007. Law at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity DRAGNET: Search of free legal databases from New York Law School. Archived 3 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. World Legal Information Institute Commonwealth Legal Information Institute Asian Legal Information Institute Australasian Legal Information Institute British and Irish Legal Information Institute Canadian Legal Information Institute (archived 4 October 2006) New Zealand Legal Information Institute Pacific Islands Legal Information Institute Southern African Legal Information Institute