Saky (Ukrainian and Russian: Саки; Crimean Tatar: Saq) is a town in Crimea. Although it is the administrative centre of the Saky Raion, it does not belong to the raion (district), serving instead as the center and the only locality of Saky Municipality. Population: 25,146 (2014 Census). The exact origin of the present town of Saky is unknown. At the time of the Crimean Khanate, Saky was a small village. In 1805, Saky had less than 400 people, more than 95 percent of whom were Crimean Tatars. In 1827, the first bathhouse was built and ten years later an office of the military hospital of Simferopol. During the Crimean War, the allied forces landed near Saky between Saky Lake and Kyzyl-Yar Lake and besieged Sevastopol. At the beginning of February 1855, the troops of General Stepan Aleksandrovich Khroulev focused on Saky before attacking the enemy in the fortifications of Evpatoria. The village was completely destroyed by bombing. After the Crimean War, during the second wave of emigration of Crimean Tatars, the Tatar population of Saky abandoned the ruined village. In 1858, migrants from the region of Poltava settled there, followed a little later by the Greeks of Constantinople. In February 1945, the British and American delegations at the Yalta conference landed at Saky Airport. Saky city council member Oleg Kolodyazhny (Our Ukraine) was shot dead in Saky on June 29, 2010. A series of explosions occurred at the nearby Saky air base on August 9, 2022. Jodobrom § Iodobrom, bromine iodine and other halogens halides and other different chemicals Saky Chemical Plant, Chemical Industry, various chemicals production Saki CHP thermal plant was recently updated enhanced output with an PGU GTE25P gas turbine units Agricultural College (Branch), Crimean Federal University Lake Cokrak in Saky Beach in Saky Seaside resorts Dmytro Matviyenko (born 1992), Ukrainian football player Mykola Matviyenko (born 1996), Ukrainian football player This place is located on the Crimean peninsula, which is internationally recognized as part of Ukraine, but since 2014 under Russian occupation. According to the administrative-territorial division of Ukraine, there are the Ukrainian divisions (the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city with special status of Sevastopol) located on the peninsula. Russia claims these as federal subjects of the Russian Federation (the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol). Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2014). "Таблица 1.3. Численность населения Крымского федерального округа, городских округов, муниципальных районов, городских и сельских поселений" [Table 1.3. Population of Crimean Federal District, Its Urban Okrugs, Municipal Districts, Urban and Rural Settlements]. Федеральное статистическое наблюдение «Перепись населения в Крымском федеральном округе». ("Population Census in Crimean Federal District" Federal Statistical Examination) (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 4, 2016. (in Ukrainian) Події за темами: У Криму застрелили мера курортного селища, UNIAN (June 29, 2010) (in Ukrainian) У Криму розстріляли депутата, Ukrayinska Pravda (June 29, 2010) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saky.