Armiansk (Ukrainian: Армянськ; Russian: Армянск, romanized: Armyansk; Armenian: Արմյանսկ; Crimean Tatar: Ermeni Bazar) is a town of regional significance in the northern Crimean peninsula. The status of Crimea is disputed by the two countries since February 2014. Armiansk is located on the Isthmus of Perekop and serves as the administrative center of the Armiansk Municipality. Population: 21,987 (2014 Census). At the beginning of the 18th century Armenians and Greeks who had come from the nearby city of Or Qapı (present-day Perekop) founded Armiansk. The first name of the town was Ermeni Bazar (Crimean Tatar for the "Armenian market"). In 1921 it was renamed Armiansk. On 2 March 2014, early in the 2014 Crimean Crisis, Russian Naval Infantry units without cockades or rank insignia set up a checkpoint in Armiansk to check cars driving in and out of the Crimea region. Ethnic makeup according to the 2001 Ukrainian census: Crimean Titan, Ti metallurgy, TiO2, TiCl2 TiCl4 and many other chemicals The main employer in the city and the area is Crimean Titan (Russian: Крымский Титан; Ukrainian: Кримський Титан), which specializes in the refining of Titanium dioxide for use in paints, plastics, and other products. Institute of Pedagogical Education and Management (Branch), Crimean Federal University In ancient times, the city was located on the important road to Crimea. Now this road connects Kherson Oblast to Autonomous Republic of Crimea . The town also has a railroad station. "Putin's remarks raise fears of future moves against Ukraine". Washington Post. Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2014). "Таблица 1.3. Численность населения Крымского федерального округа, городских округов, муниципальных районов, городских и сельских поселений" [Table 1.3. Population of Crimean Federal District, Its Urban Okrugs, Municipal Districts, Urban and Rural Settlements]. Федеральное статистическое наблюдение «Перепись населения в Крымском федеральном округе». ("Population Census in Crimean Federal District" Federal Statistical Examination) (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 4, 2016. "- YouTube". YouTube. Archived from the original on 2016-05-11. Retrieved 2016-11-27. "Національний склад міст за переписом 2001 року". datatowel.in.ua. Archived from the original on 3 Dec 2023. Retrieved 17 Feb 2024. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Armiansk. Armiansk.Info project (in Russian) The murder of the Jews of Armiansk during World War II, at Yad Vashem website. v t e