Japan is divided into eight regions. They are not official administrative units, though they have been used by government officials for statistical and other purposes since 1905. They are widely used in, for example, maps, geography textbooks, and weather reports, and many businesses and institutions use their home regions in their names, for example Kinki Nippon Railway, Chūgoku Bank, and Tōhoku University. Each region contains one or more of the country's 47 prefectures. Of the four main islands of Japan, Hokkaidō, Shikoku, and Kyūshū make up one region each, the latter also containing the Satsunan Islands, while the largest island Honshū is divided into five regions. Okinawa Prefecture is usually included in Kyūshū, but is sometimes treated as its own ninth region. Japan has eight High Courts, but their jurisdictions do not correspond to the eight regions (see Judicial system of Japan for details). This is a list of Japan's major islands, traditional regions, and subregions, going from northeast to southwest. The eight traditional regions are marked in bold. Hokkaidō (the island and its archipelago) Honshū Tōhoku region (northern part) Kantō region (eastern part) Nanpō Islands (part of Tokyo Metropolis) Chūbu region (central part) Hokuriku region (northwestern Chūbu) Kōshin'etsu region (northeastern Chūbu) Tōkai region (southern Chūbu) Kansai (or Kinki) region (south-central part) Chūgoku region (western part) San'in region (northern Chūgoku) San'yō region (southern Chūgoku) Shikoku Kyūshū Northern Kyūshū Southern Kyūshū Ryukyu Islands Satsunan Islands Okinawa In many contexts in Japan (government, media markets, sports, regional business or trade union confederations), regions are used that deviate from the above-mentioned common geographical 8-region division that is sometimes referred to as "the" regions of Japan in the English Wikipedia and some other English-language publications. Examples of regional divisions of Japan as used by various institutions are: Ecoregions of Japan Geography of Japan Prefectures of Japan "Regions". Archived from the original on 2020-07-27. Retrieved 2021-02-14. Regions of Japan A Guide to the Regions of Japan Japan's Regional Megamarkets - Semantic Scholar (PDF) What special characteristics does Hokkaido have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Tohoku region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Kanto region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Chubu region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Kinki region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Chugoku region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Shikoku region have? from Kids Web Japan What special characteristics does the Kyushu-Okinawa region have? from Kids Web Japan Regions of Japan on japan-guide.com Regions of Japan on web-japan.org NPA: 管区警察局の活動, retrieved September 24, 2021. NHK: 全国のNHK Archived 2022-06-13 at the Wayback Machine, retrieved September 24, 2021. MLIT: 地方整備局, retrieved September 24, 2021. JMA: 天気予報等で用いる用語>地域名, retrieved September 24, 2021. BoJ: 地域経済報告 ── さくらレポート ── （２０２１年７月）, the definition of regions is in the table of contents before p. 1 (Summary in English translation, the definition of regions is in the appendix), retrieved September 24, 2021. Media related to Regions of Japan at Wikimedia Commons