Adyghe (/ˈædɪɡeɪ/ or /ˌɑːdɪˈɡeɪ/; also known as West Circassian) is a Northwest Caucasian language spoken by the western subgroups of Circassians. It is spoken mainly in Russia, as well as in Turkey, Jordan, Syria and Israel, where Circassians settled after the Circassian genocide (c. 1864–1870) by the Russians. It is closely related to the Kabardian (East Circassian) language, though some reject the distinction between the two languages in favor of both being dialects of a unitary Circassian language. The literary standard of Adyghe is based on its Temirgoy dialect. Adyghe and Russian are the two official languages of the Republic of Adygea in the Russian Federation. In Russia, there are around 128,000 speakers of Adyghe, almost all of them native speakers. In total, some 300,000 speak it worldwide. The largest Adyghe-speaking community is in Turkey, spoken by the diaspora from the Russian–Circassian War (c. 1763–1864). In addition, the Adyghe language is spoken by the Cherkesogai in Krasnodar Krai. Adyghe belongs to the family of Northwest Caucasian languages. Kabardian (also known as East Circassian) is a very close relative, treated by some as a dialect of Adyghe or of an overarching Circassian language. Ubykh, Abkhaz and Abaza are somewhat more distantly related to Adyghe. Shapsug dialect (Adyghe: Шапсыгъабзэ) North Shapsugs, Great Shapsugs, Kuban Shapsugs (Шапсыгъэ шху) dialect Kfar Kama dialect (Кфар Камэм ишапсыгъэбзэ) Temirgoy-Shapsugs, Pseuşko accent (Кӏэмгуе-шапсыгъ) South Shapsugs, Small Shapsugs, Coastal Shapsugs, Black Sea Shapsugs (Шапсыгъэ-цӏыкӏу) dialect Hakuchi dialect (Хьакӏуцубзэ, Къарацхаибзэ) Natukhai dialect (Adyghe: Нэтӏхъуаджэбзэ) Zhaney dialect Bzhedug dialect (Adyghe: Бжъэдыгъубзэ): spoken by Circassians in the Republic of Adygea and the Biga district of the city of Çanakkale in Turkey Temirgoy (Adyghe: Кӏэмыгуябзэ, Кӏэмгуибзэ): literary standard of Adyghe. Also spoken by Circassians in the Republic of Adygea Abzakh dialect (Adyghe: Aбдзэхабзэ): spoken by Circassians in the village of Rehaniya in Israel and Circassians in Syria from the Golan Heights Mamkhegh dialect Yegeruqay dialect Hatuqwai dialect Mequash dialect Adyghe exhibits between 50 and 60 consonants depending on the dialect. All dialects possess a contrast between plain and labialized glottal stops. A very unusual minimal contrast, and possibly unique to the Abzakh dialect of Adyghe, is a three-way contrast between plain, labialized and palatalized glottal stops (although a palatalized glottal stop is also found in Hausa and a labialized one in Tlingit). The Shapsug (Black Sea) dialect of Adyghe contains a very uncommon sound: a voiceless bidental fricative [h̪͆], which corresponds to the voiceless velar fricative [x] found in other varieties of Adyghe. This sound is only known to be used in the Black Sea dialect. These consonants exist only in borrowed words. Note: Adyghe has many consonants that appear across its dialects, and thus has a complex system of consonant allophony. More information on those can be found at Adyghe phonology. In contrast to its large inventory of consonants, Adyghe has only three phonemic vowels in a vertical vowel system. Adyghe, like all Northwest Caucasian languages, has a basic agent–object–verb typology and is characterised by the ergative construction of sentences. The official alphabet for Adyghe is the Cyrillic script, which has been used since 1936. Before that, the Arabic script was used. In 2012, Adıge Dil Derneği (Circassian Language Association or Adıǵe Bze Xase [ABX] in the Latin Circassian script; danef.com) in Turkey has issued a call for the Circassian people for the creation of a standard Latin script to be used by all Circassian people on the globe. Their main motivation for the creation of this alphabet was that the majority of Circassian people live in Turkey and use the Latin alphabet in their daily life because they know Turkish. However, when trying to teach the language to the younger generation, teaching them a new alphabet takes time and makes the process more laborsome. ABX has created a Latin script based on the Turkish alphabet. They chose the Abzakh dialect as their base because it is the dialect with the most speakers in Turkey. However, ABX has been criticized heavily by others. Some suggested that they created the alphabet without a good understanding of the Circassian phonology and have not even considered former Latin scripts used to write Circassian and that the use of the Latin script would sever the ties with the Homeland. Despite the criticism, ABX has obtained a 40 000 Euro funding from the European Union for the recording of the Circassian language with a Latin script and the preparation of multi-media learning materials for the language and the materials created by ABX were accepted by the Ministry of National Education to be taught in Secondary Schools. This decision was protested and legally objected by the Federation of Caucasian Associations (Kafkas Dernekleri Federasyonu; KAFFED) who created the materials for Circassian and Abaza languages with Cyrillic script but the court ruled in favor of ABX and the continued use of the Latin script in Circassian courses. Some glyphs in the Temirgoy-based Cyrillic script have no equivalent in the Abzakh-based Latin script because of dialectal differences. Though there are some additional letters in the alphabet for Eastern Circassian, the materials in the ABX website are in West Circassian The letter ⟨ы⟩ [ə] is not written after a ⟨у⟩ [w], ⟨й⟩ [j] or a labialised consonant. For example: унэ [wənɐ] "house" instead of уынэ. In case the letter ⟨у⟩ is the first letter of a word or when it is not related to any other consonant, it is pronounced as [wə] ⟨уы⟩. For example: унэ instead of уынэ. When it is related to a consonant, it becomes a vowel and pronounced as [əw~u] ⟨ыу⟩. For example: чэту [t͡ʃɐtəw] "cat" instead of чэтыу. In case a labialised consonant is followed by a vowel ⟨э⟩ [ɐ], instead of the letter ⟨у⟩ there is a ⟨о⟩. For example: гъогу [ʁʷɐɡʷ] "road" instead of гъуэгу. In case a labialised consonant is followed by a vowel ⟨а⟩ [aː] or ⟨и⟩ [əj~i], the labialised consonant letter is written fully. For example: цуакъэ [t͡sʷaːqɐ] "shoes". In case the letter ⟨о⟩ is the first letter of a word or when it is not related to any other consonant, it is pronounced as [wɐ] ⟨уэ⟩. For example, о [wɐ] "you" instead of уэ. In case the letter ⟨е⟩ is the first letter of a word or when it is not related to any other consonant, it is pronounced as [jɐ] ⟨йэ⟩. For example: еӏо [jɐʔʷɐ] "he says" instead of йэӏо. When it is related to a consonant, it becomes a vowel and pronounced as [ɐj~e] ⟨эй⟩. For example: делэ [dɐjlɐ] "fool" instead of дэйлэ. In case the letter ⟨и⟩ is the first letter of a word or when is not related to any other consonant, it is pronounced as [jə] ⟨йы⟩. For example: илъэс [jəɬɐs] "year" instead of йылъэс. When it is related to a consonant, it becomes a vowel and pronounced as [əj~i] ⟨ый⟩. For example: сиӏ [səjʔ] "I have" instead of сыйӏ. The vowels are written ⟨ы⟩ [ə], ⟨э⟩ [ɐ] and ⟨а⟩ [aː]. Other letters represent diphthongs: ⟨я⟩ represents [jaː], ⟨и⟩ [jə] or [əj], ⟨о⟩ [wɐ] or [ɐw], ⟨у⟩ represent [wə] or [əw], and ⟨е⟩ represents [jɐ] or [ɐj]. The language of Adyghe is officially written in the Cyrillic script but is also unofficially written in the Latin script, in a version of the Arabic script before 1927, and then a version of the Latin alphabet implemented by the Soviet Union until 1938. Prior to mid 19th Century, Adyghe was an unwritten language. Starting from 1853, the process of creating an orthography for Adyghe language was started. In Tbilisi in 1853, a document titled "Primer of the Circassian Language" (Archive) was published, in which an Arabic-based orthography influenced by Ottoman Turkish alphabet was developed. This document became the first ever publication in Adyghe. In this document, several new letters were introduced to represent the consonants that exist in Adyghe language. This proposed orthography, although with many shortcomings, received widespread approval and usage. And thus, Arabic script became the accepted orthography for Adyghe. Over the following decades, several authors attempted to further improve Adyghe Arabic orthography. The most successful attempt was the alphabet compiled by Akhmetov Bekukh. In this version, letters were designated for vowel sounds, and the orthography was transformed from an "Impure abjads to a true alphabet. In 1918, on the initiative of the Kuban Revolutionary Committee, a primer was published in Yekaterinodar. This official endorsement resulted in a literary boom in Adyghe language and the publication of various newspapers, textbooks and other literature, including the Adyghe Maq, the main Adyghe language newspaper established in 1923. During the abovementioned decades, parallel with this process, Arabic orthography was also standardized for the sister Circassian language of Kabardian. Although very similar in many aspects, there are minor variations in what letters are included based on each respective phonology, and there are minor differences in presentation of a few consonants. In 1927, the Arabic-based alphabet was discarded and replaced with Latin, which was discared a decade afterwards and replaced with Cyrillic alphabet in 1938. Below table shows Adyghe Arabic alphabet as it was officially adopted between 1918 and 1927. Adyghe orthography was officially switched to Latin alphabet in 1927. Adyghe Latin alphabet was compiled and finalized a year prior, in 1926. This alphabet was the sole official script in the Soviet Union. Adyghe Latin Alphabet consisted of 50 letters, many of them newly created, some even borrowed from Cyrillic. Another interesting feature of this iteration of Adyghe Latin Alphabet was that there was no distinction between lower case and upper case letters. Each letter only had one single case. Below table shows Adyghe Latin alphabet as it was officially adopted between 1927 and 1938. Adyghe Arabic alphabet used before 1927 Adyghe Latin alphabet used from 1927 to 1938 (page 1) Adyghe Latin alphabet used from 1927 to 1938 (page 2) Comparison of Adyghe Latin and Adyghe Cyrillic alphabets Adyghe Arabic alphabet letters Adyghe Latin alphabet letters There are thirteen labialised consonants; however, in some dialects, there are three additional ones: Кхъу [q͡χʷ], Ху [xʷ] and Чъу [t͡ɕʷ]. Adyghe is taught outside Circassia in Prince Hamza Ibn Al-Hussein Secondary School, a school for Jordanian Adyghes in Jordan's capital city of Amman. This school, established by the Jordanian Adyghes with support from the late king Hussein of Jordan, is one of the first schools for the Adyghe communities outside Circassia. It has around 750 Jordanian Adyghe students, and aims to preserve the Adyghe language and traditions among future generations. Adyghe is spoken by Circassians in Iraq and by Circassians in Israel, where it is taught in schools in their villages. It is also spoken by many Circassians in Syria, although the majority of Syrian Circassians speak Kabardian.[citation needed] There are many books written in or translated into Adyghe. An Adyghe translation of the Quran by Ishak Mashbash is available. The New Testament and many books of the Old Testament have been published in Adyghe by the Institute for Bible Translation in Moscow. According to the UNESCO 2009 map entitled "UNESCO Map of the World's Languages in Danger", the status of the Adyghe language in 2009, along with all its dialects (Adyghe, Western Circassian tribes; and Kabard-Cherkess, Eastern Circassian tribes), is classified as vulnerable. Adyghe Maq, the main Adyghe-language newspaper Anthem of the Republic of Adygea Adyghe: Адыгабзэ, romanized: Ādəɣābză, [aːdɘɣaːbzɜ] Only in loanwords. Adyghe at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) "UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in danger". www.unesco.org. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 3 March 2021. "Adyghe". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) Aydın, Şamil Emre (2015), Çerkes Diyalektleri ISBN 9786056569111 Applebaum, Ayla; Gordon, Matthew (2013). "A Comparative Phonetic Study of the Circassian Languages". Berkeley Linguistics Society. University of California, Santa Barbara. "ADIGE DİL DERNEĞİ'NDEN ÇAĞRI!". www.ozgurcerkes.com (in Turkish). Retrieved 24 January 2024. "Hapi Cevdet Yıldız | Anadili Eğitimi ve Alfabe Sorunu". Cherkessia.net (in Turkish). 18 June 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "kafkasya kuzey kafkasya cerkes cerkez çerkes çerkez kafkasya kuzey kafkasya cerkes cerkez çerkes çerkez kafkasya kuzey kafkasya cerkes cerkez çerkes çerkez". www.circassiancenter.com. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "Adıǵe Dili (Çerkes Dili) Latin alfabesine uyarlanıyor". Pusula Haber (in Turkish). 1 October 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "T.C. Millî Eğitim Bakanlığı Talim Terbiye Kurulu Başkanlığı". mufredat.meb.gov.tr. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "Kaffed'den Kiril eylemi". Ajans Kafkas (in Turkish). 16 April 2015. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "KAFFED'İN LATİN ALFABESİ İLE EĞİTİM KONUSUNDAKİ DAVASI RED EDİLDİ. – ÇERKES-FED" (in Turkish). Retrieved 24 January 2024. DANEF. "DANEF". DANEF (in Turkish). Retrieved 24 January 2024. ADYGHE (ADYGHIAN) M. I. Isaev (1979). Language construction in the USSR (Языковое строительство в СССР). Мoscow: "Nauka" «Наука». pp. 180–191, 352. H. Sh. Urys (2000). Adygebzem and tkhide (Адыгэбзэм и тхыдэ). Nalshyk: "Elburs". ISBN 5-7860-1439. {{cite book}}: Check |isbn= value: length (help) Yevlampiev, Ilya; Pentzlin, Karl; Joomagueldinov, Nurlan (19 July 2011). Proposal to encode Arabic characters used for Adyghe and Chechen languages (PDF). pp. 4 and 10. Circassians bid to save ancient language. Al Jazeera. 14 May 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2011. "Circassian Quran Website". Circassian Quran. Retrieved 6 June 2023. "UNESCO Map of World's language in Danger" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2009. "OHCHR |". www.ohchr.org. Retrieved 15 November 2020. Adyghe edition of Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Grammar of the Circassian Language. Useful site to learn the Adyghe grammar. Louis Loewe (1854). A dictionary of the Circassian language, English-Circassian-Turkish. George Bell. Sample Adyghe document in Arabic Script, 1924, تەزغەو نەخوشتەر-گوبغویش: تەزغەو نەشتەر-گوبغواب / Тэзгъэу нэхъущтэр-губгъуищ: тэзгъэу нэщтэр-губгъуаб. Zubrilin, Aleksey Arsenevich. Moscow and Krasny Vostok, USSR. Adyghe alphabet, Omniglot. "Adyghe transliteration schemes" (PDF).. Adyghe sample, Language Museum. Learning Adyghe resource. Learn Circassian, International Centre for Circassian Studies (ICCS). Rferl North Caucasus Radio. Adyghe transliteration tool. Ancient Adyghe Abkhaz–Abaza Ubykh alphabet. How to count in Adyghe language. Adyghe language dictionary. Recordings of Adyghe language