The emblems of the constituent republics of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics all featured predominantly the hammer and sickle and the red star that symbolized communism, as well as a rising sun (although in the case of the Latvian SSR, since the Baltic Sea is west of Latvia, it could be interpreted as a setting sun), surrounded by a wreath of wheat (except the Karelo-Finnish SSR with a wreath of rye). The USSR State motto, Workers of the world, unite!, in both the republic's language and Russian was also placed on each one of them. In addition to those repetitive motifs, emblems of many Soviet republics also included features that were characteristic of their local landscapes, economies or cultures. The emblems are often called coats of arms, but since they (deliberately) did not follow the rules of heraldry, most of them cannot be considered coats of arms. However, they all did follow the same basic pattern, a pattern which sometimes has led to the use of the term "socialist heraldry". The table below presents final versions of the renderings of the Soviet republics' emblems prior to the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, as well as the arms of two republics that ceased to exist before that time. For comparison, national arms of present-day successor states of the Soviet republics are also shown. As can be seen, most Asian post-Soviet republics use arms based on or reminiscent of the Soviet-era emblems. Most European republics, on the other hand, reverted to their traditional pre-Soviet heraldic arms. Belarus used the traditional Pahonia as its coat of arms from 1991 to 1995 when it was replaced by a new emblem closely resembling the Soviet-era design. Additionally, the secessionist Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic (Transnistria), internationally recognised as part of Moldova, uses an emblem based on the emblem of the Moldavian SSR (see Coat of arms of Transnistria) and the self-proclaimed Luhansk People's Republic, controlling part of the Luhansk Oblast in Ukraine, created the similar emblem. Emblem of the self-proclaimed Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic Emblem of the self-proclaimed Republic of Abkhazia Emblem of the self-proclaimed Republic of South Ossetia Emblem of the self-proclaimed Chechen Republic of Ichkeria (1990–1997) Coat of arms of the self-proclaimed Republic of Crimea (2014) Emblem of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People's Republic (2014–2022) Coat of arms of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic (2014–2022) Coat of arms of the self-proclaimed Republic of Artsakh (1992–2024) "Государственные гербы и флаги республик СССР". sovietthings.webuda.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 5 December 2012. "Kazakhstan in the Soviet Union". crwflags.com. Retrieved 5 December 2012. "Coats of arms". azerbaijans.com. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2012. "Armenia in the Soviet Union". crwflags.com. Retrieved 5 December 2012. "Estonia in the Soviet Union". flags-of-the-world.net. Retrieved 5 December 2012. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Coats of arms of the Soviet Republics. Communist symbolism State Emblem of the Soviet Union Flags of the Soviet Republics Coats of arms of the Yugoslav Socialist Republics List of coats of arms of the Russian Federation