The province of Enna (Italian: provincia di Enna; Sicilian: pruvincia di Enna; officially libero consorzio comunale di Enna) is a province in the autonomous island region of Sicily, Italy. It was created in 1927, out of parts of the provinces of Caltanisetta and Catania. The capital was designated as Enna (then called Castrogiovanni), instead of Piazza Armerina, due to the influence of politician Napoleone Colajanni. Following the suppression of the Sicilian provinces, it was replaced in 2015 by the free municipal consortium of Enna (Italian: libero consorzio comunale di Enna). Its capital is the city of Enna, located on a mountain and the highest provincial capital in Sicily. Located in the center of the island, it is the only landlocked province in Sicily. The province of Enna has an area of 2,562 square kilometres (989 sq mi), and a total population of 168,052 (2017). There are 20 comuni (sg.: comune) in the province [1], see comuni of the province of Enna. The main comunes by population are: Villa Romana del Casale, in Piazza Armerina, a huge ancient Roman "villa", where there are many well preserved Roman mosaics, the most important mosaic system in the Roman world of that time; Morgantina, an ancient town that constitutes the most important archeological area in Central Sicily, whose finds are located in many big museums all over the world: Malibu, Los Angeles, California; New York; Musée du Louvre, Paris; and the Archeological Museum of Aidone, the commune in which Morgantina is located. Castello di Lombardia, in Enna, the biggest castle of Sicily: it had 20 towers centuries ago, but now it has 6 towers, and among these there is Torre Pisana, a very big tower affording an extensive panoramic vista of the surrounding countryside; Duomo of Enna, a cathedral built in the 13th century; Museo Alessi in Enna, a museum which hosts the exhibitions of the Treseaure of Enna's Our Lady and her crown, made with gold. The Cathedral of Piazza Armerina, characterized by a huge green dome. Lake Pergusa, in Enna: it has a forest inside a wildlife reserve, where thousands of rare birds can be found. The Autodromo di Pergusa, the most important racing circuit of southern Italy: it hosted and still hosts international competitions, such as Formula One, Formula 3000, and the Ferrari Party and other events In Enna, for Good Friday, there is a procession, and on 2 July is held the Enna's Our Lady feast; Piazza Armerina, on 11, 12 and 13 August, is seat of the Palio dei Normanni, an ancient and traditional feast whose protagonists are the horses. Sulfur mining in Sicily Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional Gross Domestic Product (Small regions TL3), OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. Official website Pictures, history, tourism, hospitality, books, local products, local surnames, transportation in the province of Enna 37°34′N 14°16′E﻿ / ﻿37.567°N 14.267°E﻿ / 37.567; 14.267