Malala Yousafzai (Urdu: ملالہ یوسفزئی, Pashto: ملاله یوسفزۍ, pronunciation: [məˈlaːlə jusəf ˈzəj]; born 12 July 1997) is a Pakistani female education activist and the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize laureate at the age of 17. She is youngest Nobel Prize laureate in history, the second Pakistani and the only Pashtun to receive a Nobel Prize. Yousafzai is a human rights advocate for the education of women and children in her native homeland, Swat, where the Pakistani Taliban had at times banned girls from attending school. Her advocacy has grown into an international movement, and according to former Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, she has become Pakistan's "most prominent citizen." The daughter of education activist Ziauddin Yousafzai, she was born to a Yusufzai Pashtun family in Swat and was named after the Afghan folk heroine Malalai of Maiwand. Considering Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Barack Obama, and Benazir Bhutto as her role models, she was also inspired by her father's thoughts and humanitarian work. In early 2009, when she was 11, she wrote a blog under her pseudonym Gul Makai for the BBC Urdu to detail her life during the Taliban's occupation of Swat. The following summer, journalist Adam B. Ellick made a New York Times documentary about her life as the Pakistan Armed Forces launched Operation Rah-e-Rast against the militants in Swat. In 2011, she received Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize. She rose in prominence, giving interviews in print and on television, and was nominated for the International Children's Peace Prize by activist Desmond Tutu. On 9 October 2012, while on a bus in Swat District after taking an exam, Yousafzai and two other girls were shot by a Taliban gunman in an assassination attempt targeting her for her activism; the gunman fled the scene. She was struck in the head by a bullet and remained unconscious and in critical condition at the Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology, but her condition later improved enough for her to be transferred to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, UK. The attempt on her life sparked an international outpouring of support. Deutsche Welle reported in January 2013 that she may have become "the most famous teenager in the world". Weeks after the attempted murder, a group of 50 leading Muslim clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā against those who tried to kill her. Governments, human rights organizations and feminist groups subsequently condemned the Pakistani Taliban. In response, the Taliban further denounced Yousafzai, indicating plans for a possible second assassination attempt which the Taliban felt was justified as a religious obligation. This sparked another international outcry. After her recovery, Yousafzai became a more prominent activist for the right to education. Based in Birmingham, she co-founded the Malala Fund, a non-profit organisation, with Shiza Shahid. In 2013, she co-authored I Am Malala, an international best seller. In 2013, she received the Sakharov Prize, and in 2014, she was the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize with Kailash Satyarthi of India. Aged 17 at the time, she was the youngest-ever Nobel Prize laureate. In 2015, she was the subject of the Oscar-shortlisted documentary He Named Me Malala. The 2013, 2014 and 2015 issues of Time magazine featured her as one of the most influential people globally. In 2017 she was awarded honorary Canadian citizenship and became the youngest person to address the House of Commons of Canada. Yousafzai completed her secondary school education at Edgbaston High School, Birmingham in England from 2013 to 2017. From there she won a place at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford, and undertook three years of study for a Bachelor of Arts degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE), graduating in 2020. She returned in 2023 to become the youngest ever Honorary Fellow at Linacre College, Oxford. Yousafzai was born on 12 July 1997 in the Swat District of Pakistan's northwestern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, into a lower-middle-class family. She is the daughter of Ziauddin Yousafzai and Toor Pekai Yousafzai. Her family is Sunni Muslim of Pashtun ethnicity, belonging to the Yusufzai tribe. The family did not have enough money for a hospital birth and Yousafzai was born at home with the help of neighbours. She was given her first name Malala (meaning "grief-stricken") after Malalai of Maiwand, a famous Pashtun poet and warrior woman from southern Afghanistan. At her house in Mingora, she lived with her two younger brothers, Khushal and Atal, her parents, Ziauddin and Tor Pekai, and two chickens. Fluent in Pashto, Urdu and English, Yousafzai was educated mostly by her father, Ziauddin Yousafzai, a poet, school owner, and an educational activist himself, running a chain of private schools known as the Khushal Public School. In an interview, she once said that she aspired to become a doctor, though later her father encouraged her to become a politician instead. Ziauddin referred to his daughter as something entirely special, allowing her to stay up at night and talk about politics after her two brothers had been sent to bed. Inspired by the twice-elected, assassinated Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, Yousafzai started speaking about education rights as early as September 2008, when her father took her to Peshawar to speak at the local press club. "How dare the Taliban take away my basic right to education?" she asked in a speech covered by newspapers and television channels throughout the region. In 2009, she began as a trainee and was then a peer educator in the Institute for War and Peace Reporting's Open Minds Pakistan youth programme, which worked in the region's schools to help students engage in constructive discussion on social issues through journalism, public debate and dialogue. In late 2008, Aamer Ahmed Khan of the BBC Urdu website and his colleagues came up with a novel way of covering the Pakistani Taliban's growing influence in Swat. They decided to ask a schoolgirl to blog anonymously about her life there. Their correspondent in Peshawar, Abdul Hai Kakar, had been in touch with a local school teacher, Ziauddin Yousafzai, but could not find any students willing to report, as their families considered it too dangerous. Finally, Yousafzai suggested his own daughter, 11-year-old Malala. At the time, Pakistani Taliban militants led by Maulana Fazlullah were taking over the Swat Valley, banning television, music, girls' education, and women from going shopping. Bodies of beheaded policemen were being displayed in town squares. At first, a girl named Aisha from her father's school agreed to write a diary, but her parents stopped her from doing it because they feared Taliban reprisals. The only alternative was Yousafzai, who was four years younger and in seventh grade at the time. "We had been covering the violence and politics in Swat in detail but we didn't know much about how ordinary people lived under the Taliban", said Mirza Waheed, former editor of BBC Urdu. Because they were concerned for Yousafzai's safety, the BBC editors insisted she use a pseudonym. Her blog was published under the byline "Gul Makai" ("cornflower" in Pashto), a name taken from a character in a Pashtun folktale. On 3 January 2009, her first entry was posted to the BBC Urdu blog. She hand-wrote notes and passed them to a reporter who scanned and e-mailed them. The blog recorded Yousafzai's thoughts during the First Battle of Swat, as military operations took place, fewer girls show up to school, and finally, her school shut down. That day she wrote: I had a terrible dream yesterday with military helicopters and the Taliban. I have had such dreams since the launch of the military operation in Swat. My mother made me breakfast and I went off to school. I was afraid going to school because the Taliban had issued an edict banning all girls from attending schools. Only 11 out of 27 pupils attended the class because the number decreased because of the Pakistani Taliban's edict. My three friends have shifted to Peshawar, Lahore and Rawalpindi with their families after this edict. In Swat, the Pakistani Taliban had set an edict that no girls could attend school after 15 January 2009. They had already blown up more than 100 girls' schools. The night before the ban took effect was filled with the noise of artillery fire, waking Yousafzai several times. The following day, she also read for the first time excerpts from her blog that were published in a local newspaper. Following the edict, the Pakistani Taliban destroyed several more local schools. On 24 January 2009, Yousafzai wrote: "Our annual exams are due after the vacations but this will only be possible if the Pakistani Taliban allow girls to go to school. We were told to prepare certain chapters for the exam but I do not feel like studying." It seems that it is only when dozens of schools have been destroyed and hundreds others closed down that the army thinks about protecting them. Had they conducted their operations here properly, this situation would not have arisen. — Malala Yousafzai, 24 January 2009 BBC blog entry In February 2009, girls' schools were still closed. In solidarity, private schools for boys had decided not to open until 9 February, and notices appeared saying so. On 7 February, Yousafzai and her brother returned to their hometown of Mingora, where the streets were deserted, and there was an "eerie silence". She wrote in her blog: "We went to the supermarket to buy a gift for our mother but it was closed, whereas earlier it used to remain open till late. Many other shops were also closed." Their home had been robbed and their television was stolen. After boys' schools reopened, the Pakistani Taliban lifted restrictions on girls' primary education, where there was co-education. Girls-only schools were still closed. Yousafzai wrote that only 70 pupils attended out of the 700 who were enrolled. On 15 February, gunshots were heard in Mingora's streets, but Yousafzai's father reassured her, saying, "Don't be scared—this is firing for peace." Her father had read in the newspaper that the government and militants were going to sign a peace deal the next day. Later that night, when the Taliban announced the peace deal on their FM Radio studio, another round of stronger firing started outside. Yousafzai spoke out against the Pakistani Taliban on the national current affairs show Capital Talk on 18 February. Three days later, Tehreek-e-Nafaz-e-Shariat-e-Mohammadi leader Maulana Fazlulla announced on his FM radio station that he was lifting the ban on women's education, and girls would be allowed to attend school until exams were held on 17 March, but that they had to wear burqas. On 25 February, Yousafzai wrote on her blog that she and her classmates "played a lot in class and enjoyed ourselves like we used to before." Attendance at Yousafzai's class was up to 19 of 27 pupils by 1 March, but the Pakistani Taliban were still active in the area. Shelling continued, and relief goods meant for displaced people were looted. Only two days later, Yousafzai wrote that there was a skirmish between the military and Taliban, and the sounds of mortar shells could be heard: "People are again scared that the peace may not last for long. Some people are saying that the peace agreement is not permanent, it is just a break in fighting." On 9 March, Yousafzai wrote about a science paper that she performed well on, and added that the Taliban were no longer searching vehicles as they once did. Her blog ended on 12 March 2009. After the BBC diary ended, Yousafzai and her father were approached by New York Times reporter Adam B. Ellick about filming a documentary. In May, the Pakistani Army moved into the region to regain control during the Second Battle of Swat (also known as Operation Rah-e-Rast). Mingora was evacuated and Yousafzai's family was displaced and separated. Her father went to Peshawar to protest and lobby for support, while she was sent into the countryside to live with relatives. "I'm really bored because I have no books to read," she is filmed saying in the documentary. That month, after criticising militants at a press conference, Yousafzai's father received a death threat over the radio by a Pakistani Taliban commander. Yousafzai was deeply inspired in her activism by her father. That summer, for the first time, she committed to becoming a politician and not a doctor, as she had once aspired to be. I have a new dream ... I must be a politician to save this country. There are so many crises in our country. I want to remove these crises. — Malala Yousafzai, Class Dismissed (documentary) By early July, refugee camps were filled to capacity. The prime minister made a long-awaited announcement saying it was safe to return to the Swat Valley. The Pakistani military had pushed the Taliban out of the cities and into the countryside. Yousafzai's family reunited, and on 24 July 2009 they headed home. They made one stop first—to meet with a group of other grassroots activists that had been invited to see United States President Barack Obama's special representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke. Yousafzai pleaded with Holbrooke to intervene in the situation, saying, "Respected ambassador, if you can help us in our education, so please help us." When her family finally returned home, they found it had not been damaged, and her school had sustained only light damage. Following the documentary, Yousafzai was interviewed on the national Pashto-language station AVT Khyber, the Urdu-language Daily Aaj, and Canada's Toronto Star. She made a second appearance on Capital Talk on 19 August 2009. Her BBC blogging identity was being revealed in articles by December 2009. She also began appearing on television to publicly advocate for female education. From 2009 to 2010 she was the chair of the District Child Assembly of the Khpal Kor Foundation. In 2011, Yousafzai trained with local girls' empowerment organisation, Aware Girls, run by Gulalai Ismail, whose training included advice on women's rights and empowerment to peacefully oppose radicalisation through education. In October 2011, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a South African activist, nominated Yousafzai for the International Children's Peace Prize of the Dutch international children's advocacy group, KidsRights Foundation. She was the first Pakistani girl to be nominated for the award. The announcement said, "Malala dared to stand up for herself and other girls and used national and international media to let the world know girls should also have the right to go to school." The award was won by Michaela Mycroft of South Africa. Yousafzai's public profile rose even further when she was awarded Pakistan's first National Youth Peace Prize two months later in December. On 19 December 2011, Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani awarded her the National Peace Award for Youth. At the ceremony, she stated she was not a member of any political party, but hoped to found a national party of her own to promote education. The prime minister directed the authorities to set up an IT campus in the Swat Degree College for Women at Yousafzai's request, and a secondary school was renamed in her honour. By 2012, she was planning to organise the Malala Education Foundation, which would help poor girls go to school. In 2012, she attended the International Marxist Tendency National Marxist Summer School. In a television interview the same year, she named Barack Obama, Benazir Bhutto and Abdul Ghaffar Khan (Bacha Khan), a Pashtun leader known for his nonviolent Khudai Khidmatgar resistance movement against the British Raj, as inspirations for her activism. As Yousafzai became more recognised, the dangers facing her increased. Death threats against her were published in newspapers and slipped under her door. On Facebook, where she was an active user, she began to receive threats. Eventually, a Pakistani Taliban spokesman said they were "forced" to act. In a meeting held in the summer of 2012, Taliban leaders unanimously agreed to kill her. I think of it often and imagine the scene clearly. Even if they come to kill me, I will tell them what they are trying to do is wrong, that education is our basic right. — Malala Yousafzai envisioning a confrontation with the Taliban On 9 October 2012, a Taliban gunman shot Yousafzai as she rode home on a bus after taking an exam in Pakistan's Swat Valley. Yousafzai was 15 years old at the time. According to reports, a masked gunman shouted: "Which one of you is Malala? Speak up, otherwise I will shoot you all." Upon being identified, Yousafzai was shot with one bullet, which travelled 18 inches (46 cm) from the side of her left eye, through her neck and landed in her shoulder. Two other girls were also wounded in the shooting: Kainat Riaz and Shazia Ramzan, both of whom were stable enough following the shooting to speak to reporters and provide details of the attack. After the shooting, Yousafzai was airlifted to a military hospital in Peshawar, where doctors were forced to operate after swelling developed in the left portion of her brain, which had been damaged by the bullet when it passed through her head. After a five-hour operation, doctors successfully removed the bullet, which had lodged in her shoulder near her spinal cord. The day following the attack, doctors performed a decompressive craniectomy, in which part of her skull was removed to allow room for swelling. On 11 October 2012, a panel of Pakistani and British doctors decided to move Yousafzai to the Armed Forces Institute of Cardiology in Rawalpindi. Mumtaz Khan, a doctor, said that she had a 70% chance of survival. Interior Minister Rehman Malik said that Yousafzai would be moved to Germany, where she could receive the best medical treatment, as soon as she was stable enough to travel. A team of doctors would travel with her, and the government would bear the cost of her treatment. Doctors reduced Yousafzai's sedation on 13 October, and she moved all four limbs. Offers to treat Yousafzai came from around the world. On 15 October, Yousafzai travelled to the United Kingdom for further treatment, approved by both her doctors and family. Her plane landed in Birmingham, England, where she was treated at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, one of the specialties of this hospital being the treatment of military personnel injured in conflict. According to media reports at the time, the UK Government stated that "[t]he Pakistani government is paying all transport, migration, medical, accommodation and subsistence costs for Malala and her party." Yousafzai had come out of her coma by 17 October 2012, was responding well to treatment, and was said to have a good chance of fully recovering without any brain damage. Later updates on 20 and 21 October stated that she was stable, but was still battling an infection. By 8 November, she was photographed sitting up in bed. On 11 November, Yousafzai underwent surgery for eight and a half hours, in order to repair her facial nerve. On 3 January 2013, Yousafzai was discharged from the hospital to continue her rehabilitation at her family's temporary home in the West Midlands, where she had weekly physiotherapy. She underwent a five-hour-long operation on 2 February to reconstruct her skull and restore her hearing with a cochlear implant, after which she was reported to be in stable condition. Yousafzai wrote in July 2014 that her facial nerve had recovered up to 96%. The murder attempt received worldwide media coverage and produced an outpouring of sympathy and anger. Protests against the shooting were held in several Pakistani cities the day after the attack, and over 2 million people signed the Right to Education campaign's petition, which led to ratification of the first Right to Education Bill in Pakistan. Pakistani officials offered a 10 million rupee (≈US$105,000) reward for information leading to the arrest of the attackers. Responding to concerns about his safety, Yousafzai's father said: "We wouldn't leave our country if my daughter survives or not. We have an ideology that advocates peace. The Taliban cannot stop all independent voices through the force of bullets." Pakistan's president Asif Ali Zardari described the shooting as an attack on "civilized people". UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon called it a "heinous and cowardly act". United States President Barack Obama found the attack "reprehensible, disgusting and tragic", while Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Yousafzai had been "very brave in standing up for the rights of girls" and that the attackers had been "threatened by that kind of empowerment". British Foreign Secretary William Hague called the shooting "barbaric" and that it had "shocked Pakistan and the world". American singer Madonna dedicated her song "Human Nature" to Yousafzai at a concert in Los Angeles the day of the attack, and also had a temporary Malala tattoo on her back. American actress Angelina Jolie wrote an article explaining the event to her children and answering questions like "Why did those men think they needed to kill Malala?" Jolie later donated $200,000 to the Malala Fund for girls' education. Former First Lady of the United States, Laura Bush wrote an op-ed piece in The Washington Post in which she compared Yousafzai to Holocaust diarist Anne Frank. Ehsanullah Ehsan, chief spokesman for the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility for the attack, saying that Yousafzai "is the symbol of the infidels and obscenity", adding that if she survived, the group would target her again. In the days following the attack, the Pakistani Taliban reiterated its justification, saying Yousafzai had been brainwashed by her father: "We warned him several times to stop his daughter from using dirty language against us, but he didn't listen and forced us to take this extreme step." The Pakistani Taliban also justified its attack as part of religious scripture, stating that the Quran says that "people propagating against Islam and Islamic forces would be killed", going on to say that "Sharia says that even a child can be killed if he is propagating against Islam". On 12 October 2012, a group of Islamic clerics in Pakistan issued a fatwā – a ruling of Islamic law – against the Taliban gunmen who tried to kill Yousafzai. Islamic scholars from the Sunni Ittehad Council publicly denounced attempts by the Pakistani Taliban to mount religious justifications for the shooting of Yousafzai and two of her classmates. Although the attack was roundly condemned in Pakistan, "some fringe Pakistani political parties and extremist outfits" have aired conspiracy theories, such as the shooting being staged by the American Central Intelligence Agency to provide an excuse for continuing drone attacks. The Pakistani Taliban and some other pro-Pakistani Taliban elements branded Yousafzai an "American spy". On 15 October 2012, UN Special Envoy for Global Education, Gordon Brown, the former British Prime Minister, visited Yousafzai while she was in the hospital, and launched a petition in her name and "in support of what Malala fought for". Using the slogan "I am Malala", the petition's main demand was that there be no child left out of school by 2015, with the hope that "girls like Malala everywhere will soon be going to school". Brown said he would hand the petition to President Zardari in Islamabad in November. The petition contains three demands: We call on Pakistan to agree to a plan to deliver education for every child. We call on all countries to outlaw discrimination against girls. We call on international organisations to ensure the world's 61 million out-of-school children are in education by the end of 2015. The day after the shooting, Pakistan's Interior Minister Rehman Malik stated that the Taliban gunman who shot Yousafzai had been identified. Police named 23-year-old Atta Ullah Khan, a graduate student in chemistry, as the gunman in the attack. As of 2015[update], he remained at large, possibly in Afghanistan. The police also arrested six men for involvement in the attack, but they were later released due to lack of evidence. In November 2012, US sources confirmed that Mullah Fazlullah, the cleric who ordered the attack on Yousafzai, was hiding in eastern Afghanistan. He was killed by a U.S.-Afghan air strike in June 2018. On 12 September 2014, ISPR Director, Major General Asim Bajwa, told a media briefing in Islamabad that the 10 attackers belonged to a militant group called "Shura". General Bajwa said that Israrur Rehman was the first member of the militant group to be identified and apprehended by troops. Acting upon the information received during his interrogation, all other members of the militant group were arrested. It was an intelligence-based joint operation conducted by ISI, police, and the military. In April 2015, it was first reported that the ten men who had been arrested were sentenced to life in prison by Judge Mohammad Amin Kundi, a counterterrorism judge, with the chance of eligibility for parole, and possible release, after 25 years. It is not known whether the actual would-be murderers were among the ten sentenced. But in June it was revealed that eight of the ten men, who were tried in-camera for the attack, and actually confessed to helping plan the attack, had in fact been acquitted in the secret trial. Insiders revealed that one of the men acquitted and freed had been the mastermind behind the murder bid. It is believed that all the other men involved in the shooting of Yousafzai fled to Afghanistan soon afterwards and were never even captured. The information about the release of suspects came to light after the London Daily Mirror attempted to locate the men in prison. Senior police official Salim Khan and the Pakistan High Commission in London stated that the eight men were released because there was not enough evidence to connect them to the attack. From March 2013 to July 2017, Yousafzai was a pupil at the all-girls Edgbaston High School in Birmingham. In August 2015, she received 6 A*s and 4 As at GCSE level. At A-Level, she studied Geography, History, Mathematics and Religious Studies. Also applying to Durham University, the University of Warwick and the London School of Economics (LSE), Yousafzai was interviewed at Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford in December 2016 and received a conditional offer of three As in her A‑Levels; in August 2017, she was accepted to study Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE). In February 2020, climate change activist Greta Thunberg travelled to Oxford University to meet Yousafzai. On 19 June 2020, Yousafzai said after passing her final examinations that she had completed her PPE degree at Oxford; she graduated with honours. Traditions are not sent from heaven, they are not sent from God. It is we who make cultures and we have the right to change it and we should change it. —Yousafzai at the Girl Summit in London Innocent victims are killed in these acts, and they lead to resentment among the Pakistani people. If we refocus efforts on education it will make a big impact. —Yousafzai expressing her concerns to Barack Obama that drone attacks are fueling terrorism I am convinced Socialism is the only answer and I urge all comrades to take this struggle to a victorious conclusion. Only this will free us from the chains of bigotry and exploitation. —Yousafzai expressing her belief in socialism in a letter to a meeting of Pakistani Marxists in Lahore Yousafzai addressed the United Nations in July 2013, and had an audience with Queen Elizabeth II in Buckingham Palace. In September, she spoke at Harvard University, and in October, she met with US President Barack Obama and his family; during that meeting, she confronted him on his use of drone strikes in Pakistan. In December, she addressed the Oxford Union. In July 2014, Yousafzai spoke at the Girl Summit in London. In October 2014, she donated $50,000 to the UNRWA for reconstruction of schools on the Gaza Strip. Even though she was fighting for women's rights as well as children's rights, Yousafzai did not describe herself as a feminist when asked on Forbes Under 30 Summit in 2014. In 2015, Yousafzai told Emma Watson she decided to call herself a feminist after hearing Watson's speech at the UN launching the HeForShe campaign. On 12 July 2015, her 18th birthday, Yousafzai opened a school in the Bekaa Valley, Lebanon, near the Syrian border, for Syrian refugees. The school, funded by the not-for-profit Malala Fund, offers education and training to girls aged 14 to 18 years. Yousafzai called on world leaders to invest in "books, not bullets". Yousafzai has repeatedly condemned the Rohingya persecution in Myanmar. In June 2015, the Malala Fund released a statement in which Yousafzai argues that the Rohingya people deserve "citizenship in the country where they were born and have lived for generations" along with "equal rights and opportunities." She urges world leaders, particularly in Myanmar, to "halt the inhuman persecution of Burma's Muslim minority Rohingya people." In September 2017, speaking in Oxford, Yousafzai said: "This should be a human rights issue. Governments should react to it. People are being displaced, they're facing violence." Yousafzai also posted a statement on Twitter calling for Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi to condemn the treatment of the Rohingya people in Myanmar. Suu Kyi has avoided taking sides in the conflict, or condemning violence against the Rohingya people, leading to widespread criticism. In 2014, Yousafzai stated that she wished to return to Pakistan following her education in the UK, and inspired by Benazir Bhutto, she would consider running for prime minister: "If I can help my country by joining the government or becoming the prime minister, I would definitely be up for this task." She repeated this aim in 2015 and 2016. However, Yousafzai noted in 2018 that her goal had changed, stating that "now that I have met so many presidents and prime ministers around the world, it just seems that things are not simple and there are other ways that I can bring the change that I want to see." In a 2018 interview with David Letterman for Netflix's show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction, Yousafzai was asked: "Would you ever want to hold a political position?" She replied: "Me? No." Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown arranged for Yousafzai's appearance before the United Nations in July 2013. Brown also requested that McKinsey consultant Shiza Shahid, a friend of the Yousafzai family, chair Yousafzai's charity fund, which had gained the support of Angelina Jolie. Google's vice-president Megan Smith also sits on the fund's board. In November 2012, the consulting firm Edelman began work for Yousafzai on a pro bono basis, which according to the firm "involves providing a press office function for Malala". The office employs five people, and is headed by speechwriter Jamie Lundie. McKinsey also continues to provide assistance to Yousafzai. On 12 July 2013, Yousafzai's 16th birthday, she spoke at the UN to call for worldwide access to education. The UN dubbed the event "Malala Day". Yousafzai wore one of Benazir Bhutto's shawls to the UN. It was her first public speech since the attack, leading the first ever Youth Takeover of the UN, with an audience of over 500 young education advocates from around the world. The terrorists thought they would change my aims and stop my ambitions, but nothing changed in my life except this: weakness, fear and hopelessness died. Strength, power and courage was born ... I am not against anyone, neither am I here to speak in terms of personal revenge against the Taliban or any other terrorist group. I'm here to speak up for the right of education for every child. I want education for the sons and daughters of the Taliban and all terrorists and extremists. Yousafzai received several standing ovations. Ban Ki-moon, who also spoke at the session, described her as "our hero". Yousafzai also presented the chamber with "The Education We Want", a Youth Resolution of education demands written by Youth for Youth, in a process co-ordinated by the UN Global Education First Youth Advocacy Group, telling her audience: Malala day is not my day. Today is the day of every woman, every boy and every girl who have raised their voice for their rights. The Pakistani government did not comment on Yousafzai's UN appearance, amid a backlash against her in Pakistan's press and social media. Words from the speech were used as lyrics for "Speak Out", a song by Kate Whitley commissioned by BBC Radio 3 and broadcast on International Women's Day 2017. On 8 October 2013 Malala, at the age of 16, visited The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, an American television programme, her first major late night appearance. She was there as a guest to promote her book, I Am Malala. On the program they discussed her assassination attempt, human rights, and women's education. She left Jon Stewart speechless when she described her thoughts after learning the Pakistani Taliban wanted her dead, saying: I started thinking about that, and I used to think that the Talib would come, and he would just kill me. But then I said, "If he comes, what would you do Malala?" then I would reply to myself, "Malala, just take a shoe and hit him." But then I said, "If you hit a Talib with your shoe, then there would be no difference between you and the Talib. You must not treat others with cruelty and that much harshly, you must fight others but through peace and through dialogue and through education." Then I said I will tell him how important education is and that "I even want education for your children as well." And I will tell him, "That"s what I want to tell you, now do what you want. Stewart, visibly moved by her words, ended the conversation saying: "I am humbled to speak with you." Stewart would again have her as a guest on the show after the 2015 Charleston Church Shooting, in which he started the show citing no jokes saying, "our guest is an incredible person who suffered unspeakable violence by extremists and her perseverance and determination through that to continue on is an incredible inspiration and to be quite honest with you, I don't think there's anyone else in the world I would rather talk to tonight than Malala so that's what we'll do and sorry about no jokes." On 10 October 2014, Yousafzai was announced as the co-recipient of the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize for her struggle against the suppression of children and young people and for the right of all children to education. Having received the prize at the age of 17, Yousafzai is the youngest Nobel laureate. Yousafzai shared the prize with Kailash Satyarthi, a children's rights activist from India. She is the second Pakistani to receive a Nobel Prize after 1979 Physics laureate Abdus Salam. After she was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, there was praise, but also some disapproval of the decision. A Norwegian jurist, Fredrik Heffermehl, commented on being awarded the Nobel Prize: "This is not for fine people who have done nice things and are glad to receive it. All of that is irrelevant. What Nobel wanted was a prize that promoted global disarmament." Adán Cortés, a college student from Mexico City and asylum seeker, interrupted Yousafzai's Nobel Peace Prize award ceremony in protest for the 2014 Iguala mass kidnapping in Mexico, but was quickly taken away by security personnel. Yousafzai later sympathised, and acknowledged that problems are faced by young people all over the world, saying "there are problems in Mexico, there are problems even in America, even here in Norway, and it is really important that children raise their voices". In March 2018, Yousafzai was the subject of an interview with David Letterman for his Netflix show My Next Guest Needs No Introduction. Speaking about the Taliban, she opined that their misogyny comes from a superiority complex, and is reinforced by finding "excuses" in culture or literature, such as by misinterpreting teachings of Islam. On the topic of her attackers, Yousafzai comments: "I forgive them because that's the best revenge I can have." Pointing out that the person who attacked her was a young boy, she says: "He thought he was doing the right thing". Asked about the presidency of Donald Trump, Yousafzai said: "Some of the things have really disappointed me, like sexual harassment and the ban on Muslims and racism." She also criticised the Trump administration's proposed budget cuts to education, saying that education is the first step to "eradicating extremism and ending poverty". Throughout the episode, clips are shown of Yousafzai acting as a tour guide for prospective students to her college Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford. In July 2021, amid a major offensive by the Taliban insurgents, Yousafzai urged the international community to press for an immediate ceasefire in Afghanistan and provide humanitarian aid to Afghan civilians. Following the Taliban takeover of Kabul on 15 August 2021, she expressed concern about the fate of women's rights, fearing that women in Afghanistan would lose the social and educational gains that had been made during the previous Afghan government's two decades. Yousafzai condemned the Taliban's ban on girls' education beyond 6th grade, and said "the Taliban will continue to make excuses to prevent girls from learning beyond primary school." She said the Taliban "want to erase girls and women from all public life in Afghanistan," and asked "leaders around the world to take collective action to hold the Taliban accountable for violating the human rights of millions of women and girls." Yousafzai had said that she did not understand why people had to marry. After her own marriage in 2021 she said that she had not been against marriage, but had concerns about it related to child marriage and forced marriage, and unequal marriages where "women make more compromises than men". In her own marriage she felt that she had found a person who understood her values. On 7 March 2022, Malala Yousafzai advocated for every woman's right to decide to wear what she likes for herself, from a burqa to a bikini: "Come and talk to us about individual freedom and autonomy, about preventing harm and violence, about education and emancipation. Do not come with your wardrobe notes." On 9 November 2021, Yousafzai married Asser Malik, a manager with the Pakistan Cricket Board, in Birmingham. Her opposition to the policy of Talibanisation made her unpopular among Taliban sympathisers. A Dawn columnist said she was scapegoated by the "failing state government," and a journalist in The Nation wrote Yousafzai was hated by "overzealous patriots" who were keen to deny the oppression of women in Pakistan. Her statements conflicted with the view that militancy in Pakistan was a result of Western interference, and conservatives and Islamic fundamentalists described her ideology as "anti-Pakistan". In 2015, the All Pakistan Private Schools Federation (APPSF) banned her autobiographical book, I Am Malala, at all Pakistani private schools, with the APPSF president Mirza Kashif Ali releasing his own book against her, I Am Not Malala. His book accused Yousafzai of attacking the Pakistan Armed Forces under the pretence of female education, described her father as a "double agent" and "traitor", and denounced the Malala Fund's promotion of secular education. However, Ali pointed out that the APPSF had gone on a national strike when Yousafzai was attacked by the Pakistani Taliban. Conspiracy theorists in newspapers and social media also alleged that Yousafzai had staged her assassination attempt, or that she was an agent of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Many Pakistanis view her as an "agent of the West", due to her Nobel prize, Oxford education and residence in England. Another conspiracy theory alleges that Yousafzai is a Jewish agent. Farman Nawaz argued in Daily Outlook Afghanistan that Yousafzai would have gained more fame in Pakistan if she belonged to the province of Punjab. Yousafzai is seen as courageous by some Pakistanis. On 29 March 2018, Yousafzai returned to Pakistan for the first time since the shooting. Meeting Prime Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, she gave a speech in which she said it had been her dream to return without any fear. Yousafzai then visited her hometown Mingora in Swat District, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. The APPSF, representing 173,000 private schools in Pakistan, organised an "I Am Not Malala Day" on 30 March in response to what the federation said were her "anti-Islam and anti-Pakistan" views. Yousafzai responded by saying "I am proud of my religion and country." Many people in India have accused Yousafzai of spreading the "Pakistani agenda" over the Kashmir conflict, and being selective in condemning human rights abuses. On 7 August 2019, following the Indian revocation of the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, Yousafzai expressed her concern about the situation and appealed to the international community to ensure peace in Jammu and Kashmir. On 14 September 2019, Malala posted a tweet, in which she said that a Kashmiri girl told her: "I feel purposeless and depressed because I can't go to school. I missed my exams on August 12 and I feel my future is insecure now." However, many Twitter users pointed out that on 12 August 2019, it was Eid al-Adha in India, a public holiday when schools were closed across the country, so an exam would not be even possible on that day. After her tweet, Yousafzai was widely criticised on Twitter, including by some Indian celebrities. Yousafzai's memoir I Am Malala: The Story of the Girl Who Stood Up for Education and Was Shot by the Taliban, co-written with British journalist Christina Lamb, was published in October 2013 by Little, Brown and Company in the US and by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in the UK. Fatima Bhutto, reviewing the book for The Guardian called the book "fearless" and stated that "the haters and conspiracy theorists would do well to read this book", though she criticised "the stiff, know-it-all voice of a foreign correspondent" that is interwoven with Yousafzai's. Marie Arana for The Washington Post called the book "riveting" and wrote "It is difficult to imagine a chronicle of a war more moving, apart from perhaps the diary of Anne Frank." Tina Jordan in Entertainment Weekly gave the book a "B+", writing "Malala's bravely eager voice can seem a little thin here, in I Am Malala, likely thanks to her co-writer, but her powerful message remains undiluted." A children's edition of the memoir was published in 2014 under the title I Am Malala: How One Girl Stood Up for Education and Changed the World. According to Publishers Weekly, in 2017 the book had sold almost 2 million copies, and there were 750,000 copies of the children's edition in print. Yousafzai was the subject of the 2015 documentary He Named Me Malala, which was shortlisted for the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. In 2020, an Indian Hindi-language biographical film Gul Makai by H. E. Amjad Khan was released, with Reem Sameer Shaikh portraying her. Yousafzai authored a picture book, Malala's Magic Pencil, which was illustrated by Kerascoët and published on 17 October 2017. By March 2018, The Bookseller reported that the book had over 5,000 sales in the UK. In a review for The Guardian, Imogen Carter describes the book as "enchanting", opining that it "strikes just the right balance" between "heavy-handed" and "heartfelt", and is a "welcome addition to the frustratingly small range of children's books that feature BAME central characters". Rebecca Gurney of The Daily Californian gives the book a grade of 4.5 out of 5, calling it a "beautiful account of a terrifying but inspiring tale" and commenting "Though the story begins with fantasy, it ends starkly grounded in reality." In March 2018, it was announced that Yousafzai's next book We Are Displaced: True Stories of Refugee Lives would be published on 4 September 2018 by Little, Brown and Company's Young Readers division. The book is about refugees, and includes stories from Yousafzai's own life along with those of people she has met. Speaking about the book, Yousafzai said that "What tends to get lost in the current refugee crisis is the humanity behind the statistics" and "people become refugees when they have no other option. This is never your first choice." Profits from the book will go to Yousafzai's charity Malala Fund. She visited Australia and criticized its asylum policies and compared immigration policies of the US and Europe unfavourably to those of poor countries and Pakistan. The book was published on 8 January 2019. On 8 March 2021, a multiyear partnership between Yousafzai and Apple was announced. She will work on programming for Apple's streaming service, Apple TV+. The work will span “dramas, comedies, documentaries, animation, and children's series, and draw on her ability to inspire people around the world.” National and international honours, listed by the date: 2011: International Children's Peace Prize (nominee) 2011: National Youth Peace Prize January 2012: Anne Frank Award for Moral Courage October 2012: Sitara-e-Shujaat, Pakistan's second-highest civilian bravery award November 2012: Foreign Policy magazine top 100 global thinker December 2012: Time magazine Person of the Year shortlist for 2012 November 2012: Mother Teresa Awards for Social Justice December 2012: Rome Prize for Peace and Humanitarian Action January 2013: Top Name in Annual Survey of Global English in 2012 January 2013: Simone de Beauvoir Prize March 2013: Memminger Freiheitspreis 1525 (conferred on 7 December 2013 in Oxford) March 2013: Doughty Street Advocacy award of Index on Censorship March 2013: Fred and Anne Jarvis Award of the UK National Union of Teachers April 2013: Vital Voices Global Leadership Awards, Global Trailblazer April 2013: One of Time's "100 Most Influential People in the World" May 2013: Premi Internacional Catalunya Award of Catalonia, May 2013 June 2013: Annual Award for Development of the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) June 2013: International Campaigner of the Year, 2013 Observer Ethical Awards August 2013: Tipperary International Peace Award for 2012, Ireland Tipperary Peace Convention 2013: Portrait of Yousafzai by Jonathan Yeo displayed at National Portrait Gallery, London September 2013: Ambassador of Conscience Award from Amnesty International 2013: International Children's Peace Prize 2013: Clinton Global Citizen Awards from Clinton Foundation September 2013: Harvard Foundation's Peter Gomes Humanitarian Award from Harvard University 2013: Anna Politkovskaya Award – Reach All Women in War 2013: Reflections of Hope Award – Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum 2013: Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought – awarded by the European Parliament 2013: Honorary Master of Arts degree awarded by the University of Edinburgh 2013: Pride of Britain (October) 2013: Glamour magazine Woman of the Year 2013: GG2 Hammer Award at GG2 Leadership Awards (November) 2013: International Prize for Equality and Non-Discrimination 2014: Awarded the World Children's Prize also known as Children's Nobel Prize 2014: Awarded Honorary Life Membership by the PSEU (Ireland) 2014: Skoll Global Treasure Award 2014: Honorary Doctor of Civil Law, University of King's College, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 2014: 2014 Nobel Peace Prize, shared with Kailash Satyarthi 2014: Philadelphia Liberty Medal 2014: Asia Game Changer Award 2014: One of Time Magazine "The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2014" 2014: Honorary Canadian citizenship 2015: Asteroid 316201 Malala named in her honour. 2015: The audio version of her book I Am Malala wins Grammy Award for Best Children's Album. 2016: Honorary President of The Students' Union of the University of Sheffield 2016: Order of the Smile 2017: Youngest ever United Nations Messenger of Peace 2017: Received honorary doctorate from the University of Ottawa 2017: Ellis Island International Medal of Honor 2017: Wonk of the Year 2017 from American University 2017: Harper's Bazaar inducted Malala in the list of "150 of the most influential female leaders in the UK". 2018: Advisor to Princess Zebunisa of Swat, Swat Relief Initiative Foundation, Princeton, New Jersey 2018: Gleitsman Award from the Center for the Public Leadership at Harvard Kennedy School 2019: For their first match of March 2019, the women of the United States women's national soccer team each wore a jersey with the name of a woman they were honoring, on the back; Carli Lloyd chose the name of Yousafzai. 2022: Elected World's Children's Prize Decade Child Rights Hero. In the 2016 action comedy film Zoolander 2, Malala Yousafzai is depicted as dating/marrying the "next hot model" Derek Zoolander Jr. (portrayed by Cyrus Arnold), who earlier had been admiring and reading her various autobiographies. In the 2023 animated superhero film Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, Sofia Barclay voices Malala Windsor / Spider-UK (Earth-835), described as a composite of Malala Yousafzai and the House of Windsor. A lieutenant of Miguel O'Hara's Spider-Society, Barclay said of the character: "Who better to model a superhero after than a real-life superhero? A woman famous in real life for her integrity and bravery when faced with dangerous odds: yes please!". Biography portal Pakistan portal Islam portal Farida Afridi Bibi Aisha Muzoon Almellehan Humaira Bachal British Pakistanis Sahar Gul Aitzaz Hasan Shenila Khoja-Moolji List of peace activists Women's education in Pakistan Women's rights in 2014 Women's rights in Pakistan Yousafzai's family was denied permission to attend the award ceremony in India by Pakistani authorities over security concerns, so the award was smuggled to her father by British-Pakistani film maker Sevy Ali. Anon (2019). "Yousafzai, Malala". Who's Who (online Oxford University Press ed.). Oxford: A & C Black. doi:10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.U282567. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) "Malala Yousafzai announces her marriage on Twitter". CBC News. Associated Press. 9 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. Tighe, Siobhann (18 April 2017). "Malala Yousafzai's mother: Out of the shadows". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. امنسټي انټرنېشنل پر ملاله یوسفزۍ برید وغانده (in Pashto). BBC Pashto. 18 October 2012. Archived from the original on 25 November 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Adam B. Ellick (2009). Class Dismissed. The New York Times (documentary). Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai Becomes Youngest-Ever Nobel Prize Winner". 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Profile: Malala Yousafzai Archived 11 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News with links to related stories. Johnson, Kay (28 March 2018). "Nobel winner Malala in tears on emotional return to Pakistan". Reuter's. Archived from the original on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2018. Waraich, Omar (23 December 2014). "Malala, Obama, socialism: Nobel laureate's political views are complex". Al Jazeera America. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2021. "Following in Benazir's footsteps, Malala aspires to become PM of Pakistan". The Express Tribune. 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2016. D'Amours, Jillian Kestler. "Malala Yousafzai made an honorary Canadian citizen". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 30 December 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2017. "Malala Yousafzai Receiving Honorary Canadian Citizenship Wednesday". The Huffington Post. The Canadian Press. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Schifrin, Nick (7 October 2013). "The 72 Hours That Saved Malala: Doctors Reveal for the First Time How Close She Came to Death". Good Morning America. Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. Kyle McKinnon (18 January 2013). "Will Malala's Influence Stretch to Europe?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 18 August 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2013. "Malala Yousafzai: 'fatwa' issued against gunmen". The Guardian. 12 October 2012. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2017. Imtiaz, Saba (17 July 2013). "(Pakistani)Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan's letter to Malala Yousafzai: this is why we tried to kill you". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 11 May 2020. "$7 million from Malala Fund for education project in remote areas". DAWN.COM. 12 April 2014. Archived from the original on 6 January 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2017. "Best Sellers – November 3, 2013 – The New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2017. "Nobel Laureates by Age". nobelprize.org. 20 October 2014. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai becomes youngest-ever Nobel Prize winner". The Express Tribune. 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "The Nobel Peace Prize for 2014" (Press release). Oslo: Nobel Media AB. 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai awarded honorary Canadian citizenship". Dawn. 12 April 2017. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "Malala Yousafzai attends first day at Edgbaston High School in Birmingham". BBC News. 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai full of 'joy and gratitude' after graduating from Oxford". The Guardian. 19 June 2020. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2020. "Malala Yousafzai awarded honorary fellowship at Linacre College, Oxford". Cherwell. 5 May 2023. Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 15 May 2023. Rowell, Rebecca (2014). Malala Yousafzai: Education Activist. ABDO. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-61783-897-2. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Thomas, Rebecca (6 November 2015). "Malala Yousafzai: Her father's daughter". BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 April 2017. Saleem Ali (14 October 2012). "Malala and Sharbat Gula: Pashtun Icons of Hope". National Geographic. University of Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013. Retrieved 29 September 2013. Throp, Claire (2015). Malala Yousafzai. Heinemann Raintree. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-4846-2469-2. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Diary of a Pakistani schoolgirl". BBC News. 19 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Bacha Khan's philosophy of non-violence and Benazir Bhutto's charisma inspires Malala". The Express Tribune. 16 January 2012. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Tooley, James. "Malala for free schools: Why does the media hide the fact that she's for educational choice — as are so many developing nations?". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2013. Coulson, Andrew J. "Why Malala Didn't Go to Public School". Cato Institute. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2013. Owais Tohid (11 October 2012). "My conversations with Malala Yousafzai, the girl who stood up to the Taliban". The Christian Science Monitor. p. 3. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Adam B. Ellick (9 October 2012). "My 'Small Video Star' Fights for Her Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Westhead, Rick (26 October 2009). "Brave defiance in Pakistan's Swat Valley". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Young Journalist Inspires Fellow Students". Institute for War and Peace Reporting. 5 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. "Pakistani Heroine: How Malala Yousafzai Emerged from Anonymity". Time World. 23 October 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2013. Peer, Basharat (10 October 2012). "The Girl Who Wanted To Go To School". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai: Portrait of the girl blogger". BBC News. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Young Pakistani Journalist Inspires Fellow Students". Institute of War & Peace Reporting. 15 January 2010. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. Jon Boone (9 October 2012). "Malala Yousafzai: Pakistan Taliban causes revulsion by shooting girl who spoke out". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2012. Ali, Manzoor (12 October 2012). "Where it all started: 'A diary that highlighted Swat's human tragedy'". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 20 April 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2012. The name Gul Makai – a heroine of Pakhtun folktale – was chosen as an apt pseudonym meant to strike a chord with the local population so they could easily identify with Malala's blog, he added. Rose, H.A. (1911). A Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province. Vol. 1. p. 56. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2012. Yet another legend of Yusufzai origin is often recited by the Kurram Dums. It enshrines the lives of Musa Khan and Gulmakai, their quarrels and final reconciliation. It is very well known I believe on the Peshawar side, and has probably been already recorded. "Swat: Diary of a Pakistani schoolgirl (Malala Yousafzai) – BBC". original Urdu and English translation of Yousufzai's blog. LUBP. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "Pakistan media condemn attack on Malala Yousafzai". BBC News. 9 October 2012. Archived from the original on 22 April 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Malala Yousufzai. "(Part 10 of Yousafzai's blog)" (in Urdu). BBC Urdu. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "Capital Talk on Wednesday, August 19, 2009". Pakistan Herald. 19 August 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Young Journalist Inspires Fellow Students". Institute for War & Peace Reporting. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2012. van Gilder Cooke, Sonia (23 October 2012). "Pakistani Heroine: How Malala Yousafzai Emerged from Anonymity". Time. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 24 October 2012. Child Assembly ensures a voice for youth affected by crises in Swat, Pakistan. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. District Child Assembly Swat 2009. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016 – via YouTube. Briggs, Billy. "The Peshawar women fighting the Taliban: 'We cannot trust anyone'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2018. "Desmond Tutu announces nominees Children's Peace Prize 2011". The International Children's Peace Prize. 25 October 2011. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Michaela Mycroft winner of International Children's Peace Prize 2011". International Children's Peace Prize. 21 November 2011. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2011. "Malala in the House, plans to launch political party". Dawn. Pakistan. 4 January 2012. Archived from the original on 25 September 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Sumera Khan (20 December 2011). "National peace prize named after Malala Yousafzai". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Mehsud, Saud (10 October 2012). "Malala Yousufzai: Pakistani schoolgirl had defied threats from Taliban for years (+video)". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. Waraich, Oscar (23 December 2014). "Malala, Obama, socialism: Nobel laureate's political views are complex". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 20 January 2020. Norton, Ben (6 September 2016). "The Malala that they ignore". Green Left. Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2020. "'Radio Mullah' sent hit squad after Malala Yousafzai". The Express Tribune. 12 October 2012. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. From the Preface to the 2014 edition of I Am Malala, p. xix. ISBN 978-1780226583. Asma Ali Zain (4 November 2012). "Malala will soon undergo reconstructive surgery". Khaleej Times. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 4 November 2012. Declan Walsh (12 October 2012). "Taliban Reiterate Vow to Kill Pakistani Girl". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2012. Mushtaq Yusufza (9 October 2012). "Pakistani teen blogger shot by Taliban 'critical' after surgery". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Robert Mackey; Adam B. Ellick (11 October 2012). "Pakistani Girl Airlifted to Military Hospital". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Nasir Habib; Reza Sayah (11 October 2012). "Official: Pakistani teen blogger's shooting a 'wake-up call' to 'clear ... danger'". CNN. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Malala to be shifted to Germany: Malik". Associated Press of Pakistan. 11 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Palash R. Ghosh (10 October 2012). "Malala Yousafzai: Family Refuses To Cower In Fear As Girl Remains In Critical Condition". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. Palmer, Elizabeth (13 October 2012). "Indications of hope for shot Pakistani girl". CBS. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. Alt URL Walsh, Declan (15 October 2012). "Global Outpouring to Help Pakistani Schoolgirl/Girl Shot by Taliban Arrives in Britain for Treatment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai: Pakistani girl shot by Taliban to be treated in Birmingham hospital that treats wounded soldiers". The Telegraph. London. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai: Pakistani girl shot by Taliban to be treated in Birmingham hospital that treats wounded soldiers". The Daily Telegraph. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015. Retrieved 11 November 2014. Bennett, Dashiell (17 October 2012). "Malala Yousufzai Comes Out of Her Coma". Atlantic Wire. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 17 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai status updates". Queen Elizabeth Hospital. 22 October 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. "Schoolgirl shot by Taliban says she has been 'humbled and inspired by messages of support'". ITV News. 9 November 2012. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 9 November 2012. "Malala Yousafzai to undergo cranial reconstructive surgery in UK". India Today. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2013. "Pakistani girl Malala released from hospital". CNN. 4 January 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2013. Retrieved 4 January 2013. "Girl shot by Taliban in stable condition after two operations to reconstruct skull and restore hearing". New York Post. Archived from the original on 5 February 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. "Malala Yousafzai, Pakistani Girl Shot by Taliban Militants". Archived from the original on 5 February 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2016. Yusuf, Huma (16 November 2012). "Ghost Education". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2013. "Education is now compulsory for Pakistani children". NDTV.com. 14 November 2012. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 13 October 2013. "Quiet Progress for Education in Pakistan". Brookings Institution. 8 April 2013. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 13 October 2013. "Malala Yousafzai: Pakistan girl 'strong' – doctors". BBC News. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "UN chief strongly condemns 'heinous and cowardly' attack on Pakistani schoolgirl". UN News Service. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Pakistani teen still critical, Obama calls attack tragic". Yahoo News. Indo Asian News Service. 11 October 2012. Archived from the original on 4 February 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai: Reward offered for arrest of attackers". BBC News. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Teen girl Malala Yousafzai shot by Taliban has a 'good chance' of recovery". The Australian. Agence France-Presse. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. Retrieved 24 July 2013. Seth Abramovitch (11 October 2012). "Madonna Dedicates L.A. Performance to Child Activist Shot in Pakistan". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Madonna Strips For Malala Yousafzai, Dedicates Song To Young Pakistani Woman Shot By Taliban". The Huffington Post. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. Jolie, Angelina (16 October 2012). "Angelina Jolie: We All Are Malala". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 19 October 2012. "malalafund.org". Malala Fund. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Angelina Jolie Donates $200,000 to the Malala Fund". ABC News. 5 April 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2013. Bush, Laura (10 October 2012). "A girl's courage challenges us to act". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Richard Leiby; Michele Langevine Leiby (10 October 2012). "Taliban says it shot Pakistani teen for advocating girls' rights". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Malala Yousafzai deserved to die, say Pakistani Taliban". The Guardian. London. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. Jon Boone (12 October 2012). "Malala Yousafzai: 'fatwa' issued against gunmen". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2012. "Taliban threat worries Pakistan media". BBC News. 17 October 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Venky Vembu (15 October 2012). "How Pak jihadi minds justify attack on Malala: Perversely". firstpost.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "TTP labels Malala as 'an American spy'". The News. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 22 March 2013. Retrieved 20 October 2012. Mackey, Robert (16 October 2012). "After a Bullet in the Head, Assaults on a Pakistani Schoolgirl's Character Follow". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2012. Taqi, Mohammad (18 October 2012). "Malala and anti-Malala Pakistan". Daily Times. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2012. Walsh, Declan (18 October 2012). "Pakistani Police Detain Family of Suspect in Attack on Girl". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "Malala Inc: Global operation surrounds teenage activist". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2013. "Malala Yousafzai: Taliban shooting victim flown to UK". BBC News. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "A World at School". The Office of the UN Special Envoy for Global Education. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Pakistani Interior Minister: Taliban Gunman Who Shot 14-Year-Old Girl Identified". VOA News. 10 October 2012. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "Arrests made in shooting of Pakistani schoolgirl Malala". CNN. 28 October 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2013. "Malala at U.N.: The Taliban failed to silence us". CNN. 12 July 2013. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 24 July 2013. Zahir Shah; Greg Botelho (30 April 2015). "Pakistan: 10 sentenced to life in prison for attack on Malala Yousafzai". CNN. Archived from the original on 1 May 2015. "Mullah Fazlullah hiding in Afghanistan: US officials". The Express Tribune. 8 November 2012. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 8 November 2012. "Air Strike Kills Pakistani Taliban Leader Who Reportedly Ordered Attack On Malala". The Huffington Post. Reuters. 15 June 2018. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. "Malala Yousafzai's attackers arrested: ISPR". Pakistan Today. 12 September 2014. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. Dockterman, Eliana (12 September 2014). "Malala's Attackers Arrested in Pakistan". Time. Archived from the original on 12 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Hughes, Chris. "Brave Malala's hitmen secretly FREED just weeks after their 25-year prison sentences". Daily Mirror. MGN Ltd. Archived from the original on 5 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Pakistan court frees eight men charged with attack on schoolgirl Malala". Reuters. 5 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2015. Elgot, Jessica (21 August 2015). "Malala Yousafzai celebrates string of A* grades at GCSE". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. Hill, Amelia (17 August 2017). "Schoolgirl campaigner Malala Yousafzai wins Oxford university place". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 24 October 2017. Helen Regan (17 August 2017). "Malala Yousafzai Has Been Accepted to Study at Oxford University". Time.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2017. "Greta Thunberg meets Malala Yousafzai at Oxford University". BBC News. 25 February 2020. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2021. "Malala Yousafzai graduates from Oxford University". BBC News. 19 June 2020. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Romo, Vanessa (9 November 2021). "Malala Yousafzai, Nobel laureate and girls' education champion, gets married". NPR. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2021. Emma Batha (23 July 2014). "Malala tells Girl Summit education is key to ending child marriage". Thomson Reuters Foundation. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Malala Confronts Obama". CNN. 12 October 2013. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2013. "Socialist City Council member on Nobel Prize Winner Malala Yousafzai: "Socialism is the Only Answer"". Democracy Now!. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Yousafzai, Malala (2013). "Address to United Nations Youth Assembly". United Nations. "One child, one teacher, one book and one pen can change the world" "Shot Pakistan schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai addresses UN". BBC News. 12 July 2013. Archived from the original on 18 July 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Malala, une entreprise". Le Point. Agence France-Presse. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2013. "Malala Yousafzai's Toughest Battle?". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 10 December 2014. "Freida Pinto speaks at girls' rights summit in UK". The Houston Chronicle. Associated Press. 22 July 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Meikle, James (29 October 2014). "Malala Yousafzai gives $50,000 to reconstruction of Gaza schools". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "The Feminist Life: Malala Won't Use the F-Word". Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2014. "Malala on Peace, Drones and Islam". Forbes. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. "Malala tells Emma Watson she identifies as a feminist, thanks to her". Women in the World in Association with The New York Times – WITW. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Mendoza, Jessica (13 July 2015). "Malala Yousafzai urges global investment in 'books, not bullets'". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 29 February 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2015. Westall, Sylvia (13 July 2015). "Nobel winner Malala opens school for Syrian refugees". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015. Khaliq, Fazal (8 June 2015). "Malala calls on world leaders to save Rohingya Muslims". Dawn. Archived from the original on 20 February 2018. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Rhodan, Maya (8 June 2015). "Malala Says Burma's Rohingya Muslims 'Deserve Citizenship'". Time. Archived from the original on 15 December 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Coughlan, Sean (8 September 2017). "Malala calls for defence of Rohingya". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Hincks, Joseph (4 September 2017). "Malala Yousafzai Says 'the World Is Waiting' for Suu Kyi to Condemn Treatment of Myanmar's Rohingya". Time. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. "Malala Yousafzai — future prime minister of Pakistan?". DAWN. 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Kellaway, Kate (25 October 2015). "Malala Yousafzai: 'I want to become prime minister of my country'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Medrano, Kastalia (20 October 2016). "Malala Yousafzai Wants To Become The Prime Minister Of Pakistan". Time. Archived from the original on 9 April 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Gentleman, Amelia (11 March 2018). "Malala Yousafzai: 'The west is viewed as an ideal, but there's still a lot of work to be done'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Wilstein, Matt (8 March 2018). "Malala Yousafzai Sounds Off on Trump to Letterman: 'I'm a Muslim,' Does He Want to Ban Me?". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 9 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Mackinnon, Mark (8 October 2013). "One year after being shot by the Taliban, Malala Yousafzai is a mighty machine". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2013. Michelle Nichols (12 July 2013). "Pakistan's Malala, shot by Taliban, takes education plea to U.N." Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Global action on education doesn't end with Malala Day". Ottawa Citizen. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 13 October 2013. "The Education We Want" (PDF). United Nations Global Education First Initiative. 12 July 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Youth Advocacy Group". UN Global Education First Initiative – United Nations Secretary General's Global Initiative on Education. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai's speech at the United Nations". A World at School. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 13 October 2013. Ghafour, Hamida (19 June 2013). "Malala Yousafzai: Backlash against Pakistani teen activist spreads in her homeland". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 3 August 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2013. Huma Yusuf (18 July 2013). "About the Malala Backlash". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2018. "BBC National Orchestra to perform Malala speech premiere". BBC. 8 March 2017. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Evans, Rian (9 March 2017). "BBCNOW/Zhang – Malala's message is set to music". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Hallett, Vicky (2 October 2015). "An Unguarded Malala Is The Perfect Talk Show Guest". NPR News. Archived from the original on 14 May 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Jon Stewart Had No Jokes to Tell About Charleston, But Malala Yousafzai Made Him Laugh". Slate. Archived from the original on 11 May 2021. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Watch Nobel winner Malala Yousafzai's 2013 'Daily Show' visit". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 13 May 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "16-Year-Old Malala Yousafzai Leaves Jon Stewart Speechless With Comment About Pacifism". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 23 March 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. The Daily Show – Malala Yousafzai Extended Interview. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2020 – via YouTube. The Daily Show – Charleston Church Shooting. The Daily Show. Archived from the original on 25 April 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020 – via YouTube. "Jon Stewart on Charleston: 'No jokes,' 'just sadness'". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Jon Stewart Tells No Jokes About Charleston Church Shooting". Time. Archived from the original on 17 July 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "A Look at the Top 10 Youngest Nobel Laureates". Yahoo!-ABC News Network. 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Cowell, Alan; Walshoct, Declan (10 October 2014). "Nobel Peace Prize for Malala Yousafzai and Kailash Satyarthi". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Le prix Nobel de la paix attribué à Malala Yousafzai et Kailash Satyarthi". Ijsberg Magazine (in French). 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Nobel peace prize decision is highly political". The Guardian. 10 October 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai: Mixed Reaction in Pakistan to Teenage Activists Nobel Prize Award". International Business Times. 11 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Walsh, Declan (10 October 2014). "Two Champions of Children Are Given Nobel Peace Prize". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai says Mexican protester's actions show 'There are problems in Mexico'". FOX News Latino. Associated Press. 11 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 5 March 2015. Kilkenny, Katie (9 March 2018). "Malala Yousafzai Shares Thoughts on Trump, Jay-Z on David Letterman Talk Show". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 9 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Malala talks about education, extremism and politics with David Letterman". Geo TV. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Malala discusses Trump, girls' education and Muslim ban on David Letterman's show". The Express Tribune. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Malala Yousafzai urges powers to call for ceasefire in Afghanistan". Telegraph India. 15 August 2021. Archived from the original on 13 September 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2021. Malala I Survived the Taliban I Fear for My Afghan Sisters Archived 19 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times, Malala, 17 August 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2021. "Taliban schools U-turn 'a devastating day' for Afghan girls – Malala Yousafzai". BBC. 23 March 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022. "Erasing Afghan women from public life: Malala asks world leaders to hold Taliban accountable". The Express Tribune. 9 May 2022. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 26 May 2022. Strick, Katie (18 November 2021). "Asser Malik: Who is Malala Yousafzai's hunky new husband?". Evening Standard. "'Women have the right to choose between burqa and bikini'". The Express Tribune. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Dasgupta, Sravasti (10 November 2021). "Asser Malik: Who is Malala Yousafzai's new husband?". independent.co.uk. The Independent. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2021. Chaturvedi, Amit (11 October 2021). "Malala Yousafzai, activist and Nobel laureate, gets married in Birmingham". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021. "Malala Yousafzai makes for a stunning bride in her wedding photos; check them out". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. Cyril Almeida (13 October 2013). "Hating Malala". Dawn. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Turk, Shoaib (21 April 2018). "Seven types of people in Pakistan who hate Malala Yousufzai". The Nation. Archived from the original on 13 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Inayat, Naila (18 April 2018). "Malala Yousafzai is adored around the world, but many in Pakistan have come to hate her". USA Today. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Khan, Mohammad Zubair; Diver, Tony (30 March 2018). "Malala to return to Pakistan after finishing her studies in Britain". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Ali, Sarfraz (29 March 2018). "'I am not Malala' Day: Pakistani teachers protest Nobel laureate's return after 6 years". Daily Pakistan. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 13 May 2018. "I am not Malala: Teachers release novel against Nobel Peace winner". The Express Tribune. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Ansar Abbasi (22 October 2013). "Malala exposes herself to criticism". The News International. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 29 June 2014. Sikandar, Salman (17 April 2018). "Keep beating your drums of hatred, this iron lady is unbeatable!". The Nation. Archived from the original on 13 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018. Farman Nawaz. "Noble Prize Winner's Fate in Pakistan". Daily Outlook Afghanistan. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "As Malala returns to Pakistan, leaders declare terrorism defeated". CBS News. 29 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 April 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Malala returns to Pakistan for first time". BBC News. 29 March 2018. Archived from the original on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2018. "Malala returns to home town in Pakistan for first time since shooting". BBC. 31 March 2018. Archived from the original on 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Malala Yousafzai appeals for peace, says worried about safety of Kashmiri children and women". India Today. Ist. Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 21 September 2019. "Malala Yousafzai urges UN to help Kashmiri children go back to school". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "Malala Yousafzai Urges UN to Help Kashmiri Children Go Back Safely to School". Google News. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "Malala claims Kashmiri girl missed her exam on Aug 12, Twitterati point out it was Eid on that day | Latest News & Updates at DNAIndia.com". DNA India. Archived from the original on 20 September 2019. Retrieved 21 September 2019. "Indian users go haywire following Malala's recent tweets for Kashmir". Express Tribune. 16 September 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2020. "Critics of Malala Yousafzai's appeal to restore education system in Kashmir are conveniently ignoring her track record". Firstpost. 16 September 2019. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020. "Shooter Heena Sidhu slams Malala Yousafzai on Kashmir tweet". Hindustan Times. 17 September 2019. Archived from the original on 18 September 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "Indians unhappy with Malala Yousafzai's tweets about Kashmir, slam activist for spreading 'Pakistani agenda'". Economic Times. Archived from the original on 30 November 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2019. "Formats and Editions of I Am Malala" Archived 3 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine WorldCat. Retrieved 11 April 2014. Bhutto, Fatima (30 October 2013). "I Am Malala by Malala Yousafzai – review". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Arana, Marie (11 October 2013). "Book review: 'I Am Malala' by Malala Yousafzai". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Jordan, Tina (21 October 2013). "I am Malala". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2013. Yousafzai, Malala (2014). I Am Malala: How One Girl Stood Up for Education and Changed the World. Little, Brown Books for Young Readers. ISBN 978-0-316-32793-0. Robbins, Sarah J. (12 October 2017). "Four Questions with Malala Yousafzai". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on 20 November 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. "15 films in the Documentary Feature category will advance in the voting process for the 88th Academy Awards". Natalie Kojen. Oscar.org. 1 December 2015. Archived from the original on 1 December 2015. Retrieved 2 December 2015. Dubey, Rachana (30 January 2020). "H.E. Amjad Khan: I didn't seek Malala's permission for Gul Makai and that was a huge risk". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 September 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2021. Yousafzai, Malala (2017). Malala's Magic Pencil. Little, Brown Books for Young Readers. ISBN 978-0-316-31957-7. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Cowdrey, Katherine (12 March 2018). "Malala signs We Are Displaced with W&N". The Bookseller. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Carter, Imogen (10 October 2017). "Malala's Magic Pencil by Malala Yousafzai review – an enchantingly light touch". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017. Gurney, Rebecca (23 October 2017). "Illustrating a better world: 'Malala's Magic Pencil' inspires, invokes youth voices". The Daily Californian. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017. Wilson, Kristian (12 March 2018). "Malala Yousafzai's New Book 'We Are Displaced' Will Tell The True Stories Of Refugees She's Met". Bustle. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Canfield, David (12 March 2018). "Malala Yousafzai is writing about refugees for her next book". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 12 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "What is Malala Yousafzai up to now?". The Week UK. Archived from the original on 19 February 2019. Retrieved 18 February 2019. Cowdrey, Katherine (13 March 2018). "Malala leads Hachette showcase 2018". The Bookseller. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Power, Julie (13 December 2018). "'Your job as a human is to welcome them': Malala's disappointment at Australia". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 29 December 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018. We Are Displaced by Malala Yousafzai. Little, Brown and Company. 2018. ISBN 978-0-316-52364-6. Archived from the original on 27 February 2019. Retrieved 11 March 2019. We Are Displaced by Malala Yousafzai. Orion Publishing Group. 2018. ISBN 978-1-4746-1006-3. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 11 March 2019. "Apple TV+ announces programming partnership with Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai". Apple Newsroom. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "Malala Yousafzai to receive Anne Frank courage award". BBC News. 29 January 2014. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 19 October 2014. Rocker, Simon (13 January 2014). "Malala to get Anne Frank courage award". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Retrieved 19 October 2014. "Malala Yousufzai to be given Pak's highest civilian bravery award". The Indian Express. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2012. "The FP Top 100 Global Thinkers". Foreign Policy. 26 November 2012. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. Carbone, Nick (18 December 2012). "TIME Reveals Its Short List for Person of the Year 2012". Time. Archived from the original on 19 December 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2012. "How Malala Yousafzai got a Mumbai award". Indo-Asian News Service. 9 December 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. "Teresa awards given away". The Indian Express. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Retrieved 9 December 2012. "Mother Teresa Awards 2012". Mother Teresa Awards: A Harmony Foundation Initiatives. Archived from the original on 15 December 2014. Retrieved 15 December 2014. "Top words of 2012 capture 'impending doom'". USA Today. 1 January 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 7 October 2013. Khaliq, Fazal (30 December 2011). "Teenage icon: Rome again honours Malala, father collects reward". The Express Tribune. Archived from the original on 1 January 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2012. "Awarding of the Simone de Beauvoir Prize to Malala Yousafzai". France Diplomatie. 9 January 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2013. "Stadt Memmingen: Malala Yousafzai erhält den 'Memminger Freiheitspreis 1525'". Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Memminger Freiheitspreis an Malala Yousafzai überreicht". all-in.de – das Allgäu online. 8 December 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. Yasin, Sara (21 March 2013). "Winners – Index Awards 2013". Index on Censorship. Archived from the original on 2 September 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "The Fred & Anne Jarvis Award". NUT. 29 March 2013. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 16 April 2013. "2013 Global Leadership Awards". Vital Voices. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "The 100 Most Influential People in the World". Time magazine. 29 April 2013. p. 140. "Premi Internacional Catalunya". Generalitat de Catalunya. 27 May 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "Malala Yousafzai receives OFID 2013 Annual Award for Development". Ofid.org. 13 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. GNM press office (13 June 2013). "Malala Yousafzai and Joanna Lumley honoured as International and British Campaigners of the Year at the 2013 Observer Ethical Awards". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "Malala Yousafzai gets peace prize". Daily Express. 21 August 2013. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 23 August 2013. "Jonathan Yeo portrait of Malala to go on display". BBC News. 10 September 2013. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. Davies, Will (17 September 2013). "Malala Yousafzai Gets Amnesty's Top Honor". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2013. "Malala awarded 2013 Children's Peace Prize". Pakistan Tribune. Agence France-Presse. 27 August 2013. Archived from the original on 27 August 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2013. "Childrenspeaceprize > Winners > 2013". KidsRights Foundation. 6 September 2013. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "2013 Clinton Global Citizen Awards". WBUR. 27 September 2013. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2013. Becker, Deborah and Lynn Jolicoeur (27 September 2013). "Malala, Pakistani Teen Shot By Taliban, Honored at Harvard". wbur. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "The 9th Annual Reflections of Hope Award Ceremony". The Oklahoma City National Memorial & Museum. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Honorary degree for Malala Yousafzai". The University of Edinburgh. 4 November 2013. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 22 October 2013. Rod McPhee (6 October 2013). "David Beckham awards Malala Yousafzai the Pride of Britain Teenager of Courage award after being shot by Taliban – Mirror Online". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 11 July 2016. "Malala Yousafzai is a 2013 Glamour Woman of the Year; Join Us as we Support Her Mission to Make School a Basic Right For Every Girl". Glamour. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. "Malala topped Power List 101 at GG2 Leadership awards". Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Mexico to give equality prize to Pakistan's Malala". Business Standard India. AFP/PTI. 25 November 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2021. "Nobel Peace laureate Malala wins World Children's Prize". Sveriges Radio. 28 October 2014. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. "PSEU Ireland" (PDF). pseu.ie. March 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 12 December 2014. "Skoll World Forum". Archived from the original on 12 October 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2014. "Malala Yousafzai Canada Scholarship announced". University of King's College. Archived from the original on 19 June 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Bond, Michaelle (1 July 2014). "Liberty Medal for Pakistani education activist Malala Yousafzai". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on 10 April 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2014. "Jack Ma, Malala Among Asia Society's 'Game Changer' Honorees". NBC News. 18 September 2014. Archived from the original on 15 September 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2020. "The 25 Most Influential Teens of 2014". Time. 13 October 2014. Archived from the original on 4 January 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2014. Campion-Smith, Bruce; Alex Boutilier (12 April 2017). "Malala Yousafzai has become an honorary Canadian citizen". The Star. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. "(316201) Malala = 2007 EJ98 = 2010 ML48". The International Astronomical Union Minor Planet Center. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley. "'I Am Malala' Wins Grammy For Best Children's Album". Forbes. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 19 July 2020. "The Results Are In". 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "Order of Smile award for Poland's Błaszczykowski". Radio Poland. RadioZet.pl. 3 November 2016. Archived from the original on 31 December 2018. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "Order Uśmiechu dla Malali Yousafzai" [Order of Smile for Malala Yousafzai] (in Polish). Radio Poland. 6 November 2016. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "Malala Yousafzai made youngest UN Messenger of Peace". BBC News. 11 April 2017. Archived from the original on 11 April 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2017. Johanne Adam (12 April 2017). "The University honours Malala Yousafzai". University of Ottawa Gazette. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. "Ellis Island International Medal of Honor". 13 May 2017. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2017. Sangillo, Gregg (12 September 2017). "Wonk of the Year: Malala Yousafzai is the 2017 Honoree". Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2017. "Introducing the Bazaar 150 Visionary Women list". Harper's Bazaar. 15 November 2017. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2017. "Malala among UK's 150 most influential women". The Express Tribune. 17 November 2017. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2017. "Malala girl who stood up to the Taliban coming to the Dunk on Thursday – Providence Journal". Providence Journal. 23 July 2016. Archived from the original on 18 January 2018. Retrieved 16 January 2018. "Nobel Prize Winner Malala Yousafzai to Receive the 2018 Gleitsman Award from the Center for Public Leadership at Harvard Kennedy School". hks.harvard.edu. 30 October 2018. Archived from the original on 29 May 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2019. Ennis, Dawn (4 March 2019). "Lesbian icons honored with jerseys worn by USWNT". Outsports. Archived from the original on 5 March 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2019. "The Queen presents the Decade Child Rights Hero award". www.kungahuset.se. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Truffaut-Wong, Olivia (12 February 2016). "Ranking All 39 (!) 'Zoolander 2' Cameos". Bustle. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Uddin, Shaheena (9 June 2023). "How Across the Spider-Verse blazes a trail with first hijabi Spider-Woman". Radio Times. Retrieved 16 June 2023. Wikiquote has quotations related to Malala Yousafzai. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Malala Yousafzai. Official website Malala Yousafzai on Twitter Appearances on C-SPAN Malala Yousafzai at IMDb "Malala: Wars Never End Wars", DAWN, 2013 interview with audio clips of Yousafzai Malala Yousafzai collected news and commentary at The Guardian Malala Yousafzai collected news and commentary at The New York Times Class Dismissed: Malala's Story, English-language documentary July 2013 United Nations speech in full (with 17 min. Al Jazeera video) Malala Yousafzai on Nobelprize.org Forging the Ideal Educated Girl by Shenila Khoja-Moolji for academic work on Yousafzai