Ariana Grande-Butera (born June 26, 1993) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. Regarded as a pop icon, she is noted as an influential figure in popular music and as one of the most prominent vocalists of her generation for her four-octave vocal range and signature whistle register. Grande has received numerous accolades throughout her career, including one Brit Award, two Grammy Awards, two Billboard Music Awards, three American Music Awards, nine MTV Video Music Awards, and 35 Guinness World Records. Rolling Stone ranked her amongst the greatest singers of all time. Grande began her career at age 15 by appearing in the Broadway musical 13 (2008). She rose to prominence for her performance as Cat Valentine in the Nickelodeon television series Victorious (2010–2013), as well as the spin-off follow-up series Sam & Cat (2013–2014), and signed with Republic Records in 2011. Grande's debut studio album, Yours Truly (2013), incorporated retro-pop and R&B elements and yielded the successful single "The Way". My Everything (2014), her second album, experimented with EDM and catapulted her to worldwide stardom through the singles "Problem", "Break Free", and "Bang Bang". Grande further explored pop and R&B with her third album Dangerous Woman (2016), which solidified her critical and commercial success. Personal struggles influenced Grande's trap-infused fourth and fifth albums, Sweetener (2018) and Thank U, Next (2019). The former won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album, while the latter broke several streaming records and was nominated for Album of the Year. Thank U, Next garnered two Billboard Hot 100 number-one songs with its title track and "7 Rings", and made Grande the first solo artist to simultaneously occupy the top three positions on the chart. She broke the record for the most number-one debuts in Hot 100 history with the title track of her trap-influenced sixth album, Positions (2020), and the collaborations "Stuck with U" with Justin Bieber and "Rain on Me" with Lady Gaga, the latter of which won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. Grande ventured into dance music on her seventh album, Eternal Sunshine (2024), which produced the number-one singles "Yes, And?" and "We Can't Be Friends (Wait for Your Love)". She returned to acting with the political satire Don't Look Up (2021), and will star as Glinda in the upcoming two-part film adaptation of Wicked (2024–2025). Among the world's best-selling music artists, Grande has sold over 90 million records; all of her studio albums have been certified platinum or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Having amassed 98 billion streams thus far, Grande is one of the most-streamed artists of all time and the most-streamed female artist, as of 2021. She was the most-streamed female act of the 2010s and has the most songs with over a billion streams for a woman, with 14 on Spotify. Grande also has a large social media following; with over 380 million followers, she is the sixth-most-followed individual on Instagram and one of the most-subscribed and most followed musicians on YouTube and Spotify. She was named Woman of the Year (2018) and the most successful female artist to debut in the 2010s by Billboard, featured in listicles such as Time 100 (2016 and 2019), Forbes Celebrity 100 (2019–2020), and ranked the highest-paid female musician of 2020 by Forbes. Outside of music and film, Grande has worked with many charitable organizations and advocates for animal rights, mental health, and gender, racial, and LGBT equality. Her business ventures include R.E.M. Beauty, a cosmetics brand launched in 2021, and a fragrance line that has earned over $1 billion in global retail sales. Ariana Grande-Butera was born on June 26, 1993, in Boca Raton, Florida. She is the daughter of Joan Grande, the Brooklyn-born CEO of Hose-McCann Communications, a manufacturer of marine communications equipment owned by the Grande family since 1964, and Edward Butera, a graphic design firm owner in Boca Raton. Grande is of Italian descent and has described herself as an Italian American with Sicilian and Abruzzese roots. She has an older half-brother, Frankie Grande, who is an entertainer and producer. Her family moved from New York to Florida before her birth, and her parents separated when she was eight or nine years old. Grande has a close relationship with her maternal grandmother, Marjorie Grande. At age 8, she sang "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the Panthers' home game against the Chicago Blackhawks on January 16, 2002. As a young child, Grande performed with the Fort Lauderdale Children's Theater, playing her first role as the title character in the musical Annie. She also performed in their productions of The Wizard of Oz and Beauty and the Beast. At age eight, she performed at a karaoke lounge on a cruise ship and with various orchestras such as South Florida's Philharmonic, Florida Sunshine Pops and Symphonic Orchestras. During this time, she attended the Pine Crest School and later North Broward Preparatory. When she first arrived in Los Angeles, California to meet with her managers, she expressed a desire to record an R&B album: "I was like, 'I want to make an R&B album,' They were like 'Um, that's a helluva goal! Who is going to buy a 14-year-old's R&B album?!'" In 2008, Grande was cast as cheerleader Charlotte in the Broadway musical 13. Grande was cast in the Nickelodeon television show Victorious along with 13 co-star Elizabeth Gillies in 2009. In the sitcom, set at a performing arts high school, she played the "adorably dimwitted" Cat Valentine. She had to dye her hair red every other week for the role, which severely damaged it. The show premiered in March 2010 to the second-largest audience for a live-action series in Nickelodeon, with 5.7 million viewers. The role helped propel Grande to teen idol status, but she was more interested in a music career, saying that acting is "fun, but music has always been first and foremost with me." After the first season of Victorious wrapped, Grande wanted to focus on her music career and began working on her debut album in August 2010. To strengthen her vocal range, she began working with vocal coach Eric Vetro. The second season premiered in April 2011 to 6.2 million viewers, becoming the show's highest-rated episode. In May 2011, Grande appeared in Greyson Chance's video for the song "Unfriend You" from his album Hold On 'til the Night (2011), portraying his ex-girlfriend. She made her first musical appearance on the track "Give It Up" from the Victorious soundtrack in August 2011. While filming Victorious, Grande made several recordings of herself singing covers of songs by Adele, Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey, and uploaded them to YouTube. A friend of Monte Lipman, chief executive officer (CEO) of Republic Records, came across one of the videos. Impressed by her vocals, he sent the links to Lipman, who signed her to a recording contract. Grande voiced the title role in the English dub of the Spanish-language animated film Snowflake, the White Gorilla in November 2011. From 2011 to 2013, she was cast in the role of fairy Princess Diaspro in the Nickelodeon revival of Winx Club. In December 2011, Grande released her first single, "Put Your Hearts Up", which was recorded for a potential teen-oriented pop album that was never issued. She later disowned the track for its bubblegum pop sound, saying she had no interest in recording music of that genre. The song was later certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). On a second soundtrack, Victorious 2.0, released on June 5, 2012, as an extended play, she supplied vocals as part of the show's cast for the song "5 Fingaz to the Face". The third and final soundtrack, Victorious 3.0, was released on November 6, 2012, which featured a duet by Grande and Victoria Justice titled "L.A. Boyz", with an accompanying music video being released shortly after. In December 2012, Grande collaborated on the single version of "Popular Song", a duet with British singer and songwriter Mika. After four seasons, Victorious was not renewed, with the finale airing in February 2013. Grande starred as Snow White in the pantomime-style musical theatre production A Snow White Christmas with Charlene Tilton and Neil Patrick Harris at the Pasadena Playhouse. She played Amanda Benson in Swindle, a 2013 Nickelodeon film adaptation of the children's book of the same name. Meanwhile, Nickelodeon created Sam & Cat, an iCarly and Victorious spin-off starring Jennette McCurdy and Grande. Grande and McCurdy reprised their roles as Cat Valentine and Sam Puckett on the buddy sitcom, which paired the characters as roommates who form an after-school babysitting business. Grande released her debut album, Yours Truly, on August 30, 2013. A pop and R&B record influenced by 1950s doo-wop, Yours Truly debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 albums chart, with 138,000 copies sold in its first week. Yours Truly also debuted in the top ten in several other countries, including Australia, the UK, Ireland, and the Netherlands. Its lead single, "The Way", featuring Pittsburgh rapper Mac Miller, debuted at number ten on the US Billboard Hot 100, eventually peaking at number nine for two weeks. Grande was later sued by Minder Music for copying the line "What we gotta do right here is go back, back in time" from the 1972 song "Troglodyte (Cave Man)" by The Jimmy Castor Bunch. The album's second single, "Baby I", was released in July. Its third single, "Right There", featuring Detroit rapper Big Sean, was released in August 2013. They respectively peaked at number 21 and 84 on the Billboard Hot 100. Grande recorded the duet "Almost Is Never Enough" with Nathan Sykes of The Wanted, which was released as a promotional single in August 2013. She also joined Justin Bieber on his Believe Tour for three shows and kicked off her own headlining mini-tour, The Listening Sessions. At the 2013 American Music Awards, she won the award for New Artist of the Year. She released a four-song Christmas EP, Christmas Kisses in December 2013. Grande received the Breakthrough Artist of the Year award from the Music Business Association, recognizing her achievements throughout 2013. By January 2014, Grande had begun recording her second studio album, with singer-songwriter Ryan Tedder and record producers Benny Blanco and Max Martin. The same month, she earned the Favorite Breakout Artist award at the People's Choice Awards 2014. In March 2014, Grande sang at the White House concert, "Women of Soul: In Performance at the White House". The following month, President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama invited Grande again to perform at the White House for the Easter Egg Roll event. Grande released her second studio album My Everything on August 25, 2014, and debuted atop the Billboard 200. Its lead single, "Problem" debuted at number three (eventually climbing to number two) on the Billboard Hot 100. The album's second single, "Break Free", featuring German musician and producer Zedd, peaked at number four in the United States. She performed the song as the opening of the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards, and won Best Pop Video for "Problem". Grande and Nicki Minaj provided guest vocals on "Bang Bang", the lead single from Jessie J's album Sweet Talker, which peaked at number one in the UK and reached number three in the US. With the singles "Problem", "Break Free", and "Bang Bang", Grande joined Adele as the only female artist with three top ten singles simultaneously on the Billboard Hot 100 as a lead artist. Grande was the musical performer on Saturday Night Live, with Chris Pratt as the host on September 27, 2014. That same month, the third single from My Everything, "Love Me Harder", featuring Canadian recording artist the Weeknd, was released and peaked at number seven in the United States. The song became her fourth top ten single of 2014, the most by any artist that year. In November 2014, Grande was featured in Major Lazer's song "All My Love" from the soundtrack album for the film The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1 (2014). The same month, Grande released a Christmas song titled "Santa Tell Me" as a single from the reissue of her first Christmas EP, Christmas Kisses (2014). The following month, she appeared on Nicki Minaj's third album The Pinkprint, with the song "Get on Your Knees". She later released the fifth and the final single from My Everything, "One Last Time", which peaked at number 13 in the US. In February 2015, Grande embarked on her first worldwide concert tour, The Honeymoon Tour, to further promote My Everything, with shows in North America, Europe, Asia and South America. Grande was featured on Cashmere Cat's song "Adore", which was released in March 2015. In the spring, she signed an exclusive publishing contract with the Universal Music Publishing Group, covering her entire music catalog. Grande also filmed an episode for the Fox Broadcasting Company reality TV series Knock Knock Live (2015), but the show was canceled before her episode aired. She also guest-starred on several episodes of the Fox comedy-horror television series Scream Queens as Sonya Herfmann/Chanel #2 from September to November 2015. She recorded the duet "E Più Ti Penso" with Italian recording artist Andrea Bocelli, which was released in October 2015 as the lead single from Bocelli's album Cinema (2015), and covered the song "Zero to Hero", originally from the animated film Hercules (1997), for the compilation album We Love Disney (2015). Grande also released her second Christmas EP, Christmas & Chill in December 2015. Grande began recording songs for her third studio album, Dangerous Woman, originally titled Moonlight, in 2015. In October of that year, she released the single "Focus", initially intended as the lead single from the album; the song debuted at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100. The next month American singer Who Is Fancy released the single "Boys Like You", which features Ariana Grande and Meghan Trainor. She was featured in the remix version of "Over and Over Again", a song by English singer Nathan Sykes from his solo debut studio album Unfinished Business, which was released in January 2016. In March 2016, Grande released "Dangerous Woman" as the lead single from the retitled album of the same name. The single debuted at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100, making her the first artist to have the lead single from each of their first three albums debut in the top ten. The same month, Grande appeared as host and musical guest of Saturday Night Live, where she performed "Dangerous Woman" and debuted the promotional single "Be Alright", which charted at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100. Grande garnered positive reviews for her appearance on the show, including praise for her impressions of various singers, some of which she had done on The Tonight Show. Grande released Dangerous Woman on May 20, 2016, which debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. It also debuted at number two in Japan, and at number one in several other markets, including Australia, the Netherlands, Ireland, Italy, New Zealand and the UK. Mark Savage, writing for BBC News, called the album "a mature, confident record". At the Summertime Ball at London's Wembley Stadium in June, Grande performed three songs from the album as part of her set. In August, Grande released a third single from the album, "Side to Side", featuring rapper Nicki Minaj, her eighth top ten entry on the Hot 100, which peaked at number four on that chart. Dangerous Woman was nominated for Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album and the title track for Best Pop Solo Performance. Aside from music, Grande played Penny Pingleton in the NBC television broadcast Hairspray Live!, which aired in December 2016. Grande recorded the title track of the soundtrack for the 2017 live-action remake of Disney's 1991 animated film Beauty and the Beast. The recording was released as a duet with American singer John Legend in February 2017. The same month, Grande embarked on her third concert tour, the Dangerous Woman Tour, to promote the album. On May 22, 2017, her concert at Manchester Arena was the target of a suicide bombing—a shrapnel-laden homemade bomb detonated by an Islamic extremist, motivated by Muslim casualties from US intervention in the Syrian Civil War, as people were leaving the arena. The Manchester Arena bombing, which occured at the City Room, caused 22 deaths and injured hundreds more. Grande suspended the remainder of the tour and held a televised benefit concert, One Love Manchester, on June 4, helping to raise $23 million to aid the bombing's victims and affected families. The concert featured performances from Grande, as well as Liam Gallagher, Robbie Williams, Justin Bieber, Katy Perry, Miley Cyrus and other artists. To recognize her efforts, the Manchester City Council named Grande the first honorary citizen of Manchester. The tour resumed on June 7 in Paris and ended in September 2017. In August 2017, Grande appeared in an Apple Music Carpool Karaoke episode, singing musical theatre songs with American entertainer Seth MacFarlane. In December 2017, Billboard magazine named her "Female Artist of the Year". Grande began working on songs for her fourth studio album, Sweetener, with Pharrell Williams in 2016, but "the events in Manchester gave a hard reset to the project's expectations". Grande released "No Tears Left to Cry" as the lead single from Sweetener in April 2018, with the song debuting at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, making Grande the only artist to have debuted the lead single of her first four albums in the top ten of the Hot 100. In June 2018, she was featured in "Bed", the second single from Nicki Minaj's fourth studio album Queen. The same month, she was featured on Troye Sivan's single "Dance to This" from his sophomore album Bloom. The second single, "God Is a Woman", peaked at number 8 on the Hot 100 and became Grande's tenth top ten single in the US. Released in August 2018, Sweetener debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and received acclaim from critics. She simultaneously charted nine songs from the album on the Hot 100, along with a collaboration, making her the fourth female artist to reach the ten-song mark. Grande gave four concerts to promote the album, billed as The Sweetener Sessions, in New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles, and London between August 20 and September 4, 2018. In October 2018, Grande participated in the NBC broadcast, A Very Wicked Halloween, singing "The Wizard and I" from the musical Wicked. The following month, the BBC aired a one-hour special, Ariana Grande at the BBC, featuring interviews and performances. In November 2018, Grande released the single "Thank U, Next" and announced her fifth studio album of the same name. The song debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Grande's first chart topping single in the United States, spending seven non-consecutive weeks atop. Since then, it has been certified five-times platinum in the United States; the song's music video broke records for most-watched music video on YouTube within 24 hours of release and fastest Vevo video to reach 100 million views on YouTube, both of which were later surpassed by other artists. On Spotify, it became the fastest song to reach 100 million streams (11 days) and most-streamed song by a female artist in a 24-hour period, with 9.6 million streams, before being surpassed by her own song "7 Rings" (nearly 15 million streams). Later the same month, Grande released, in collaboration with YouTube, a four-part docuseries titled Ariana Grande: Dangerous Woman Diaries. It shows behind the scenes and concert footage from Grande's Dangerous Woman Tour, including moments from the One Love Manchester concert, and follows her professional life during the tour and the making of Sweetener. The series debuted on November 29, 2018. By the end of the year, she became the most streamed female artist on Spotify, and was named Billboard's Woman of the Year. In January 2019, it was announced that Grande would be headlining the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, where she became the youngest and only the fourth female artist ever to headline the festival. It took place April 12–14 and April 19–21. Grande brought a number of guest artists to perform with her, including NSYNC, P. Diddy, Nicki Minaj and Justin Bieber. Her set has received critical acclaim. Grande's second single from Thank U, Next, "7 Rings", was released on January 18, 2019, and debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week of February 2, becoming her second single in a row (and overall) to top the charts. It made Grande the third female artist with multiple number-one debuts after Mariah Carey (3) and Britney Spears (2) and fifth artist overall after Justin Bieber and Drake. The song broke several streaming and recording industry records. Spending eight non-consecutive weeks at number one, it became Grande's most successful song on the chart and one of the best selling singles worldwide. Thank U, Next was released on February 8, 2019, and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 while receiving acclaim from critics. It broke the records for the largest streaming week for a pop album and for a female album in the United States with 307 million on-demand streams. Grande became the first solo artist to occupy the top three spots on the Billboard Hot 100 with "7 Rings" at number one, her third single "Break Up with Your Girlfriend, I'm Bored" debuting at number two, and her lead single "Thank U, Next" rose to number three, and the overall second artist to do so since the Beatles did in 1964 when they occupied the top five spots. In the United Kingdom, Grande became the second female solo artist to simultaneously hold the number one and two spots and the first musical artist to replace herself at number one, twice consecutively. In February 2019, it was reported Grande wouldn't attend the Grammy Awards after she had a disagreement with producers over a potential performance at the ceremony. Grande ended up earning her first Grammy, for Best Pop Vocal Album, for Sweetener. The same month, Grande won a Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist. She also embarked on her third headlining tour, the Sweetener World Tour, to promote both Sweetener and Thank U, Next, which began on March 18, 2019. Grande was nominated for 9 awards at the 2019 Billboard Music Awards, including Top Artist. She would win two awards for Billboard Chart Achievement and Top Female Artist on May 1, 2019. Grande performed at the event via a pre-recorded performance from her Sweetener World Tour. In June 2019, Grande announced that she co-executive produced the soundtrack to the film Charlie's Angels; a collaboration with Miley Cyrus and Lana Del Rey, titled "Don't Call Me Angel", was released as the lead single on September 13, 2019. It was later nominated for Best Original Song, at the 24th Satellite Awards. In August 2019, she released a single titled "Boyfriend" with pop duo Social House. Grande co-wrote singer Normani's debut solo single "Motivation", which was released on August 16, 2019. Grande won three awards at the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards, including the Artist of the Year award. She was nominated for 12 awards in total, including Video of the Year for "Thank U, Next". Grande was featured on the remix of American singer and rapper Lizzo's song "Good as Hell", which was released on October 25, 2019. By the end of the year, Billboard named Grande the most accomplished female artist to debut in the 2010s, while NME named her one of the defining music artists of the decade. She also became the most streamed female artist of the decade on music streaming service Spotify. Also, Forbes ranked her amongst the highest-paid celebrities in 2019, placing at number 62 on the list, while Billboard ranked her as 2019's highest-paid solo musician. In January 2020, Grande received multiple nominations at the 2020 iHeartRadio Music Awards, including Female Artist of the Year. The following month, she made a guest appearance in the second season of the American television series Kidding, which stars Jim Carrey. On March 27, 2020, she appeared on Childish Gambino's fourth studio album 3.15.20 on the track "Time". Grande and Justin Bieber released a collaboration song titled "Stuck with U" on May 8, 2020; net proceeds from the sales of the song were donated to the First Responders Children's Foundation in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. The song debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Grande's third chart-topping single. Alongside Bieber, both artists tied Mariah Carey and Drake for the most songs to debut at number one on the Hot 100; Grande is the first artist to have her first three number ones debut at the top, following "Thank U, Next" and "7 Rings". Grande also released a collaboration with Lady Gaga, "Rain on Me", as the second single from Gaga's sixth studio album Chromatica. The song also debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Grande's fourth number-one single and helping Grande break the record for the most number-one debuts on that chart. The song won the Best Pop Duo/Group Performance category at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards. In 2020, Grande became the highest-earning woman in music on Forbes's 2020 Celebrity 100 list, placing 17th overall with $72 million. At the 2020 MTV Video Music Awards, she was nominated for nine awards for both "Stuck with U" (with Bieber) and "Rain on Me" (with Gaga). For the latter, Grande received her third consecutive nomination for Video of the Year. She won four awards, including Song of the Year for "Rain on Me". Grande's sixth studio album, Positions, was released on October 30, 2020. It debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming Grande's fifth number-one album. The eponymous lead single was released on October 23. It debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Grande's fifth chart-topping single and breaking numerous records. Grande became the first artist to have five number-one debuts on the Hot 100 and the first to have their first five number ones debut at the top. "Positions" became her third number-one single in 2020 following "Stuck with U" and "Rain on Me", making Grande the first artist since Drake to have three number-one singles in a single calendar year and the first female artist to do so since Rihanna and Katy Perry in 2010. Alongside the release of Positions, the song from the album "34+35" served as the second single off the album. The song debuted at number 8, becoming Grande's 18th top ten single. Grande released a "34+35" remix featuring American rappers Doja Cat and Megan Thee Stallion on January 15, 2021. The remix helped the song reach a new peak at number two, the highest-charting song credited to three or more female soloists on the Hot 100 since Christina Aguilera, Mýa, Pink and Lil' Kim's "Lady Marmalade" in 2001. The remix was one of five additional tracks included on the deluxe edition of Positions, released on February 19, 2021. In March, the song "POV" was sent to radio as the album's third single. The song reached number 27 on the Hot 100 and would reach the top ten on mainstream radio, making Grande the first artist to have three concurrent songs in the top ten for Pop Airplay. Grande was named the most-played artist on iHeartRadio's stations in 2021, reaching 2.6 billion in audience. On November 13, 2020, Grande made a surprise appearance on the Adult Swim Festival, performing alongside music artist Thundercat, performing his song "Them Changes", which Grande had previously covered. Grande and Jennifer Hudson also featured on a remix of Mariah Carey's 2010 Christmas song "Oh Santa!". The song was released on December 4, 2020, as part of Mariah Carey's Magical Christmas Special. Grande released the concert film for her Sweetener World Tour, Excuse Me, I Love You, on December 21, 2020, exclusively on Netflix. In April, Grande was featured on a remix of the Weeknd's "Save Your Tears". The remix reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and Canadian Hot 100, becoming both artists' sixth number one single on both charts. She joined Paul McCartney as the only artist to earn three number-one duets on the Hot 100. With 69 weeks, the remix became one of the ten songs with the most total weeks on the chart. It ranked as the second best-performing song of the year on the Billboard year-end Hot 100 chart of 2021. Grande and the Weeknd performed "Save Your Tears" together at the 2021 iHeartRadio Music Awards. On February 24, 2023, following months-long renewed interest in and virality of the Weeknd's 2016 song "Die for You," a remix of the song with Grande was released. The remix marked their fourth collaboration. In the Billboard Hot 100 issue dated March 11, 2023, the remix reached the top of the chart, becoming both artists' seventh number one hit. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), it was the fourth best-selling song of 2023 globally. In June, Grande featured on the song "I Don't Do Drugs" from Doja Cat's third studio album Planet Her. Her contribution as a songwriter and featured artist on the song earned Grande a nomination for Album of the Year at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. In December 2021, Grande appeared in Adam McKay's film Don't Look Up, alongside Leonardo DiCaprio, Jennifer Lawrence, and Meryl Streep. With streams of more than 152 million hours in a week, it broke the record for the biggest week of views in Netflix history. To promote the film, Grande released the song "Just Look Up", in collaboration with rapper Kid Cudi, on December 3, 2021. At the 27th Critics' Choice Awards, Grande received nominations in the categories Best Song and Best Acting Ensemble, as a part of the cast. She also received a nomination at the 28th Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture. On August 25, 2023, Grande released a reissue of her debut studio album, Yours Truly (Tenth Anniversary Edition). On December 9, 2023, Grande and Jennifer Hudson made a surprise appearance onstage to sing the "Oh Santa!" remix at Mariah Carey's show at the Madison Square Garden, of her Merry Christmas One and All! tour. In November 2021, it was announced that Grande would play Glinda for the upcoming two-part film adaptation of the musical Wicked, directed by Jon M. Chu and starring alongside Cynthia Erivo, who will play Elphaba. The first part, Wicked, is slated to be released on November 27, 2024. Both Grande & Erivo attended the 96th Academy Awards on March 10, 2024, where they presented Best Original Score and Best Original Song. On January 17, 2024, Grande announced her seventh studio album, titled Eternal Sunshine. Its lead single, "Yes, And?", was released with an accompanying music video on January 12, 2024, and debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100. The song topped the Billboard Global 200 and Global Excl. US charts for two weeks. On February 16, a remix of "Yes, And?" featuring Mariah Carey, included in the deluxe edition of Eternal Sunshine, was released. The album was released on March 8, along with the second single off the record, "We Can't Be Friends (Wait for Your Love)". To promote the album, Grande appeared as the musical guest on Saturday Night Live on March 9, 2024. She performed "We Can't Be Friends (Wait for Your Love)" live for the first time, alongside "Imperfect for You" from Eternal Sunshine. Grande's music is generally pop and R&B with elements of EDM, hip hop, and trap, the latter first appearing prominently on her Christmas & Chill extended play. While consistently maintaining pop and R&B tones, she has increasingly incorporated trap into her music as her career has progressed, thanks to her work with record producer Tommy Brown. She has collaborated with Brown on every album thus far and stated that "one of the things I love most about working with Tommy is that none of the beats he plays me ever sound the same." Grande learned how to sound engineer and produce her own vocals because she "love[s] being hands on" with every project, revealing that rapper Mac Miller first taught her how to use the digital audio workstation Pro Tools. Collaborator Justin Tranter remarked that he felt inspired seeing how involved Grande is in creating her music "from the writing to the vision to the storytelling and to even engineering and comping her own vocals." She has co-written songs addressing a wide variety of themes, such as love, sex, wealth, breakups, independence, empowerment, self-love and moving on from the past. Grande's debut album Yours Truly was complimented for recreating the R&B "vibe and feel of the 90s" with the help of songwriter and producer Babyface. Her follow-up record, My Everything, explored EDM and electropop genres. Grande expanded the pop and R&B sound on her third album, Dangerous Woman, which was praised by the Los Angeles Times for integrating elements of different styles, such as reggae-pop ("Side to Side"), dance-pop ("Be Alright"), and guitar-trap fusion ("Sometimes"). Trap-pop was more heavily featured on her fourth and fifth studio albums, Sweetener and Thank U, Next. Elias Leight of Rolling Stone opined that Grande "set her sights on conquering trap, savage basslines and jittery swarms of drum programming" and "embrace[d] the sound of hard-bitten Southern hip-hop" on Sweetener, exploring funk music with themes of love and prosperity. Craig Jenkins of Vulture noted that she embraced trap and hip hop with undertones of R&B on Thank U, Next, with lyrics about breakups, empowerment, and self-love. Her sixth album, Positions, further emphasized the R&B and trap-pop sound of its two predecessors, with lyrics discussing sex and romance. Grande grew up listening mainly to urban pop and 1990s music. She credited Gloria Estefan with inspiring her to pursue a music career after Estefan saw and complimented Grande's performance on a cruise ship when she was eight years old. Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston are her primary vocal influences: "I love Mariah Carey. She is literally my favorite human being on the planet. And of course Whitney [Houston] as well. As far as vocal influences go, Whitney and Mariah pretty much cover it." Grande was also influenced vocally by Destiny's Child, Beyoncé, Celine Dion and Madonna. She reflected on her childhood by posting videos of herself singing songs from Dion's 1997 album Let's Talk About Love on her social media. Grande credits Madonna with "pav[ing] the way for me and also every other female artist" and admitted to being "obsessed with her entire discography". Musically, Grande admires India Arie because her "music makes me feel like everything is going to be okay", loves Brandy's songs because "her riffs are incredibly on point," and praised Imogen Heap's "intricate" song structure. Grande also named Judy Garland as a childhood influence, admiring her ability to tell "a story when she sings", and named "Over the Rainbow" as one of the first songs she remembers singing because "Wizard Of Oz was always my favorite movie when I was younger." Music producer and collaborator Savan Kotecha stated that he and Grande were influenced by Lauryn Hill when creating her fourth album Sweetener and its lead single "No Tears Left to Cry". Kotecha told Variety, "we were listening to Lauryn Hill about chord changes and why we stick to four chords all the time". Grande expressed admiration for rappers' unconventional music release strategy. She told Billboard, "My dream has always been to be—obviously not a rapper, but, like, to put out music in the way that a rapper does. I feel like there are certain standards that pop women are held to that men aren't ... It's just like, 'Bruh, I just want to ... drop [music] the way these boys do." It inspired her to release "Thank U, Next" without any prior announcement, which The Ringer called "more of a Drake move than an Ariana Grande move." Grande has been described as a soprano, possessing a four-octave vocal range and a whistle register. With the release of Yours Truly, critics compared Grande's wide vocal range and music to those of Mariah Carey. Julianne Escobedo Shepherd of Billboard wrote that both Carey and Grande have "the talent to let their vocals do the talking ... that's not where the similarities end. ... Grande is subverting it with cute, comfortable, and on-trend dresses with a feminine slant." Grande called the comparisons "a huge compliment" but noted sonic differences in her and Carey's discographies. Steven J. Horowitz of Billboard wrote in 2014, "With her sophomore album, the 'Problem' singer no longer resembles [Carey]—and that's okay." Mark Savage of BBC News named Grande "one of pop's most intriguing and gifted singers" and complimented her "unrivalled vocal control". In The New York Times, Jon Pareles noted that Grande's voice "can be silky, breathy or cutting, swooping through long melismas or jabbing out short R&B phrases; it's always supple and airborne, never forced." Composer and playwright Jason Robert Brown wrote in a 2016 Time magazine article, "[N]o matter how much you are underestimated ... you are going to open your mouth and that unbelievable sound is going to come out. That [...] instrument [...] allows you to shut down every objection and every obstacle." Grande cited Audrey Hepburn as a major style influence in her early career; however, she later found emulating Hepburn's style "a little boring". She also drew inspiration from actresses of the 1950s and 1960s, such as Ann-Margret, Nancy Sinatra and Marilyn Monroe. Grande's modest look early in her career was described as "age appropriate" in comparison to contemporary artists who grew up in the public eye. Jim Farber of New York's Daily News wrote in 2014 that Grande received less attention "for how little she wears or how graphically she moves than for how she sings." That year, she abandoned her earlier style in favor of short skirts and crop tops with knee-high boots in live performances and red carpet events. She also began regularly wearing cat and bunny ears and, subsequently, oversized jackets and hoodies. Grande's style is often imitated by social media influencers and celebrities. After years of dyeing her hair red for her role as Cat Valentine on Nickelodeon, Grande wore extensions as her hair recovered from damage. Anne T. Donahue of MTV News noted that her "iconic" high ponytail has received more attention than her fashion choices. Although Grande drew criticism for alleged impolite interactions with reporters and fans in 2014, she dismissed the reports as "weird, inaccurate depictions". Rolling Stone wrote: "Some may cry 'diva', but it's also Grande just taking a stand to not allow others to control her image." In July 2015, Grande sparked controversy after being seen on surveillance video in a doughnut shop licking doughnuts that were on display and saying "I hate Americans. I hate America. This is disgusting", referring to a tray of doughnuts. She subsequently apologized, saying that she is "EXTREMELY proud to be an American" and that her comments rather referred to obesity in the United States. She later released a video apology for "behaving poorly". The incident was parodied by The Muppets, and featured in Miley Cyrus's Saturday Night Live cover of "My Way", about the regrets of the Summer 2015. Grande herself poked fun at the incident while hosting Saturday Night Live in 2016, saying, "A lot of kid stars end up doing drugs, or in jail, or pregnant, or get caught licking a doughnut they didn't pay for." In 2020, she said that she stopped doing interviews for a while out of fear that her words would be misconstrued and that she would be labeled a "diva". With a large following on social media, Grande is one of the most influential celebrities on the internet. As of January 2024[update], her YouTube channel has over 53 million subscribers, making her among the most subscribed music artists on the platform; her music videos have been viewed a total of over 25 billion times, with eight of them reaching over one billion views; her Spotify profile has amassed over 95 million followers, making her the fourth most-followed artist and second most-followed woman; her Instagram account has over 380 million followers, making her the sixth-most-followed individual and third-most-followed woman; her now deactivated Twitter account had over 80 million followers, making it the seventh-most-followed account, at the time; her Facebook page has over 42 million followers, and her TikTok account has over 34 million followers. According to Guinness World Records, Grande was the most followed woman on Instagram from 2019 to 2021, and is the most followed musician and female musician as of 2021. In May 2021, Visual Capitalist ranked Grande as the world's top female social media influencer. Often regarded as a pop icon and triple threat entertainer, wax figures of Grande are found at Madame Tussauds Wax Museums in major cities around the world, including New York, Orlando, Amsterdam, Bangkok, Hollywood, London, Sydney, Berlin and Hong Kong. In 2016 and 2019, Grande was named one of Time's 100 most influential people in the world. In 2017, Celia Almeida of the Miami New Times wrote that of all the biggest pop stars of the past 20 years, Grande made the most convincing transition "from ingénue to an independent female artist". In 2018, music magazine Hits labeled her "pop diva supreme" and "reigning pop diva of the times", and Bloomberg named her the "first pop diva of the streaming generation" in 2020. Grande was also included in Pitchfork's list of "The 200 Most Important Artists of Pitchfork's First 25 Years" for "emerging with music that pushed her artistry further as it asserted a magical trifecta of hope, joy, and a powerhouse voice". Her song "Thank U, Next" was in Rolling Stone's 2021 revision of their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. In 2023, the magazine included Grande among the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. Many recording artists have cited Grande as an influence, including Madison Beer, Sufjan Stevens, Melanie Martinez, Meghan Trainor, Troye Sivan, Jungkook of BTS, Maria Becerra, Billie Eilish, Yeri of Red Velvet, Sabrina Carpenter, Danna Paola, Zara Larsson, Melody, Bryson Tiller, Lana Del Rey, Dove Cameron, Michelle Zauner of Japanese Breakfast, Grace VanderWaal, Breanna Yde, Maggie Lindemann, Charlie Puth, Giselle of Aespa, and Tate McRae. Throughout her career, Grande has sold over 85 to 90 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time. All of Grande's studio albums have been certified platinum or higher by the RIAA and have spent at least one year charting on the Billboard 200 chart. Grande has sold over 100 million units, across albums, singles, and features (when physical, downloads, and streaming-equivalent sales are combined), and 10 million albums and 86.5 million digital singles units as a lead artist in the United States, making her the fifth highest-certified female artist on RIAA's Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking. In the U.S., Grande has moved 22.4 million album units, and garnered over 23.6 billion streams across lead artist credits, as of 2023, according to Luminate. Grande is also one of the highest-certified artists in the UK, with nearly 28 million units. Having amassed 98 billion streams thus far, Grande is the most-streamed female artist as of 2021, and one of the most streamed artists of all time; she is the most streamed female artist of 2010s decade on Spotify and Apple Music. With over 30 billion streams, she is among the ten most-streamed acts ever on Spotify, being only one of two women on the ranking. She became the most-streamed female artist on Spotify in 2020, surpassing Rihanna, and held the record for over two years. Her songs and albums are some of the most streamed of all time. Grande became the first woman with one and two billion streams with one album, 3.5 billion streams on three separate albums, the first artist to have five albums with four billion streams. She also has fourteen songs that have overcome one billion streams, making her the female artist with the most one billion songs on Spotify. As of 2022, she's also the most followed female artist on Spotify. Grande has won two Grammy Awards, one BRIT Award, nine MTV Video Music Awards, three MTV Europe Music Awards and three American Music Awards. She has received 39 Billboard Music Award nominations and won two in 2019, including Top Female Artist. Grande has won nine Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, including one in 2014 for Favorite TV Actress for her performance on Sam & Cat, and three People's Choice Awards. In 2014, she received the Breakthrough Artist of the Year Award from the Music Business Association and Best Newcomer at the Bambi Awards. She has won six iHeartRadio Music Awards and twelve Teen Choice Awards. She was named Billboard Women in Music's Rising Star in 2014 and Woman of the Year in 2018, the greatest pop star of 2019, with honorable mention in 2014 and 2018, and the most successful female artist to debut in the 2010s by Billboard. Grande has broken numerous Hot 100 records. Nine singles by Grande have topped the US Billboard Hot 100, her most recent being "We Can't Be Friends (Wait for Your Love)". Grande has a total of sixteen top ten debuts thus far, beginning with her first single "The Way"; the lead single from each of her first seven studio albums have debuted in the top ten, making her the only artist to achieve this. In 2020, she became the first act to have her first five number one singles, "Thank U, Next", "7 Rings", "Stuck With U", "Rain on Me", and "Positions" debut at number one; that year, Grande also broke the record for the most number one debuts and became the first female artist topping Global 200, Global 200 Excl. US and Hot 100 simultaneously. Grande would also become the first artist to have three singles debut at number one on a single calendar year. She later broke the record for most simultaneously charting songs on the top 40 of the Hot 100 for a female artist with the release of her fifth studio album, Thank U, Next, when eleven of the twelve tracks charted within the region (later surpassed by Billie Eilish). The three singles from Thank U, Next, "7 Rings", "Break Up with Your Girlfriend, I'm Bored", and "Thank U, Next" charted at numbers one, two, and three respectively on the week of February 23, 2019, making Grande the first solo artist to occupy the top three spots of the Billboard Hot 100 and the first artist to do so since the Beatles in 1964. With her album Thank U, Next, Grande set the record for the largest streaming week for a pop album and for a female artist, with 307 million on-demand audio streams. With "Die for You" with the Weeknd reaching number one, Grande surpassed Paul McCartney as the artist with the most number-one duets in Hot 100 history, with four songs. As of March 2024, Grande has 85 entries on the Hot 100, tying Grande with Beyonce as the third female artist with the most 100 entries. Grande is also the female artist with the most number one debuts on the Hot 100, breaking her tie with Taylor Swift. She was also named the Billboard Year-End Top Female Artist for 2017 and 2019 and was named the sixth top female artist (twelfth overall) on the magazine's Decade-End Top Artists Chart for the 2010s. The magazine also ranked her 78th on the Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists Charts, respectively. As of 2023, Grande has broken thirty-five Guinness World Records. These records included the most songs to debut at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, most followers on Spotify (female), most monthly listeners on Spotify (female), most streamed act on Spotify (female), most streamed track in one week by a female artist on the Billboard charts, fastest hat-trick of UK No. 1 singles by a female artist, first female artist to replace herself at No. 1 on UK singles chart, first solo artist to replace themselves at No. 1 on UK singles chart for two consecutive weeks, most subscribers for a musician on YouTube (female), most streamed album by a female artist in one week (UK), among others. Eleven records were achieved from the success of her album Thank U, Next which was featured in the 2020 edition. At age ten, Grande co-founded the South Florida youth singing group Kids Who Care, which performed at charitable fund-raisers and raised over $500,000 in 2007 alone. In 2009, as a member of the charitable organization Broadway in South Africa, she and her brother Frankie performed and taught music and dance to children in Gugulethu, South Africa. She was featured with Bridgit Mendler and Kat Graham in Seventeen magazine in a 2013 public campaign to end online bullying called "Delete Digital Drama". After watching the film Blackfish that year, she urged fans to stop supporting SeaWorld. In September 2014, Grande participated at the charitable Stand Up to Cancer television program, performing her song "My Everything" in memory of her grandfather, who had died of cancer that July. Grande has adopted several rescue dogs as pets and has promoted pet adoption at her concerts. In 2016, she launched a line of lip shades, "Ariana Grande's MAC Viva Glam", with MAC Cosmetics, the profits of which benefited people affected by HIV and AIDS. In 2015, Grande and Miley Cyrus performed a cover of Crowded House's "Don't Dream It's Over" as part of Cyrus' "Backyard Sessions" to benefit her Happy Hippie Foundation, which helps homeless and LGBT youths. Later that year, Grande headlined the Dance On the Pier event, part of the LGBT Pride Week in New York City. As a feminist, Grande wrote a well-received, "empowering" essay on Twitter decrying the double standard and misogyny in the focus of the press on female musicians' relationships and sex lives instead of "their value as an individual". She noted that she has "more to talk about" concerning her music and accomplishments rather than her romantic relationships. That year, Grande joined Madonna to raise funds for orphaned children in Malawi; she and Victoria Monét recorded "Better Days" in support of the Black Lives Matter movement. To aid the victims of the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017, Grande organized the One Love Manchester concert and re-released "One Last Time" and her live performance of "Over the Rainbow" at the event as charity singles. The total amount raised was reportedly $23 million (more than £17 million), and she received praise for her "grace and strength" in leading the benefit concert. Madeline Roth of MTV wrote that the performance "bolstered courage among an audience that desperately needed it. ... Returning to the stage was a true act of bravery and resilience". In 2017, New York magazine's Vulture section ranked the event as the No. 1 concert of the year, and Billboard's Mitchell Harrison called Grande a "gay icon" for her LGBT-friendly lyrics and performances and "support for the LGBTQ community". In September 2017, Grande performed in A Concert for Charlottesville which benefitted the victims of the August 2017 white nationalist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia. In March 2018, she participated in March for Our Lives to support gun control reform. Grande donated the proceeds from the first show in Atlanta on her Sweetener World Tour to Planned Parenthood in a response to the passage of a number of anti-abortion laws in several states including Georgia. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Grande donated between $500 and $1,000 each to a number of fans as financial support. Grande also supported a COVID-19 fund named Project 100, which aimed to provide $1,000 digital payments to 100,000 families who have been greatly impacted by the pandemic. In May 2020, Grande announced that all net proceeds from her collaboration with singer Justin Bieber, "Stuck With U", would be donated to the First Responders Children's Foundation to fund grants and scholarships for children of frontline workers who are working during the global pandemic. That month, Grande joined a Los Angeles protest against the murder of George Floyd, demanding justice and asking fans to sign petitions condemning the act of police brutality. She highlighted white privilege and called for more activism outside social media. The following month, she praised a Black-owned coffee shop on Instagram, and encouraged her LA-based followers to support the business. In recent years, Grande surprised kids, who spend the holiday at children's hospitals in L.A. and the UK, with gifts from wish lists at the UCLA Mattel Children's Hospital and the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, among others. Manchester Foundation Trust Charity revealed that Grande had gifted nearly 1,000 presents to patients across the hospital network's children's wards and newborn intensive care units in 2021. In June 2021, Grande, along with a dozen other celebrities signed an open letter to Congress to pass the Equality Act highlighting the Act would protect "marginalized communities". In the same month, Grande partnered with the online portal BetterHelp, and gave away $2 million worth of therapy to fans. On International Transgender Day of Visibility in 2022, she launched the Protect & Defend Trans Youth Fund to benefit transgender youth, pledging to match every donation up until $1.5 million. In May 2022, Grande was among 160 artists and influencers, who signed a 'Bans Off Our Bodies' full-page advertisement in The New York Times, in support of abortion rights in the US. Grande was also one of 175 entertainers to sign an open letter to oppose books bans in US schools in 2023. In June 2022, Grande endorsed Karen Bass for 2022 Los Angeles mayoral election. In November 2015, she released a limited edition handbag in collaboration with Coach. In January 2016, she launched a makeup collection with MAC Cosmetics, donating 100% of proceeds to the MAC AIDS Fund. In February 2016, Grande launched a fashion line with Lipsy London. Later that year, she teamed up with Brookstone, using the concept art of artist Wenqing Yan, to design cat ear headphones. In 2017, Grande collaborated with Square Enix to create a character based on herself for the mobile game Final Fantasy Brave Exvius. Grande was a limited-time unlockable character as part of the Dangerous Woman Tour event, which also included an orchestral remix of Grande's song "Touch It"; the character, Dangerous Ariana, is a magical support character who uses music-based attacks. In September 2017, she became a brand ambassador for Reebok. In August 2018, she partnered with American Express for The Sweetener Sessions, a partnership which continued through the Sweetener World Tour in 2019, alongside T-Mobile. In March 2019, she partnered with Starbucks for the launch of the Cloud Macchiato beverage. In May 2019, Grande was announced as the face of Givenchy's Fall-Winter campaign. The campaign began in July and generated $25.13 million in media impact value. Beats, Samsung, Fiat, Reebok, and Guess products have been featured in Grande's music videos. She has appeared in commercials for Macy's, T-Mobile, and Apple, as well as for her own fragrances. Since 2019, Grande was among the ten of the highest paid individuals on Instagram. In 2023, Grande earns $1.6 million per sponsored Instagram post. Grande has released thirteen fragrances with Luxe Brands. She launched her debut fragrance, Ari by Ariana Grande, in 2015. In the wake of its success, she launched her third fragrance, Sweet Like Candy, in 2016. Her fifth fragrance, Moonlight, was released in 2017, followed by Cloud (2018), Thank U, Next (2019), R.E.M. (2020), and God Is A Woman (2021), which was later expanded to a body care line. She then released the duo fragrance collection Mod Vanilla and Mod Blush (2022). The line also includes the limited editions Frankie (2016), Sweet Like Candy Limited Edition (2017), Thank U, Next 2.0, Cloud Intense (both 2021), and Cloud Pink (2023). The fragrances won the FiFi Award multiple times, most recently with R.E.M. in 2021. In 2022, it was reported that Cloud was the best-selling fragrance at Ulta, selling one bottle every eleven minutes. Grande's fragrance line is the most-searched celebrity offering, with 4.4 million searches across Google and social media platforms per year. Since its launch in 2015, the franchise has made $1 billion in retail sales globally. In November 2021, Grande launched her makeup line R.E.M. Beauty, which is distributed at Ulta Beauty as of March 2022. The original line featured 12 core products for lips and eyes, and the range has since been expanded with additional skincare and makeup products. Forbes reported in 2022 that R.E.M. Beauty was one of the brands boosting Ulta's driving gross margin due to strong consumer demand. In May, the line won "Best New Brand" at the Allure Best of Beauty Awards. In February 2023, it was announced, that the brand will be launching in 81 Sephora stores and 13 online sites, including across Europe. Grande has said she struggled with hypoglycemia, which she attributed to poor dietary habits. She has been a vegan since 2013. Fans questioned in 2019 whether she was still a vegan after working with Starbucks to create a special edition of one of her favorite drinks which was revealed to contain eggs. Her nutritionist, Harley Pasternak, told the magazine Glamour that Grande is vegan but that he has got her to "feel OK about indulging and celebrating sometimes". Grande developed post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and anxiety after the Manchester Arena bombing; she nearly pulled out of her performance in the 2018 broadcast A Very Wicked Halloween due to anxiety. Grande has also said she has been in therapy for over a decade, having first seen a mental health professional shortly after her parents' divorce. Grande was raised Roman Catholic, but left the church during the pontificate of Benedict XVI (circa 2013), opposing its stance on homosexuality and noting that her half-brother Frankie is gay. Grande stated that she and Frankie later visited a Kabbalah Centre and that they both "really had a connection with it." Several of her songs, such as "Break Your Heart Right Back", are supportive of LGBT rights. She has also been labeled "an advocate for a sex-positive attitude". In November 2019, Grande endorsed Bernie Sanders' second presidential bid. Forbes began reporting on Grande's earnings in July 2019. She purchased a mansion in Hollywood Hills for $13.7 million in June 2020. Grande owned a penthouse in Lower Manhattan, which was sold for $13.5 million, in 2021. In September 2022, Grande put her Montecito, California house, which had a break-in three months before, up for sale. The mansion was reported to have sold for $9.1 million. Grande met actor Graham Phillips in the cast of the Broadway musical 13 in 2008 and dated him until 2011. Grande was later involved in an on-again, off-again relationship with Australian YouTuber Jai Brooks from August 2012 to July 2013; the two resumed their relationship from May to August 2014. She dated English singer Nathan Sykes between August and December 2013, and then dated rapper Big Sean from October 2014 to April 2015. After recording "The Way" with rapper Mac Miller in 2012, the two began dating in 2016. Grande was featured on Miller's single "My Favorite Part" from his album The Divine Feminine (2016); she also provided an uncredited introduction to the album and was the inspiration behind its fifth track, "Cinderella". By May 2018, their relationship had ended and Grande entered a whirlwind romance with comedian Pete Davidson. They got engaged in June, after a few weeks of dating, while a song titled after and inspired by Davidson was featured on Grande's album Sweetener (2018). That September, Miller died from an accidental drug overdose; Grande expressed grief over his death on social media and called him her "dearest friend". She and Davidson called off their engagement and ended their relationship the following month. Grande began dating real estate agent Dalton Gomez in January 2020. Their relationship, while mostly private, was made public in May 2020, in the music video of her and Justin Bieber's charity single "Stuck With U". Grande announced their engagement on December 20, 2020, after 11 months of dating. On May 15, 2021, they married in a private ceremony at her home in Montecito, California. Her wedding pictures became among the most-liked Instagram posts, with over 25 million likes. The couple separated on February 20, 2023, and simultaneously filed for divorce in September, citing "irreconcilable differences". Grande and Gomez agreed on a divorce settlement in October 2023, which was finalized in March 2024. Because the couple had a prenuptial agreement, no children, and no significant legal disputes in their split, their divorce moved quickly and cleanly in the court system and only had to wait the required six months before a judge's order could take effect. Under their settlement, Grande was ordered to make a one-time payment of $1.25 million to Gomez with no future alimony, give him half of the proceeds of the sale of their Los Angeles home, and pay up to $25,000 towards his attorney's fees. Don't Look Up (2021) Wicked (2024) Wicked Part Two (2025) Studio albums Yours Truly (2013) My Everything (2014) Dangerous Woman (2016) Sweetener (2018) Thank U, Next (2019) Positions (2020) Eternal Sunshine (2024) The Listening Sessions (2013) The Honeymoon Tour (2015) Dangerous Woman Tour (2017) Sweetener World Tour (2019) The Sweetener Sessions (2018) Justin Bieber – Believe Tour (2013) Biography portal Pop music portal United States portal List of American Grammy Award winners and nominees List of artists who have achieved simultaneous UK and US number-one hits List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists List of highest-certified music artists in the United States Honorific nicknames in popular music UK Singles Chart records and statistics List of most-streamed songs on Spotify Her full name is pronounced as /ˌɑːriˈɑːnə ˈɡrɑːndeɪ bjʊˈtɛərə/ AR-ee-AH-nə GRAHN-day byuu-TAIR-ə. Grande pronounces her surname with the final syllable like "day"; she explained in an interview for Beats 1 that the pronunciation with the final syllable like "dee" was used by her grandfather. Darden, Ebro. "The Ariana Grande Interview". Beats 1. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022 – via Apple Music. Collar, Matt. "Ariana Grande Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2010. Sheets, Connor Adams (October 6, 2013). "Who Is Ariana? All About Ariana Grande, Leader of the Arianators". International Business Times. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2015. McLean, Craig (October 17, 2014). "Ariana Grande: 'If you want to call me a diva I'll say: cool'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2015. Farber, Jim (August 14, 2014). "Ariana Grande owes her stardom to singing, not sex appeal". Daily News. New York City. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2015. Goodman, Lizzy (August 15, 2014). "Billboard Cover: Ariana Grande on Fame, Freddy Krueger and Her Freaky Past". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Savage, Mark (May 23, 2017). "Ariana Grande: The diva with a heart". BBC. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Grande, Ariana [@ArianaGrande] (February 23, 2011). "I am Italian American, half Sicilian and half Abruzzese xx RT @_mylifestory @ArianaGrande What is your nationality? :)" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved November 29, 2018 – via Twitter. Gonzales, Erica (December 14, 2016). "Ariana Grande Had the Perfect Response When Her Brother Came Out". Harpers Bazaar. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. "Ariana Grande had the cutest date at the AMAs: Her Grandma!". People. Archived from the original on November 26, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2015. Ariana Grande at 8 years old singing National Anthem (via Ariana Grande Official Artist Channel). June 8, 2011. Archived from the original on December 20, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2021 – via YouTube. Geggis, Anne (August 31, 2012). "America's Tweetheart: Boca-born singer/actress big on Twitter". South Florida Sun-Sentinel. Florida. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Nostro, Lauren. "Who Is Ariana Grande? – Growing Up and Starting to Sing". Complex. Archived from the original on July 19, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2014. "About Ariana Grande". MTV. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2014. Wilson, Olivia (December 9, 2014). "16 Celebrities You Didn't Know Went to Boarding or Prep School". Teen. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2016. Brantley, Ben (October 6, 2008). "Stranger in Strange Land: The Acne Years". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 9, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2014. "Ariana Grande". Time for Kids. December 5, 2013. Archived from the original on December 18, 2013. Retrieved September 7, 2014. Brown, Lauren (April 21, 2010). "Elizabeth Gillies from Victorious Interview". Seventeen. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Mueller, Marissa G. (June 7, 2019). "Ariana Grande Wore Her Hair Down Again, and Fans Still Can't Handle It". Allure. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved December 23, 2019. Since people give me such a hard time about my hair I thought I'd take the time to explain the whole situation to everybody," she wrote on Facebook. "I had to bleach my hair and dye it red every other week for the first 4 years of playing Cat... as one would assume, that completely destroyed my hair. Wyatt, Edward (March 25, 2010). "First the Tween Heart, Now the Soul". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Seidman, Robert (March 29, 2010). "Nickelodeon Scores 2nd Biggest "Kids' Choice Awards"; "Victorious" Bows to 5.7 Million". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved September 3, 2014. Greene, Andy (May 22, 2014). "How Ariana Grande and Max Martin Made 'Problem' the Song of the Summer". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Hyman, Dan (August 22, 2013). "Life Is Grande: Ariana Grande On Her Debut Album and the Thrill of Hearing Herself on the Radio". Elle. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Laracy, Noah (May 6, 2010). "Ariana Grande: A Back Stage Exclusive". Backstage. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved February 7, 2015. Seidman, Robert (April 5, 2011). "Cable Top 25: 'Kids' Choice Awards,' 'Pawn Stars,' 'WWE RAW' and 'Victorious' Top Weekly Cable Viewing". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on April 8, 2011. Retrieved September 3, 2014. "Universal Republic Records Announces the Signing of Ariana Grande". Reuters. August 11, 2011. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved August 29, 2014. Dinh, James (June 28, 2011). "Greyson Chance Gets Revenge In 'Unfriend You' Video". MTV. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2015. Spanos, Brittany (May 20, 2016). "Ariana Grande: 7 Forgotten Screen Cameos". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 31, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Nickelodeon (June 9, 2011). "Global hit animated series 'Winx Club' comes to Nickelodeon, starting Monday, June 27, at 8pm" (Press release). Archived from the original on September 11, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2016 – via The Futon Critic. "Artist Biography by Stephen Thomas Erlewine". AllMusic. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2014. "Put Your Hearts Up – RIAA's Gold & Platinum Program searchable database". RIAA. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Phares, Heather (June 5, 2012). "Victorious 2.0: More Music from the Hit TV Show". AllMusic. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2014. "Victoria Justice & Ariana Grande: "L.A. Boyz"". Nick.com. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014. Depland, Michael (April 29, 2013). "New Video: Mika Featuring Ariana Grande, 'Popular Song'". MTV. Archived from the original on May 3, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2013. "'Victorious': Nickelodeon Cancels Victoria Justice Series After 3 Seasons". The Huffington Post. August 11, 2012. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2014. "Ariana Grande, Charlene Tilton and Neil Patrick Harris Headline A Snow White Christmas at Pasadena Playhouse, 12/13-23 – BroadwayWorld.com". Pasadenaplayhouse.org. September 7, 2012. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2012. Marechal, AJ (October 3, 2012). "Nick stars set to 'Swindle'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2013. Snierson, Dan (August 2, 2012). "Nickelodeon greenlights spin-off pilots for 'iCarly,' 'Victorious' from creator Dan Schneider – EXCLUSIVE". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2014. "Nickelodeon greenlights an 'iCarly' spinoff and other new shows". Los Angeles Times. August 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 7, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2012. Grande, Ariana (August 30, 2013). "Yours Truly". iTunes. iTunes Store. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2021. Ryce, Andre (September 23, 2013). "Ariana Grande Yours Truly". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on November 24, 2013. Retrieved June 7, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (September 11, 2013). "Ariana Grande Debuts At No. 1 On Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2013. "Ariana Grande, Tamar Braxton Score Top Debuts". Rap-Up. September 11, 2014. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved August 29, 2014. "WEEK COMMENCING 9 SEPTEMBER, 2013". ARIA. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Lane, Daniel. "The 1975 score debut Number 1 album". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2013. "GFK Chart-Track – Irish Album Chart 5 September 2013". www.chart-track.co.uk. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2016. "Yours Truly". Dutch Charts. Archived from the original on November 29, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2014. "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis Top Hot 100; Imagine Dragons, Ariana Grande Hit Top 10". Billboard. February 16, 2008. Archived from the original on June 13, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2013. "The song, featuring T.I. and Pharrell, zips 6–1 to become Thicke's first Hot 100 No. 1. Plus, Ariana Grande returns to the top 10 at a new peak and Miley Cyrus debuts at No. 11". Billboard. June 12, 2013. Archived from the original on June 14, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2014. Corner, Lewis (December 13, 2013). "Ariana Grande faces lawsuit over allegedly copying song lyrics". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2014. Thompson, Avery (July 15, 2013). "Ariana Grande: 'Baby I' – Singer Reveals Name of New Single". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved August 11, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (October 30, 2013). "Ariana Grande, Big Sean Masquerade in 'Right There' Video: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (July 31, 2013). "Ariana Grande Unveils 'Yours Truly' Artwork, Confirms Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn (July 29, 2013). "Ariana Grande 'Working Out A Lot' Before Justin Bieber Tour". MTV. Archived from the original on September 12, 2019. Retrieved August 30, 2014. "AMAs 2013: See the complete winners list". Entertainment Weekly. November 25, 2013. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved November 25, 2013. Gallo, Phil (November 26, 2013). "Ariana Grande, Taylor Swift Lead AMAs to Record Twitter Traffic (Exclusive)". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "Ariana Grande to release new music in the lead-up to Christmas". Digital Spy. November 6, 2013. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Trakin, Roy (April 14, 2014). "Ariana Grande to be Awarded 'Breakthrough Artist of the Year' by Music Business Association". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 27, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Menyes, Carolyn (January 13, 2014). "Ariana Grande Twitter announces she's working on second album in studio". Music Times. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2014. "Aretha Franklin, Ariana Grande Set for First Lady's 'Women of Soul' Concert". Billboard. March 4, 2014. Archived from the original on July 9, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2014. Singh, Sonalee (April 22, 2014). "Ariana Grande Sexy Legs on Display at Easter Egg Roll Event: Gushes About Jim Carrey". International Business Times. Archived from the original on April 24, 2014. Retrieved April 22, 2014. "Ariana Grande scores second chart-topping album on Billboard 200". Reuters. September 3, 2014. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. "Ariana Grande | Biography, Music & News". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Lipshutz, Jason (June 23, 2014). "Ariana Grande's 'Break Free': Zedd Discusses The 'Problem' Follow-Up". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Trust, Gary (August 20, 2014). "Ariana Grande, Iggy Azalea Triple Up In Hot 100's Top 10, MAGIC! Still No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2014. Ehrlich, Brenna (August 24, 2014). "Ponytail Princess Ariana Grande Wins Best Pop Video VMA". MTV. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (July 1, 2014). "Jessie J, Ariana Grande, Nicki Minaj Combine For 'Bang Bang' Single". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2014. Reed, Ryan (September 10, 2014). "Ariana Grande, Chris Pratt Set for 'Saturday Night Live' Premiere". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Trust, Gary (October 17, 2014). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Ed Sheeran, Ariana Grande, Fergie Debut". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Williams, Brillion (January 22, 2015). "Ariana Grande to Be Headlining NBA All-Star Show". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 7, 2015. Carley, Brennan (November 13, 2014). "Major Lazer and Ariana Grande Team Up for Piercing 'Mockingjay' Cut". Spin. Archived from the original on August 17, 2023. Retrieved May 18, 2018. White, Caitlin (November 24, 2014). "Ariana Grande's 'Santa Tell Me' Is Officially Here, and It Sounds Like Christmas Came Early!". MTV. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2014. "Ariana Grande – Chart History: The Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Perdani, Yuliasri (June 16, 2015). "Ariana Grande to debut in Jakarta soon". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on October 24, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2015. McDermott, Maeve; Ryan, Patrick (December 22, 2015). "The 50 best songs of 2015". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2017. "Ariana Grande Signs with Universal Music Publishing Group". Billboard. June 1, 2015. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2020. and Stassen, Murray (June 2, 2015). "Ariana Grande signs worldwide publishing deal with UMPG". Music Week. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Holloway, Daniel (July 14, 2015). "Justin Bieber, Ariana Grande to Appear on Ryan Seacrest's Knock Knock Live". TheWrap.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (July 30, 2015). "Fox Pulls Ryan Seacrest's Knock Knock Live After Two Episodes". Variety. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Stack, Tim (April 24, 2015). "First Look: Ariana Grande on the set of Scream Queens". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Mallenbaum, Carly (October 14, 2015). "Ariana Grande has Italian duet with Andrea Bocelli. Of course it's good". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 8, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Glein, Kelsey (October 30, 2015). "Gwen Stefani, Ariana Grande, and More Reimagine Your Favorite Disney Songs on New Album". InStyle. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2015. Spanos, Brittany (December 17, 2015). "Hear Ariana Grande's Surprise-Released EP 'Christmas & Chill'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Roth, Madeline (May 30, 2015). "Ariana Grande Revealed Her New Album Title – And It's Literally Out of This World". MTV. Archived from the original on May 30, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2015. Trust, Gary (November 9, 2015). "Adele's 'Hello' Tops Hot 100 for Second Week; Ariana Grande, Meghan Trainor Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Thompson, Heather (November 23, 2015). "Ariana Grande Teams With Who is Fancy For 'Boys Like You' Song". M Magazine. Archived from the original on November 16, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. Mallenbaum, Carly (January 16, 2016). "Hear Ariana Grande Join Ex-Boyfriend Nathan Sykes on 'Over and Over Again'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Nolfi, Joey (March 10, 2016). "Hear Ariana Grande's sultry new single 'Dangerous Woman'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2020.; Geffen, Sasha (March 11, 2016). "Ariana Grande's 'Dangerous Woman' Is Here and It Deserves Its Own Spy Movie". MTV. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2016. "iTunes – Music – Dangerous Woman by Ariana Grande". iTunes Store (US). Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 10, 2016. Trust, Gary (March 21, 2016). "Rihanna Rules Hot 100 for Fifth Week, Ariana Grande Debuts at No. 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Hilliday, B. S (March 13, 2016). "Ariana Grande Crushes 'Dangerous Woman' & 'Be Alright' Performances On SNL". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 13, 2016. Trust, Gary (March 31, 2016). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Iggy Azalea & Ariana Grande Debut". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved April 20, 2020. "Ariana Grande Incredibly Imitates Whitney, Celine, Britney and More". The Huffington Post. March 14, 2016. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2016. D'Addario, Daniel. "Ariana Grande's Saturday Night Live Performance Was a Triumph". Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Iasimone, Ashley (March 13, 2016). "Watch All of Ariana Grande's Celebrity Impressions". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (May 29, 2016). "Drake's Views Still No. 1 on Billboard 200, Ariana Grande and Blake Shelton Debut at Nos. 2 & 3". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 30, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2020. "週間 CDアルバムランキング: 2016年05月16日～2016年05月22". Oricon. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. "Ariana Grande – Dangerous Woman". australian-charts.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2016.; "Ariana Grande – Dangerous Woman". dutchcharts.nl. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2016.; "Top 100 Artist Album, Week Ending 26 May 2016". Irish Music Charts Archive. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2016.; "Album – Classifica settimanale WK 21" (in Italian). Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2016.; "New Zealand Top 40 Albums Chart". Recorded Music New Zealand. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2016. White, Jack (May 27, 2016). "Ariana Grande scores first Number 1 album with Dangerous Woman". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2016. "Ariana Grande – 'Greedy' (Live at the Summertime Ball 2016)". Capital FM. June 2, 2016. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2016. "The Hot 100: The Week of December 3, 2016". Billboard. November 23, 2016. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2020. "Here Is the Complete List of Nominees for the 2017 Grammys". Billboard. December 6, 2016. Archived from the original on December 6, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Saraiya, Sonia (December 7, 2016). "TV Review: Hairspray Live!". Variety. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved December 10, 2017. Stutz, Colin (January 11, 2017). "Ariana Grande and John Legend to Record "Beauty and the Beast" Duet for Disney Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Kelemen, Matt (January 27, 2017). "Ariana Grande Is a Dangerous Talent". Las Vegas. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2017. "Ariana Grande's Manchester Benefit Concert Draws Biggest U.K. TV Audience of 2017". The Hollywood Reporter. June 5, 2017. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved June 5, 2017. Blistein, Jon (August 15, 2017). "Families of Ariana Grande Concert Attack Victims to Receive $324,000". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Smirke, Richard (June 4, 2017). "Bravery, Resilience Shine as Ariana Grande Leads All-Star Benefit Concert for Victims of Manchester Bombing". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Macguire, Eoghan (July 12, 2017). "Manchester Names Ariana Grande Honorary Citizen". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Lynch, Jess (June 7, 2017). "Ariana Grande proves she's an unstoppable force as she resumes her world tour". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on June 8, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017.; and Gonzalez, Sandra (June 7, 2017). "Ariana Grande honors 'angels' as tour resumes". CNN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2017.; and Billboard (September 1, 2017). "Ariana Grande Wraps Up First Tour of Mainland China". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Lakshmin, Deepa (September 21, 2017). "Ariana Grande Wrote A Beautiful Goodbye Note To Her Dangerous Woman Tour". MTV. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved September 22, 2017. Fierberg, Ruthie (August 22, 2017). "Ariana Grande and Seth MacFarlane Sing Little Shop's 'Suddenly Seymour' on Carpool Karaoke". People. Archived from the original on September 7, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2017. McNeilage, Ross (December 2, 2017). "Ariana Grande Is Billboard's Female Artist of the Year". MTV. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Tanzer, Myles (May 30, 2018). "Ariana Grande". The Fader. Archived from the original on January 29, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2018. Reed, Ryan (April 20, 2018). "Hear Ariana Grande's Uplifting New Song 'No Tears Left to Cry'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018. Trust, Gary (April 30, 2018). "Drake Leads Billboard Hot 100, Ariana Grande Arrives at No. 3 & J. Cole Collects Record Three Debuts in Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2018. Nelson, Jeff (June 20, 2018). "Ariana Grande Drops 'The Light Is Coming' Video, Frolics in the Woods with Nicki Minaj". People. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2018. Kiefer, Halle (June 14, 2018). "Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj Just Released Their New Single, "Bed"". teenVogue. Archived from the original on September 28, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Kiefer, Halle (July 13, 2018). "Listen to Ariana Grande's New Song 'God is a woman'". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2018. Whittum, Connor (July 13, 2018). "Ariana Grande's Epic 'God Is a Woman' Video, Decoded". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 8, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2018. Zellner, Xander (August 27, 2018). "Ariana Grande Earns 10th Top 10 Hit, Lands 10 Songs on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2018. Blistein, Jon (June 20, 2018). "Hear Ariana Grande Tap Nicki Minaj for Snappy 'The Light Is Coming'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved June 20, 2018.; "Ariana Grande Switches on 'The Light Is Coming' Featuring Nicki Minaj: Stream It Here". Billboard. June 20, 2018. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2018. Kreps, Daniel (August 26, 2018). "On the Charts: Ariana Grande's Sweetener Opens at Number One". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 19, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2018. "Reviews for Sweetener by Ariana Grande". Metacritic. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved August 28, 2018. Zellner, Xander (August 27, 2018). "Ariana Grande Earns 10th Top 10 Hit, Lands 10 Songs on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved August 29, 2018. Legaspi, Althea (August 8, 2018). "Ariana Grande Details Intimate Sweetener Sessions Concerts". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved August 22, 2018. Lenker, Maureen Lee (October 29, 2018). "The 5 best moments in A Very Wicked Halloween". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2018. Blair, Olivia (October 29, 2018). "Ariana Grande has a one hour special airing on the BBC this week and it's a dream". Cosmopolitan.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2018. Sporn, Natasha (November 1, 2018). "Ariana Grande at the BBC: Why Davina McCall's chat with star is a must watch". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2018. Stiernberg, Bonnie (November 3, 2018). "Ariana Grande Teases New Album 'Thank U, Next'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2018. "thank u, next – Single by Ariana Grande". iTunes. November 3, 2018. Archived from the original on November 4, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2018. "Ariana Grande Achieves First Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 as 'Thank U, Next' Debuts on Top". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "Chart History Ariana Grande". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2020. "Gold & Platinum – Ariana Grande – Thank U, Next". RIAA. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Ariana Grande's 'Thank U, Next' Has the Biggest Music Video Debut in YouTube History". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2018. "Grande's 'thank u, next' bests Adele to fastest 100 million views". Reuters. December 4, 2018. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. "Ariana Grande breaks 100 m Spotify streams record with "thank u, next"". Fader. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Jarvey, Natalie (November 28, 2018). "Ariana Grande Docuseries to Stream on YouTube". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Spotify Announces 2018 'Wrapped' Most Streamed Stats: Drake & Ariana Grande Top the List". Billboard. December 4, 2022. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "Coachella 2019: Full Lineup Announced". Pitchfork. January 2, 2019. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019. "Ariana Grande Is Making History at Coachella This Year". Elle. January 3, 2019. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019. "Childish Gambino, Ariana Grande, Tame Impala To Headline Coachella 2019". TicketNews. January 3, 2019. Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved January 3, 2019. "Ariana Grande Reportedly Raked in $8 Million from Coachella". jezebel. April 15, 2019. Archived from the original on August 22, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2019. "Watch Ariana Grande Bring Out Justin Bieber at Coachella 2019". pitchfork. April 22, 2019. Archived from the original on March 2, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2019. "Ariana Grande breaks her own record (again) with '7 Rings'". MTV UK. January 19, 2019. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2019. "Ariana Grande's '7 Rings' Soars In at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2019. "The 7 Records Ariana Grande Has Already Broken With '7 Rings'". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 23, 2020. Retrieved January 31, 2019. "Chart History: Ariana Grande". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2020. "Reviews for thank u, next by Ariana Grande". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 21, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Caulfield, Keith (February 17, 2019). "Ariana Grande's 'Thank U, Next' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With Biggest Streaming Week Ever for a Pop Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 5, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Trust, Gary (February 19, 2019). "Ariana Grande Claims Nos. 1, 2 & 3 on Billboard Hot 100, Is First Act to Achieve the Feat Since The Beatles in 1964". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019. "Ariana Grande just made UK chart history". The Independent. February 15, 2019. Archived from the original on March 18, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Kreps, Daniel (February 6, 2019). "Ariana Grande Not Attending Grammys After Producers 'Insulted' Her". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 31, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. "Grammys 2019: Ariana Grande Wins First Grammy". Pitchfork. February 10, 2019. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2019. Lynch, Joe (February 20, 2019). "Brit Awards 2019 Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 20, 2019. Brandle, Lars (October 25, 2018). "Ariana Grande Announces 'Sweetener' World Tour: See the Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2018. Lynch, Joe (May 1, 2019). "2019 Billboard Music Awards Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 16, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019. Daw, Stephen (May 1, 2019). "Ariana Grande Gives Epic Performance Of '7 Rings' at the 2019 BBMAs: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019. Strauss, Matthew (June 27, 2019). "First Charlie's Angels Trailer Previews Lana, Ariana, and Miley's New Song: Watch". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved June 27, 2019. Hachey, Connor (August 28, 2019). "Lana Del Rey Talks Norman F*cking Rockwell, Jack Antonoff and more!". 104.3 MYFM. Archived from the original on August 29, 2019. Retrieved August 29, 2019. Henry, Ben (August 2, 2019). "Ariana Grande Revealed What Her New Song "Boyfriend" Is About And TBH It's Very Relatable". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on January 2, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Holmes, Charles (August 8, 2019). "Normani Reveals Ariana Grande Wrote on Her New Single". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Nordyke, Kimberly (August 26, 2019). "MTV Video Music Awards: Taylor Swift, Jonas Brothers, Cardi B Among Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2019. Brooks, Hayden (October 24, 2019). "Ariana Grande's Remix Of Lizzo's 'Good As Hell' Is Dropping Tonight". iheartradio.com. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2019. "Decade-End Charts Top Artists 2010s". Billboard. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Mylrea, Hannah (December 3, 2019). "NME's 10 Artists Who Defined The Decade: The 2010s". nme.com. Archived from the original on March 18, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Skinner, Tom (December 3, 2019). "Spotify reveals most-streamed artists and songs of the decade". nme.com. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019. "The World's Highest-Paid Entertainers 2019". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 28, 2004. Retrieved April 15, 2020. Christman, Ed. "Billboard's U.S. Money Makers: The Top Paid Musicians of 2019". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2021. Blistering, Jon (January 8, 2020). "Billie Eilish, Ariana Grande, Shawn Mendes Lead iHeartRadio Music Awards Nominees". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 11, 2020. Retrieved January 8, 2020. Sanyal, Pathikrit (February 19, 2020). "'Kidding' Season 2 Episode 5 will see Ariana Grande's green fairy arrive on Jeff's show as old set collapses". MEA WorldWide. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (May 7, 2020). "Justin Bieber & Ariana Grande Are Collaborating For a Good Cause". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 1, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. "Ariana Grande & Justin Bieber's "Stuck With U" Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. May 18, 2020. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Aniftos, Rania (May 15, 2020). "Lady Gaga & Ariana Grande's 'Rain on Me' Collaboration Is Coming Really Soon". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved May 16, 2020. "Lady Gaga & Ariana Grande's 'Rain on Me' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. June 2020. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2020. Shafer, Ellise (March 14, 2021). "Grammys 2021 Winners List". Variety. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 4, 2020). "The World's Highest Paid Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 28, 2004. Retrieved June 4, 2020. "#17 Ariana Grande". Archived from the original on June 5, 2020. Retrieved June 4, 2020 – via Forbes. Hosken, Patrick (August 30, 2020). "2020 MTV VMA Winners: see the full list". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 31, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. Warner, Denise (August 30, 2020). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2020 MTV VMAs". Billboard. Retrieved April 1, 2024. Harris, Latesha (October 30, 2020). "Ariana Grande Releases New Album 'Positions,' Her Most Explicit To Date". NPR. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (November 8, 2020). "Ariana Grande Claims Fifth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Positions'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020. Sinha, Charu (October 21, 2020). "Get Into 'Position' for Ariana Grande's New Single". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Trust, Gary (November 2, 2020). "Ariana Grande's 'Positions' Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100, Luke Combs' 'Forever After All' Launches at No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2020. Trust, Gary (November 9, 2020). "24kGoldn & Iann Dior's 'Mood' Swings Back to No. 1 on Hot 100; Ariana Grande, Bad Bunny & Jhay Cortez Debut in Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Trust, Gary (January 25, 2021). "Olivia Rodrigo's 'Drivers License' No. 1 on Hot 100 for 2nd Week, Ariana Grande's '34+35' Bounds to No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Trust, Gary (May 10, 2021). "3 Top 10 'Positions': Ariana Grande Makes History on Pop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2023. Aswad, Jem (November 29, 2021). "Dua Lipa's 'Levitating,' Ariana Grande Top iHeartRadio's Most-Played Lists of 2021". Variety. Archived from the original on November 29, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (November 13, 2020). "See Ariana Grande Perform 'Them Changes' With Thundercat at Adult Swim Festival". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Aniftos, Rania (December 3, 2020). "Mariah Carey, Ariana Grande & Jennifer Hudson Have Blessed Us With 'Oh Santa!'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Vulpo, Mike (December 9, 2020). "Ariana Grande Reveals Her Sweetener Tour Is Officially Coming to Netflix". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Mamo, Heran (April 23, 2021). "The Weeknd Drops 'Save Your Tears' Remix With Ariana Grande: Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. "Ariana Grande (Chart History): Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. May 10, 2021. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Trust, Gary (May 3, 2021). "The Weeknd & Ariana Grande's 'Save Your Tears' Soars to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Trust, Gary; Caulfield, Keith (December 2, 2021). "The Year In Charts 2021: Dua Lipa's 'Levitating' Is the No. 1 Billboard Hot 100 Song of the Year". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Bloom, Madison (May 27, 2021). "Watch the Weeknd and Ariana Grande Perform "Save Your Tears" at 2021 iHeartRadio Music Awards". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Strauss, Matthew (February 24, 2023). "The Weeknd Enlists Ariana Grande for New "Die for You (Remix)"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Trust, Gary (February 6, 2023). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Tops Billboard Hot 100 for Third Week, Lil Uzi Vert's 'Just Wanna Rock' Hits Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 7, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Trust, Gary (March 6, 2023). "The Weeknd & Ariana Grande's 'Die for You' Leaps to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Brandle, Lars (February 26, 2024). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Wins IFPI Global Single Award For 2023". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 26, 2024. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Legaspi, Althea (June 9, 2021). "Doja Cat Enlists Ariana Grande, the Weeknd for New 'Planet Her' Album". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 22, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Yossman, K. J. (January 6, 2022). "Adam McKay's 'Don't Look Up' Smashes Netflix Viewing Records With Over 150 Million Hours Viewed". Variety. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Skinner, Tom (December 3, 2021). "Hear Ariana Grande and Kid Cudi's new collaboration, 'Just Look Up'". NME. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Nordyke, Kimberly (March 13, 2022). "Critics Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 19, 2023. Retrieved January 9, 2024. Nordyke, Kimberly (February 27, 2022). "SAG Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 28, 2022. Retrieved January 9, 2024. Bloom, Madison (August 19, 2023). "Ariana Grande Releasing Yours Truly 10th Anniversary Reissue Friday". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Kreps, Daniel (August 19, 2023). "Ariana Grande Details Week's Worth of 'Yours Truly' 10th Anniversary Plans". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 24, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Russell, Shania (December 10, 2023). "Mariah Carey invites her 'Christmas angels' Ariana Grande and Jennifer Hudson onstage for 'Oh Santa'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 9, 2024. Shafer, Ellise; Donnelly, Matt (November 4, 2021). "Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo to Star in 'Wicked' Musical for Universal". Variety. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved November 4, 2021. Petski, Densie (March 14, 2023). "Universal Moves Up 'Wicked' Part 1 Release Date". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Le, Brendan (March 21, 2023). "Wicked Costars Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo Present Together at Oscars 2024". People. Retrieved March 11, 2024. {{cite web}}: Check |archive-url= value (help)CS1 maint: url-status (link) Mier, Tomás (December 27, 2023). "Ariana Grande Finally Teases New Music Era: 'See You Next Year'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Spanos, Brittany. "Ariana Grande Strikes A Pose With House Single 'Yes, And?'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Unterberger, Andrew (January 18, 2024). "Will It Be 'Yes, And' or 'No, But' for Ariana Grande Atop the Hot 100 Next Week?". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. * Trust, Gary (January 22, 2024). "Ariana Grande's 'Yes, And?' Launches at No. 1 on Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 22, 2024. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Trust, Gary (January 29, 2024). "Ariana Grande's 'Yes, And?' Adds Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard Global Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 30, 2024. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Kaufman, Gil (March 11, 2024). "Ariana Grande Releases 'Slightly Deluxe' Edition of 'Eternal Sunshine' With Mariah Carey, Troye Sivan Features". Billboard. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Gonzalez, Alex (March 8, 2024). "Ariana Grande Comes To A Heartbreaking Conclusion On Her New Single, 'We Can't Be Friends (Wait For Your Love)'". Uproxx. Archived from the original on March 8, 2024. Retrieved March 8, 2024. Hoglund, Andy (March 10, 2024). "Saturday Night Live recap: After 12 years, Josh Brolin returns to host with a lively, excitable performance". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 10, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Dobbins, Amanda (September 4, 2013). "Ariana Grande 101: Is She Really the New Mariah". Vulture. Archived from the original on February 14, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2018. "Ariana Grande's 'Dangerous Woman' Isn't Dangerous Or Womanly... So What?". Noisey. May 23, 2016. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. "6 Reasons Ariana Grande's 'Sweetener' Is Her Most Uplifting Album Yet". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2019. "Ariana Grande's 'Sweetener' Proves That Trap Is the New Pop". Rolling Stone. August 17, 2018. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved January 27, 2020. Saponara, Michael (March 7, 2019). "Producer Tommy Brown Breaks Down Every Song He Produced on Ariana Grande's 'Thank U, Next' Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2020. Tanzer, Myles (October 30, 2020). "How Ariana Grande's New Album, 'Positions,' Was Made During Covid-19". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. "Grande on 'Yours Truly' and Miley Cyrus". Rolling Stone. September 11, 2013. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. "'Thank U' Text: Ariana Grande's Collaborators Break Down The Artist's Latest Album". npr. February 9, 2019. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. Aniftos, Rania (February 8, 2019). "Ariana Grande's 'Thank U, Next' Album: 5 Most Heartbreaking Lyrics". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved January 26, 2020. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (August 25, 2014). "My Everything – Ariana Grande". AllMusic. Archived from the original on February 24, 2022. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Sheffield, Rob (August 26, 2014). "Ariana Grande My Everything". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 17, 2018. Retrieved August 28, 2014. Wood, Mikael (May 18, 2016). "Review: Ariana Grande leaves the princess image behind with Dangerous Woman". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Leight, Elias (August 17, 2018). "Ariana Grande's Sweetener Proves That Trap Is the New Pop". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 4, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018. "Gimme Five: Ariana Grande's Most Inspirational Female Singers". Billboard. October 9, 2013. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Jenkins, Craig (February 8, 2019). "Thank U, Next Is a Phoenix Moment for Ariana Grande". Vulture. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019. Retrieved February 22, 2019. Camp, Alexa (October 30, 2020). "Review: Ariana Grande's Positions Too Often Defaults to a Familiar Pose". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2020. Siroky, Mary (October 30, 2020). "Ariana Grande's Positions Is a 2020 Pop Fairytale: Review". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2020. Lipshutz, Jason (March 28, 2013). "Ariana Grande Talks Breakout Hit 'The Way': Watch New Music Video". Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Nickelodeon Kids". Nickelodeon Kids. January 26, 2013. Archived from the original on October 1, 2014. Retrieved January 26, 2013. "Limelight Spotlight Q&A: Ariana Grande". January 13, 2012. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "Ariana Grande Covers Whitney Houston at the White House". Rap-Up. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2014. "Ariana Grande Strips Down To Lingerie For Sexy 'V' Shoot". Hollywoodlife. February 21, 2014. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2014. "Ariana Grande Opens Up About Mac Miller's Life and Music". teenvogue. May 14, 2020. Archived from the original on June 10, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2020. Rhue, Holly (December 23, 2018). "Watch Ariana Grande Absolutely Nail A Celine Dion Song As A Toddler". Elle. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (November 2, 2018). "Watch Ariana Grande Talk Anxiety, Perform 'Sweetener' Songs on BBC Special". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2023. "Madonna inspires Ariana Grande". AP News. March 2, 2017. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2023. "How Ariana Grande Scored Two Number One Albums in Just Six Months". Rolling Stone. February 18, 2019. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2022. LeDonne, Rob (August 23, 2018). "Songwriter Savan Kotecha on the Making of Ariana Grande's Sweetener". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Ariana Grande Wants to Release Music Like a Rapper". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Zoladz, Lindsay (December 5, 2018). "Thank U, Next: How Ariana Grande and Drake Accelerated the Pop Music Life Cycle". The Ringer. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. McKinney, Kelsey (July 8, 2015). "9 Questions You're Too Embarrassed To Ask About Ariana Grande". Vox. Archived from the original on February 3, 2018. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Empire, Kitty (May 21, 2017). "Ariana Grande review – pop it till it flops". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 27, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2018. Vincent, Alice (June 2, 2015). "Ariana Grande, O2, review: 'spectacle but no soul'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 12, 2018. "Ariana Grande 101: Is She Really the New Mariah?". Vulture. September 4, 2013. Archived from the original on February 14, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2015. "Ariana Grande: Five Things To Know About The Little Girl Behind That Big Voice". Vh1. September 6, 2013. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved October 11, 2017. "Ariana Grande's new single 'Baby I': Hear it here". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2014.; and "Ariana Grande and Chris Brown Duet Release Coming Out in March". celebdirtylaundry. February 17, 2014. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2014. Horowitz, Steven J. (August 27, 2014). "It's Time to Stop Comparing Ariana Grande to Mariah Carey". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Shepherd, Julianne Escobedo (August 26, 2014). "Ariana Grande's Fashion Focus: Breaking Down Her Many Confident Looks". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Pareles, Jon (August 29, 2018). "Ariana Grande Sails Above Sorrow on Sweetener". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Brown, Jason Robert (April 21, 2016). "The World's Most Influential People: Ariana Grande". Time. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved April 21, 2016. McLoughlin, Louby (August 20, 2014). "Ariana Grande: 'I Look Back At Things I Wore Yesterday And Cringe'". Grazia. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2014. Farber, Jim (August 14, 2014). "Ariana Grande owes her stardom to singing, not sex appeal". Daily News. Archived from the original on October 5, 2014. Retrieved March 19, 2024. McAfee, Tierney (July 2, 2014). "'Total Ariana Live': See Ariana Grande's Hottest Looks Before Show". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2014.; Glein, Kelsey (August 25, 2014). "Ariana Grande Steps Out in Style with 3 Pairs of Thigh-High Boots at the MTV VMAs". InStyle. Archived from the original on January 29, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2014.; Morton, Caitlin (April 23, 2014). "Ariana Grande Is Totally Having a Nancy Sinatra Moment". MTV. Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved September 2, 2014.; and Mitzeliotis, Katrina (May 18, 2014). "Ariana Grande's Billboard Awards Performance Dress: Pretty In a Mini". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Piwowarski, Allison (February 3, 2021). "What's Up With The Cat Ears?". Bustle. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Jackson, Vannessa (February 3, 2021). "What Does Ariana Grande's Bunny Mask Mean". Bustle. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Chochreck, Ella (December 20, 2020). "11 Times Ariana Grande Went Pantless With an Oversized Hoodie & Thigh-High Boots". Footwear News. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Anfitos, Rania (February 2, 2020). "These 8 Celebrity Doppelgangers on TikTok Will Have You Seeing Double". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "Madison Beer Asks People To Stop The 'Hurtful' Ariana Grande 'Copying' Claims". Capital FM. November 19, 2020. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Eggenberger, Nicole (January 22, 2014). "Ariana Grande Explains Hair Extensions: Natural Hair Looks "Absolutely Ratchet"". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2014. Donahue, Anne T. (April 18, 2016). "Do Not Be Distracted by Ariana Grande's Ponytail". MTV. Vincent, Peter (September 8, 2014). "Ariana Grande's surreal life in the spotlight". The Sydney Morning Herald.; Yahr, Emily (September 19, 2014). "Ariana Grande is on the brink of a major image problem. How can she fix it?". The Washington Post.; "Ariana Grande's Donut Video & 5 More Controversies". Billboard. July 8, 2015.; Garvey, Marianne; Niemietz, Brian; Coleman, Oli (September 30, 2014). "A show of ego from Ariana Grande". New York Daily News.; Michael, Wendy (August 27, 2014). "Ariana Grande Acted Like a Diva to MTV VMA Contest Winner, Left Her In Tears". Cambio.com. Retrieved July 9, 2015.; and Clun, Rachel (September 16, 2014). "Giuliana Rancic makes latest claim about Ariana Grande's diva behaviour". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved July 9, 2015. McLean, Craig (October 17, 2014). "Ariana Grande: 'If you want to call me a diva I'll say: cool'". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Castillo, Arielle (May 18, 2016). "Ariana Grande: Five Great 'Scandals' – Ariana vs. the Press, 2014". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved August 24, 2017. Lipshutz, Jason (July 8, 2015). "Demi Lovato to Replace Ariana Grande at MLB All-Star Game Concert". Billboard.; and Yahr, Emily (July 8, 2015). "Ariana Grande's doughnut scandal is an important reminder: The cameras are always watching". The Washington Post. Ramisetti, Kirthana (July 8, 2015). "Ariana Grande apologizes for 'I hate America' comments in video: 'I am EXTREMELY proud to be an American'". New York Daily News. Strecker, Erin (July 9, 2015). "Ariana Grande Shares Apology Video: 'I'm Going to Learn From My Mistakes'". Billboard. Gomez, Patrick (October 11, 2015). "The Muppets' Swedish Chef Licks Doughnuts à la Ariana Grande". People. Archived from the original on March 19, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Lindsay, Jessica (October 4, 2015). "Miley parodies Kim Davis and Martin Shkreli in SNL number". Gay Times. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2015. "Ariana Grande Sings About Wanting an Adult Scandal in 'SNL' Monologue". Billboard. March 13, 2016. Ahlgrim, Callie (February 9, 2019). "Ariana Grande says being called a diva forced her to 'quiet down a little bit' and stop doing interviews". Insider. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Jensen, Erin. "Harry and Meghan, Ariana Grande on Time's list of most influential people on the internet". Today. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Duboff, Josh (March 9, 2017). "How Ariana Grande Amassed Her 100 Million Instagram Followers". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 16, 2017. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved July 16, 2020 – via YouTube.; and "Jessie J, Ariana Grande, Nicki Minaj – Bang Bang ft. Ariana Grande, Nicki Minaj". JessieJVEVO. August 25, 2014. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2019. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved July 16, 2020 – via Spotify. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved July 16, 2020 – via Instagram. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved July 16, 2020 – via Twitter. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved July 16, 2020 – via Facebook. "Ariana Grande". Retrieved January 13, 2022 – via TikTok. "Ariana Grande Officially Becomes Most Followed Woman on Instagram". Forbes. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "World's Top 50 Influencers Across Social Media Platforms". Visual Capitalist. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "How Ariana Grande Went From Nickelodeon Star to Pop Icon". Yahoo. October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. "Women's History Month: Triple Threat Female Artists Who Sing, Write, and Act (Part 2)". American Songwriter. March 29, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2022. "At Madame Tussauds New York, attend the "Met Gala" with "Katy Perry," "Lady Gaga," "Justin Bieber" and more". 97.9 WRMF. June 23, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (March 10, 2022). "Ariana Grande Gets Madame Tussauds Wax Figure in Orlando". Billboard. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Westland, Evie (April 6, 2017). "Ariana Grande in Madame Tussauds Amsterdam". Metronieuws.nl (in Dutch). Retrieved December 3, 2022. "Ariana melts hearts in wax". The Nation Thailand. October 29, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Gilmore, Kelly (March 11, 2022). "This Ariana Grande Wax Figure Will Have You Doing a Double Take". E! Online. Retrieved December 3, 2022. "Ariana Grande's Madame Tussauds Wax Figure Brutally Mocked". Newsweek. December 13, 2023. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "Ariana Grande bekommt Wachsfigur bei Madame Tussauds". BZ-Berlin. May 7, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "Miss Universe 2018 Catriona Gray's wax figure now in Madame Tussauds Hong Kong". Rappler. September 2023. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Sivan, Troye (April 17, 2019). "The World's Most Influential People: Ariana Grande". Time. Almeida, Celia (April 11, 2017). "Ariana Grande Is Not Your Sex Kitten". Miami New Times. "ARIANA: POP DIVA SUPREME – HITS Daily Double". Hits Daily Double. August 30, 2018. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Shaw, Lucas (December 11, 2020). "Ariana Grande Is the Biggest Pop Star in the World". Bloomberg. "The 200 Most Important Artists of Pitchfork's First 25 Years". Pitchfork. October 4, 2021. "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time". Rolling Stone. September 15, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. "Madison Beer Asks People To Stop The 'Hurtful' Ariana Grande 'Copying' Claims". Capital FM. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "Sufjan Stevens on Making Pop Music in a Crisis". Vanity Fair. September 24, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2020. "Melanie Martinez on 'Cry Baby,' Not Wanting to Be a Role Model & What She Learned From 'The Voice'". Billboard. Retrieved April 4, 2015. "Meghan Trainor Is All About that Bass, T-Pain, and Drunk Texting". Out. September 10, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2014. "Troye Sivan Said Ariana Grande Is "Breaking the Rules" in His Essay for Her Time 100 Honor". Teen Vogue. April 17, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "BTS' Jungkook says watching Ariana Grande perform live "really stayed" with him". NME. May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. "María Becerra, la chica de los 40 millones, anticipa los dúos que se vienen después de Cazzu, Tini y Lola Indigo". Zonales. February 12, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Ariana sei Dank – Billie Eilish hat wieder Lust auf Musik". Zeit Online. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Red Velvet's Yeri Gets A Sweet Reply From Her Idol Ariana Grande". Soompi. January 23, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. "SABRINA CARPENTER REVEALS THE BEST THING ARIANA GRANDE TAUGHT HER ABOUT MAKING MUSIC". Tigerbeat. Retrieved November 21, 2018. "Danna Paola le responde a quienes dicen que quiere imitar a Ariana Grande" (in Spanish). RCN Radio. October 15, 2020. Retrieved October 15, 2020. "Zara Larsson inspired by Beyonce". The Nation. March 25, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "Melody se torna assunto do momento ao ser comparada com Ariana Grande em vídeo. Vem entender". Febre Teen. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "Bryson Tiller Announces A 'Special' Christmas Project Inspired By Justin Bieber And Ariana Grande". Uproxx. November 10, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "Lana Del Rey stans Ariana Grande". W Magazine. October 16, 2019. Retrieved January 30, 2023. "Young Age, Winning an Emmy, and Launching a Solo Pop Career". Create & Culative. January 20, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "Japanese Breakfast's Michelle Zauner On Her Wild Year And Winning The 2021 Uproxx Music Critics Poll". Uproxx. December 16, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "Grace VanderWaal Fangirls Over Ariana Grande, Talks Tour With Imagine Dragons on BBMA Red Carpet: Watch". Billboard. May 21, 2018. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "YDE Talks About Her New EP 'Send Help', Taking Inspiration From Olivia Rodrigo, Ariana Grande, Miley Cyrus & More". Yahoo!. September 9, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "INTERVIEW: Maggie Lindemann Is Out To Inspire The Next Generation Of Women". iHeart. January 20, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "Charlie Puth: Inspiration durch Ariana Grande". RTL. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2023. "'The First Time': Aespa Talks Inspiration From Fashion, Harry Styles, Grimes, Ariana Grande". Rolling Stone. December 2, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Tate McRae Celebrates Going #1 With Greedy. Ask Anything Chat. December 10, 2023. Archived from the original on December 10, 2023. Retrieved December 10, 2023 – via YouTube. "Ariana Grande Reacts To Being Cast As Glinda In Wicked Movie". ScreenRant. November 5, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "15 Inspirational Quotes by Pop Star Ariana Grande". Epic Media Labs. May 29, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Murray, Sean (July 29, 2021). "Fortnite Rift Tour Concert Event Might Bring Ariana Grande To The Virtual Stage". TheGamer. Retrieved January 21, 2023. "RIAA: Searchable Database". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved April 16, 2022. "Ariana Grande". RIAA. Retrieved April 8, 2019. Trust, Gary (August 25, 2023). "'Such a Breath of Fresh Air': Ariana Grande's 'Yours Truly' Collaborators Reflect on 10 Years of Her Debut Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "Ariana Grande Signs With New Management". Retrieved December 10, 2023. "BRIT Certified". British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Ariana Grande Was The Most Streamed Female Artist Of The 2010s". Huffpost. December 3, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "20 Most Streamed Women in Apple Music History, From Ariana Grande to Lady Gaga (Photos)". TheWrap. March 8, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2023. "Top 10 Artists on Spotify: Is Ed Sheeran Still in the Lead?". Music Times. April 2, 2022. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Ariana Grande pleads with Rihanna to "drop her album" after breaking streaming record". NME. August 19, 2020. "Ariana Grande Becomes First Female Artist To Surpass 2 Billion Spotify Streams With Three Albums". Inquisitr. March 25, 2019. "Ariana Grande becomes first female artist with 3.5 billion streams on three separate albums". NME. February 2, 2020. "Ariana Grande's 'Positions' Surpassed 4 Billion Spotify Streams, Her Fifth Album To Do So". Uproxx. December 4, 2022. "BILLIONS CLUB". Spotify. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "The 10 biggest artists on Spotify in 2022". RouteNote. December 13, 2022. "Grammys 2015: And the Nominees Are..." Billboard. "Full list of Brit awards 2019 winners – as they happen". The Guardian. February 20, 2019. "2014 MTV Video Music Awards – Winners List". ABC News. Wright, Tolly (November 6, 2016). "MTV's 2016 European Music Awards Honored Europe's Favorite Singing Canadians". Vulture.com. Park, Andrea (November 20, 2016). "AMAs 2016: Highlights and winners at the American Music Awards". CBS News. Wahlberg, Mark (March 29, 2014). "Nickelodeon's Kids' Choice Awards: The Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 2, 2015. "2014 People's Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". MTV. January 8, 2014. Retrieved January 31, 2014. "Ariana Grande to be Awarded 'Breakthrough Artist of the Year' by Music Business Association". Billboard. "Newcomer BAMBI goes to Ariana Grande". Bambi. "Ariana Grande Performs "Problem" ft. Iggy Azalea at the iHeartRadio Music Awards". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2014. "2015 Teen Choice Award Winners – Full List". Variety. August 16, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2015. Lynch, Joe (December 12, 2014). "Women in Music's Rising Star Ariana Grande Shares Her Mother's Most Important Lesson". Billboard. Aniftos, Rania. "Ariana Grande Is Billboard's 2018 Woman of the Year". Billboard. Retrieved November 6, 2018. "The Greatest Pop Star By Year". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Trust, Gary (March 18, 2024). "Ariana Grande's 'We Can't Be Friends' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 18, 2024. {{cite web}}: Check |archive-url= value (help) "Ariana Grande's "thank u, next" Debuts At #1". Stereogum. November 12, 2018. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Trust, Gary (February 19, 2019). "Ariana Grande Breaks Record For Most Simultaneous Top 40 Billboard Hot 100 Hits by a Female Artist". Billboard. Retrieved February 19, 2019. "Ariana Grande". Billboard. March 19, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Trust, Gary (March 18, 2024). "Ariana Grande's 'We Can't Be Friends' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 21, 2024. "Year-End Charts Top Artists – Female (2017)". Billboard. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Year-End Charts Top Artists – Female (2019)". Billboard. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Decade-End Charts Top Artists (2010s)". Billboard. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists". Billboard. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "The Weeknd's 'Blinding Lights' Is the New No. 1 Billboard Hot 100 Song of All Time". Billboard. November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Stephenson, Kristen. "Ariana Grande shatters her 20th Guinness World Records title following success of hit single "Positions"". GuinnessWorldRecords. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Higgins, Cole (February 8, 2021). "Ariana Grande just earned her 20th Guinness World Records title". CNN. Retrieved February 9, 2021. "Ariana Grande – About Ariana". OfficalArianaGrande. Archived from the original on February 12, 2014. Retrieved October 29, 2016. Nikutopia. "Ariana Grande's Brother Frankie to Play Cat's Brother in Upcoming "Victorious" Episode?". Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved July 17, 2013. "Ariana Grande on PIX Morning News (April 30, 2010)". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. "Spread Love, Not Hate". Seventeen Magazine. Retrieved July 8, 2012. "The Who, Ariana Grande, and Dave Matthews Help Stand Up to Cancer". Rolling Stone. September 6, 2014. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2014. Lindner, Emilee (March 20, 2015). "Ariana Grande Rescued 15 Dogs And Is Giving Them Away to Her Fans". MTV.; and Caldwell, Kayla (March 28, 2015). "Miami-Dade Animal Services Adoption Fees Waived". NBCMiami.com. Ruffo, Jillian (January 13, 2016). "It's Here: Ariana Grande's M.A.C Viva Glam Collection Can Finally Grace Your Lips". People StyleWatch. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016. Retrieved January 13, 2016. Keirans, Maeve (June 16, 2016). "Ariana Grande Is a Beautiful Giant In Her New MAC Campaign". MTV. "Neil Finn Salutes Miley Cyrus and Ariana Grande's Crowded House Cover". Yahoo Music. May 16, 2015.; and "Watch Miley Cyrus and Ariana Grande Cover 'Don't Dream It's Over'". Time. May 14, 2015.; and O'Donnell, Kevin (May 14, 2015). "Watch Miley Cyrus and Ariana Grande Cover 'Don't Dream It's Over'". Entertainment Weekly.[permanent dead link] Erlich, Brenna (June 29, 2015). "Ariana Grande Told All the Haters In SCOTUS to 'Get Their Heads Out Of Their F–king Asses'". MTV News.; and Hinzmann, Dennis (July 1, 2015). "ICYMI: Ariana Grande Slayed at NYC Pride's Dance on the Pier". Out. Peters, Mitchell (June 7, 2015). "Ariana Grande Shares Empowering Essay Following Big Sean Breakup". Billboard.; and "Ariana Grande Lashes Out Against 'Double Standard and Misogyny'". ABC News. June 8, 2015. Plucinska, Joanna (June 8, 2015). "Pop-Star Sisterhood Approves Ariana Grande's Feminist Stand". Time.; and Rosa, Jelani (June 10, 2015). "Here's What Selena Gomez Had to Say About Ariana Grande's Empowering Feminist Essay". Seventeen. Grinberg, Emanuella (June 9, 2015). "Ariana Grande takes down sexist double standards in a single tweet". CNN. Yahr, Emily (June 8, 2015). "Why Ariana Grande's feminist Twitter post was a brilliant career move". The Washington Post. Roberts, Kayleigh (December 3, 2016). "Ariana Grande and Madonna Gave a Racy Live Performance Together". Elle. Daly, Rhian (July 11, 2016). "Ariana Grande and Victoria Monét share 'Better Days' in support of Black Lives Matter". NME. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Civico, Aldo (June 6, 2017). "Ariana Grande, I Wish You Were Our President!". The Huffington Post.; and Mallenbaum, Carly (June 5, 2017). "Ariana Grande stays strong, makes a pitch-perfect return to Manchester". USA Today. "Ariana Grande continues raising money for Manchester victims". SFGate.com. June 8, 2017. Lynskey, Dorian (June 9, 2017). "How Ariana Grande's Embrace of Community at 'One Love Manchester' Made Her a Star in the U.K." Billboard.; and "Ariana Grande to get honorary citizenship of Manchester". BBC. June 13, 2017. Roth, Madeline (December 6, 2017). "Against All Odds, Selena, Ariana, and Kesha Triumphed In 2017". MTV News. Lockett, Dee (December 21, 2017). "The 10 Best Concerts of 2017". New York. Harrison, Mitchell (July 19, 2017). "8 Reasons Ariana Grande Is the Gay Icon of Her Generation". Billboard. Delbyck, Cole (September 25, 2017). "Ariana Grande Returns to the Stage for Charlottesville Unity Concert". Huffington Post. Honeycutt, Shanté (March 16, 2018). "Ariana Grande, Miley Cyrus, Jennifer Hudson & More Set to Join Student-Led March for Our Lives". Billboard.; and Kreps, Daniel (March 24, 2018). "Watch Ariana Grande Sing 'Be Alright' at March for Our Lives Rally". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2018. Aswad, Jem (June 12, 2019). "Ariana Grande donates Profits from Atlanta Concert to Planned Parenthood". Variety. "Ariana Grande donates $250,000 from Atlanta concert to Planned Parenthood". USA Today. Retrieved June 18, 2019. Reilly, Kaitlin (March 27, 2020). "Ariana Grande & Taylor Swift Are Sending Money to Fans Who Lost Their Jobs Due to Coronavirus". Refinery29. Judd, Donald (April 21, 2020). "Stacey Abrams and Andrew Yang announce push to provide direct cash payments to families on food stamps". CNN. Griffin, Louise (May 29, 2020). "Ariana Grande, Halsey, Timothée Chalamet, and More Celebrities Spent Their Weekends Protesting". New York. Retrieved June 2, 2020. Elizabeth, De (May 31, 2020). "Billie Eilish, Beyoncé, Ariana Grande and More Celebrities Respond to George Floyd's Death". Teen Vogue. Retrieved June 2, 2020. "ARIANA GRANDE Plays Santa For Kids GRANTS WISH LISTS AT L.A., UK HOSPITALS!!!". TMZ. December 24, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2021. "Ariana Grande Gifts Hauls of Christmas Presents to Manchester Children's Hospitals: 'We Were So Touched'". Rolling Stone. December 28, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2023. Meyers, Dave (June 22, 2021). "Ariana Grande, Pink, Halsey, Taylor Swift, Ed Sheeran, Lady Gaga & more urge Congress to pass the Equality Act". WRMF. Retrieved June 22, 2021. "Ariana Grande donates thousands for free mental health counselling". Jersey Evening Post. Claverley Group. June 30, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2021. Mcnamara, Brittney (June 30, 2021). "Ariana Grande Is Giving Away $2 Million in Free Therapy With BetterHelp". Teen Vogue. Retrieved December 30, 2021. Cantor, Matthew (April 1, 2022). "Ariana Grande giving $1.5m to support trans youth amid 'disgraceful' legislative attacks". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Ariana Grande and other stars support Roe v Wade in New York Times ad". The Guardian. UK. May 13, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Horton, Adrian (September 19, 2023). "'Chilling': Ariana Grande, Amanda Gorman and others sign letter against book bans". The Guardian. Rosenbaum, Claudia (June 6, 2022). ""THERE'S MORE TO BEING A DEMOCRAT THAN JUST REGISTERING": THE L.A. MAYOR'S RACE IS TEARING HOLLYWOOD APART". Vanity Fair. Last, Ashley (November 4, 2015). "Coach unveils collaboration with Ariana Grande". Retrieved October 12, 2019. "Ariana Grande Goes from a Good Girl to a Bad Girl MAC's Viva Glam Campaign – InStyle". InStyle. January 13, 2016. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2016.; Kinonen, Sarah (August 22, 2016). "Ariana Grande's Having the Most Glam Week Ever (and It's Only Monday)". People. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2016. "Ariana Grande Teams Up With Lipsy for Her First Fashion Line". MTV UK. February 3, 2016. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2016. "Ariana Grande & Brookstone Collaborate on Limited-Edition Cat-Ear Headphones". Billboard. September 20, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2019. Wong, Steven (February 7, 2017). "How 'Final Fantasy Brave Exvius' Teamed Up With Ariana Grande". AList. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. Fahey, Mike (January 9, 2017). "How To Get Ariana Grande in Final Fantasy Brave Exvius, Because You Can Do That Now". Kotaku. Archived from the original on October 21, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2020. Briones, Isis (September 29, 2017). "48 Hours in Hong Kong With Ariana Grande". Billboard. Silver, Michael (March 5, 2019). "Ariana Grande Inspires New Starbucks Cloud Macchiato". Billboard. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Feller, Madison (May 10, 2019). "Ariana Grande's Ponytail Is The New Face Of Givenchy". Elle. Cohen, Julia (September 16, 2019). "Givenchy X Ariana Grande: The Full Data Rundown". Launchmetrics. "Ariana Grande Product Placement Photos". Product Placement Blog. December 8, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Ariana Grande TV Commercials Ads". i-Spot. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Instagram's 2021 rich list: Cristiano Ronaldo is the highest earner, pushing Dwayne Johnson into second with Ariana Grande third". South China Morning Post. July 3, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Bayley, Leanne (February 20, 2015). "Ariana Grande is launching her first fragrance". Glamour Magazine. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2015.; Geffen, Sasha (June 20, 2015). "Ariana Grande Accidentally Revealed Her New Perfume On Snapchat: See The Pics". MTV. Retrieved October 30, 2016.; "Ariana Grande Launches Her Second Fragrance Frankie". International Business Times. January 20, 2016.; Zhekova, Dobrina (July 20, 2016). "Ariana Grande Launches Sweet Like Candy Fragrance – Celebrity Perfumes". InStyle. Archived from the original on March 19, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2016. "Ariana Grande launches God Is A Woman body care collection". CNN. August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2022. "Ariana Grande Channels '60s Mod Inspiration for New Vanilla and Blush Fragrance Duo Collection". PR Newswire. November 22, 2022. "This Cult-Favorite Perfume Sold Every 11 Seconds Last Year — And Now I Know Why". The Zoe Report. March 23, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Ariana Grande Is the Last Great Celebrity Perfumer". Harper's Bazaar. November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Brands, LUXE (July 29, 2021). "Grammy® Award Winning and Multi-Platinum Artist Ariana Grande Enters the Clean Beauty Category with the Launch of God is a Woman, a New Fragrance Inspired by the Power of Nature". PR Newswire. "The Hollywood Reporter's 40 Biggest Celebrity Entrepreneurs in 2022". THR. November 23, 2022. Rosenstein, Jenna (November 12, 2021). "Ariana Grande's Makeup Brand, r.e.m. beauty, Is Available Right Now". Harper's Bazaar. Manso, James (March 25, 2022). "Ariana Grande's R.E.M. Beauty Heads to Ulta". WWD. Rosenstein, Jenna; Dodson, Tiffany (April 18, 2022). "Ariana Grande's Makeup Brand, r.e.m. Beauty, Is Now Available at Ulta". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Everything You Need To Know About Ariana Grande's R.E.M Beauty Line". Elle. July 29, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Cohan, Shelley (May 26, 2022). "Strong Customer Demand Leads Ulta Beauty To A 21% Sales Increase". Forbes. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "These Are the Winners of Our Allure Readers' Choice Awards for 2022". Allure. May 16, 2017. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved June 3, 2022. "Ariana Grande's beauty line to launch at Sephora". FashionUnited. February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Carbone, Gina (June 19, 2013). "Nickelodeon Star Ariana Grande Addresses Eating Disorder Rumors". WetPaint. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2018.; and Goodman, Lizzy (August 15, 2014). "Billboard Cover: Ariana Grande on Fame, Freddy Krueger and Her Freaky Past". Billboard. Nied, Jennifer (August 16, 2020). "Ariana Grande Sticks To A Vegan Diet And Walks 12,000 Steps A Day". Women's Health. Retrieved August 21, 2022. Kretzer, Michelle (November 8, 2013). "Ariana Grande Goes Vegan—and That's Not All". PETA. Retrieved August 21, 2022. "Ariana Grande Vegan? '7 Rings' Singer's Diet As Fans Question New Starbucks Drink". Capital. March 11, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2022. Sheridan, Emily (October 17, 2018). "Ariana Grande reveals she's suffering from anxiety after 'split' from Pete Davidson". Mirror. Weiner, Zoë (July 11, 2018). "Ariana Grande Reveals She's Been in Therapy for Over a Decade: 'It's Work'". Self. "Singer Ariana Grande Abandons Catholic Beliefs". CathNewsUSA. November 20, 2013. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved February 9, 2014. Ehrlich, Brenna (October 22, 2014). "Ariana Grande Reveals Love for Gay Brother Frankie Made Her Question Catholic Faith". MTV. Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2016. McLean, Craig (October 17, 2014). "Ariana Grande: 'If you want to call me a diva I'll say: cool'". The Daily Telegraph. Peeples, Jason (August 16, 2014). "Ariana Grande Says Recording Song About Gay Affair Was 'Very Fun'". The Advocate. Bruner, Raisa (February 27, 2017). "Watch Ariana Grande's Steamy, Diverse and Sex-Positive Video for 'Everyday'". Time. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "Ariana Grande Breaks Free From Capitalism, Endorses Bernie Sanders". Rolling Stone. November 20, 2019. Retrieved April 24, 2022. Cuccinello, Hayley (July 11, 2019). "Ariana Grande and Aaron Rodgers Join The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities". Forbes. Retrieved October 18, 2022. McClain, James (June 10, 2020). "Ariana Grande Snags $13.7 Million Hollywood Hills Mansion". Yahoo!. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Chubb, Hannah (July 20, 2021). "Ariana Grande's Former NYC Apartment, Where She Lived With Pete Davidson, Sells for $13.5M". People. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Duncan, Michelle (September 29, 2022). "Ariana Grande Sells Historic Tudor-Style Montecito Home for $9.1 Million". Architectural Digest. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Blanchett, Ben (June 29, 2022). "Alleged Stalker Reportedly Breaks Into Ariana Grande's Home Again". HuffPost. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Zauzmer, Emily (July 22, 2015). "Graham Phillips Defends Ex-Girlfriend Ariana Grande After Doughnut Controversy: 'It Doesn't Speak to Her Character at All'". People. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2018. Cabrera, Daniela (August 26, 2016). "Who Has Ariana Grande Dated? The Singer Has a Thing for Guys in the Music Biz". Bustle.com. Retrieved January 22, 2018. Celebrity, Yahoo (August 5, 2014). "Ariana Grande Breaks Up With Jai Brooks Following Her Grandfather's Death". Yahoo.com. Retrieved December 4, 2023. Stanton, Leanne Aciz (May 17, 2021). "Ariana Grande's Dating History In Photos: A Timeline of Her Exes and Flings". US Weekly. Retrieved January 30, 2022. Lee, Esther (April 20, 2015). "Ariana Grande, Big Sean Split After 8 Months of Dating: Breakup Details". Us Weekly. Retrieved July 1, 2019. Garcia, Patricia (September 27, 2016). "Mac Miller on Love, Ariana Grande, and the Last Thing That Made Him Cry". Vogue. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Avila, Theresa (September 7, 2016). "Ariana Grande Confirms Her Relationship With Mac Miller by Literally Wrapping Her Legs Around Him". New York. Mac Miller (Ft. Ariana Grande) – My Favorite Part, retrieved March 26, 2020 Quinn, Dave (May 24, 2018). "Ariana Grande Says Mac Miller's Explicit Song 'Cinderella' Is About Her and Twitter Is Shook". People. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Penrose, Nerisha (May 25, 2018). "A Timeline of Ariana Grande & Mac Miller's Relationship". Billboard.; and Jackson, Dory (May 10, 2018). "Why Did Ariana Grande and Mac Miller Break Up? Singer Shares Update on Instagram Story Post". Newsweek. Mallenbaum, Carly (June 21, 2018). "Pete Davidson confirms Ariana Grande engagement: 'I feel like I won a contest'". USA Today. Retrieved June 21, 2018. Thompson, Julia (September 14, 2018). "Ariana Grande in tribute post to Mac Miller: 'You were my dearest friend'". USA Today. Ahlgrim, Callie. "Here's a complete timeline of Ariana Grande and Pete Davidson's whirlwind engagement and sudden split". Business Insider. Retrieved April 1, 2024. "Ariana Grande and Dalton Gomez's Relationship Timeline". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Bailey, Alyssa (May 8, 2020). "Ariana Grande Confirms She's Dating Dalton Gomez With a Kiss in Her 'Stuck With U' Music Video". Elle. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Perez, Lexy (December 20, 2020). "Ariana Grande Engaged to Real Estate Agent Dalton Gomez". The Hollywood Reporter. Macon, Alexandra. "Inside Ariana Grande's Intimate At-Home Wedding". Vogue. Retrieved May 26, 2021. "Ariana Grande's wedding photo become most-liked Instagram post that features people". Today. May 29, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Longmire, Becca (May 28, 2021). "Ariana Grande Breaks Instagram Record After Sharing Stunning Photos From Wedding To Dalton Gomez". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on May 28, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Jordan, Julie; Avila, Daniela (July 17, 2023). "Ariana Grande Separates from Husband Dalton Gomez After 2 Years of Marriage: Source". People. Calvario, Liz; Dasrath, Diana (October 7, 2023). "Ariana Grande and Dalton Gomez settle divorce after two years of marriage". TODAY. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Richardson, Randi (July 17, 2023). "Ariana Grande and husband Dalton Gomez have separated after 2 years of marriage". Today. Saunders, Angel (October 6, 2023). "Ariana Grande and Dalton Gomez Settle Divorce Weeks After Filing". People.com. Retrieved October 6, 2023. "Ariana Grande and Dalton Gomez are officially divorced". Associated Press. March 19, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2024. "A Snow White Christmas". The Pasadena Playhouse. December 30, 2012. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2013. Ariana Grande at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Ariana Grande at IMDb Ariana Grande at the Internet Broadway Database