Spotify (/ˈspɒtɪfaɪ/; Swedish: [ˈspɔ̂tːɪfaj]) is a Swedish audio streaming and media service provider founded on 23 April 2006 by Daniel Ek and Martin Lorentzon. It is one of the largest music streaming service providers, with over 602 million monthly active users, including 236 million paying subscribers, as of December 2023. Spotify is listed (through a Luxembourg City-domiciled holding company, Spotify Technology S.A.) on the New York Stock Exchange in the form of American depositary receipts. Spotify offers digital copyright restricted recorded audio content, including more than 100 million songs and five million podcasts, from record labels and media companies. As a freemium service, basic features are free with advertisements and limited control, while additional features, such as offline listening and commercial-free listening, are offered via paid subscriptions. Users can search for music based on artist, album, or genre, and can create, edit, and share playlists. Spotify is available in most of Europe, as well as Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Oceania, with a total availability in 184 markets. Its users and subscribers are based largely in the US and Europe, jointly accounting for around 53% of users and 67% of revenue. It has no presence in mainland China where the market is dominated by QQ Music. The service is available on most devices, including Windows, macOS, and Linux computers, iOS and Android smartphones and tablets, smart home devices such as the Amazon Echo and Google Nest lines of products, and digital media players like Roku. As of December 2023, Spotify was the 47th most-visited website in the world with 24.78% of its traffic coming from the United States followed by Brazil with 6.51% according to data provided by Semrush. Unlike physical or download sales, which pay artists a fixed price per song or album sold, Spotify pays royalties based on the number of artist streams as a proportion of total songs streamed. It distributes approximately 70% of its total revenue to rights holders (often record labels), who then pay artists based on individual agreements. While certain musicians have voiced objections to Spotify's royalty structure and its effect on record sales, others laud the service for offering a lawful option to combat piracy and for remunerating artists each time their music is played. Spotify was founded in 2006 in Stockholm, Sweden, by Daniel Ek, former CTO of Stardoll, and Martin Lorentzon, co-founder of Tradedoubler. According to Ek, the company's title was initially misheard from a name shouted by Lorentzon. Later they conceived a portmanteau of "spot" and "identify". In February 2010, Spotify opened public registration for the free service tier in the United Kingdom. Registrations surged following the release of the mobile service, leading Spotify to halt registration for the free service in September, returning the UK to an invitation-only policy. Spotify launched in the United States in July 2011, and offered a six-month, ad-supported trial period, during which new users could listen to an unlimited amount of music for free. In January 2012, the free trial periods began to expire, limiting users to ten hours of streaming each month and five plays per song. Using PC streaming, a similar structure to the one used today allowed the listener to play songs freely, but with ads every 4–7 songs depending on listening duration. Later that same year, in March, Spotify removed all limits on the free service tier indefinitely, including mobile devices. In April 2016, Ek and Lorentzon wrote an open letter to Swedish politicians, demanding action in three areas that they claimed hindered the company's ability to recruit top talent as Spotify grows, including access to flexible housing, better education in the programming and development fields, and stock options. Ek and Lorentzon wrote that to continue competing in a global economy, politicians needed to respond with new policies, or else thousands of Spotify jobs would be moved from Sweden to the United States. In February 2017, Spotify announced the expansion of its United States operations in Lower Manhattan, New York City, at 4 World Trade Center, adding approximately 1,000 new jobs and retaining 832 existing positions. The company's US headquarters are located in New York City's Flatiron District. On 14 November 2018, the company announced a total of 13 new markets in the MENA region, including the creation of a new Arabic hub and several playlists. In October 2015, "Thinking Out Loud" by Ed Sheeran became the first song to pass 500 million streams. A month later, Spotify announced that "Lean On" by Major Lazer and DJ Snake featuring MØ was its most-streamed song of all time with over 525 million streams worldwide. In April 2016, Rihanna overtook Justin Bieber to become the biggest artist on Spotify, with 31.3 million monthly active listeners. In May 2016, Rihanna was overtaken by Drake with 31.85 million total streams. In December 2016, Drake's just-under 36 million monthly listeners were overtaken by the Weeknd's 36.068 million. Later that same month, Drake's song "One Dance" became the first song to hit one billion streams on Spotify. Upon its release in August 2017, the single "Look What You Made Me Do" by Taylor Swift earned over eight million streams within 24 hours, breaking the record for the most single-day streams for a track. On 19 June 2018, XXXTentacion's hit single "Sad!" broke Swift's single-day streaming record, amassing 10.4 million streams the day after he was fatally shot in Florida. In March 2011, Spotify announced a customer base of 1 million paying subscribers across Europe, and by September 2011, the number of paying subscribers had doubled to two million. In August 2012, Time reported 15 million active users, four million being paying Spotify subscribers. User growth continued, reaching 20 million total active users, including five million paying customers globally and one million paying customers in the United States, in December 2012. By March 2013, the service had 24 million active users, six million being paying subscribers, which grew to 40 million users (including ten million paying) in May 2014, 60 million users (including 15 million paying) in December 2014, 75 million users (20 million paying) in June 2015, 30 million paying subscribers in March 2016, 40 million paying subscribers in September 2016, and 100 million total users in June 2016. In April 2020, Spotify reached 133 million premium users. In countries affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, Spotify registered a fall in users in late February, but it has seen a recovery. In March 2022, Spotify had 182 million premium subscribers. At the end of Q2 2022, Spotify reported 188 million paying subscribers and 433 million total users. The Financial Times reported in March 2017 that, as part of its efforts to renegotiate new licensing deals with music labels, Spotify and major record labels had agreed that Spotify would restrict some newly released albums to its Premium tier, with Spotify receiving a reduction in royalty fees to do so. Select albums would be available only on the Premium tier for a period of time, before general release. The deal "may be months away from being finalized, but Spotify is said to have cleared this particular clause with major record labels". New reports in April confirmed that Spotify and Universal Music Group had reached an agreement to allow artists part of Universal to limit their new album releases to the Premium service tier for a maximum of two weeks. Spotify CEO Daniel Ek commented that "We know that not every album by every artist should be released the same way, and we've worked hard with UMG to develop a new, flexible release policy. Starting today, Universal artists can choose to release new albums on premium only for two weeks, offering subscribers an earlier chance to explore the complete creative work, while the singles are available across Spotify for all our listeners to enjoy". It was announced later in April that this type of agreement would be extended to indie artists signed to the Merlin Network agency. Spotify went public on the stock market in April 2018 using a direct public offering rather than an initial public offering. This approach is not intended to raise fresh capital, but to let investors get their returns. Morgan Stanley is the company's slated advisor on the matter. After making its debut on the New York Stock Exchange on 3 April 2018, CNBC reported that Spotify opened at $165.90, more than 25% above its reference price of $132. On 3 July 2020, cybersecurity firm VPNMentor discovered a database containing 380 million individual records, including the logins and passwords of Spotify users. The database was thought to be evidence of an impending credential stuffing cyberattack targeting Spotify as it contained the credentials of up to 350,000 compromised user accounts. In response to the attack, Spotify issued a rolling reset of passwords for affected accounts in November 2020. In May 2013, Spotify acquired music discovery app Tunigo. In March 2014, they acquired The Echo Nest, a music intelligence company. In June 2015, Spotify announced they had acquired Seed Scientific, a data science consulting firm and analytics company. In a comment to TechCrunch, Spotify said that Seed Scientific's team would lead an advanced analytics unit within the company, focused on developing data services. In January 2016, they acquired social and messaging startups Cord Project and Soundwave, followed in April 2016 by CrowdAlbum, a "startup that collects photos and videos of performances shared on social networks," and would "enhance the development of products that help artists understand, activate, and monetize their audiences". In November 2016, Spotify acquired Preact, a "cloud-based platform and service developed for companies that operate on subscription models which helps reduce churn and build up their subscriber numbers". In March 2017, Spotify acquired Sonalytic, an audio detection startup, for an undisclosed amount of money. Spotify stated that Sonalytic would be used to improve the company's personalized playlists, better match songs with compositions, and improve the company's publishing data system. Later that month, Spotify also acquired MightyTV, an app connected to television streaming services, including Netflix and HBO Go, that recommends content to users. Spotify intended to use MightyTV to improve its advertising efforts on the free tier of service. In April 2017, they acquired Mediachain, a blockchain startup that had been developing a decentralized database system for managing attribution, and other metadata for media. This was followed in May 2017 with the acquisition of artificial intelligence startup Niland, which uses technology to improve personalisation and recommendation features for users. In November 2017, Spotify acquired Soundtrap, an online music studio startup. On 12 April 2018, Spotify acquired the music licensing platform Loudr. In August 2018, Spotify bought the exclusive rights to The Joe Budden Podcast and expanded the show to a twice-weekly schedule. On 6 February 2019, Spotify acquired the podcast networks Gimlet Media and Anchor FM Inc., with the goal of establishing themselves as a leading figure in podcasting. On 26 March 2019, Spotify announced they would acquire another podcast network, Parcast. On 12 September 2019, Spotify acquired SoundBetter, a music production marketplace for people in the music industry to collaborate on projects, and distribute music tracks for licensing. On 19 November 2019, Spotify announced the acquisition of the exclusive rights to The Last Podcast on the Left. On 5 February 2020, Spotify announced its intent to acquire Bill Simmons' sports and pop culture blog and podcast network The Ringer for an undisclosed amount. On 19 May 2020, Spotify acquired exclusive rights to stream the popular podcast The Joe Rogan Experience beginning in September of that year, under an agreement valued at around US$100 million (equivalent to $116,000,000 in 2023). In November 2020, Spotify announced plans to acquire Megaphone from The Slate Group for US$235 million. In March 2021, Spotify acquired app developer Betty Labs and their live social audio app, Locker Room, On 12 May 2021. Armchair Expert announced on Instagram that the podcast would be available exclusively on Spotify beginning 1 July, saying they would continue to maintain the same creative control over the show after the move. Locker Room was rebranded in June 2021 as Spotify Greenroom, and turned into a Clubhouse competitor. The same month, Spotify acquired Podz, a podcast discovery startup. Also the same month, Spotify bought the exclusive rights to the Call Her Daddy podcast. In November 2021, Spotify acquired audiobook company Findaway, including its publishing imprint OrangeSky Audio. In December 2021, Spotify acquired Whooshkaa, a podcast tech company that develops specialized technology that allows radio broadcasters to easily turn their existing audio content into on-demand podcast programming. In February 2022, Spotify acquired Chartable and Podsights. Both are podcast advertising companies. In 2022, Spotify Greenroom rebranded as Spotify Live, which was subsequently planned to be shut down in April 2023. In June 2022, Spotify acquired Sonantic, a synthetic voice and video developer. In July 2022, Spotify acquired Heardle, a Wordle-inspired music trivia game, for an undisclosed amount; Heardle was shut down in May 2023. In October 2022, Spotify acquired the Dublin-based content moderation startup, Kinzen. In 2023, Spotify merged Anchor into their Spotify for Podcasters tool, a rebranding move and to organize its tools for creating, managing, growing, and monetizing their content in one place. In January 2015, Sony announced PlayStation Music, a new music service with Spotify as its exclusive partner. PlayStation Music incorporates the Spotify service into Sony's PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 gaming consoles, and Sony Xperia mobile devices. The service launched on 30 March 2015. In March 2017, Spotify announced a partnership with the South by Southwest (SXSW) conference for 2017, presenting specific content in special playlists through an SXSW hub in Spotify's apps. The integration also enabled Spotify within the SXSW GO app to help users discover and explore artists performing at the conference. Two more partnerships were announced in March; one with WNYC Studios, and one with Waze. The WNYC Studios partnership brought various podcasts from WNYC to Spotify, including Note to Self, On the Media and Here's the Thing. Spotify also announced that the third season of WNYC Studios' 2 Dope Queens podcast would premiere with a two-week exclusivity period on the service on 21 March 2017. The Waze partnership allows Waze app users to view directions to destinations within the Spotify app and access their Spotify playlists through the Waze app. In October 2017, Microsoft announced that it would be ending its Groove Music streaming service by December, with all music from users transferring to Spotify as part of a new partnership. In December, Spotify and Tencent's music arm, Tencent Music Entertainment (TME), agreed to swap stakes and make an investment in each other's music businesses. As a result of this transaction, Spotify gained a 9% stake in TME with TME gaining a 7.5% stake in Spotify. In February 2018, Spotify integrated with the gaming-oriented voice chat service Discord on desktop clients, allowing users to display their currently playing song as a rich presence on their profile, and invite other users with Spotify Premium to group "listening parties". In April, Spotify announced a discounted entertainment bundle with video-on-demand provider Hulu, which included discounted rates for university students. In May 2020, Spotify teamed up with ESPN and Netflix to curate podcasts around their Michael Jordan documentary The Last Dance, and in September, Spotify signed a deal with Chernin Entertainment to produce movies and TV shows. In 2020 and 2021, Spotify and DC, a brand at the time under Warner Bros. Entertainment signed deals to create audio shows on the platform around characters such as Catwoman, Wonder Woman, the Riddler, Batgirl, Superman and Lois Lane, among others. In 2022, Spotify became the official streaming partner of FC Barcelona. In May 2022, Spotify announced a partnership with the online game platform and game creation system the Roblox Corporation, the partnership saw Spotify as the first streaming brand to have a presence within the game with the launch of "Spotify Island". In March 2023, Spotify announced a partnership with Patreon, which Spotify claimed would "enable creators to expand their creative business through direct payments from fans, and allow fans to listen to their Patreon content on Spotify". In July 2015, Spotify launched an email campaign to urge its App Store subscribers to cancel their subscriptions and start new ones through its website, bypassing the 30% transaction fee for in-app purchases required for iOS applications by technology company Apple Inc. A later update to the Spotify app on iOS was rejected by Apple, prompting Spotify's general counsel Horacio Gutierrez to write a letter to Apple's then-general counsel Bruce Sewell, stating: "This latest episode raises serious concerns under both U.S. and EU competition law. It continues a troubling pattern of behavior by Apple to exclude and diminish the competitiveness of Spotify on iOS and as a rival to Apple Music, particularly when seen against the backdrop of Apple's previous anticompetitive conduct aimed at Spotify ... we cannot stand by as Apple uses the App Store approval process as a weapon to harm competitors." Sewell responded to the letter: "We find it troubling that you are asking for exemptions to the rules we apply to all developers and are publicly resorting to rumors and half-truths about our service." He also elaborated that "Our guidelines apply equally to all app developers, whether they are game developers, e-book sellers, video-streaming services or digital music distributors; and regardless of whether they compete against Apple. We did not alter our behavior or our rules when we introduced our own music streaming service or when Spotify became a competitor". Furthermore, he stated that "There is nothing in Apple's conduct that 'amounts to a violation of applicable antitrust laws.' Far from it. ... I would be happy to facilitate an expeditious review and approval of your app as soon as you provide us with something that is compliant with the App Store's rules". In the following months, Spotify joined several other companies in filing a letter with the European Union's antitrust body indirectly accusing Apple and Google of "abusing their 'privileged position' at the top of the market", by referring to "some" companies as having "transformed into 'gatekeepers' rather than 'gateways'". The complaint led to the European Union announcing that it would prepare an initiative by the end of 2017 for a possible law addressing unfair competition practices. Spotify released the first version of its Apple Watch app in November 2018, allowing playback control of the iPhone via the watch. Users can also choose which devices to play music on via Bluetooth. In a further escalation of the dispute with Apple, on 13 March 2019, Spotify filed an antitrust complaint with the European Commission over unfair app store practices. Two days later, Apple responded, stating that the claim was misleading rhetoric and that Spotify wanted benefits of a free app without being a free app. Spotify responded with a statement calling Apple a monopolist and stated that they had only filed the complaint as Apple's actions hurt competition and consumers and clearly violated the law. It also said that Apple believed Spotify users on the app store were Apple's customers and not Spotify's. Apple responded to Spotify's claims by counter-claiming that Spotify's market reach and user base would not have been possible without the Apple App Store platform. Additionally, Apple stated that they have attempted to work with Spotify to integrate the service better with Apple's products, such as Siri and Apple Watch. In 2019, under iOS 13, it became possible to play Spotify music using Siri commands. Spotify was one of the first companies to support Epic Games in their lawsuit against Apple, which was filed after Epic also tried to bypass Apple's 30% fee for microtransactions in Fortnite. In September 2020, Spotify, Epic, and other companies founded The Coalition for App Fairness, which aims for better conditions for the inclusion of apps in app stores. On 1 March 2021, Spotify confirmed that its platform would no longer have access to music from artists represented by Kakao Entertainment. However, after talking it out and renewing the contracts between the two, Spotify later announced that they had reached an agreement with Kakao Entertainment, allowing their content to be available once again on the platform across the globe. In November 2021, Spotify hid the "shuffle" button for albums following a request by singer Adele, arguing that tracks in albums are supposed to be played back in the order specified by the artist in order to "tell a story". In May 2022, Spotify began testing a feature that would allow select artists to promote their NFTs via their profiles. Some artists included in this initial test phase were Steve Aoki and The Wombats. The testing was very limited in nature and was only available on Spotify's Android app in the US. In May 2023, Spotify removed tens of thousands of songs, roughly 7% of the tracks uploaded by the Boomy, due to suspected “artificial streaming”, the practice of using online bots to inflate the listening statistics. Spotify operates under a freemium business model (basic services are free, while additional features are offered via paid subscriptions). Spotify generates revenue by selling premium streaming subscriptions to users and advertising placements to third parties. Some of the premium options users may choose from include individual, duo, family, and student. In December 2013, the company launched a new website, "Spotify for Artists", explaining its business model and revenue data. Spotify gets its content from major record labels as well as independent artists and pays copyright holders royalties for streaming music. The company pays 70% of its total revenue to rights holders. Spotify for Artists states that the company does not have a fixed per-play rate; instead, it considers factors such as the user's home country and the individual artist's royalty rate. Rights holders received an average per-play payout between $.000029 and $.0084. In 2013, Spotify revealed that it paid artists an average of $0.007 per stream. Music Week editor Tim Ingham commented that while the figure may "initially seem alarming," he noted: "Unlike buying a CD or download, streaming is not a one-off payment. Hundreds of millions of streams of tracks are happening every day, which quickly multiplies the potential revenues on offer – and is a constant long-term source of income for artists." According to Ben Sisario of The New York Times, approximately 13,000 out of seven million artists (0.19%) on Spotify generated $50,000 (equivalent to $58,000 in 2023) or more in payments in 2020. In November 2023, Spotify announced a new royalty model taking effect in 2024, aiming to reduce the amount of "fraudulent" royalties collected from "functional" non-music tracks with short lengths (such as environmental sounds and white noise). Under the model, tracks must reach at least 1,000 listens in 12 months to become eligible for royalties, "functional" tracks will require a longer amount of play time to count as a listen, and distributors will face reprimands if their content is responsible for generating "fradulant" royalties. The changes faced a mixed reaction from the music industry, who believed that it would be detrimental to emerging musicians, but would make a larger share of total royalty payments available to musicians. As of August 2022, the three Spotify subscription types are: None of these subscriptions limit listening time. In March 2014, Spotify introduced a discounted Premium subscription tier for students in which students in the United States enrolled in a university pay half-price for a Premium subscription. In April 2017, the discount was expanded to 33 more countries. Spotify introduced a Family subscription in October 2014, which allows up to 5 family members to have a premium subscription. In May 2016, the limit was changed to 6 family members, and the price was reduced. The Family subscription provides access to Spotify Kids. In November 2018, Spotify announced it was opening up Spotify Connect to all of the users using its Free service, however, these changes still required products supporting Spotify Connect to support the latest software development kit. In July 2020, Spotify added another tier, Premium Duo. This is aimed at couples and for $12.99 it lets up to 2 people (living at the same address) share a subscription. In February 2021, Spotify announced their plans to introduce a HiFi subscription, to offer listening in high fidelity, lossless sound quality. The rollout for the HiFi tier is yet to be announced. In August 2021, Spotify launched a test subscription tier called Spotify Plus. The subscription costs $0.99 and is supposed to be a combination of the free and premium tiers. Subscribers to this plan will still receive ads but will get the ability to listen to songs without shuffle mode and skip any number of tracks. The company reported that the tier conditions may change before its full launch. This might have been discontinued (at least in some regions) according to an email sent to a redditor. In 2008, just after launch, the company made a loss of 31.8 million Swedish kronor (US$4.4 million). In October 2010, Wired reported that Spotify was making more money for labels in Sweden than any other retailer "online or off". Years after growth and expansion, a November 2012 report suggested strong momentum for the company. In 2011, it reported a near US$60 million net loss from revenue of $244 million (equivalent to $326,200,000 in 2023), while it was expected to generate a net loss of $40 million (equivalent to $52,490,000 in 2023) from revenue of $500 million in 2012 (equivalent to $656,100,000 in 2023). Another source of income was music purchases from within the app, however this service was removed in January 2013. In May 2016, Spotify announced "Sponsored Playlists", a monetisation opportunity in which brands can specify the audiences they have in mind, with Spotify matching the marketer with suitable music in a playlist. That September, Spotify announced that it had paid a total of over $5 billion to the music industry. In June 2017, as part of renegotiated licenses with Universal Music Group and Merlin Network, Spotify's financial filings revealed its agreement to pay more than $2 billion (equivalent to $2,445,000,000 in 2023) in minimum payments over the next two years. As of 2017[update], Spotify was not yet a profitable company. Spotify's revenue for Q1 2020 amounted to €1.85 billion ($2 billion). A large part of this sum, €1.7 billion ($1.84 billion), came from Spotify Premium subscribers. Gross profit in the same quarter amounted to €472 million ($511 million), with an operating loss of €17 million ($18 million). Despite subscriber and podcasts growth, during Q2 of 2020, Spotify reported a loss of €356 million (€1.91 per share). The "deeper" loss came as a result of the company's tax debt to over one-third of its employees in Sweden. In February 2010, Spotify received a small investment from Founders Fund, where board member Sean Parker was recruited to assist Spotify in "winning the labels over in the world's largest music market". In June 2011, Spotify secured $100 million of funding (equivalent to $133,700,000 in 2023) and planned to use this to support its US launch. The new round of funding valued the company at $1 billion. A Goldman Sachs-led round of funding closed in November 2012, raising around $100 million (equivalent to $131,200,000 in 2023) at a $3 billion valuation (equivalent to $3,937,000,000 in 2023). In April 2015, Spotify began another round of fundraising, with a report from The Wall Street Journal stating it was seeking $400 million (equivalent to $502,800,000 in 2023), which would value the company at $8.4 billion (equivalent to $10,558,000,000 in 2023). The financing was closed in June 2015, with Spotify raising $526 million (equivalent to $661,100,000 in 2023), at a value of $8.53 billion (equivalent to $10,721,000,000 in 2023). In January 2016, Spotify raised another $500 million (equivalent to $622,500,000 in 2023) through convertible bonds. In March 2016, Spotify raised $1 billion (equivalent to $1,245,000,000 in 2023) in financing by debt plus a discount of 20% on shares once the initial public offering (IPO) of shares takes place. The company was, according to TechCrunch, planning to launch on the stock market in 2017, but in 2017 it was seen as planning on doing the IPO in 2018 in order to "build up a better balance sheet and work on shifting its business model to improve its margins". In March 2009, Spotify began offering music downloads in the United Kingdom, France, and Spain. Users could purchase tracks from Spotify, which partnered with 7digital to incorporate the feature. The ability to purchase and download music tracks via the app was removed on 4 January 2013. In November 2015, Spotify introduced a "Fan Insights" panel in limited beta form, letting artists and managers access data on monthly listeners, geographical data, demographic information, music preferences and more. In April 2017, the panel was upgraded to leave beta status, renamed as "Spotify for Artists", and opened to all artists and managers. Additional features include the ability to get "verified" status with a blue checkmark on an artist's profile, receiving artist support from Spotify, customising the profile page with photos and promoting a certain song as their "pick". In September 2018, Spotify announced "Upload Beta", allowing artists to upload directly to the platform instead of going through a distributor or record label. The feature was rolled out to a small number of US-based artists by invitation only. Uploading was free and artists received 100% of the revenue from songs they uploaded; artists were able to control when their release went public. On 1 July 2019, Spotify deprecated the program and announced plans to stop accepting direct uploads by the end of that month and eventually remove all content uploaded in this manner. In June 2017, Variety reported that Spotify would announce "Secret Genius", a new initiative aimed at highlighting songwriters and producers, and the effect those people have on the music industry and the artists' careers. The project, which would feature awards, "Songshops" songwriting workshops, curated playlists, and podcasts, is an effort to "shine a light on these people behind the scenes who play such a big role in some of the most important moments of our lives. When the general public hears a song, they automatically associate it with the artist who sings it, not the people behind the scenes who make it happen, so we thought the title Secret Genius was appropriate", Spotify's former Global Head of Creator Services Troy Carter told Variety the first awards ceremony would take place in late 2017,[needs update] and was intended to honour "the top songwriters, producers and publishers in the industry as well as up-and-coming talent". Additionally, as part of "The Ambassador Program", 13 songwriters would each host a Songshop workshop, in which their peers would collaboratively attempt to create a hit song, with the first workshop taking place in Los Angeles in June 2017. In October 2017, Spotify launched "Rise", a program aimed at promoting emerging artists. In February 2020, Spotify announced it would be featuring new songwriter pages and 'written by' playlists. This was aimed at giving fans a behind the scenes look at the process of some of their favorite songwriters. Initial pages added included Justin Trantor, Meghan Trainor, and Missy Elliott. Spotify thereafter announced it was planning to add more of these pages and playlists to highlight songwriters. In January 2021, Spotify made a selection of audiobooks available on the platform as a test of developing a greater breadth of content for users. The addition of audiobooks to the service would create similar offerings to that of Amazon's Audible. In 2020, Spotify partnered with Wizarding World to release a series of recorded readings of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, by various stars of the franchise. In November 2023, Spotify expanded free access to 200,000 audiobooks for Spotify Premium subscribers. On 31 January 2018, Spotify started testing a new Pandora-styled standalone app called Stations by Spotify for Australian Android users. It featured 62 music channels, each devoted to a particular genre. Spotify itself has two channels named after its playlists that link directly to the users' profile: "Release Radar" and "Discover Weekly". The aim was to help users to listen to the music they want without information overload or spending time building their own playlists. At launch, the skipping feature was not featured to "reinforce the feel of radio", but it was quietly added later and with no limits. Songs can be "loved" but cannot be "hated". If a song is "loved", a custom radio channel will be created based on it, and when there are at least 15 of these songs, a "My Favourites" channel is unlocked. The standalone app was made available to all iOS and Android users in the United States since 4 June 2019. Spotify announced the app would be shut down on 16 May 2022. The company said users would be able to login into the main Spotify app with their Stations account and transfer their stations into Spotify. Spotify has client software currently available for Windows, macOS, Wear OS, Android, iOS, watchOS, iPadOS, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S game consoles. There is an official, although unsupported Linux version. Spotify also offers a proprietary protocol known as "Spotify Connect", which lets users listen to music through a wide range of entertainment systems, including speakers, receivers, TVs, cars, and smartwatches. Spotify also has a web player (open.spotify.com). Offline Music listening is possible on watchOS and more recently added to google's WearOS for those with premium subscriptions. Unlike the apps, the web player does not have the ability to download music for offline listening. In June 2017, Spotify became available as an app through Windows Store. In Spotify's apps, music can be browsed or searched for via various parameters, such as artist, album, genre, playlist, or record label. Users can create, edit and share playlists, share tracks on social media, and make playlists with other users. Spotify provides access to over 100 million songs, 5 million podcasts, and 4 billion playlists. In June 2012, Soundrop became the first Spotify app to attract major funding, receiving $3 million (equivalent to $3,937,000 in 2023) from Spotify investor Northzone. In November 2011, Spotify introduced a Spotify Apps service that made it possible for third-party developers to design applications that could be hosted within the Spotify computer software. The applications provided features such as synchronised lyrics, music reviews, and song recommendations. However, after the June 2014 announcement of a Web API that allowed third-party developers to integrate Spotify content in their own web applications, the company discontinued its Spotify Apps platform in October, stating that its new development tools for the Spotify web player fulfilled many of the advantages of the former Spotify Apps service that allows users to access the service directly from their web browser without downloading the app. But "would ensure the Spotify platform remained relevant and easy to develop on, as well as enabling you to build innovative and engaging music experiences". In April 2012, Spotify introduced a "Spotify Play Button", an embeddable music player that can be added to blogs, websites, or social media profiles, that lets visitors listen to a specific song, playlist, or album without leaving the page. The following November, the company began rolling out a web player, with a similar design to its computer programs, but without the requirement of any installation. In December 2012, Spotify introduced a "Follow" tab and a "Discover" tab, along with a "Collection" section. "Follow" lets users follow artists and friends to see what they are listening to, while "Discover" directs users to new releases as well as music, review, and concert recommendations based on listening history. Users can add tracks to a "Collection" section of the app, rather than adding them to a specific playlist. The features were announced by CEO Daniel Ek at a press conference, with Ek saying that a common user complaint about the service was that "Spotify is great when you know what music you want to listen to, but not when you don't". In May 2015, Spotify announced a new "Home" start-page that could recommend music. The company also introduced "Spotify Running", a feature aimed at improving music while running with music matched to running tempo, and announced that podcasts and videos ("entertainment, news and clips") would be coming to Spotify, along with "Spotify Originals" content. In December 2015, Spotify debuted Spotify Wrapped, a program that creates playlists based on each user's most listened-to songs from the year. Users then can view and save this playlist at the end of the year. In January 2016, Spotify and music annotation service Genius formed a partnership, bringing annotation information from Genius into infocards presented while songs are playing in Spotify. The functionality is limited to selected playlists and was only available on Spotify's iOS app at launch, being expanded to the Android app in April 2017. This feature was known as "Behind the Lyrics". As of 18 November 2021,[update] "Behind the Lyrics" has been replaced with auto-generated real-time lyrics due to consumer demand. The feature is powered by lyrics provider Musixmatch. In May 2017, Spotify introduced Spotify Codes for its mobile apps, a way for users to share specific artists, tracks, playlists or albums with other people. Users find the relevant content to share and press a "soundwave-style barcode" on the display. A camera icon in the apps' search fields lets other users point their device's camera at the code, which takes them to the same content. In January 2019, Spotify introduced Car View for Android, allowing devices running Android to have a compact Now Playing screen when the device is connected to a car's Bluetooth. Also in January 2019, Spotify beta-tested its Canvas feature, where artists or labels can upload looping 3 to 8-second moving visuals to their tracks, replacing album covers in the "Now Playing" view; users have the option to turn off this feature. Canvas is only available for Spotify's iOS and Android mobile apps. Months later, Spotify tested its own version of stories (the sharing format popularized by social apps) known as "Storyline", and the focus is on allowing artists to share their own insights, inspiration, details about their creative process or other meanings behind the music. In March 2021, Spotify announced an upcoming option for higher-resolution sound, Spotify Hi-Fi. In July 2015, Spotify launched Discover Weekly, a playlist generated weekly. Updated on Mondays, it provides users with music recommendations. In December 2015, Quartz reported that songs in Discover Weekly playlists had been streamed 1.7 billion times. In March 2016, Spotify launched six playlists branded as Fresh Finds, including the main playlist and Fire Emoji, Basement, Hiptronix, Six Strings, and Cyclone (hip-hop, electronic, pop, guitar-driven, and experimental music respectively). The playlists spotlight songs by lesser-known musicians and their songs. In August 2016, Spotify launched Release Radar, a personalized playlist that allows users to stay up-to-date on new music released by the artists they listen to the most. It also helps users discover new music, by mixing in other artists' music. The playlist is updated every Friday, and is a maximum of two hours in length. The RADAR program is Spotify's global artist program, exclusively designed to help emerging artists worldwide reach the next stage in their careers and strengthen their connection to listeners.[citation needed] Spotify provides artists taking part in RADAR with resources and access to integrated marketing opportunities to help them boost their careers, in addition to expanded reach and exposure to 178 markets worldwide. In September 2016, Spotify introduced Daily Mix, a series of (up to six) playlists that mixes the user's favorite tracks with new, recommended songs. New users can access Daily Mix after approximately two weeks of listening to music through Spotify. Daily Mixes were only available on the Android and iOS mobile apps at launch, but the feature was later expanded to Spotify's computer app in December 2016.[citation needed] In 2017, Spotify introduced RapCaviar, a hip-hop playlist. Rap Caviar had 10.9 million followers by 2019, becoming one of Spotify's Top 5 playlists. RapCaviar was originally curated by Tuma Basa. It was relaunched by Carl Chery in 2019. In July 2018, Spotify introduced a beta feature that gives artists, labels, and teams an easy way to submit unreleased music directly to Spotify's editorial team for playlist consideration.[citation needed] In June 2019, Spotify launched a custom playlist titled "Your Daily Drive" that closely replicates the drive time format of many traditional radio stations. It combines short-form podcast news updates from The Wall Street Journal, NPR, and PRI with a mix of a user's favorite songs and artists interspersed with tracks the listener has yet to discover. "Your Daily Drive", which is found in a user's library under the "Made For You" section, updates throughout the day. In May 2020, Spotify introduced the Group Session feature. This feature allows two or more Premium users in the same location to share control over the music that is being played. The Group Session feature was later expanded to allow any Premium user to join/participate in a Group Session, with a special link the host can send to participants. In July 2021, Spotify launched the "What's New" feed, a section that collects all new releases and episodes from artists and podcasts that the user follows. The feature is represented by a bell icon on the app's main page and is available on iOS and Android. In November 2021, Spotify launched the City and Local Pulse charts, aimed at representing the songs listened to in major cities around the world. The charts are available for 200 cities with the most listeners on Spotify. In 2023, Spotify launched additional features to help independent artists distributing their music on the platform reach a wider array of potential fans. One such feature is a tool that Spotify rolled out in March 2023, called "Discovery Mode". Discovery Mode allows artists who meet certain criteria and have a Spotify For Artists account to submit qualifying songs for Spotify's in-house promotion services. Spotify helps place songs campaigned through Discovery Mode on listeners' personal algorithmic playlists. Discovery Mode does not require an upfront budget. Instead, a 30% commission is applied to recording royalties generated from all streams of selected songs in Discovery Mode contexts - Spotify Radio and Autoplay. All other streams of selected songs outside of Spotify Radio and Autoplay remain commission-free. In September 2023, Spotify introduced its latest playlist update 'Daylist', a new kind of playlist which adapts to the user's mood throughout the day. Spotify has experimented with different limitations to users' listening on the Free service tier. In April 2011, Spotify announced via a blog post that they would drastically cut the amount of music that free members could access, effective 1 May 2011. The post stated that all free members would be limited to ten hours of music streaming per month, and in addition, individual tracks were limited to five plays. New users were exempt from these changes for six months. In March 2013, the five-play individual track limit was removed for users in the United Kingdom, and media reports stated that users in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand never had the limit in the first place. In December 2013, CEO Daniel Ek announced that Android and iOS smartphone users with the free service tier could listen to music in Shuffle mode, a feature in which users can stream music by specific artists and playlists without being able to pick which songs to hear. Mobile listening previously was not allowed in Spotify Free accounts. Ek stated that "We're giving people the best free music experience in the history of the smartphone." This shuffle feature is not available on Android and iOS tablets, or computers. In January 2014, Spotify removed all time limits for Free users on all platforms, including on computers, which previously had a 10-hour monthly listening limit after a 6-month grace period. In April 2018, Spotify began to allow Free users to listen on-demand to whatever songs they want for an unlimited number of times, as long as the song is on one of the user's 15 personalized discovery playlists. Before May 2020, all service users were limited to 10,000 songs in their library, after which they would receive an "Epic collection, friend" notification and would not be able to save more music to their library. Spotify later removed this limit. Spotify is proprietary and uses digital rights management (DRM) controls. Spotify's terms and conditions do not permit users to reverse-engineer the application. Spotify allows users to add local audio files for music not in its catalog into the user's library through Spotify's desktop application, and then allows users to synchronize those music files to Spotify's mobile apps or other computers over the same Wi-Fi network as the primary computer by creating a Spotify playlist, and adding those local audio files to the playlist. Audio files must either be in the .mp3, .mp4 (.mp4 files that have video streams are not supported), or .m4p media formats. This feature is available only for Premium subscribers. Spotify has a median playback latency of 265 ms (including local cache). In April 2014, Spotify moved away from the peer-to-peer (P2P) system they had used to distribute music to users. Previously, a desktop user would listen to music from one of three sources: a cached file on the computer, one of Spotify's servers, or from other subscribers through the P2P system. P2P, a well-established Internet distribution system, served as an alternative that reduced Spotify's server resources and costs. However, Spotify ended the P2P setup in 2014, with Spotify's Alison Bonny telling TorrentFreak: "We're gradually phasing out the use of our desktop P2P technology which has helped our users enjoy their music both speedily and seamlessly. We're now at a stage where we can power music delivery through our growing number of servers and ensure our users continue to receive a best-in-class service." Originally Spotify had their own servers but in 2016 most of their infrastructure was migrated to Google Cloud. Spotify first announced a voice-activated music-streaming gadget for cars in May 2019. Named the Car Thing, it represents the music-streaming service's first entry into hardware devices. In early 2020, as part of filings to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), submitted images of the device that make it seem much more like a miniature infotainment screen. In April 2021, Spotify rolled out its own voice assistant with the hands-free wake word: "Hey Spotify". Using this, users can perform various actions such as pulling playlists, launching radio stations, playing or pausing songs. This voice-based virtual assistant may be intended more towards Spotify's own hardware such as its "Car Thing". The company is incorporated in Luxembourg as Spotify Technology S.A., and is headquartered in Stockholm, Sweden, with offices in 16 countries around the world. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Spotify temporarily closed its office in Russia and indefinitely suspended both premium and free services in the country. In 2023, Spotify announced that it would leave Uruguay due to a copyright law. However, Spotify changed their minds a few weeks later. Barcelona Barcelona Femení In September 2010, the World Economic Forum (WEF) announced the company as a Technology Pioneer for 2011. Spotify has attracted significant criticism since its 2006 launch. The primary point of criticism centres around what artists, music creators, and the media have described as "unsustainable" compensation. Unlike physical sales or legal downloads (both of which were the main medium of listening to music at the time), which pay artists a fixed amount per song or album sold, Spotify pays royalties based on their "market share": the number of streams for their songs as a proportion of total songs streamed on the service. Spotify distributes approximately 70% of its total revenue to rights-holders, who will then pay artists based on their individual agreements. Worldwide, 30,000 musicians have joined the organization UnionOfMusicians (UMAW). UMAW organized protests in 31 cities in March 2021 and its campaign #JusticeAtSpotify is demanding more transparency and a compensation of one cent per stream. Spotify has been criticised by artists and producers including Taylor Swift and Thom Yorke, who have argued that Spotify does not fairly compensate musicians, and both withdrew their music from the service. Their catalogues returned to the service in 2017. While the streaming music industry in general faces the same critique about inadequate payments, Spotify, being the leading service, faces particular scrutiny due to its free service tier, allowing users to listen to music for free, though with advertisements between tracks. The free service tier has led to a variety of major album releases being delayed or withdrawn from the service. In response to the allegations about unfair compensation, Spotify claims that it is benefitting the industry by migrating users away from unauthorized copying and less monetized platforms to its free service tier, and then downgrades that service until they upgrade to paid accounts. A study has shown that record labels keep a high amount of the money earned from Spotify, and the CEO of Merlin Network, a representative body for over 10,000 independent labels, has also observed significant yearly growth rates in earnings from Spotify, while clarifying that Spotify pays labels, not artists. In 2017, as part of its efforts to renegotiate licence deals for an interest in going public, Spotify announced that artists would be able to make albums temporarily exclusive to paid subscribers if the albums are part of Universal Music Group or the Merlin Network. In 2016, Spotify was criticized for allegedly making certain artists' music harder to find than others, as these artists would release their music to the rival streaming service Apple Music before releasing it to Spotify. In May 2018, Spotify attracted criticism for its "Hate Content & Hateful Conduct policy" that removed the music of R. Kelly and XXXTentacion from its editorial and algorithmic playlists because "When we look at promotion, we look at issues around hateful conduct, where you have an artist or another creator who has done something off-platform that is so particularly out of line with our values, egregious, in a way that it becomes something that we don't want to associate ourselves with." R. Kelly has faced accusations of sexual abuse, while XXXTentacion was on trial for domestic abuse in a case that did not reach a judgement before his death that June. This policy was revoked in June because the company deemed the original wording to be too "vague"; they stated that "Across all genres, our role is not to regulate artists. Therefore, we are moving away from implementing a policy around artist conduct". However, artists such as Gary Glitter and Lostprophets are still hidden from Spotify's radio stations. According to some computer science and music experts, various music communities are often ignored or overlooked by music streaming services such as Spotify. The most commonly perceived error is said to be caused by a lack of diverse scope within curation staff, including overlooking mainstay artists in large genres, potentially causing a categorical homogenization of musical styles; even impacting mainline artists like within hip hop with A Tribe Called Quest. In March 2021, David Dayen argued in The American Prospect that musicians were in peril due to monopolies in streaming services like Spotify. Daniel Ek, co-founder and CEO of Spotify, discussed "what he called an artist-friendly streaming solution". He explained, "An extension of the internet radio craze of the early 2000s, Spotify would license content from record labels, and then support artists as people listened to their music." In January 2022, 270 scientists, physicians, professors, doctors, and healthcare workers wrote an open letter to Spotify expressing concern over "false and societally harmful assertions" on Joe Rogan's podcast, The Joe Rogan Experience, and asked Spotify to "establish a clear and public policy to moderate misinformation on its platform". The 270 signatories objected to Rogan broadcasting COVID-19 misinformation, citing "a highly controversial" episode featuring guest Robert Malone (#1757). On 26 January, Neil Young removed his music from Spotify after they refused to remove the podcast. Other artists and podcasters, such as Joni Mitchell, Nils Lofgren, Brené Brown, and Crosby, Stills, & Nash, also announced a boycott of Spotify. Spotify promised to add content advisories for anything containing discussions related to COVID-19 and posted additional rules. Comparison of music streaming services List of most-streamed artists on Spotify List of most-streamed songs on Spotify List of podcast clients Tech companies in the New York metropolitan area "20-F". 20-F. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2021. "About us". Spotify. Archived from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2021. "Form 20-F". US Securities and Exchange Commission. 8 February 2024. Archived from the original on 13 February 2024. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "Spotify Technology S.A. Q3 2023 update". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "Spotify AB". Legal Entity Identifier. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021. "Contact". Spotify. Archived from the original on 9 July 2016. Retrieved 20 February 2022. "Spotify UK revenues surge to almost £190m as mobile subscriptions take off". The Guardian. 14 October 2016. Archived from the original on 17 July 2022. Retrieved 6 August 2021. "Company Info". Spotify For the Record. 2 February 2022. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 2 February 2022. "About Spotify". Spotify. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Spotify Q3 2022 investor presentation" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 November 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Spotify Music". Roku Channel Store. Roku. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2018. "Top websites". Semrush. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "spotify.com". semrush. Archived from the original on 25 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. Sehgal, Kabir (26 January 2018). "Spotify and Apple Music should become record labels so musicians can make a fair living". CNBC. Archived from the original on 24 February 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2018. Swanson, Kate (2013). "A Case Study on Spotify: Exploring Perceptions of the Music Streaming Service". Journal of the Music and Entertainment Industry Educators Association. 13 (1): 207–230. doi:10.25101/13.10. Archived from the original on 1 December 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "The story of Spotify: Sweden's controversial king of music streaming". The Local Sweden. 2 March 2018. Archived from the original on 2 June 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Parsons, Jeff (3 April 2018). "History of Spotify: how the Swedish streaming company changed the music industry". mirror. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Huddleston Jr., Tom (4 April 2018). "How Spotify's college-dropout founder became a self-made millionaire at 23 — and a billionaire at 35". CNBC. Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Bertoni, Steven. "Spotify's Daniel Ek: The Most Important Man In Music". Forbes. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Spotify reintroduces waiting list, nudges you to paying". www.theregister.com. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. D'Orazio, Dante (6 January 2012). "Spotify early adopters will soon lose unlimited listening on free accounts". The Verge. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Spotify to continue to let US users stream music for free". New York Post. 29 March 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Sheffield, Hazel (15 April 2016). "Spotify's threats to leave Sweden spur startup protest in Stockholm". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Spotify expands with World Trade Center move". Agence France-Presse via ABS-CBN. 15 February 2017. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 15 February 2017. Loudenback, Tanza (25 July 2016). "Step inside Spotify's New York City office, where you'll find an airy roof deck, cold brew coffee, and a secret recording studio". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 20 February 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2017. "Spotify expands to Iraq and Libya". Arab News. 17 November 2021. Weiner, Natalie (12 October 2015). "Ed Sheeran's 'Thinking Out Loud' Becomes First Song to Hit 500 Million Spotify Streams". Billboard. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Leaning power: Spotify names its most streamed track of all time". The Guardian. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Ingham, Tim (7 April 2016). "The biggest artist on Spotify is a shareholder in Tidal". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 30 September 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Jones, Rhian (18 May 2016). "Drake is Spotify's most popular artist in history ... and right now". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. Ingham, Tim (1 December 2016). "Drake finally loses his Spotify crown to record-breaking The Weeknd". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. McIntyre, Hugh (16 December 2016). "Drake's One Dance Is The First Song To Hit 1 Billion Plays On Spotify". Forbes. Archived from the original on 17 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. Kaufman, Gil (16 December 2016). "Drake's One Dance Is First Song to Reach 1 Billion Plays on Spotify". Billboard. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. "Taylor Swift sets records for Spotify streams and platforms, YouTube views". The Associated Press. 26 August 2017. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 7 September 2017. "XXXTentacion Breaks Taylor Swift's Single-Day Streaming Record on Spotify". Billboard. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2020. "Spotify hits milestone with 1 million subscribers". BBC News. BBC. 8 March 2011. Archived from the original on 9 January 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Van Grove, Jennifer (21 September 2011). "Spotify Surpasses 2 Million Paying Subscribers". Mashable. Archived from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Sanburn, Josh (16 August 2012). "Spotify is Growing — But Why Isn't It Growing Faster?". Time. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Weber, Harrison (6 December 2012). "Spotify announces 5M+ paid subscribers globally, 1M paid in US, 20M total active users, 1B playlists". The Next Web. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Sloan, Paul (29 May 2014). "Spotify: Growing like mad, yet so far to go". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Brustein, Joshua (22 May 2014). "Spotify Hits 10 Million Paid Users. Now Can It Make Money?". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Singleton, Micah (21 March 2016). "Spotify hits 30 million subscribers". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Kahn, Jordan (14 September 2016). "Spotify hits 40 million paid subscriber milestone, outpacing Apple Music's growth". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on 7 September 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Murgia, Madhumita (20 June 2016). "Spotify crosses 100 m users". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Spangler, Todd (29 April 2020). "Spotify Gains 6 Million Paid Subscribers in Q1 as COVID-19 Disrupts Listening Patterns". Variety. Archived from the original on 27 May 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Spotify's subscribers, usage surge amid coronavirus outbreak". CNBC. 29 April 2020. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2020. "Spotify Q1 2022 financials reveal 182m subscribers and 422m active users – Music Ally". 27 April 2022. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022. Porter, Jon (27 July 2022). "Spotify's subscribers rise to 188M amid podcasting setbacks". The Verge. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022. Statt, Nick; Singleton, Micah (16 March 2017). "Spotify will restrict some albums to its paid tier". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. Wilhelm, Parker (16 March 2017). "Spotify may soon require a Premium account to listen to certain albums". TechRadar. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. Summers, Nick (16 March 2017). "Spotify might delay album releases for 'free' users". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. Singleton, Micah (4 April 2017). "Spotify Premium users will get some albums two weeks before free users". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017. Titcomb, James (4 April 2017). "Spotify to restrict albums to paying subscribers for first time". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2017. Hern, Alex (4 April 2017). "Spotify to host top stars' albums for premium subscribers only". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017. Schneider, Marc (20 April 2017). "Following Universal Deal, Spotify Locks Down Indies in Long-Term Licensing Pact With Merlin". Billboard. Archived from the original on 21 April 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2017. Ingraham, Nathan (20 April 2017). "Spotify lets thousands of indie labels limit free streaming". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2017. "Is Spotify really worth $23bn?". BBC News. 1 March 2018. Archived from the original on 28 February 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Spotify files to go public as it discloses subscriber growth and heavy losses". The Verge. Archived from the original on 28 February 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Castillo, Michelle (28 February 2018). "Spotify files to go public, lost $1.5 billion last year". CNBC. Archived from the original on 28 February 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Salinas, Sara (3 April 2018). "Spotify loses some of its initial heat as it drops from its opening price of $165.90". CNBC. Archived from the original on 3 April 2018. Retrieved 3 April 2018. "Report: Spotify Targeted in Potential Fraud Scheme". vpnMentor. 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Moore, Mike (24 November 2020). "Thousands of Spotify accounts hacked – here's what you need to know". TechRadar. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Owaida, Amer (24 November 2020). "Up to 350,000 Spotify accounts hacked in credential stuffing attacks". WeLiveSecurity. Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Woodard, Nick (26 November 2020). "300,000 Spotify Accounts Reportedly Hacked". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Spotify Acquires Music Discovery App Tunigo, A Spotify-Powered Songza Competitor". 3 May 2013.[permanent dead link] Etherington, Darrell (6 March 2014). "Spotify Acquires The Echo Nest, Gaining Control Of The Music DNA Company That Powers Its Rivals". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Turns Out Spotify Acquired The Echo Nest For Just €50M". 10 May 2015. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2020. Constine, Josh (24 June 2015). "Spotify Buys Beats' Analytics Provider Seed Scientific". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016. Vanian, Jonathan (24 June 2015). "Why Spotify just bought a data science startup". Fortune . Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "Spotify Buys Cord Project And Soundwave To Expand Messaging And Social Features". 20 January 2016.[permanent dead link] Goldman, Joshua (27 April 2016). "Spotify snaps up photo-video aggregator for concertgoers". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Spotify acquires Preact to fuel its subscription business". Techcrunch. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2020. Perez, Sarah (7 March 2017). "Spotify acquires audio detection startup Sonalytic". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. Ingham, Tim (27 March 2017). "Spotify acquires MightyTV. Can its founder fix Daniel Ek's advertising woes?". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. Perez, Sarah (26 April 2017). "Spotify acquires blockchain startup Mediachain to solve music's attribution problem". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. LeFebvre, Rob (26 April 2017). "Spotify's latest move shows it's trying to get royalties right". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. Russell, Jon (18 May 2017). "Spotify buys AI startup Niland to develop its music personalization and recommendations". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 20 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. Novet, Jordan (18 May 2017). "Spotify just bought an AI startup to help it stay ahead of Apple Music". CNBC. NBCUniversal News Group. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. Perez, Sarah; Lunden, Ingrid (17 November 2017). "Spotify acquires online music studio Soundtrap as it goes after creators". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 22 September 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Krishna, Swapna (17 November 2017). "Spotify acquires Soundtrap, an online music recording studio". Engadget. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Perez, Sarah (12 April 2018). "Spotify acquires music licensing platform Loudr". techcrunch.com. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "'The Joe Budden Podcast' Lands Exclusive Partnership with Spotify". Spotify Newsroom. 22 August 2018. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. Retrieved 29 June 2019. Kafka, Peter (6 February 2019). "Spotify has bought two podcast startups and it wants to buy more". Recode. Archived from the original on 6 February 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2019. Warren, Tom (6 February 2019). "Spotify gets serious about podcasts with two acquisitions". The Verge. Archived from the original on 7 February 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2019. Russell, Jon (6 February 2019). "Spotify buys Gimlet and Anchor in podcast push, earmarks $500M for more deals". TechCrunch. Retrieved 6 February 2019.[permanent dead link] "Spotify acquires another podcast network to keep building its original show catalog". The Verge. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019. "Spotify acquires true crime studio Parcast to expand its original podcast content". TechCrunch. 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2020. "Spotify acquires SoundBetter, a music production marketplace, for an undisclosed sum". TechCrunch. 12 September 2019. Retrieved 12 September 2019.[permanent dead link] "'Last Podcast on the Left' Moving Exclusively to Spotify". The Hollywood Reporter. 19 November 2019. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Robertson, Katie; Scheiber, Noam (5 February 2020). "Spotify Is Buying The Ringer". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. "Spotify is buying The Ringer to boost its sports podcast content". TechCrunch. 5 February 2020. Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. Spangler, Todd (19 May 2020). "Joe Rogan Will Bring His Podcast Exclusively to Spotify". Variety. Archived from the original on 19 May 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2020. Flegenheimer, Matt (1 July 2021). "Joe Rogan Is Too Big to Cancel". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 1 July 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Carman, Ashley (10 November 2020). "Spotify is acquiring podcast hosting company Megaphone for $235 million". The Verge. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Fischer, Sara (31 March 2021). "Spotify enters live social audio with acquisition of Locker Room". Axios. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Spangler, Todd (12 May 2021). "Dax Shepard Is Moving His Podcast Exclusively to Spotify This Summer". Variety. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022. "ArmchairExpPod". Instagram. Archived from the original on 25 December 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2021. "Spotify launches its live audio app and Clubhouse rival, Spotify Greenroom". 16 June 2021.[permanent dead link] "Spotify acquires Podz, a podcast discovery platform". 17 June 2021. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. Spangler, Todd (15 June 2021). "Spotify Clinches $60M-Plus Deal With Alex Cooper for 'Call Her Daddy' Podcast, Yanking It Away From Barstool". Variety. Archived from the original on 18 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Spotify Acquires Audiobook Company Findaway". Android Headlines. 12 November 2021. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2021. "Spotify acquires podcast tech company Whooshkaa which turns radio broadcasts into on-demand audio". 16 December 2021. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. Carman, Ashley (16 February 2022). "Spotify is acquiring two major podcast tech platforms". The Verge. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Spotify rebranding its live social audio app". Ad Age. 23 March 2022. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Chan, J. Clara (3 April 2023). "Spotify Shutters Live Audio App". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. "Spotify Acquires Synthetic Voice Startup Sonantic". 13 June 2022. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "Spotify acquired Heardle, the Wordle-like music game". TechCrunch. 12 July 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2022.[permanent dead link] Shapiro, Ariel (12 July 2022). "Spotify acquires music trivia game Heardle". The Verge. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2022. Alexander, Christina (14 April 2023). "Farewell Heardle: Spotify Killing Its Version of Wordle Less Than a Year After Acquisition". IGN. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023. Retrieved 17 April 2023. "Spotify acquires Dublin-based content moderation startup Kinzen". Music Business Worldwide. 6 October 2022. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. Perez, Sarah (8 March 2023). "Spotify is revamping its podcaster tools, including Anchor, and is partnering with Patreon". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Lempel, Eric (30 March 2015). "Spotify Launches on PlayStation Music Today". Sony. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Rossignol, Derrick (13 March 2017). "Spotify lands '2 Dope Queens' and other hit WNYC podcasts". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. Nieva, Richard (14 March 2017). "Spotify gives you driving directions through Waze". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. Warren, Tom (2 October 2017). "Microsoft retires Groove Music service, partners with Spotify". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Russell, Jon (8 December 2017). "Spotify and Tencent agree to swap stakes in their music businesses". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Sawers, Paul (8 December 2017). "Spotify and China's Tencent invest in each other as part of 'strategic collaboration'". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Tencent Music, Spotify's strategic partner in China, is valued at over $12B – TechCrunch". techcrunch.com. March 2018. Archived from the original on 8 June 2018. Retrieved 3 June 2018. Farokhmanesh, Megan (1 February 2018). "Please tell me Spotify's new partnership with Discord will fix its bad gamer playlists". The Verge. Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. Perez, Sarah (11 April 2018). "Spotify and Hulu launch a discounted entertainment bundle for $12.99 per month". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on 11 April 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2018. Carman, Ashley (1 May 2020). "Netflix and ESPN team up with Spotify to curate podcasts around their Michael Jordan documentary". The Verge. Archived from the original on 3 May 2020. Retrieved 3 May 2020. "Spotify Strikes First-Look Deal To Adapt Podcasts As Movies And TV Shows". Movies. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 25 September 2020. Alexander, Julia (22 February 2021). "DC Comics is launching a podcast universe on Spotify". The Verge. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Chan, J. Clara (8 March 2023). "Behind Spotify's Growing DC Comics Audioverse". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Cohen, David (15 March 2022). "Spotify to Become Main Partner, Official Audio Streaming Partner of FC Barcelona". Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Spotify becomes first music streamer to launch on Roblox". Tech Crunch. 3 May 2022. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022. Makari, Reem (8 March 2023). "Spotify unveils Patreon partnership, redesigned app and more". www.podpod.com. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Welch, Chris (8 July 2015). "Spotify urges iPhone customers to stop paying through Apple's App Store". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 28 September 2019. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Kafka, Peter (30 June 2016). "Spotify says Apple won't approve a new version of its app because it doesn't want competition for Apple Music". Recode. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2017. Paczkowski, John (1 July 2016). "Apple Slams Spotify For Asking For "Preferential Treatment"". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Raymundo, Oscar (1 July 2016). "Apple slams Spotify for criticizing the App Store as anti-competitive". Macworld. International Data Group. Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Campbell, Mikey (5 May 2017). "Spotify, others file EU complaint over Apple and Google app store practices". AppleInsider. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. Miller, Chance (6 May 2017). "Spotify again accuses Apple of abusing its size & acting as a 'gatekeeper'". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. Fioretti, Julia (10 May 2017). "EU to tackle complaints over tech companies' trading practices". Reuters. Thomson Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 May 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2017. Lovejoy, Ben (10 May 2017). "EU planning a new law addressing 'unfair contractual clauses' following Spotify's complaint against Apple". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2017. "Spotify officially releases the first version of its Apple Watch app". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 14 November 2018. Rossignol, Joe (16 March 2019). "Spotify on Apple's Response to App Store Dispute: 'Every Monopolist Will Suggest They Have Done Nothing Wrong'". www.macrumors.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Addressing Spotify's Claims". Apple Newsroom. Archived from the original on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Meek, Andy (7 October 2019). "Apple just finally added Spotify integration to Siri in iOS 13". BGR. Archived from the original on 7 October 2019. Retrieved 8 October 2019. Amadeo, Ron (24 September 2020). "Epic, Spotify, and others take on Apple with "Coalition for App Fairness"". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 26 September 2020. "Spotify and K-Pop Label Kakao Settle Licensing Dispute, Music Returning to Platform". 10 March 2021. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 15 February 2022. "Spotify hides shuffle button after Adele says albums should 'tell a story'". The Guardian. 21 November 2021. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "Exclusive: Spotify tests letting artists promote NFTs on their profiles – Music Ally". 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. Nicolaou, Anna. "Spotify ejects thousands of AI-made songs in purge of fake streams". www.ft.com. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Spotify Premium". Spotify. Archived from the original on 13 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022. "How is Spotify contributing to the music business?". Spotify. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2016. "Spotify reveals artists earn $0.007 per stream". BBC News. BBC. 4 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2017. Ovide, Shira (22 March 2021). "Streaming Saved Music. Artists Hate It". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2021. Aswad, Jem (6 November 2023). "What Spotify's New Royalty Model Really Means". Variety. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "Spotify's New Royalty Model Explained by an Expert". Consequence of Sound. 2 November 2023. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "Confirmed: From 2024, tracks on Spotify will have to be played 1,000 times before they start earning money". Music Business Worldwide. 5 November 2023. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Hernandez, Brian Anthony (25 March 2014). "Spotify Slashes Subscription Prices for College Students". Mashable. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Dalton, Andrew (19 April 2017). "Spotify's half-price plan for students comes to 33 more countries". Engadget. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2017. Lancaster, Luke (19 April 2017). "Students can now pick up Spotify Premium for half price". CNET. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2017. Warren, Tom (20 October 2014). "Spotify Family lets you share a subscription from $14.99 per month". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. O'Hear, Steve (20 October 2014). "Spotify Introduces Family Plan, Starting At $14.99 Per Month For Two Members". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Dillet, Romain (23 May 2016). "Spotify family plan is now cheaper, $14.99 for up to 6 people". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Johnson, Dave (24 November 2021). "How to sign up for Spotify's Family plan, the streaming service's membership for up to 6 people". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. Heater, Brian (7 November 2018). "Spotify Connect speakers will soon work with its free tier". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018. Sawers, Paul (7 November 2018). "Spotify Connect for speakers opens to free users via a new SDK". Venturebeat. Archived from the original on 10 November 2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018. Guinness, Harry (8 July 2020). "What Is Spotify Duo, and Is It Right for You?". How-To Geek. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "Spotify Premium Duo". Spotify. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "Spotify HiFi subscription to launch in select markets later this year". Music Business Worldwide. 22 February 2021. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. Porter, Jon (3 August 2021). "Spotify is testing a less restrictive ad-supported tier costing $0.99 a month". The Verge. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 3 August 2021. "Spotify is ending its Spotify Plus service. I hope that it just becomes the default free service now, otherwise I'm really going to miss on demand music streaming for $3 a month". Reddit. 9 February 2022. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Nylander, Johan (17 August 2009). "Spotify doubled its loss last year". The Swedish Wire. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Geere, Duncan (29 October 2010). "Spotify now top-tier music revenue source in Sweden". Wired. Archived from the original on 30 October 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2017. Eldon, Eric (10 November 2012). "Spotify Is Having A Good 2012: Revenues Could Reach $500M As It Expands The Digital Music Market". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2017. Brian, Matt (4 January 2013). "Spotify is no longer offering new music download purchases to its users". The Next Web. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2017. Swant, Marty (26 May 2016). "Spotify Will Now Let Brands Sponsor the Most Popular Playlists". Adweek. Beringer Capital. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. Morrison, Maureen (26 May 2016). "Spotify Opens Its Popular Playlists to Sponsors". Advertising Age. Archived from the original on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. Ingham, Tim (29 September 2016). "Spotify has already paid the music industry over $1.2bn this year". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 12 June 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2017. Kafka, Peter (15 June 2017). "Spotify has guaranteed to pay big music labels billions over the next two years". Recode. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017. Retrieved 22 June 2017. Turner, Giles; Shaw, Lucas (15 June 2017). "Spotify's Loss More Than Doubles Even as User Growth Surges". Bloomberg Technology. Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 22 June 2017. Plummer, Robert (12 February 2017). "The clock is ticking for Spotify". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on 12 February 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2017. "Spotify Usage and Revenue Statistics (2020)". Business of Apps. 20 December 2018. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020. Retrieved 14 May 2020. Steele, Anne (29 July 2020). "Spotify Loss Deepens Despite Subscriber, Podcast Growth". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 29 July 2020. Bradshaw, Tim; Menn, Joseph (1 March 2010). "Spotify-MOG battle heats up". Financial Times. The Nikkei. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Spotify valued at $1bn, coming to US". Investoo. 18 June 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2012. Retrieved 7 November 2016. ref_176 MacMillan, Douglas; Jarzemsky, Matt; Farrell, Maureen (29 March 2016). "Spotify Raises $1 Billion in Debt Financing". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016.(subscription required) Lunden, Ingrid; Roof, Katie (2 February 2017). "Sources: Spotify may delay IPO to 2018 as it rethinks licensing deals". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2017. Dillett, Romain (17 November 2015). "Spotify Bets On Data To Lure Artists To Its Platform". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017. Perez, Sarah (18 April 2017). "Spotify's artist dashboard exits beta, offering streaming insights, profile management & more". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017. Rys, Dan (18 April 2017). "Spotify Upgrades Fan Insights Feature to 'Spotify for Artists': Exclusive". Billboard. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017. Deahl, Dani (20 September 2018). "Spotify will now let artists directly upload their music to the platform". The Verge. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 10 April 2019. Darus, Alex (2 July 2019). "Spotify shuts down direct music uploading for independent artists". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on 6 May 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Aswad, Jem (8 June 2017). "Spotify Launches 'Secret Genius' Program to Celebrate Songwriters (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. Perez, Sarah (20 October 2017). "Spotify launches RISE, a new emerging artist program". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Krishna, Swapna (20 October 2017). "Spotify's RISE program will try to find future music superstars". Engadget. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. "Spotify rolls out Written By playlists as it expands support for songwriters and publishers". www.musicweek.com. Archived from the original on 17 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Spotify Adds Hundreds More Songwriter Pages and 'Written By' Playlists". Billboard. 9 July 2020. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Spotify Tests Audiobooks With Classics Collection (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. 25 January 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. Carman, Ashley (5 May 2020). "Daniel Radcliffe and others are reading chapters of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone on video". The Verge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. Vega, Nicolas (8 November 2023). "Spotify Premium subscribers can now listen to over 200,000 audiobooks for free". CNBC. Archived from the original on 9 November 2023. Retrieved 9 November 2023. "Spotify's new Stations app is all about playlists without any of the faff". Alphr. Archived from the original on 25 May 2018. Retrieved 25 May 2018. Spotify Stations is now available in the US Archived 16 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine – The Verge (published 4 June 2019) Lawler, Richard (6 May 2022). "Spotify will shut down its radio-like listening app Stations on May 16th". The Verge. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "Spotify: Discover music, podcasts, and playlists - Apps on Google Play". play.google.com. "Spotify New Music and Podcasts". App Store. "Spotify Flathub page". Flathub. "Announcing Alpha & Beta Programs". community.spotify.com. 4 December 2018. "How we use Python at Spotify". Spotify Labs. Spotify. 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 8 March 2017. "Spotify Is Now Available in 74 Languages Around the World". Billboard. 16 May 2023. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. Hamburger, Ellis (15 November 2012). "Spotify to begin rolling out browser-based music app in beta today". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 11 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Spotify on Apple Watch". Spotify. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Wedel, Chris (2 September 2021). "How to use Spotify offline on Wear OS 3 watches". Android Central. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Warren, Tom (20 June 2017). "Spotify is now available in the Windows Store". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2017. Weir, Andy (20 June 2017). "Spotify for Windows 10 PCs appears in the Windows Store, but you can't have it... [Update: Oh yes, you can!]". Neowin. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Spotify vs. Apple Music: Which service is the streaming king?". Digital Trends. 28 October 2016. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2016. Russell, Jon (2 March 2017). "Spotify Reaches 50 Million Paying Users". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Dredge, Stuart (30 November 2011). "Spotify amps up iTunes rivalry with its own apps platform". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2016. Cheredar, Tom (12 June 2012). "Even Spotify apps are getting funded: Soundrop raises $3M to turn music social". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on 10 November 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2016. Lunden, Ingrid (11 June 2012). "Spotify App Soundrop Tunes Into First Investment: $3M From Spotify Lead Backer Northzone". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2016. Lunden, Ingrid (13 November 2014). "Spotify Axes App Finder, Kills Soundrop and Its Listening Rooms". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2016. Constine, Josh (11 April 2012). "Spotify's New Embeddable Play Button Lets Any Site Turn You On To Legal Tunes". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Spotify Improves Music Discovery, Social Features". ABC News. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. "Spotify Launches Influencer Following Music Graph, Collection, And Instant Previews To Aid Discovery". TechCrunch. 6 December 2012. Archived from the original on 17 July 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Hamburger, Ellis (6 December 2012). "Spotify debuts new Discovery engine, Collection, and Follow, which lets users follow friends and celebrities". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Warren, Christina (6 December 2012). "Spotify Wants to Make Music Discovery Truly Social". Mashable. Archived from the original on 26 May 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Lanxon, Nate (6 December 2012). "Spotify announces major updates to service, gets Metallica catalogue". Wired. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Welch, Chris (20 May 2015). "Spotify now does videos and podcasts". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 10 November 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Moynihan, Tim (20 May 2017). "Here are all the new features packed inside Spotify". Wired. Archived from the original on 22 December 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Crook, Jordan (20 May 2015). "Spotify Introduces Video Clips, Podcasts, And Activity-Based Playlists". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. "How Spotify Wrapped Has Evolved Over The Years". ScreenRant. 7 December 2020. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Swant, Marty. "Spotify Rolls Out New 'Wrapped' Campaign To Help Users Remember Their Decade Of Music". Forbes. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Lunden, Ingrid (12 January 2016). "Spotify And Genius Team To Stream The Backstory On Music Tracks". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017. Kulwin, Noah (12 January 2016). "Spotify Adds 'Behind the Lyrics' Playlists, Powered by Lyrics Site Genius". Recode. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017. Cox, Jamieson (12 January 2016). "Spotify and Genius are collaborating on info-rich Behind the Lyrics playlists". The Verge. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017. Perez, Sarah (25 April 2017). "Spotify brings "Behind the Lyrics" to Android". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Dalton, Andrew (25 April 2017). "Spotify took its sweet time getting Behind the Lyrics on Android". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Spotify finally rolls out real-time lyrics to global users Archived 27 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine – TechCrunch (published 18 November 2021) Garun, Natt (5 May 2017). "Spotify adds QR-like codes for quick music sharing". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. Constine, Josh (5 May 2017). "Scan these new QR-style Spotify Codes to instantly play a song". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. Clark, Bryan (5 May 2017). "Spotify Codes bring Snapchat-like QR codes to music streaming". The Next Web. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017. "[Update: Rolling out as 'Car View'] Spotify tests stripped-down "Safety Mode" UI when connected to Bluetooth devices". xda-developers. 18 January 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2019. Welch, Chris (16 January 2019). "Spotify launches a simplified Car View for controlling your music while driving". The Verge. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 19 January 2019. With Spotify Canvas, Artists Add Moving Visuals To Tracks Archived 2 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine – Hyperbot.com (published 31 January 2019) Spotify is testing its own version of Stories called 'Storyline' Archived 23 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine – TechCrunch (published 13 May 2019) Richardson, Mark (8 March 2021). "Streaming for Audiophiles". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2021. Kokalitcheva, Kia (20 July 2015). "Spotify's new feature will help you fight the Monday blues". Fortune. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Dredge, Stuart (20 July 2015). "Spotify bites back at Apple Music with weekly 'mixtape' playlist for each user". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Pasick, Adam (21 December 2015). "The magic that makes Spotify's Discover Weekly playlists so damn good". Quartz. Archived from the original on 3 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "Spotify now has even more playlists to help you find hot new music". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. Popper, Ben (5 August 2016). "Spotify's Release Radar is a personalized playlist of brand-new music". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. Constine, Josh (5 August 2016). "Spotify follows Discover Weekly with personalized new releases playlist". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 15 March 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2017. "The Tea with AleXa: An Exclusive Interview with the K-Pop Sensation!". El-Shai. 30 May 2021. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Apple Music takes on Spotify's influential RapCaviar brand with Rap Life playlist and weekly show". Music Business Worldwide. 19 July 2019. Archived from the original on 17 October 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2020. Marks, Craig (September 2017). "How a Hit Happens Now". Vulture. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 28 April 2020. "What is Rap Caviar on Spotify?". 9 February 2018. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. "Meet Tuma Basa, The Mastermind Behind Spotify's 'Rap Caviar' Playlist". Genius. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 15 March 2020. "Spotify sculpts Cardi B, other hip-hop stars for latest RapCaviar pantheon". Marketing Dive. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. Spotify Launches Your Daily Drive With Custom Music And News Updates Archived 8 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine – Radio Insight (published 12 June 2019; accessed 13 June 2019) Clover, Juli (11 May 2020). "Spotify Gains New 'Group Session' Feature With Shared Listening Queue". Mac Rumors. Archived from the original on 16 May 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2020. "Your Squad Can Now Stream Simultaneously Using Spotify's Group Session Beta". Spotify Newsroom. 28 July 2020. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2021. "Spotify adds What's New feed for all the music and podcasts you follow". The Verge. 27 July 2021. Archived from the original on 27 July 2021. Retrieved 27 July 2021. Aswad, Jem (10 November 2021). "Spotify Expands Charts to Include Genre and Local Categories". Variety. Archived from the original on 24 January 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2021. "Discovery Mode – Spotify for Artists". artists.spotify.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "Spotify rafraîchit la playlist Daylist tout au long de la journée". Journal du Geek. 18 September 2023. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "Spotify launches Daylist, a new kind of playlist". Evening Standard. 12 September 2023. Archived from the original on 18 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Butcher, Mike (14 April 2011). "Spotify takes the axe to its free service – can it now claim to slash music piracy?". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 14 June 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. O'Hear, Steve (19 March 2013). "Spotify Ditches Its 5 Play Limit For Spotify Free Users In The UK". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 4 July 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Richmond, Shane (19 March 2013). "Spotify removes five-play song cap". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Hamburger, Ellis (11 December 2013). "Spotify announces free streaming on Android and iPhone, but only in Shuffle mode". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Crook, Jordan (11 December 2013). "Spotify Goes Freemium On Tablets, Launches Free Shuffle Product On Smartphones". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Murray-Morris, Sophie (15 January 2014). "Spotify removes time restrictions on free desktop player". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2017. Constine, Josh (15 January 2014). "Spotify Drops Free Web Listening Time Limit Everywhere – A Big Scalability Milestone". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 15 November 2017. Retrieved 2 June 2017. "Spotify beefs up its free tier – TechCrunch". techcrunch.com. 24 April 2018. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Gartenberg, Chaim (26 May 2020). "Spotify finally removes its 10,000-song library limit". The Verge. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2023. Orlowski, Andrew (31 August 2009). "Spotify, DRM and the celestial jukebox". The Register. Situation Publishing. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2016. Kreitz, Gunnar; Niemelä, Fredrik. "Spotify – Large Scale, Low Latency, P2P Music-on-Demand Streaming" (PDF). Royal Institute of Technology. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Ernesto (16 April 2014). "Spotify Starts Shutting Down Its Massive P2P Network". TorrentFreak. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2016. Toor, Amar (24 February 2016). "Spotify is moving its data to Google's servers". The Verge. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Sapra, Bani. "We just got our best look yet at Spotify's mysterious music streaming gadget, the Car Thing, and it has built-in LTE wireless". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 13 July 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2021. Statt, Nick (2 April 2021). "Spotify leaks another look at the Car Thing, this time from within in its own app". The Verge. Archived from the original on 7 April 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2021. "Hands-free "Hey Spotify" wake word rolls out". GSMArena.com. Archived from the original on 8 April 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2021. Hollister, Sean (7 April 2021). ""Hey Spotify" is another hands-free way to control your music, rolling out now". The Verge. Archived from the original on 8 April 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2021. "EDGAR Filing Documents for 0001639920-21-000006". www.sec.gov. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 14 April 2021. "Spotify Technology S.a." lei.report. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 10 March 2021. "Listening is everything". Spotify. Archived from the original on 9 July 2016. Retrieved 10 March 2021. "Spotify Expands International Footprint, Bringing Audio to 80+ New Markets". Spotify. 22 February 2021. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Spotify closes its office in Russia in response to attack on Ukraine until further notice". Reuters. 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. Shaw, Lucas (25 March 2022). "Spotify Pulls Free Service From Russia, Completing Its Exit". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Spotify deixará de funcionar no Uruguai a partir de 2024 e culpa novas leis". TecMundo (in Portuguese). 23 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Governo do Uruguai recua e Spotify vai continuar operando no país" [Uruguay government recedes and Spotify will continue operating in the country]. Tecnoblog (in Portuguese). 13 December 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Synskey, Dorian (10 November 2013). "Is Daniel Ek, Spotify founder, going to save the music industry … or destroy it?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Milian, Mark (15 July 2011). "Spotify music-streaming service launches in U.S." CNN. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Van Grove, Jennifer (12 October 2011). "Spotify Launches in its Ninth Country: Denmark". Mashable. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Peoples, Glenn (12 October 2011). "Spotify Launches In Denmark, Its Ninth Country". Billboard. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Roxborough, Scott (12 March 2012). "Spotify Launching In Germany Tuesday". Billboard. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Peoples, Glenn (21 May 2012). "Spotify to Launch in Australia and New Zealand Tuesday". Billboard. Archived from the original on 13 February 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2017. "Spotify launches in Australia". The Sydney Morning Herald. 22 May 2012. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 3 December 2017. "Spotify (finally) launches in Ireland". The Irish Times. 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Lunden, Ingrid (13 November 2012). "Spotify Is Now Live In 17 Countries After Quietly Adding Ireland And Luxembourg Today". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. "@Spotify now available in Andorra, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg and Monaco". Twitter. 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Spotify begins Latin America push with Mexico launch". BBC News. BBC. 16 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Russell, Jon (24 September 2013). "Spotify is now live in 32 countries after launching in Taiwan, Argentina, Greece and Turkey". The Next Web. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Kastrenakes, Jacob (11 December 2013). "Spotify launches in 20 new markets throughout Latin America and Europe". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2016. "Spotify makes long-awaited entry into Indonesia". The Jakarta Post. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2017. "Spotify to launch in Thailand on 22 August". The Nation. Nation Multimedia Group. 11 August 2016. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 22 August 2017. Russell, Jon (21 August 2017). "Spotify launches in Thailand to continue its Asia push". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 December 2017. "Spotify Launches in the Middle East and North Africa". Variety. 13 November 2018. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 14 November 2018. "Spotify finally takes off in UAE and North Africa after 'soft' launch". Music Biz Nation. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020. "Spotify Now Available in India, Apps Show Up on App Store, Google Play". NDTV India. 26 February 2019. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 26 February 2019. "Spotify Is Now Available in Russia, Croatia, Ukraine, and 10 Other European Markets". 14 July 2020. Archived from the original on 14 July 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2020. "Spotify Launches in South Korea". Spotify. 1 February 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Spotify set to come to Bangladesh". The Daily Star. 24 February 2021. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Spotify Expands International Footprint, Bringing Audio to 80+ New Markets". 22 February 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "Spotify is Now Available for More Users and Creators Across the Caribbean". 29 September 2021. "Spotify Expands to Six More Countries Around the World". 17 November 2021. "Spotify Now Available in Ethiopia". 22 December 2022. "Spotify Camp Nou approved by Barcelona members". www.marca.com. MARCA.COM. 3 April 2022. Schonfeld, Erick (1 September 2010). "Foursquare, Scribd, And Spotify To Be Dubbed 2011 Technology Pioneers At Davos". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Saint, Nick (1 September 2010). "Foursquare, SecondMarket, Knewton, And Spotify Honored By World Economic Forum". Business Insider. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "We've only just begun!". Spotify. 7 October 2008. Archived from the original on 11 December 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2016. Plaugic, Lizzie (7 December 2015). "Spotify's Year in Music shows just how little we pay artists for their music". The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Has Streaming Saved the Music Industry? – Tracks – Watch the full show". ARTE. Archived from the original on 29 November 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021. "Thom Yorke pulls albums from Spotify". BBC News. BBC. 15 July 2013. Retrieved 18 January 2017. Alter, Charlotte (3 November 2014). "Taylor Swift Just Removed Her Music From Spotify". Time. Retrieved 23 December 2016. Rossignol, Derrick (8 December 2017). "Thom Yorke's Solo Albums Are Finally Streaming On Spotify, Which He Famously Hates". Uproxx. Uproxx Media Group. Retrieved 10 December 2017. "Taylor Swift's Music Returning to Spotify & Other Streaming Services Tonight". Billboard. 8 June 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. "What Streaming Music Services Pay". Information is Beautiful. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Singleton, Micah (15 June 2017). "Spotify now has 140 million active users". The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved 10 December 2017. Karp, Hannah (3 December 2015). "Coldplay to Headline Super Bowl Halftime Show". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 24 December 2016. (subscription required) Luckerson, Victor (24 November 2014). "Beyoncé's Latest Album Is Finally on Spotify". Time. Retrieved 24 December 2016. Carr, Austin (15 February 2012). "Why Spotify Turned Down Adele's 21". Fast Company. Mansueto Ventures. Retrieved 24 December 2016. Ingham, Tim (3 February 2015). "Major labels keep 73% of Spotify Premium payouts – Report". Music Business Worldwide. Retrieved 17 December 2016. Masnick, Mike (5 February 2015). "Yes, Major Record Labels Are Keeping Nearly All The Money They Get From Spotify, Rather Than Giving It To Artists". Techdirt. Retrieved 17 December 2016. Buskirk, Eliot Van (21 June 2012). "David Lowery Might Be Right About Some Things, But He's Wrong About Streaming, Money, and Artists". Evolver.fm. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2016. "Spotify Is Burying Musicians for Their Apple Deals". Bloomberg.com. 26 August 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2020. Strauss, Matthew (10 May 2018). "Spotify Removes R. Kelly and XXXTentacion From Its Playlists". Pitchfork. Retrieved 21 October 2018. Minsker, Evan; Yoo, Noah (1 June 2018). "Spotify Walks Back Controversial "Hateful Conduct" Policy, Adds XXXTentacion to Major Playlist". Pitchfork. Retrieved 21 October 2018. Cairns, Dan; Dean, Jonathan (27 May 2018). "Where will Spotify's censorship end?". The Times. "Spotify Pivots on Global Cultures Initiative, Alarming Music Industry". Rolling Stone. 4 October 2019. Retrieved 18 February 2020. Hepworth, Shelley (1 January 2020). "Streaming spells the end of the 'ownership' era of music, but are we ready to let go?". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 February 2020. "Spotify and streaming services are breaking cultural music on a worldwide stage". RouteNote Blog. 6 February 2020. Retrieved 18 February 2020. Dayen, David (22 March 2021). "Islands in the Stream". The American Prospect. Tapp, Tom (13 January 2022). "Hundreds Of Doctors Sign Open Letter Asking Spotify To Address "Mass Misinformation Events," Take Aim At Joe Rogan's Show". Deadline. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Dickson, E. J. (12 January 2022). "'A Menace to Public Health': Doctors Demand Spotify Puts an End to Covid Lies on 'Joe Rogan Experience'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Yang, Maya (26 January 2022). "Spotify removes Neil Young music in feud over Joe Rogan's false Covid claims". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 January 2022. Shafer, Ellise (28 January 2022). "Joni Mitchell Says She's Removing Music From Spotify: 'Irresponsible People Are Spreading Lies'". Variety. Repko, Melissa (30 January 2022). "Bruce Springsteen guitarist Nils Lofgren joins protest of Spotify over Covid misinformation". CNBC. Retrieved 30 January 2022. Roth, Emma (30 January 2022). "Brené Brown Says She Won't Release New Episodes of Her Spotify-Exclusive Podcasts 'until Further Notice'". The Verge. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "David Crosby, Graham Nash and Stephen Stills ask to pull their content from Spotify". NPR. Retrieved 5 February 2022. Roth, Emma (30 January 2022). "Spotify finally responds to Joe Rogan controversy with a plan to label podcasts that discuss COVID-19". The Verge. Retrieved 30 January 2022. Maria Eriksson et al. (2019): Spotify Teardown: Inside the Black Box of Streaming Music, The MIT Press, ISBN 978-0262038904. Šmite, Darja; Moe, Nils Brede; Floryan, Marcin; Gonzalez-Huerta, Javier; Dorner, Michael; Sablis, Aivars (June 2023). "Decentralized decision-making and scaled autonomy at Spotify". Journal of Systems & Software. 200. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2023.111649. ISSN 0164-1212. S2CID 256931802. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spotify. Business data for Spotify: Bloomberg Google Reuters SEC filings Yahoo! Official website Portals:  Internet  Music