Sub-Saharan Africa, Subsahara, or Non-Mediterranean Africa is the area and regions of the continent of Africa that lie south of the Sahara. These include Central Africa, East Africa, Southern Africa, and West Africa. Geopolitically, in addition to the African countries and territories that are situated fully in that specified region, the term may also include polities that only have part of their territory located in that region, per the definition of the United Nations (UN). This is considered a non-standardized geographical region with the number of countries included varying from 46 to 48 depending on the organization describing the region (e.g. UN, WHO, World Bank, etc.). The African Union (AU) uses a different regional breakdown, recognizing all 55 member states on the continent—grouping them into five distinct and standard regions. The term serves as a grouping counterpart to North Africa, which is instead grouped with the definition of MENA (i.e. Middle East and North Africa) as it is part of the Arab world, and most North African states are likewise members of the Arab League. However, while they are also member states of the Arab League, the Comoros, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia (and sometimes Sudan) are all geographically considered to be part of sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, the UN Development Programme applies the "sub-Saharan" classification to 46 of Africa's 55 countries, excluding Djibouti, SADR, Somalia, and Sudan. Since around 3900 BCE, the Saharan and sub-Saharan regions of Africa have been separated by the extremely harsh climate of the sparsely populated Sahara, forming an effective barrier that is interrupted only by the Nile in Sudan, though navigation on the Nile was blocked by the Sudd and the river's cataracts. There is also an evident genetic divide between North Africa and sub-Saharan Africa that dates back to the Neolithic. The Sahara pump theory explains how flora and fauna (including Homo sapiens) left Africa to penetrate Eurasia and beyond. African pluvial periods are associated with a "Wet Sahara" phase, during which larger lakes and more rivers existed. Geographers historically divided the region into several distinct ethnographic sections based on each area's respective inhabitants. Commentators in Arabic in the medieval period used the general term bilâd as-sûdân ("Land of the Blacks") for the vast Sudan region (an expression denoting Central and West Africa), or sometimes extending from the coast of West Africa to Western Sudan. Its equivalent in Southeast Africa was Zanj ("Country of the Blacks"), which was situated in the vicinity of the Great Lakes region. The geographers drew an explicit ethnographic distinction between the Sudan region and its analogue Zanj, from the area to their extreme east on the Red Sea coast in the Horn of Africa. In modern-day Ethiopia and Eritrea was Al-Habash or Abyssinia, which was inhabited by the Habash or Abyssinians, who were the forebears of the Habesha. In northern Somalia was Barbara or the Bilad al-Barbar ("Land of the Berbers"), which was inhabited by the Eastern Baribah or Barbaroi, as the ancestors of the Somalis were referred to by medieval Arab and ancient Greek geographers, respectively. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the populations south of the Sahara were divided into three broad ancestral groups: Hamites and Semites in the Horn of Africa and Sahel related to those in North Africa, who spoke languages belonging to the Afroasiatic family; Negroes in most of the rest of the subcontinent (hence, the toponym Black Africa for Africa south of the Sahara), who spoke languages belonging to the Niger-Congo and Nilo-Saharan families; and Khoisan in Southern Africa, who spoke languages belonging to the Khoisan family. Sub-Saharan Africa has a wide variety of climate zones or biomes. South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular are considered megadiverse countries. It has a dry winter season and a wet summer season. The Sahel extends across all of Africa at a latitude of about 10° to 15° N. Countries that include parts of the Sahara Desert proper in their northern territories and parts of the Sahel in their southern region include Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, and Sudan. The Sahel has a hot semi-arid climate. South of the Sahel, a belt of savanna (the West and East Sudanian savannas) stretch from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ethiopian Highlands. The more humid Guinean and Northern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic lie between the savannas and the equatorial forests. The Horn of Africa includes hot desert climate along the coast but a hot semi-arid climate can be found much more in the interior, contrasting with savanna and moist broadleaf forests in the Ethiopian Highlands. Tropical Africa encompasses tropical rainforest stretching along the southern coast of West Africa and across most of Central Africa (the Congo) west of the African Great Lakes. In East Africa, woodlands, savannas, and grasslands are found in the equatorial zone, including the Serengeti ecosystem in Tanzania and Kenya. Distinctive Afromontane forests, grasslands, and shrublands are found in the high mountains and mountain ranges of eastern Africa, from the Ethiopian Highlands to South Africa. South of the equatorial forests, the Western and Southern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic are transition zones between the tropical forests and the miombo woodland belt that spans the continent from Angola to Mozambique and Tanzania. The Namib and Kalahari Deserts lie in Southern Africa, and are surrounded by semi-deserts including the Karoo region of South Africa. The Bushveld grasslands lie to the east of the deserts. The Cape Floristic Region is at Africa's southern tip, and is home to diverse subtropical and temperate forests, woodlands, grasslands, and shrublands. According to paleontology, early hominid skull anatomy was similar to that of their close cousins, the great African forest apes, gorilla and chimpanzee. However, they had adopted a bipedal locomotion and freed hands, giving them a crucial advantage enabling them to live in both forested areas and on the open savanna at a time when Africa was drying up, with savanna encroaching on forested areas. This occurred 10 million to 5 million years ago. By 3 million years ago several australopithecine hominid species had developed throughout Southern, East, and Central Africa. They were tool users rather than tool manufacturers. The next major evolutionary step occurred around 2.3 million BCE, when primitive stone tools were used to scavenge the carcasses of animals killed by other predators, both for their meat and their marrow. In hunting, H. habilis was most likely not capable of competing with large predators and was more prey than hunter, although H. habilis likely did steal eggs from nests and may have been able to catch small game and weakened larger prey such as cubs and older animals. The tools were classed as Oldowan. Roughly 1.8 million years ago, Homo ergaster first appeared in the fossil record in Africa. From Homo ergaster, Homo erectus (upright man) evolved 1.5 million years ago. Some of the earlier representatives of this species were small-brained and used primitive stone tools, much like H. habilis. The brain later grew in size, and H. erectus eventually developed a more complex stone tool technology called the Acheulean. Potentially the first hominid to engage in hunting, H. erectus mastered the art of making fire. They were the first hominids to leave Africa, going on to colonize the entire Old World, and perhaps later on giving rise to Homo floresiensis. Although some recent writers suggest that H. georgicus, a H. habilis descendant, was the first and most primitive hominid to ever live outside Africa, many scientists consider H. georgicus to be an early and primitive member of the H. erectus species. The fossil and genetic evidence shows Homo sapiens developed in Southern and East Africa by around 350,000 to 260,000 years ago and gradually migrated across the continent in waves. Between 50,000 and 60,000 years ago, their expansion out of Africa launched the colonization of the planet by modern humans. By 10,000 BCE, Homo sapiens had spread to all corners of the world. This dispersal of the human species is suggested by linguistic, cultural and genetic evidence. During the 11th millennium BP, pottery was independently invented in West Africa, with the earliest pottery there dating to about 9,400 BC from central Mali. It spread throughout the Sahel and southern Sahara. After the Sahara became a desert, it did not present a totally impenetrable barrier for travelers between north and south because of the application of animal husbandry towards carrying water, food, and supplies across the desert. Prior to the introduction of the camel, the use of oxen, mule, and horses for desert crossing was common, and trade routes followed chains of oases that were strung across the desert. The trans-saharan trade was in full motion by 500 BCE with Carthage being a major economic force for its establishment. It is thought that the camel was first brought to Egypt after the Persian Empire conquered Egypt in 525 BCE, although large herds did not become common enough in North Africa for camels to be the pack animal of choice for the trans-saharan trade. The Bantu expansion is a major migration movement that originated in West Central Africa (possibly around Cameroon) around 2500 BCE, reaching East and Central Africa by 1000 BCE and Southern Africa by the early centuries CE. The Djenné-Djenno city-state flourished from 250 BCE to 900 CE and was influential to the development of the Ghana Empire. The Nok culture of Nigeria (lasting from 1,500 BCE to 200 CE) is known from a type of terracotta figure. There were a number of medieval empires of the southern Sahara and the Sahel, based on trans-Saharan trade, including the Ghana Empire and the Mali Empire, Songhai Empire, the Kanem Empire and the subsequent Bornu Empire. They built stone structures like in Tichit, but mainly constructed in adobe. The Great Mosque of Djenne is most reflective of Sahelian architecture and is the largest adobe building in the world. In the forest zone, several states and empires such as Bono State, Akwamu and others emerged. The Ashanti Empire arose in the 18th century in modern-day Ghana. The Kingdom of Nri, was established by the Igbo in the 11th century. Nri was famous for having a priest-king who wielded no military power. Nri was a rare African state which was a haven for freed slaves and outcasts who sought refuge in their territory. Other major states included the kingdoms of Ifẹ and Oyo in the western block of Nigeria which became prominent about 700–900 and 1400 respectively, and center of Yoruba culture. The Yoruba's built massive mud walls around their cities, the most famous being Sungbo's Eredo. Another prominent kingdom in southwestern Nigeria was the Kingdom of Benin 9th–11th century whose power lasted between the 15th and 19th century and was one of the greatest Empires of African history documented all over the world. Their dominance reached as far as the well-known city of Eko which was named Lagos by the Portuguese traders and other early European settlers. The Edo-speaking people of Benin are known for their famous bronze casting and rich coral, wealth, ancient science and technology and the Walls of Benin, which is the largest man-made structure in the world. In the 18th century, the Oyo and the Aro confederacy were responsible for most of the slaves exported from modern-day Nigeria, selling them to European slave traders. Following the Napoleonic Wars, the British expanded their influence into the Nigerian interior. In 1885, British claims to a West African sphere of influence received international recognition, and in the following year the Royal Niger Company was chartered under the leadership of Sir George Goldie. In 1900, the company's territory came under the control of the British government, which moved to consolidate its hold over the area of modern Nigeria. On 1 January 1901, Nigeria became a British protectorate as part of the British Empire, the foremost world power at the time. Nigeria was granted its independence in 1960 during the period of decolonization. Archeological finds in Central Africa provide evidence of human settlement that may date back over 10,000 years. According to Zangato and Holl, there is evidence of iron-smelting in the Central African Republic and Cameroon that may date back to 3,000 to 2,500 BCE. Extensive walled sites and settlements have recently been found in Zilum, Chad. The area is located approximately 60 km (37 mi) southwest of Lake Chad, and has been radiocarbon dated to the first millennium BCE. Trade and improved agricultural techniques supported more sophisticated societies, leading to the early civilizations of Sao, Kanem, Bornu, Shilluk, Baguirmi, and Wadai. Following the Bantu Migration into Central Africa, during the 14th century, the Luba Kingdom in southeast Congo came about under a king whose political authority derived from religious, spiritual legitimacy. The kingdom controlled agriculture and regional trade of salt and iron from the north and copper from the Zambian/Congo copper belt. Rival kingship factions which split from the Luba Kingdom later moved among the Lunda people, marrying into its elite and laying the foundation of the Lunda Empire in the 16th century. The ruling dynasty centralised authority among the Lunda under the Mwata Yamyo or Mwaant Yaav. The Mwata Yamyo's legitimacy, like that of the Luba king, came from being viewed as a spiritual religious guardian. This imperial cult or system of divine kings was spread to most of central Africa by rivals in kingship migrating and forming new states. Many new states received legitimacy by claiming descent from the Lunda dynasties. The Kingdom of Kongo existed from the Atlantic west to the Kwango river to the east. During the 15th century, the Bakongo farming community was united with its capital at M'banza-Kongo, under the king title, Manikongo. Other significant states and peoples included the Kuba Kingdom, producers of the famous raffia cloth, the Eastern Lunda, Bemba, Burundi, Rwanda, and the Kingdom of Ndongo. Nubia, covered by present-day northern Sudan and southern Egypt, was referred to as "Aethiopia" ("land of the burnt face") by the Greeks. Nubia in her greatest phase is considered sub-Saharan Africa's oldest urban civilisation. Nubia was a major source of gold for the ancient world. Nubians built famous structures and numerous pyramids. Sudan, the site of ancient Nubia, has more pyramids than anywhere else in the world.[better source needed] The Axumite Empire spanned the southern Sahara, south Arabia and the Sahel along the western shore of the Red Sea. Located in northern Ethiopia and Eritrea, Aksum was deeply involved in the trade network between India and the Mediterranean. Growing from the proto-Aksumite Iron Age period (c. 4th century BCE), it rose to prominence by the 1st century CE. The Aksumites constructed monolithic stelae to cover the graves of their kings, such as King Ezana's Stele. The later Zagwe dynasty, established in the 12th century, built churches out of solid rock. These rock-hewn structures include the Church of St. George at Lalibela. In ancient Somalia, city-states flourished such as Opone, Mosyllon and Malao that competed with the Sabaeans, Parthians and Axumites for the wealthy Indo–Greco–Roman trade. In the Middle Ages several powerful Somali empires dominated the region's trade, including the Ajuran Sultanate, which excelled in hydraulic engineering and fortress building, the Sultanate of Adal, whose General Ahmed Gurey was the first African commander in history to use cannon warfare on the continent during Adal's conquest of the Ethiopian Empire, and the Geledi Sultanate, whose military dominance forced governors of the Omani empire north of the city of Lamu to pay tribute to the Somali Sultan Ahmed Yusuf. According to the theory of recent African origin of modern humans, the mainstream position held within the scientific community, all humans originate from either Southeast Africa or the Horn of Africa. During the first millennium CE, Nilotic and Bantu-speaking peoples moved into the region, and the latter now account for three-quarters of Kenya's population. On the coastal section of Southeast Africa, a mixed Bantu community developed through contact with Muslim Arab and Persian traders, leading to the development of the mixed Arab, Persian and African Swahili City States. The Swahili culture that emerged from these exchanges evinces many Arab and Islamic influences not seen in traditional Bantu culture, as do the many Afro-Arab members of the Bantu Swahili people. With its original speech community centered on the coastal parts of Tanzania (particularly Zanzibar) and Kenya – a seaboard referred to as the Swahili Coast – the Bantu Swahili language contains many Arabic loan-words as a consequence of these interactions. The earliest Bantu inhabitants of the Southeast coast of Kenya and Tanzania encountered by these later Arab and Persian settlers have been variously identified with the trading settlements of Rhapta, Azania and Menouthias referenced in early Greek and Chinese writings from 50 CE to 500 CE. These early writings perhaps document the first wave of Bantu settlers to reach Southeast Africa during their migration. Between the 14th and 15th centuries, large medieval Southeast African kingdoms and states emerged, such as the Buganda, Bunyoro and Karagwe kingdoms of Uganda and Tanzania. During the early 1960s, the Southeast African nations achieved independence from colonial rule. Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples, who were iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen, were already present south of the Limpopo River by the 4th or 5th century displacing and absorbing the original Khoisan speakers. They slowly moved south, and the earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the earlier Khoisan inhabitants. They reached the Fish River in today's Eastern Cape Province. Monomotapa was a medieval kingdom (c. 1250–1629), which existed between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers of Southern Africa in the territory of modern-day Zimbabwe and Mozambique. Its old capital was located at Great Zimbabwe. In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to reach the southernmost tip of Africa. In 1652, a victualling station was established at the Cape of Good Hope by Jan van Riebeeck on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. For most of the 17th and 18th centuries, the slowly expanding settlement was a Dutch possession. In 1795, the Dutch colony was captured by the British during the French Revolutionary Wars. The British intended to use Cape Town as a major port on the route to Australia and India. It was later returned to the Dutch in 1803, but soon afterward the Dutch East India Company declared bankruptcy, and the Dutch (now under French control) and the British found themselves at war again. The British captured the Dutch possession yet again at the Battle of Blaauwberg, commanded by Sir David Blair. The Zulu Kingdom was a Southern African tribal state in what is now KwaZulu-Natal in southeastern South Africa. The small kingdom gained world fame during and after their defeat in the Anglo-Zulu War. During the 1950s and early 1960s, most sub-Saharan African nations achieved independence from colonial rule. According to the 2022 revision of the World Population Prospects, the population of sub-Saharan Africa was 1.1 billion in 2019. The current growth rate is 2.3%. The UN predicts for the region a population between 2 and 2.5 billion by 2050 with a population density of 80 per km2 compared to 170 for Western Europe, 140 for Asia and 30 for the Americas. Sub-Saharan African countries top the list of countries and territories by fertility rate with 40 of the highest 50, all with TFR greater than 4 in 2008. All are above the world average except South Africa and Seychelles. More than 40% of the population in sub-Saharan countries is younger than 15 years old, as well as in Sudan, with the exception of South Africa. GDP per Capita (PPP) (2016, 2017 (PPP, US$)), Life (Exp.) (Life Expectancy 2006), Literacy (Male/Female 2006), Trans (Transparency 2009), HDI (Human Development Index), EODBR (Ease of Doing Business Rank June 2008 through May 2009), SAB (Starting a Business June 2008 through May 2009), PFI (Press Freedom Index 2009) Sub-Saharan Africa contains over 1,500 languages. With the exception of the extinct Sumerian (a language isolate) of Mesopotamia, Afroasiatic has the oldest documented history of any language family in the world. Egyptian was recorded as early as 3200 BCE. The Semitic branch was recorded as early as 2900 BCE in the form of the Akkadian language of Mesopotamia (Assyria and Babylonia) and circa 2500 BCE in the form of the Eblaite language of northeastern Syria. The distribution of the Afroasiatic languages within Africa is principally concentrated in North Africa and the Horn of Africa. Languages belonging to the family's Berber branch are mainly spoken in the north, with its speech area extending into the Sahel (northern Mauritania, northern Mali, northern Niger). The Cushitic branch of Afroasiatic is centered in the Horn, and is also spoken in the Nile Valley and parts of the African Great Lakes region. Additionally, the Semitic branch of the family, in the form of Arabic, is widely spoken in the parts of Africa that are within the Arab world. South Semitic languages are also spoken in parts of the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Eritrea). The Chadic branch is distributed in Central and West Africa. Hausa, its most widely spoken language, serves as a lingua franca in West Africa (Niger, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Cameroon, and Chad). The several families lumped under the term Khoi-San include languages indigenous to Southern Africa and Tanzania, though some, such as the Khoi languages, appear to have moved to their current locations not long before the Bantu expansion. In Southern Africa, their speakers are the Khoikhoi and San (Bushmen), in Southeast Africa, the Sandawe and Hadza. The Niger–Congo family is the largest in the world in terms of the number of languages (1,436) it contains. The vast majority of languages of this family are tonal, such as Yoruba and Igbo. However, others such as Fulani, Wolof and Kiswahili are not. A major branch of the Niger–Congo languages is Bantu, which covers a greater geographic area than the rest of the family. Bantu speakers represent the majority of inhabitants in southern, central and southeastern Africa, though San, Pygmy, and Nilotic groups, respectively, can also be found in those regions. Bantu-speakers can also be found in parts of Central Africa such as the Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and southern Cameroon. Swahili, a Bantu language with many Arabic, Persian and other Middle Eastern and South Asian loan words, developed as a lingua franca for trade between the different peoples in southeastern Africa. In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present. The San evince unique physical traits, and are the indigenous people of southern Africa. Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of Central Africa. The Nilo-Saharan languages are concentrated in the upper parts of the Chari and Nile rivers of Central Africa and Southeast Africa. They are principally spoken by Nilotic peoples and are also spoken in Sudan among the Fur, Masalit, Nubian and Zaghawa peoples and in West and Central Africa among the Songhai, Zarma and Kanuri. The Old Nubian language is also a member of this family. Major languages of Africa by region, family and number of primary language speakers in millions: Sub-Saharan Africa has several large cities. Lagos is a city in the Nigerian state of Lagos. The city, with its adjoining conurbation, is the most populous in Nigeria, and the second-most populous in Africa after Cairo, Egypt. It is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world, and also one of the most populous urban agglomerations. Lagos is a major financial centre in Africa; this megacity has the highest GDP, and also houses Apapa, one of the largest and busiest ports on the continent. Dar es Salaam is the former capital of, as well as the most populous city in, Tanzania; it is a regionally important economic centre. It is located on the Swahili coast. Johannesburg is the largest city in South Africa. It is the provincial capital and largest city in Gauteng, which is the wealthiest province in South Africa. While Johannesburg is not one of South Africa's three capital cities, it is the seat of the Constitutional Court. The city is located in the mineral-rich Witwatersrand range of hills, and is the centre of a large-scale gold and diamond trade. Nairobi is the capital and the largest city of Kenya. The name comes from the Maasai phrase Enkare Nyrobi, which translates to "cool water", a reference to the Nairobi River which flows through the city. The city is popularly referred to as the Green City in the Sun. Other major cities in sub-Saharan Africa include Abidjan, Cape Town, Kinshasa, Luanda, Mogadishu and Addis Ababa. In the mid-2010s, private capital flows to sub-Saharan Africa – primarily from the BRICs, private-sector investment portfolios, and remittances – began to exceed official development assistance. As of 2011, Africa is one of the fastest developing regions in the world. Six of the world's ten fastest-growing economies over the previous decade were situated below the Sahara, with the remaining four in East and Central Asia. According to the World Bank, the economic growth rate in the region had risen to 4.7% in 2013. This continued rise was attributed to increasing investment in infrastructure and resources as well as steady expenditure per household. 424 million people in sub-Saharan Africa were reportedly living in severe poverty in 2019. In 2022, 460 million people—an increase of 36 million in only three years—were anticipated to be living in extreme poverty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Sub-Saharan Africa's government debt rose from 28% of gross domestic product in 2012 to 50% of gross domestic product in 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic caused it to rise to 57% of gross domestic product in 2021. Sub-Saharan Africa was severely harmed when government revenue declined from 22% of GDP in 2011 to 17% in 2021. 15 African nations are at significant risk of debt, and 7 are currently in financial crisis according to the IMF. The region went on to receive IMF Special Drawing Rights of $23 billion in 2021 to assist critical public spending. As of 2023, women make up 29% of Sub-Saharan Africa's workforce, and 33% of enterprises are managed by women, suggesting a considerable gender disparity. As of 2009[update], 50% of Africa was rural with no access to electricity. In 2021, Africa generated 889 TWh of electricity, amounting to 3.13% of the global market share. Many countries are affected by power shortages. The percentage of residences with access to electricity in sub-Saharan Africa is the lowest in the world. In some remote regions, fewer than one in every 20 households has electricity. Because of rising prices in commodities such as coal and oil, thermal sources of energy are proving to be too expensive for power generation. Sub-Saharan Africa has the potential to generate 1,750 TWh of energy, of which only 7% has been explored. The failure to exploit its full energy potential is largely due to significant underinvestment, as at least four times as much (approximately $23 billion a year) and what is currently spent is invested in operating high cost power systems and not on expanding the infrastructure. African governments are taking advantage of the readily available water resources to broaden their energy mix. Hydro Turbine Markets in sub-Saharan Africa generated revenues of $120.0 million in 2007 and is estimated to reach $425.0 million.[when?] Asian countries, notably China, India, and Japan, are playing an active role in power projects across the African continent. The majority of these power projects are hydro-based because of China's vast experience in the construction of hydro-power projects and part of the Energy & Power Growth Partnership Services programme. With electrification numbers, sub-Saharan Africa with access to the Sahara and being in the tropical zones has massive potential for solar photovoltaic electrical potential. Six hundred million people could be served with electricity based on its photovoltaic potential.[failed verification] China is promising to train 10,000 technicians from Africa and other developing countries in the use of solar energy technologies over the next five years. Training African technicians to use solar power is part of the China-Africa science and technology cooperation agreement signed by Chinese science minister Xu Guanhua and African counterparts during premier Wen Jiabao's visit to Ethiopia in December 2003. The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) is developing an integrated, continent-wide energy strategy. This has been funded by, amongst others, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. These projects must be sustainable, involve a cross-border dimension and/or have a regional impact, involve public and private capital, contribute to poverty alleviation and economic development, and involve at least one country in sub-Saharan Africa. Renewable Energy Performance Platform was established by the European Investment Bank and the United Nations Environment Programme with a five-year goal of improving energy access for at least two million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It has so far invested around $45 million to renewable energy projects in 13 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Solar power and hydropower are among the energy methods used in the projects. Radio is the major source of information in sub-Saharan Africa. Average coverage stands at more than a third of the population. Countries such as Gabon, Seychelles, and South Africa boast almost 100% penetration. Only five countries—Burundi, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia—still have a penetration of less than 10%. Broadband penetration outside of South Africa has been limited where it is exorbitantly expensive. Access to the internet via cell phones is on the rise. Television is the second major source of information. Because of power shortages, the spread of television viewing has been limited. Eight per cent have television, a total of 62 million. Those in the television industry view the region as an untapped green market. Digital television and pay for service are on the rise. The region is a major exporter to the world of gold, uranium, chromium, vanadium, antimony, coltan, bauxite, iron ore, copper, and manganese. South Africa is a major exporter of manganese as well as chromium. A 2001 estimate is that 42% of the world's reserves of chromium may be found in South Africa. South Africa is the largest producer of platinum, with 80% of the total world's annual mine production and 88% of the world's platinum reserve. Sub-Saharan Africa produces 33% of the world's bauxite, with Guinea as the major supplier. Zambia is a major producer of copper. The Democratic Republic of Congo is a major source of coltan. Production from DR Congo is very small, but the country has 80% of the proven reserves in Africa, which are 80% of those worldwide. Sub-Saharan Africa is a major producer of gold, producing up to 30% of global production. Major suppliers are South Africa, Ghana, Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Guinea, and Mali. South Africa had been first in the world in terms of gold production since 1905, but in 2007 it moved to second place, according to GFMS, the precious metals consultancy. Uranium is major commodity from the region. Significant suppliers are Niger, Namibia, and South Africa. Namibia was the number one supplier from sub-Saharan Africa in 2008. The region produces 49% of the world's diamonds. Sub-Saharan Africa has been the focus of an intense race for oil by the West, China, India, and other emerging economies, even though it holds only 10% of proven oil reserves, less than the Middle East. This race has been referred to as the second Scramble for Africa. All reasons for this global scramble come from the reserves' economic benefits. Transportation cost is low and no pipelines have to be laid as in Central Asia. Almost all reserves are offshore, so political turmoil within the host country will not directly interfere with operations. Sub-Saharan oil is viscous, with a very low sulfur content. This quickens the refining process and effectively reduces costs. New sources of oil are being located in sub-Saharan Africa more frequently than anywhere else. Of all new sources of oil, 1⁄3 are in sub-Saharan Africa. Sub-Saharan Africa has more variety of grains than anywhere in the world. Between 13,000 and 11,000 BCE wild grains began to be collected as a source of food in the cataract region of the Nile, south of Egypt. The collecting of wild grains as source of food spread to Syria, parts of Turkey, and Iran by the eleventh millennium BCE. By the tenth and ninth millennia southwest Asians domesticated their wild grains, wheat, and barley after the notion of collecting wild grains spread from the Nile. Numerous crops have been domesticated in the region and spread to other parts of the world. These crops included sorghum, castor beans, coffee, cotton, okra, black-eyed peas, watermelon, gourd, and pearl millet. Other domesticated crops included teff, enset, African rice, yams, kola nuts, oil palm, and raffia palm. Domesticated animals include the guinea fowl and the donkey. Agriculture represents 20% to 30% of GDP and 50% of exports. In some cases, 60% to 90% of the labor force are employed in agriculture. Most agricultural activity is subsistence farming. This has made agricultural activity vulnerable to climate change and global warming. As of right now Sub-Saharan Africa has degraded land covering one million square kilometres. Biotechnology has been advocated to create high yield, pest and environmentally resistant crops in the hands of small farmers. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is a strong advocate and donor to this cause. Biotechnology and GM crops have met resistance both by natives and environmental groups. Cash crops include cotton, coffee, tea, cocoa, sugar, and tobacco. The OECD says Africa has the potential to become an agricultural superbloc if it can unlock the wealth of the savannahs by allowing farmers to use their land as collateral for credit. There is such international interest in sub-Saharan agriculture, that the World Bank increased its financing of African agricultural programs to $1.3 billion in the 2011 fiscal year. Recently, there has been a trend to purchase large tracts of land in sub-Sahara for agricultural use by developing countries. Early in 2009, George Soros highlighted a new farmland buying frenzy caused by growing population, scarce water supplies and climate change. Chinese interests bought up large swathes of Senegal to supply it with sesame. Aggressive moves by China, South Korea, and Gulf states to buy vast tracts of agricultural land in sub-Saharan Africa could soon be limited by a new global international protocol. According to researchers at the Overseas Development Institute, the lack of infrastructure in many developing countries represents one of the most significant limitations to economic growth and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Infrastructure investments and maintenance can be very expensive, especially in such as areas as landlocked, rural and sparsely populated countries in Africa. Infrastructure investments contributed to Africa's growth, and increased investment is necessary to maintain growth and tackle poverty. The returns to investment in infrastructure are very significant, with on average 30–40% returns for telecommunications (ICT) investments, over 40% for electricity generation and 80% for roads. In Africa, it is argued that in order to meet the MDGs, infrastructure investments would need to reach about 15% of GDP (around $93 billion a year). Currently, the source of financing varies significantly across sectors. Some sectors are dominated by state spending, others by overseas development aid (ODA) and yet others by private investors. In sub-Saharan Africa, the state spends around $9.4 billion out of a total of $24.9 billion. In irrigation, SSA states represent almost all spending; in transport and energy a majority of investment is state spending; in ICT and water supply and sanitation, the private sector represents the majority of capital expenditure. Overall, aid, the private sector and non-OECD financiers between them exceed state spending. The private sector spending alone equals state capital expenditure, though the majority is focused on ICT infrastructure investments. External financing increased from $7 billion (2002) to $27 billion (2009). China, in particular, has emerged as an important investor. Less than 40% of rural Africans live within two kilometers of an all-season road, the lowest level of rural accessibility in the developing world. Spending on roads averages just below 2% of GDP with varying degree among countries. This compares with 1% of GDP that is typical in industrialised countries, and 2–3% of GDP found in fast-growing emerging economies. Although the level of expenditure is high relative to the size of Africa's economies, it remains small in absolute terms, with low-income countries spending an average of about US$7 per capita per year. Forty per cent of African scientists live in OECD countries, predominantly in Europe, the United States and Canada. This has been described as an African brain drain. According to Naledi Pandor, the South African Minister of Science and Technology, even with the drain enrollments in sub-Saharan African universities tripled between 1991 and 2005, expanding at an annual rate of 8.7%, which is one of the highest regional growth rates in the world.[citation needed] In the last 10 to 15 years interest in pursuing university-level degrees abroad has increased. According to the CIA, low global literacy rates are concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia and South Asia. However, literacy rates in sub-Saharan Africa vary significantly between countries. The highest registered literacy rate in the region is in Zimbabwe (90.7%; 2003 est.), while the lowest literacy rate is in South Sudan (27%). Research on human capital formation was able to determine, that the numeracy levels of sub-Saharan Africa and Africa, in general, were higher than numeracy levels in South Asia. In the 1940s more than 75% of the population of sub-Saharan Africa was numerate. The numeracy of the West African countries, Benin and Ghana, was even higher with more than 80% of the population being numerate. In contrast, numeracy in South Asia was only around 50%. Higher diversity in Sub-Saharan African countries has been found to lead to a poorer economy. Researchers have argued that this is because of ethnic favoritism in their politics. Sub-Saharan leaders are more likely to provide better resources to their coethnic groups when in power. A study found that, on average, children of the favored ethnic group are 2.25% more likely to attend primary school and 1.80% more likely to complete primary school. A 1% increase in GDP is associated with a 1.5% increase in the ethnic favoritism effect on primary school attendance. Sub-Saharan African countries spent an average of 0.3% of their GDP on science and technology in 2007. This represents an increase from US$1.8 billion in 2002 to US$2.8 billion in 2007, a 50% increase in spending. At the World Conference held in Jomtien, Thailand in 1990, delegates from 155 countries and representatives of some 150 organizations gathered with the goal to promote universal primary education and the radical reduction of illiteracy before the end of the decade. The World Education Forum, held ten years later in Dakar, Senegal, provided the opportunity to reiterate and reinforce these goals. This initiative contributed to having education made a priority of the Millennium Development Goals in 2000, with the aim of achieving universal schooling (MDG2) and eliminating gender disparities, especially in primary and secondary education (MDG3). Since the World Education Forum in Dakar, considerable efforts have been made to respond to these demographic challenges in terms of education. The amount of funds raised has been decisive. Between 1999 and 2010, public spending on education as a percentage of gross national product (GNP) increased by 5% per year in sub-Saharan Africa, with major variations between countries, with percentages varying from 1.8% in Cameroon to over 6% in Burundi. As of 2015, governments in sub-Saharan Africa spend on average 18% of their total budget on education, against 15% in the rest of the world. In the years immediately after the Dakar Forum, the efforts made by the African States towards achieving EFA produced multiple results in sub-Saharan Africa. The greatest advance was in access to primary education, which governments had made their absolute priority. The number of children in a primary school in sub-Saharan Africa thus rose from 82 million in 1999 to 136.4 million in 2011. In Niger, for example, the number of children entering school increased by more than three-and-a-half times between 1999 and 2011. In Ethiopia, over the same period, over 8.5 million more children were admitted to primary school. The net rate of first-year access in sub-Saharan Africa has thus risen by 19 points in 12 years, from 58% in 1999 to 77% in 2011. Despite the considerable efforts, the latest available data from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates that, for 2012, there were still 57.8 million children who were not in school. Of these, 29.6 million were in sub-Saharan Africa alone, a figure which has not changed for several years. Many sub-Saharan countries have notably included the first year of secondary school in basic education. In Rwanda, the first year of secondary school was attached to primary education in 2009, which significantly increased the number of pupils enrolled at this level of education. In 2012, the primary completion rate (PCR) – which measures the proportion of children reaching the final year of primary school – was 70%, meaning that more than three out of ten children entering primary school do not reach the final primary year. Literacy rates have gone up in sub-Saharan Africa, and internet access has improved considerably. At least 39 countries in sub-Saharan Africa have some large-scale school feeding programs, which can improve access to education. In aggregate, 16% of school-age children (and 25% of primary school-age children) in the region benefit from school meal programs, and about 82% of the funding for these programs is provided by governments. Nonetheless, a lot must yet happen for this region to catch up. The statistics show that the literacy rate for sub-Saharan Africa was 65% in 2017. In other words, one-third of the people aged 15 and above were unable to read and write. The comparative figure for 1984 was an illiteracy rate of 49%. In 2017, only about 22% of Africans were internet users at all, according to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). In 1987, the Bamako Initiative conference organized by the World Health Organization was held in Bamako, the capital of Mali, and helped reshape the health policy of sub-Saharan Africa. The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based healthcare reform, resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services.[self-published source?] A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost. In 2011, sub-Saharan Africa was home to 69% of all people living with HIV/AIDS worldwide. In response, a number of initiatives have been launched to educate the public on HIV/AIDS. Among these are combination prevention programmes, considered to be the most effective initiative, the abstinence, be faithful, use a condom campaign, and the Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation's outreach programs. According to a 2013 special report issued by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the number of HIV positive people in Africa receiving anti-retro viral treatment in 2012 was over seven times the number receiving treatment in 2005, with an almost 1 million added in the last year alone.: 15  The number of AIDS-related deaths in sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 33 per cent less than the number in 2005. The number of new HIV infections in sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 25 per cent less than the number in 2001. Life expectancy at birth in sub-Saharan Africa increased from 40 years in 1960 to 61 years in 2017. Malaria is an endemic illness in sub-Saharan Africa, where the majority of malaria cases and deaths worldwide occur. Routine immunization has been introduced in order to prevent measles. Onchocerciasis ("river blindness"), a common cause of blindness, is also endemic to parts of the region. More than 99% of people affected by the illness worldwide live in 31 countries therein. In response, the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC) was launched in 1995 with the aim of controlling the disease. Maternal mortality is another challenge, with more than half of maternal deaths in the world occurring in sub-Saharan Africa. However, there has generally been progress here as well, as a number of countries in the region have halved their levels of maternal mortality since 1990. Additionally, the African Union in July 2003 ratified the Maputo Protocol, which pledges to prohibit female genital mutilation (FGM). National health systems vary between countries. In Ghana, most health care is provided by the government and largely administered by the Ministry of Health and Ghana Health Services. The healthcare system has five levels of providers: health posts which are first-level primary care for rural areas, health centers and clinics, district hospitals, regional hospitals, and tertiary hospitals. These programs are funded by the government of Ghana, financial credits, Internally Generated Fund (IGF), and Donors-pooled Health Fund. African countries below the Sahara are largely Christian, while those above the Sahara, in North Africa, are predominantly Islamic. There are also Muslim majorities in parts of the Horn of Africa (Djibouti and Somalia) and in the Sahel and Sudan regions (the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Mali, Niger and Senegal), as well as significant Muslim communities in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and on the Swahili Coast (Tanzania and Kenya). Mauritius is the only country in Africa to have a Hindu majority. In 2012, sub-Saharan Africa constituted in absolute terms the world's third largest Christian population, after Europe and Latin America respectively. In 2012, sub-Saharan Africa also constituted in absolute terms the world's third largest Muslim population, after Asia and the Middle East and North Africa respectively. Traditional African religions can be broken down into linguistic cultural groups, with common themes. Among Niger–Congo-speakers is a belief in a creator god or higher deity, along with ancestor spirits, territorial spirits, evil caused by human ill will and neglecting ancestor spirits, and priests of territorial spirits. New world religions such as Santería, Vodun, and Candomblé, would be derived from this world. Among Nilo-Saharan speakers is the belief in Divinity; evil is caused by divine judgement and retribution; prophets as middlemen between Divinity and man. Among Afro-Asiatic-speakers is henotheism, the belief in one's own gods but accepting the existence of other gods; evil here is caused by malevolent spirits. The Semitic Abrahamic religion of Judaism is comparable to the latter world view. San religion is non-theistic but a belief in a Spirit or Power of existence which can be tapped in a trance-dance; trance-healers. Generally, traditional African religions are united by an ancient complex animism and ancestor worship. Traditional religions in sub-Saharan Africa often display complex ontology, cosmology and metaphysics. Mythologies, for example, demonstrated the difficulty fathers of creation had in bringing about order from chaos. Order is what is right and natural and any deviation is chaos. Cosmology and ontology is also neither simple or linear. It defines duality, the material and immaterial, male and female, heaven and earth. Common principles of being and becoming are widespread: Among the Dogon, the principle of Amma (being) and Nummo (becoming), and among the Bambara, Pemba (being) and Faro (becoming). West Africa Akan mythology Ashanti mythology (Ghana) Dahomey (Fon) mythology Efik mythology (Nigeria, Cameroon) Igbo mythology (Nigeria) Serer religion and Serer creation myth (Senegal, Gambia and Mauritania) Yoruba mythology (Nigeria, Benin) Central Africa Dinka mythology (South Sudan) Lotuko mythology (South Sudan) Bushongo mythology (Congo) Bambuti (Pygmy) mythology (Congo) Lugbara mythology (Congo) Southeast Africa Akamba mythology (eastern Kenya) Masai mythology (Kenya, Tanzania) Southern Africa Khoisan religion Lozi mythology (Zambia) Tumbuka mythology (Malawi) Zulu mythology (South Africa) Sub-Saharan traditional divination systems display great sophistication. For example, the bamana sand divination uses well established symbolic codes that can be reproduced using four bits or marks. A binary system of one or two marks are combined. Random outcomes are generated using a fractal recursive process. It is analogous to a digital circuit but can be reproduced on any surface with one or two marks. This system is widespread in sub-Saharan Africa.[page needed] Sub-Saharan Africa is diverse, with many communities, villages, and cities, each with their own beliefs and traditions. Traditional African Societies are communal, they believe that the needs of the many far outweigh an individual's needs and achievements. Essentially, an individual's keep must be shared with other extended family members. Extended families are made up of various individuals and families who have shared responsibilities within the community. This extended family is one of the core aspects of every African community. "An African will refer to an older person as auntie or uncle. Siblings of parents will be called father or mother rather than uncle and aunt. Cousins will be called brother or sister". This system can be very difficult for outsiders to understand; however, it is no less important. "Also reflecting their communal ethic, Africans are reluctant to stand out in a crowd or to appear different from their neighbors or colleagues, a result of social pressure to avoid offense to group standards and traditions." Women also have a very important role in African culture because they take care of the house and children. Traditionally, in many cultures "men do the heavy work of clearing and ploughing the land, women sow the seeds, tend the fields, harvest the crops, haul the water, and bear the major burden for growing the family's food". Despite their work in the fields, women are expected to be subservient to men in some African cultures. "When young women migrate to cities, this imbalance between the sexes, as well as financial need, often causes young women of lower economic status, who lack education and job training, to have sexual relationships with older men who are established in their work or profession and can afford to support a girlfriend or two". The oldest abstract art in the world is a shell necklace, dated to 82,000 years, in the Cave of Pigeons in Taforalt, eastern Morocco. The second-oldest abstract form of art, and the oldest rock art, is found in the Blombos Cave at the Cape in South Africa, dated 77,000 years. Sub-Saharan Africa has some of the oldest and most varied style of rock art in the world. Although sub-Saharan African art is very diverse, there are some common themes. One is the use of the human figure. Second, there is a preference for sculpture. Sub-Saharan African art is meant to be experienced in three dimensions, not two. A house is meant to be experienced from all angles. Third, art is meant to be performed. Sub-Saharan Africans have a specific name for masks. The name incorporates the sculpture, the dance, and the spirit that incorporates the mask. The name denotes all three elements. Fourth, art that serves a practical function. The artist and craftsman are not separate. A sculpture shaped like a hand can be used as a stool. Fifth, the use of fractals or non-linear scaling. The shape of the whole is the shape of the parts at different scales. Before the discovery of fractal geometry, Leopold Sedar Senghor, Senegal's first president, referred to this as "dynamic symmetry". William Fagg, a British art historian, has compared it to the logarithmic mapping of natural growth by biologist D'Arcy Thompson. Lastly, sub-Saharan African art is visually abstract, instead of naturalistic. Sub-Saharan African art represents spiritual notions, social norms, ideas, values, etc. An artist might exaggerate the head of a sculpture in relation to the body not because he does not know anatomy but because he wants to illustrate that the head is the seat of knowledge and wisdom. The visual abstraction of African art was very influential in the works of modernist artists like Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Jacques Lipchitz. Traditional sub-Saharan African music is as diverse as the region's various populations. The common perception of sub-Saharan African music is that it is rhythmic music centered around the drums. This is partially true. A large part of sub-Saharan music, mainly among speakers of Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan languages, is rhythmic and centered around the drum. Sub-Saharan music is polyrhythmic, usually consisting of multiple rhythms in one composition. Dance involves moving multiple body parts. These aspects of sub-Saharan music has been transferred to the new world by enslaved sub-Saharan Africans and can be seen in its influence on music forms as samba, jazz, rhythm and blues, rock and roll, salsa, reggae and rap music. Some forms of sub-Saharan African music use strings, horns, and very little poly-rhythms. Music from the eastern Sahel and along the Nile, among the Nilo-Saharan, made extensive use of strings and horns in ancient times. Among the Afro-Asiatics of Northeast Africa, there is extensive use of string instruments and the pentatonic scale. Dancing involves swaying body movements and footwork. Among the San is extensive use of string instruments with emphasis on footwork. Modern sub-Saharan African music has been influenced by music from the New World (Jazz, Salsa, Rhythm and Blues etc.) vice versa being influenced by enslaved sub-Saharan Africans. Popular styles are Mbalax in Senegal and Gambia, Highlife in Ghana, Zoblazo in Ivory Coast, Makossa in Cameroon, Soukous in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kizomba in Angola, and Mbaqanga in South Africa. New World styles like Salsa, R&B/Rap, Reggae, and Zouk also have widespread popularity. Sub-Saharan African cuisine is very diverse. A lot of regional overlapping occurs, but there are dominant elements region by region. West African cuisine can be described as starchy, flavorfully spicey. Dishes include fufu, kenkey, couscous, garri, foutou, and banku. Ingredients are of native starchy tubers, yams, cocoyams, and cassava. Grains include millet, sorghum, and rice, usually in the Sahel. Oils include palm oil and shea butter (Sahel). One finds recipes that mix fish and meat. Beverages are palm wine (sweet or sour) and millet beer. Roasting, baking, boiling, frying, mashing, and spicing are all cooking techniques. Southeast African cuisine, especially those of the Swahili people, reflects its Islamic, geographical Indian Ocean cultural links. Dishes include ugali, sukuma wiki, and halva. Spices such as curry, saffron, cloves, cinnamon, pomegranate juice, cardamon, ghee, and sage are used, especially among Muslims. Meat includes cattle, sheep, and goats, but is rarely eaten since meat is viewed as a luxury. In the Horn of Africa, pork and non-fish seafood are avoided by Christians and Muslims. Dairy products and all meats are avoided during lent by Ethiopians. Maize (corn) is a major staple. Cornmeal is used to make ugali, a popular dish with different names. Teff is used to make injera or canjeero (Somali) bread. Other important foods include enset, noog, lentils, rice, banana, leafy greens, chili peppers, coconut milk, and tomatoes. Beverages are coffee (domesticated in Ethiopia), chai tea, fermented beer from banana or millet. Cooking techniques include roasting and marinating. Central African cuisine connects with all major regions of sub-Saharan Africa: Its cuisine reflects that. Ugali and fufu are eaten in the region. Central African cuisine is very starchy and spicy hot. Dominant crops include plantains, cassava, peanuts, chillis, and okra. Meats include beef, chicken, and sometimes exotic meats called bush meat (antelope, warthog, crocodile). Widespread spicy hot fish cuisine is one of the differentiating aspects. Mushroom is sometimes used as a meat substitute. Traditional Southern African cuisine surrounds meat. Traditional society typically focused on raising sheep, goats, and especially cattle. Dishes include braai (barbecue meat), sadza, bogobe, pap (fermented cornmeal), milk products (buttermilk, yoghurt). Crops utilised are sorghum, maize (corn), pumpkin beans, leafy greens, and cabbage. Beverages include ting (fermented sorghum or maize), milk, chibuku (milky beer). Influences from the Indian and Malay communities can be seen in its use of curries, sambals, pickled fish, fish stews, chutney, and samosa. European influences can be seen in cuisines like biltong (dried beef strips), potjies (stews of maize, onions, tomatoes), French wines, and crueler or koeksister (sugar syrup cookie). Like most of the world, sub-Saharan Africans have adopted Western-style clothing. In some countries like Zambia, used Western clothing has flooded markets, causing great angst in the retail community. Sub-Saharan Africa boasts its own traditional clothing style. Cotton seems to be the dominant material. In East Africa, one finds extensive use of cotton clothing. Shemma, shama, and kuta are types of Ethiopian clothing. Kanga are Swahili cloth that comes in rectangular shapes, made of pure cotton, and put together to make clothing. Kitenges are similar to kangas and kikoy, but are of a thicker cloth, and have an edging only on a long side. Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and South Sudan are some of the African countries where kitenge is worn. In Malawi, Namibia and Zambia, kitenge is known as Chitenge. One of the unique materials, which is not a fiber and is used to make clothing is barkcloth, an innovation of the Baganda people of Uganda. It came from the Mutuba tree (Ficus natalensis). In Madagascar a type of draped cloth called lamba is worn. In West Africa, again cotton is the material of choice. In the Sahel and other parts of West Africa the boubou and kaftan style of clothing are featured. Kente cloth is created by the Akan people of Ghana and Ivory Coast, from silk of the various moth species in West Africa. Kente comes from the Akan twi word kenten which means basket. It is sometimes used to make dashiki and kufi. Adire is a type of Yoruba cloth that is starch resistant. Raffia cloth and barkcloth are also utilised in the region. In Central Africa, the Kuba people developed raffia cloth from the raffia plant fibers. It was widely used in the region. Barkcloth was also extensively used. In Southern Africa one finds numerous uses of animal hide and skins for clothing. The Ndau in central Mozambique and the Shona mix hide with barkcloth and cotton cloth. Cotton cloth is referred to as machira. Xhosa, Tswana, Sotho, and Swazi also made extensive use of hides. Hides come from cattle, sheep, goat, and elephant. Leopard skins were coveted and were a symbol of kingship in Zulu society. Skins were tanned to form leather, dyed, and embedded with beads. Football (soccer) is the most popular sport in sub-Saharan Africa. Sub-Saharan men are its main patrons. Major competitions include the African Champions League, a competition for the best clubs on the continent and the Confederation Cup, a competition primarily for the national cup winner of each African country. The Africa Cup of Nations is a competition of 16 national teams from various African countries held every two years. South Africa hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup, a first for a sub-Saharan country. In 2010, Cameroon played in the World Cup for the sixth time, which is the current record for a sub-Saharan team. In 1996 Nigeria won the Olympic gold for football. In 2000 Cameroon maintained the continent's supremacy by winning the title too. Momentous achievements for sub-Saharan African football. Famous sub-Saharan football stars include Abedi Pele, Emmanuel Adebayor, George Weah, Michael Essien, Didier Drogba, Roger Milla, Nwankwo Kanu, Jay-Jay Okocha, Bruce Grobbelaar, Samuel Eto'o, Kolo Touré, Yaya Touré, Sadio Mané and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. The most talented sub-Saharan African football players find themselves courted and sought after by European leagues. There are currently more than 1000 Africans playing for European clubs. Sub-Saharan Africans have found themselves the target of racism by European fans. FIFA has been trying hard to crack down on racist outburst during games. Rugby is popular in sub-Saharan Africa. The Confederation of African Rugby governs rugby games in the region. South Africa is a major force in the game and won the Rugby World Cup in 1995, 2007 and 2019. Africa is also allotted one guaranteed qualifying place in the Rugby World Cup. Boxing is a popular sport. Battling Siki is the first world champion to come out of sub-Saharan Africa. Countries such as Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa have produced numerous professional world champions such as Dick Tiger, Hogan Bassey, Gerrie Coetzee, Samuel Peter, Azumah Nelson and Jake Matlala. Cricket has a following. The African Cricket Association is an international body which oversees cricket in African countries. South Africa and Zimbabwe have their own governing bodies. In 2003 the Cricket World Cup was held in South Africa, first time it was held in sub-Saharan Africa. Over the years, Ethiopia and Kenya have produced many notable long-distance athletes. Each country has federations that identify and cultivate top talent. Athletes from Ethiopia and Kenya hold, save for two exceptions, all the men's outdoor records for Olympic distance events from 800m to the marathon. Famous runners include Haile Gebrselassie, Kenenisa Bekele, Paul Tergat, and John Cheruiyot Korir. The development of tourism in this region has been identified as having the ability to create jobs and improve the economy. South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Botswana, Ghana, Cape Verde, Tanzania and Kenya have been identified as having well developed tourism industries. Cape Town and the surrounding area is very popular with tourists. Only six African countries are not geopolitically a part of sub-Saharan Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and Western Sahara (claimed by Morocco); they form the UN subregion of Northern Africa, which also makes up the largest bloc of the Arab World. Nevertheless, some international organisations include Sudan as part of North Africa. Although a long-standing member of the Arab League, Sudan has around 30% non-Arab populations in the west (Darfur, Masalit, Zaghawa), far north (Nubian) and south (Kordofan, Nuba), and a largely Arabized native Nubian population that represents the majority at 70% hence its inclusion in North Africa, but geographically and culturally Sudan is part of Sub Saharan Africa. Mauritania and Niger only include a band of the Sahel along their southern borders. All other African countries have at least significant portions of their territory within sub-Saharan Africa.  South Sudan cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English ECCAS (Economic Community of Central African States)  Angola (also in SADC) cap. Luanda cur. Angolan kwanza (Kz) lang. Portuguese  Burundi (also in EAC) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. French  Democratic Republic of the Congo (also in SADC) cap. Kinshasa cur. Congolese franc (FC) lang. French  Rwanda (also in EAC) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English  São Tomé and Príncipe cap. São Tomé cur. São Tomé and Príncipe dobra (Db) lang. Portuguese CEMAC (Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa)  Cameroon cap. Yaoundé cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. English, French  Central African Republic cap. Bangui cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. Sango, French  Chad cap. N'Djamena cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French, Arabic  Republic of the Congo cap. Brazzaville cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French  Equatorial Guinea cap. Malabo cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. Spanish, French  Gabon cap. Libreville cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French  Sudan cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (£S.) lang. Arabic (Sudanese Arabic) and English  South Sudan cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English and Arabic (Juba Arabic)  Somalia cap. Mogadishu cur. Somali shilling (So.Sh /-) lang. Somali, Arabic (official)  Kenya cap. Nairobi cur. Kenyan shilling (KSh /=) lang. Swahili, English  Uganda cap. Kampala cur. Ugandan shilling (USh /=) lang. Swahili, English  Rwanda (also in ECCAS) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English  Tanzania (also in SADC) cap. Dodoma cur. Tanzanian shilling (TSh /=) lang. Swahili, English  Burundi (also in ECCAS) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. Kirundi, French  Eritrea cap. Asmara cur. Eritrean nakfa (Nfk) 'lang.' Tigrinya, Arabic, Italian, English (unofficial, lingua franca)  Djibouti cap. Djibouti cur. Djiboutian franc (Fdj) lang. Arabic, French (official) Horn of Africa  Djibouti cap. Djibouti cur. Djiboutian franc (Fdj) lang. Arabic, French (official)  Eritrea cap. Asmara cur. Eritrean nakfa (Nfk) 'lang.' Tigrinya, Arabic, Italian, English (unofficial, lingua franca)  Ethiopia cap. Addis Ababa cur. Ethiopian birr (Br) lang. Afar, Amharic, Oromo, Somali, and Tigrinya  Somalia cap. Mogadishu cur. Somali shilling (So.Sh) lang. Somali, Arabic (official) Sudan & South Sudan  Sudan cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (£Sd.) lang. Arabic (Sudanese Arabic) and English  South Sudan cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English and Arabic (Juba Arabic) EAC  Burundi (also in ECCAS) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. Kirundi, French  Kenya cap. Nairobi cur. Kenyan shilling (KSh /=) lang. Swahili, English  Rwanda (also in ECCAS) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English  Tanzania (also in SADC) cap. Dodoma cur. Tanzanian shilling (TSh. /=) lang. Swahili, English  Uganda cap. Kampala cur. Ugandan shilling (USh /=) lang. Swahili, English SADC (Southern African Development Community)  Angola (also in ECCAS) cap. Luanda cur. Angolan kwanza (Kz) lang. Portuguese  Botswana cap. Gaborone cur. Botswana pula (P) lang. Tswana, English  Comoros cap. Moroni cur. Comorian franc (FC) lang. Comorian, Arabic, French  Eswatini cap. Mbabane cur. Swazi lilangeni (L)(E) lang. SiSwati, English  Lesotho cap. Maseru cur. Lesotho loti (L)(M) lang. Sesotho, English  Madagascar cap. Antananarivo cur. Malagasy ariary (Ar.) lang. Malagasy, French  Malawi cap. Lilongwe cur. Malawian kwacha (MK) lang. English  Mauritius cap. Port Louis cur. Mauritian rupee (Re/Rs /-) lang. English  Mozambique cap. Maputo cur. Mozambican metical (MTn) lang. Portuguese  Namibia cap. Windhoek cur. Namibian dollar (N$) lang. English  Seychelles cap. Victoria cur. Seychellois rupee (Re/Rs /-) lang. Seychellois Creole, English, French  South Africa cap. Bloemfontein, Cape Town, Pretoria cur. South African rand (R) lang. 11 official languages  Zambia cap. Lusaka cur. Zambian kwacha (ZK) lang. English  Zimbabwe cap. Harare cur. Zimbabwean dollar ($) lang. English Depending on classification Sudan is often not considered part of sub-Saharan Africa, as it is considered part of North Africa.  Sudan cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (SDG) lang. Arabic and English ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States)  Ivory Coast cap. Yamoussoukro, Abidjan cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  The Gambia cap. Banjul cur. Gambian dalasi (D)  Ghana cap. Accra cur. Ghanaian cedi (GH₵)  Guinea cap. Conakry cur. Guinean franc (FG)  Liberia cap. Monrovia cur. Liberian dollar (L$)  Mauritania cap. Nouakchott cur. Mauritanian ouguiya (UM) (sometimes, like Sudan, considered part of North Africa)  Nigeria cap. Abuja cur. Nigerian naira (₦)  Sierra Leone cap. Freetown cur. Sierra Leonean leone (Le) UEMOA (West African Economic and Monetary Union)  Benin cap. Porto-Novo cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Burkina Faso cap. Ouagadougou cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Ivory Coast cap. Yamoussoukro, Abidjan cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Guinea-Bissau cap. Bissau cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Mali cap. Bamako cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Niger cap. Niamey cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Senegal cap. Dakar cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)  Togo cap. Lomé cur. West African CFA franc (CFA) Africa portal Geography portal African diaspora Black people Geography of Africa History of Africa "Sub-Saharan Africa Demographics". Pew-Templeton Global Religious Futures Project. Archived from the original on 11 September 2022. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "Composition of macro geographical (continental) regions, geographical sub-regions, and selected economic other groupings". United Nations Statistics Division. 11 February 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2013. "The designation sub-Saharan Africa is commonly used to indicate all of Africa except northern Africa, with the Sudan included in sub-Saharan Africa." ecosostenibile (2 February 2023). "Afrotropical ecozone: boundaries, characteristics, biomes ..." An Eco-sustainable World. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Political definition of 'Major regions', according to the UN". Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 15 December 2010. "League of Arab States". Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. "Arab States". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016. Infosamak. "Centre for Marketing, Information and Advisory Services for Fishery Products in the Arab Region". Infosamak. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2009. Barakat, Halim (14 October 1993). The Arab World: Society, Culture, and State. University of California Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-520-0790-76. Markakis, John (23 January 1998). Resource Conflict in the Horn of Africa. SAGE Publishing. p. 39. ISBN 978-0-803-9884-77. Erlikh, Ḥagai (1983). The Struggle Over Eritrea, 1962-1978: War and Revolution in the Horn of Africa. Hoover Institution Press. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-817-9760-26. Fegley, Randall (1995). "Eritrea". World Bibliographical Series. Vol. 181. Clio Press. p. mxxxviii. ISBN 978-1-851-0924-51. Frishkopf, Michael A. (2010). Music and Media in the Arab World. American University in Cairo Press. p. 61. ISBN 978-9-774-1629-30. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. "About Africa". UNDP in Africa. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. "Sahara's Abrupt Desertification Started by Changes in Earth's Orbit, Accelerated by Atmospheric and Vegetation Feedbacks". ScienceDaily. 12 July 1999. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Claussen, Mark; Kubatzki, Claudia; Brovkin, Victor; Ganopolski, Andrey; Hoelzmann, Philipp; Pachur, Hans-Joachim (1999). "Simulation of an Abrupt Change in Saharan Vegetation in the Mid-Holocene" (PDF). Geophysical Research Letters. 26 (14): 2037–40. Bibcode:1999GeoRL..26.2037C. doi:10.1029/1999GL900494. hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-0013-FBE4-E. S2CID 6463581. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "Sahara's Abrupt Desertification Started By Changes In Earth's Orbit, Accelerated By Atmospheric And Vegetation Feedbacks". Science Daily. 12 July 1999. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 28 February 2018. van Zinderen-Bakker, E.M. (14 April 1962). "A Late-Glacial and Post-Glacial Climatic Correlation between East Africa and Europe". Nature. 194 (4824): 201–03. Bibcode:1962Natur.194..201V. doi:10.1038/194201a0. S2CID 186244151. Raunig, Walter (2005). Afrikas Horn: Akten der Ersten Internationalen Littmann-Konferenz 2. bis 5. Mai 2002 in München. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 130. ISBN 3-447-05175-2. Retrieved 9 June 2016. ancient Arabic geography had quite a fixed pattern in listing the countries from the Red Sea to the Indian Ocean: These are al-Misr (Egypt) – al-Muqurra (or other designations for Nubian kingdoms) – al-Habasha (Abyssinia) – Barbara (Berber, i.e. the Somali coast) – Zanj (Azania, i.e. the country of the "blacks"). Correspondingly almost all these terms (or as I believe: all of them!) also appear in ancient and medieval Chinese geography International Association for the History of Religions (1959), Numen, Leiden: EJ Brill, p. 131, West Africa may be taken as the country stretching from Senegal in the west, to the Cameroons in the east; sometimes it has been called the central and western Sudan, the Bilad as-Sūdan, 'Land of the Blacks', of the Arabs Nehemia Levtzion, Randall Lee Pouwels, The History of Islam in Africa, (Ohio University Press, 2000), p. 255. Sven Rubenson, The survival of Ethiopian independence, (Tsehai, 2003), p. 30. Jonah Blank, Mullahs on the mainframe: Islam and modernity among the Daudi Bohras, (University of Chicago Press, 2001), p. 163. F.R.C. Bagley et al., The Last Great Muslim Empires, (Brill: 1997), p. 174 Bethwell A. Ogot, Zamani: A Survey of East African History, (East African Publishing House: 1974), p. 104 James Hastings, Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics Part 12: V. 12, (Kessinger Publishing, LLC: 2003), p. 490 "black Africa". Cambridge Dictionary. Cambridge University. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2021. Shillington, Kevin(2005). History of Africa, Rev. 2nd Ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 2, ISBN 0-333-59957-8. Shillington, Kevin(2005). History of Africa, Rev. 2nd Ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 2–3, ISBN 0-333-59957-8. Shillington, Kevin(2005). History of Africa, Rev. 2nd Ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 3, ISBN 0-333-59957-8. Schlebusch; et al. (3 November 2017). "Southern African ancient genomes estimate modern human divergence to 350,000 to 260,000 years ago". Science. 358 (6363): 652–655. Bibcode:2017Sci...358..652S. doi:10.1126/science.aao6266. PMID 28971970. Mounier, Aurélien; Lahr, Marta (2019). "Deciphering African late middle Pleistocene hominin diversity and the origin of our species". Nature Communications. 10 (1): 3406. Bibcode:2019NatCo..10.3406M. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-11213-w. PMC 6736881. PMID 31506422. Scerri, Eleanor M. L.; Thomas, Mark G.; Manica, Andrea; Gunz, Philipp; Stock, Jay T.; Stringer, Chris; Grove, Matt; Groucutt, Huw S.; Timmermann, Axel; Rightmire, G. Philip; d’Errico, Francesco (1 August 2018). "Did Our Species Evolve in Subdivided Populations across Africa, and Why Does It Matter?". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 33 (8): 582–594. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2018.05.005. ISSN 0169-5347. PMC 6092560. PMID 30007846. Tishkoff SA, Reed FA, Friedlaender FR, et al. (May 2009). "The genetic structure and history of Africans and African Americans". Science. 324 (5930): 1035–44. Bibcode:2009Sci...324.1035T. doi:10.1126/science.1172257. PMC 2947357. PMID 19407144. Bradley, Simon (18 January 2007). "Swiss archaeologist digs up West Africa's past". SWI swissinfo.ch. Swiss Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Jesse, Friederike (2010). "Early Pottery in Northern Africa - An Overview". Journal of African Archaeology. 8 (2): 219–238. doi:10.3213/1612-1651-10171. JSTOR 43135518. Stearns, Peter N. (2001) The Encyclopedia of World History, Houghton Mifflin Books. p. 16. ISBN 0-395-65237-5. Collins, Robert O. and Burns, James. M(2007). A History of Sub-saharan Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 62, ISBN 978-0-521-86746-7 Davidson, Basil. Africa History, Themes and Outlines, revised and expanded edition. New York: Simon & Schuster, p. 54, ISBN 0-684-82667-4. Shillington, Kevin(2005). History of Africa, Rev. 2nd Ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 47, ISBN 0-333-59957-8. McEvedy, Colin (1980) Atlas of African History, p. 44. ISBN 0-87196-480-5. Breunig, Peter. 2014. Nok: African Sculpture in Archaeological Context: p. 21. Davidson, Basil. Africa History, Themes and Outlines, revised and expanded edition. New York: Simon & Schuster, pp. 87–107, ISBN 0-684-82667-4. Meyerowitz, Eva L. R. (1975). The Early History of the Akan States of Ghana. Red Candle Press. ISBN 9780608390352. "The Slave Trade". Countrystudies.us. Archived from the original on 23 June 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2008. Philippe Lavachery; et al. (2012). Komé-Kribi: Rescue Archaeology Along the Chad-Cameroon Oil Pipeline. É. Zangato; A.F.C. Holl (2010). "On the Iron Front: New Evidence from North-Central Africa". Journal of African Archaeology. 8 (1): 7–23. doi:10.3213/1612-1651-10153. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. J. Cameron Monroe. Akinwumi Ogundiran, Power and Landscape in Atlantic West Africa: Archaeological Perspectives. p. 316., citing Magnavita 2004; Magnavita et al. 2004, 2006; Magnavita and Schleifer 2004. Peter Mitchell et al., The Oxford Handbook of African Archeology (2013), p. 855: "The relatively recent discovery of extensive walled settlements at the transition from the Neolithic to the Early Iron Age in the Chad Basin (Magnavita et al., 2006) indicates what enormous sites and processes may still await recognition." Appiah & Gates 2010, p. 254. sfn error: no target: CITEREFAppiahGates2010 (help) Shillington, Kevin(2005). History of Africa, Rev. 2nd Ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 138–39, 142, ISBN 0-333-59957-8. Thompson, Lloyd A. (1989). Romans and blacks. Taylor & Francis. p. 57. ISBN 0-415-03185-0. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Mokhtar (editor), AnciGent Civilizations of Africa Vo. II, General History of Africa, UNESCO, 1990 Oman in history By Peter Vine Page 324 Shaping of Somali society Lee Cassanelli pg.92 Futuh Al Habash Shibab ad Din Sudan Notes and Records – 147 Somali Sultanate: The Geledi City-state Over 150 Years - Virginia Luling (2002) Page 229 Mukhtar, Mohamed Haji (25 February 2003). Historical Dictionary of Somalia. Scarecrow Press. p. xxix. ISBN 9780810866041. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2014. Liu, Hua; Prugnolle, Franck; Manica, Andrea; Balloux, François (2006). "A Geographically Explicit Genetic Model of Worldwide Human-Settlement History". The American Journal of Human Genetics. 79 (2): 230–237. doi:10.1086/505436. PMC 1559480. PMID 16826514. James De Vere Allen (1993). Swahili Origins: Swahili Culture & the Shungwaya Phenomenon. Daniel Don Nanjira, African Foreign Policy and Diplomacy: From Antiquity to the 21st Century, ABC-CLIO, 2010, p. 114 Jens Finke (2010). The Rough Guide to Tanzania. Rough Guides Limited. ISBN 9781848360754. Casson, Lionel (1989). The Periplus Maris Erythraei. Lionel Casson. (Translation by H. Frisk, 1927, with updates and improvements and detailed notes). Princeton, Princeton University Press. Chami, F. A. (1999). "The Early Iron Age on Mafia island and its relationship with the mainland." Azania Vol. XXXIV 1999, pp. 1–10. Chami, Felix A. 2002. "The Egypto-Graeco-Romans and Paanchea/Azania: sailing in the Erythraean Sea." From: Red Sea Trade and Travel. The British Museum. Sunday 6 October 2002. Organised by The Society for Arabian Studies "Weilue: The Peoples of the West". Depts.washington.edu. 23 May 2004. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Miller, J. Innes. 1969. Chapter 8: "The Cinnamon Route". In: The Spice Trade of the Roman Empire. Oxford: University Press. ISBN 0-19-814264-1 Klein, Martin A.; Wesley Johnson, G. (8 January 2010). Perspectives on the African past. Archived from the original on 27 June 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2018. Yu Huan (September 2004) [429 CE]. "The Peoples of the West from the Weilue: A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 CE". Translated by Hill, John E. Section 15 and notes. Archived from the original on 15 March 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2016 – via Silk Road Seattle. Evelyne Jone Rich; Immanuel Maurice Wallerstein (1971). Africa: Tradition and Change. Random House School Division. p. 124. ISBN 9780394009384. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Rhonda M. Gonzales (30 August 2009). Societies, religion, and history: central-east Tanzanians and the world they created, c. 200 BCE to 1800 CE. Columbia University Press. p. 222. ISBN 978-0-231-14242-7. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Roland Oliver, et al. "Africa South of the Equator," in Africa Since 1800. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005, pp. 24–25. M. Martin, Phyllis and O'Meara, Patrick (1995). Africa. 3rd edition, Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, p. 156, ISBN 0-253-32916-7. "World Population Prospects 2022". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2019 – Population Division". Esa.un.org. 28 August 2019. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2019. "Fertility rate, total (births per woman) | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. According to the CIA Factbook Archived 5 August 2012 at archive.today: Angola, Benin, Burundi, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Cameroon, Chad, the Republic of Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, and Zambia (2009). Africa Development Indicators 2008/2009: From the World Bank Africa Database African Development Indicators. World Bank Publications, p. 28, ISBN 978-0-8213-7787-1. "Country Comparison :: GDP - per capita (PPP) — The World Factbook - Central Intelligence Agency". www.cia.gov. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 2 January 2020. "Research – CPI – Overview". Transparency.org. Archived from the original on 12 January 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "Rankings - Doing Business". The Doing Business Project. World Bank. 2010. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "National Literacy Survey". National Bureau of Statistics. June 2010. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 5 September 2015. "The World Factbook". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Brown, Keith and Ogilvie, Sarah(2008). Concise encyclopedia of languages of the world Concise Encyclopedias of Language and Linguistics Series. Elsevier, p. 12, ISBN 978-0-08-087774-7. Maaroufi, Youssef. "Recensement général de la population et de l'habitat 2004". Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017. Lafkioui, Mena B. (24 May 2018). "Berber Languages and Linguistics" (PDF). Oxford Bibliographies. doi:10.1093/OBO/9780199772810-0219. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 25 May 2023. Peek, Philip M. and Yankah, Kwesi (2004). African folklore: an encyclopedia. London: (Routledge) Taylor & Francis, p. 205, ISBN 0-415-93933-X, 9780415939331 Schneider, Edgar Werner and Kortmann, Bernd(2004). A handbook of varieties of English: a multimedia reference tool, Volume 1. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, pp. 867–68, ISBN 978-3-11-017532-5. Güldemann, Tom and Edward D. Elderkin (forthcoming) "On external genealogical relationships of the Khoe family". Archived 25 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine In Brenzinger, Matthias and Christa König (eds.), Khoisan languages and linguistics: the Riezlern symposium 2003. Quellen zur Khoisan-Forschung 17. Köln: Rüdiger Köppe. Bellwood, Peter S.(2005). First farmers: the origins of agricultural societies. Wiley-Blackwell, p. 218, ISBN 978-0-631-20566-1. "Congo, Democratic Republic of the", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 22 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Rwanda", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Angola", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Congo, Republic of the", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Burundi", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Memories of Utopia – Infoshop, World Bank" (PDF). secid.org. South East Consortium for International Development. 31 May 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "SSI Finance – Loans and lending guide". Retrieved 12 February 2023. John A. Shoup (2011). Ethnic Groups of Africa and the Middle East. p. 333. "The Zaghawa is one of the major divisions of the Beri peoples who live in western Sudan and eastern Chad, and their language, also called Zaghawa, belongs to the Saharan branch of the Nilo-Saharan language group." "Sudan", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 23 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Summary and Statistical Report of the 2007: Population and Housing Census Results" (PDF). New York City: United Nations Population Fund. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "Eritrea", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Report on minority groups in Somalia" (PDF). somraf.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "Somalia", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 16 May 2023, archived from the original on 24 May 2023, retrieved 25 May 2023 "Kenya", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 7 February 2023, retrieved 12 February 2023 "20 million people can speak Luganda - linguists". New Vision. "Malagasy". Ethnologue. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "Central African Republic" Archived 10 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 13 November 2014. "South Sudan" Archived 12 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 13 November 2014. "Nigeria". CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 13 November 2014. "Niger" Archived 30 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 13 November 2014. "Chad" Archived 26 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine . CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 16 November 2014. "Uganda", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, 6 February 2023, retrieved 12 February 2023 "Population and Housing Census". www.knbs.or.ke. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. 2009. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "The Maasai of Kenya and Tanzania". The Language Journal. 22 April 2012. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "South Africa" Archived 10 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 16 November 2014. "Botswana" Archived 9 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. 20 November 2014. "Malawi" Archived 4 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 16 November 2014. "Zambia" Archived 26 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. 20 November 2014. "Mozambique" Archived 10 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. 20 November 2014. "The Future of Portuguese". BB Portuguese. Archived from the original on 2 May 2012. Retrieved 11 April 2012. "Senegal" Archived 4 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "The Gambia" Archived 1 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Cameroon" Archived 20 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Mali" Archived 30 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine. CIA World Factbook. Retrieved 20 November 2014. African Cities Driving the NEPAD Initiative. UN-HABITAT. 2006. p. 202. ISBN 9789211318159. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. John Hartley; Jason Potts; Terry Flew; Stuart Cunningham; Michael Keane; John Banks (2012). Key Concepts in Creative Industries. SAGE. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-446-2028-90. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Helmut K Anheier; Yudhishthir Raj Isar (2012). Cultures and Globalization: Cities, Cultural Policy and Governance. SAGE. p. 118. ISBN 9781446258507. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Stuart Cunningham (2013). Hidden Innovation: Policy, Industry and the Creative Sector (Creative Economy and Innovation Culture Se Series). University of Queensland Press. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-702-2509-89. Archived from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Lisa Benton-Short; John Rennie Short (2013). Cities and Nature. Routledge Critical Introductions to Urbanism and the City. p. 71. ISBN 9781134252749. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Kerstin Pinther; Larissa Förster; Christian Hanussek (2012). Afropolis: City Media Art. Jacana Media. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-431-4032-57. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Salif Diop; Jean-Paul Barusseau; Cyr Descamps (2014). The Land/Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone of West and Central Africa Estuaries of the World. Springer. p. 66. ISBN 978-3-319-0638-81. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "What Makes Lagos a Model City". The New York Times. 7 January 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2015. John Campbell (10 July 2012). "This Is Africa's New Biggest City: Lagos, Nigeria, Population 21 Million". The Atlantic. Washington D.C. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2012. "Lagos and Its Potentials for Economic Growth". 2 July 2015. Archived from the original on 9 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Africa's biggest shipping ports". Businesstech. 8 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. Brian Rajewski (1998). Africa, Volume 1 of Cities of the world: a compilation of current information on cultural, geographical, and political conditions in the countries and cities of six continents, based on the Department of State's "post reports". Gale Research International, Limited. ISBN 9780810376922. Loretta Lees; Hyun Bang Shin; Ernesto López Morales (2015). Global Gentrifications: Uneven Development and Displacement. Policy Press. p. 315. ISBN 978-1-447-3134-89. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Major urban areas - population". cia.gov. Archived from the original on 4 May 2012. Retrieved 18 November 2014. "Johannesburg". Archived from the original on 26 April 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Pulse Africa. "Not to be Missed: Nairobi 'Green City in the Sun'". pulseafrica.com. Archived from the original on 28 April 2007. Retrieved 14 June 2007. Pugliese, Jessica (2 January 2014). "Rethinking Financing for Development in Sub-Saharan Africa". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "Africa's impressive growth". World Bank. 29 August 2014. Archived from the original on 1 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Bank, European Investment (19 October 2022). Finance in Africa - Navigating the financial landscape in turbulent times. European Investment Bank. ISBN 978-92-861-5382-2. "Africa might have dodged a bullet, but systemic warnings abound for poverty reduction efforts on the continent". blogs.worldbank.org. 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Extreme poverty rises in West Africa due to COVID-19 pandemic | World Food Programme". www.wfp.org. 20 January 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "COVID-19 and Africa: Socio-economic implications and policy responses". OECD. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "For Sub-Saharan Africa, Coronavirus Crisis Calls for Policies for Greater Resilience". World Bank. Retrieved 28 October 2022. Mukhopadhyay, Abhijit. "The Search for Sustainable Solutions to Debt Accumulation in Sub-Saharan Africa". ORF. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Africa's Rapid Economic Growth Hasn't Fully Closed Income Gaps". IMF. 21 September 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Sub-Saharan Africa: Living on The Edge". IMF. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Growing Together The IMF and African Low-Income Countries". IMF. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "Sub-Saharan Africa: A New Shock and Little Room to Maneuver". IMF. Retrieved 28 October 2022. Bank, European Investment (27 September 2023). Finance in Africa: Uncertain times, resilient banks: African finance at a crossroads. European Investment Bank. ISBN 978-92-861-5598-7. "Electricity Production Data | World Electricity Statistics | Enerdata". yearbook.enerdata.net. Retrieved 19 February 2023. Creamer Media Reporter (12 November 2009). "Africa's energy problems threatens growth, says Nepad CEO". www.engineeringnews.co.za. Engineering News. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2015. "Access to energy is Africa development key". European Investment Bank. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Access to electricity – SDG7: Data and Projections – Analysis". IEA. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "More than half of sub-Saharan Africans lack access to electricity". The Economist. 13 November 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 7 June 2021. Christian K.M. Kingombe 2011. Mapping the new infrastructure financing landscape Archived 18 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine. London: Overseas Development Institute "Creamer Media" (PDF). Us-cdn.creamermedia.co.za. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "Nuclear Vs Solar Energy, Which?". Redorbit. 24 March 2006. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Zych, Ariel. "Blog: Battle of the Bots". Science Friday. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Hepeng, Jia (20 August 2004). "China to train developing nations in solar technologies". scidev.net. Archived from the original on 3 November 2009. Retrieved 14 November 2009. "About | Renewable Energy Performance Platform (REPP)". REPP. Retrieved 7 June 2021. English, Cynthia (23 June 2008). "Radio the Chief Medium for News in Sub-Saharan Africa". Gallup.com. Archived from the original on 17 November 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Africa calling: Cellphone usage sees record rise". The Mail & Guardian. 23 October 2009. Archived from the original on 25 October 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Aker, Jenny C.(2008). "Can You Hear Me Now?"How Cell Phones are Transforming Markets in Sub-Saharan Africa Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Center for Global Development. "MG.co.za". MG.co.za. 23 December 2009. Archived from the original on 26 December 2009. Retrieved 27 December 2009. Pfanner, Eric (6 August 2007). "Competition increases for pay TV in sub-Saharan Africa". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Lisa A. Corathers (January 2009). "Manganese" (PDF). Minerals.usgs.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Land-based manganese resources are large but irregularly distributed; those of the United States are very low grade and have potentially high extraction costs. South Africa accounts for about 80% of the world's identified manganese resources, and Ukraine accounts for 10%. John F. Papp (2001). "Chromium" (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey Minerals Yearbook. Minerals.usgs.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 19 October 2015. About 42% of world reserves and about 75% of the world reserve base are located in South Africa. Vronsky (1 May 1997). "Platinum: The Rich Man's Gold". Gold-Eagle.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2013. Retrieved 19 October 2015. E. Lee Bray (January 2009). "Bauxite and Alumina" (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries. Minerals.usgs.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Daniel L. Edelstein (January 2009). "Copper" (PDF). U.S. Geological Survey, Mineral Commodity Summaries. Minerals.usgs.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2015. "From the SelectedWorks of Maheta Matteo: From "Blood Diamond" to "Blood Coltan": Should International Corporations Pay the Price for the Rape of the DR Congo?". Works.bepress.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "MBendi.com". MBendi.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2006. Retrieved 20 December 2009. "World-Nuclear.org". World-Nuclear.org. Archived from the original on 26 June 2010. Retrieved 20 December 2009. Ghazvinian, John (2008). Untapped: The Scramble for Africa's Oil. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, pp. 1–16, ISBN 978-0-15-603372-5. Christopher Ehret, (2002). The Civilization of Africa. University of Virginia Press: Charlottesville, p. 98, ISBN 0-8139-2085-X. Vandaveer, Chelsie(2006). What was the cotton of Kush? Archived 14 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine KillerPlants.com, Plants That Change History Archive. National Research Council (U.S.). Board on Science and Technology for International Development (1996). Lost Crops of Africa: Grains. National Academy Press, ISBN 978-0-309-04990-0. "WorldDefenseReview.com". WorldDefenseReview.com. Archived from the original on 7 November 2009. Retrieved 13 November 2009. "Large scale land investments, household displacement and the effect on land degradation in semiarid agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia". Bowden, Rob (2007). Africa South of the Sahara. Coughlan Publishing: p. 37, ISBN 1-4034-9910-1. Evans, Ambrose (12 October 2009). "Blogspot.com". Tradeafrica.blogspot.com. Archived from the original on 25 May 2014. Retrieved 15 November 2009. "Africa Regional Brief" (PDF). World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 May 2014. Retrieved 7 May 2012. Saul, John J.; Leys, Colin (1 July 1999). "Sub-Saharan Africa in Global Capitalism". Monthly Review. 51 (3). Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Magdoff, Fred (1 November 2013). "Twenty-First-Century Land Grabs: Accumulation by Agricultural Dispossession". Monthly Review. 65 (6). doi:10.14452/MR-065-06-2013-10_1. S2CID 144627886. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Mathiason, Nick (2 November 2009). "Global protocol could limit Sub-Saharan land grab". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 9 April 2010. Ken Gwilliam, Vivien Foster, Rodrigo Archondo-Callao, Cecilia Briceño-Garmendia, Alberto Nogales, and Kavita Sethi(2008). Africa infrastructure country diagnostic, Roads in Sub-Saharan Africa Archived 18 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine. World Bank and the SSATP: p. 4 Gabara, Nthambeleni (12 November 2009). "Developed nations should invest in African universities". buanews.gov.za. BuaNews Online. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2015. Firsing, Scott (18 January 2016). "How severe is Africa's Brain Drain?". London School of Economics Blogs. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Ngwé, Luc (24 January 2018). "African brain drain: is there an alternative?". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 11 May 2020. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "World". CIA Factbook. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Baten, Jörg (2016). A history of the global economy. Cambridge University Press. pp. 328–329. ISBN 978-1-107-10470-9. Franck, Raphaël; Rainer, Ilia (May 2012). "Does the Leader's Ethnicity Matter? Ethnic Favoritism, Education, and Health in Sub-Saharan Africa" (PDF). American Political Science Review. 106 (2): 294–325. doi:10.1017/S0003055412000172. S2CID 15227415. Nordling, Linda (29 October 2009). "Africa Analysis: Progress on science spending?". scidev.net. Archived from the original on 14 June 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "South Africa's Investment in Research and Development on the Rise" (Press release). Department of Science and Technology. 22 June 2006. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Agence Française de Développement, Agence universitaire de la Francophonie, Orange, & UNESCO. (2015). Digital Services for Education in Africa. Savoirs communs, 17. Archived 13 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine Youth and skills: putting education to work (in English, Arabic, Chinese, French, and Spanish). Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 2012. ISBN 978-92-3-104240-9. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2023. School Meal Programs Around the World: Results from the 2021 Global Survey of School Meal Programs (Report). Global Child Nutrition Foundation. 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Alphonce Shiundu (2 September 2018). "More must happen". D+C, development and cooperation. Archived from the original on 1 February 2019. Retrieved 3 February 2019. "User fees for health: a background". Archived from the original on 28 November 2006. Retrieved 28 December 2006. Godfrey., Mugoti (2009). Africa (a-z). [Place of publication not identified]: Lulu Com. ISBN 978-1435728905. OCLC 946180025.[self-published source] Knippenberg R, Alihonou E, Soucat A, et al. (June 1997). "Implementation of the Bamako Initiative: strategies in Benin and Guinea". The International Journal of Health Planning and Management. 12 (Suppl 1): S29–47. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-1751(199706)12:1+<S29::AID-HPM465>3.0.CO;2-U. PMID 10173105. "Manageable Bamako Initiative schemes". Archived from the original on 8 October 2007. Retrieved 28 December 2006. "World Aids Day 2012" (PDF). Unaids.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation: What we do". Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 27 May 2013. "UNAIDS reports more than 7 million people now on HIV treatment across Africa—with nearly 1 million added in the last year—while new HIV infections and deaths from AIDS continue to fall". Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. 21 May 2013. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "Special Report: How Africa Turned AIDS Around" (PDF). Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic 2012" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2013. "Life expectancy at birth, total (years) - Sub-Saharan Africa | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "AIDSinfo". UNAIDS. Archived from the original on 8 July 2015. Retrieved 4 March 2013. "WHO | Malaria". Who.int. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Verguet S, Jassat W, Hedberg C, Tollman S, Jamison DT, Hofman KJ (February 2012). "Measles control in Sub-Saharan Africa: South Africa as a case study". Vaccine. 30 (9): 1594–600. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.12.123. PMID 22230581. "WHO | Onchocerciasis". Who.int. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "WHO | Maternal mortality". Who.int. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Bonino, Emma (15 September 2004). "Opinion | A brutal custom : Join forces to banish the mutilation of women". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Feldman-Jacobs, Charlotte (February 2009). "Commemorating International Day of Zero Tolerance to Female Genital Mutilation". Population Reference Bureau. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010. Canagarajah, Sudharshan; Ye, Xiao (April 2001). Public Health and Education Spending in Ghana in 1992-98 (PDF). World Bank Publication. p. 21. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Encyclopædia Britannica. Britannica Book of the Year 2003. Encyclopædia Britannica, (2003) ISBN 978-0-85229-956-2 p. 306 However, Southern Africa is predominantly Christian. According to the Encyclopædia Britannica, as of mid-2002, there were 376,453,000 Christians, 329,869,000 Muslims and 98,734,000 people who practiced traditional religions in Africa. Ian S. Markham,(A World Religions Reader. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 1996.) Archived 12 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine is cited by Morehouse University as giving the mid-1990s figure of 278,250,800 Muslims in Africa, but still as 40.8% of the total. These numbers are estimates and remain a matter of conjecture. See Amadu Jacky Kaba. The spread of Christianity and Islam in Africa: a survey and analysis of the numbers and percentages of Christians, Muslims and those who practice indigenous religions. The Western Journal of Black Studies, Vol 29, Number 2, June 2005. Discusses the estimations of various almanacs and encyclopedium, placing Britannica's estimate as the most agreed figure. Notes the figure presented at the World Christian Encyclopedia, summarised here Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, as being an outlier. On rates of growth, Islam and Pentecostal Christianity are highest, see: The List: The World’s Fastest-Growing Religions Archived 25 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Foreign Policy, May 2007. "The Global Religious Landscape" (PDF). Pewforum.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2020. The Future of the Global Muslim Population (PDF) (Report). Pew Research Center. 27 January 2011. Ehret, Christopher (2002). The Civilizations of Africa: A History to 1800. James Currey Publishers. ISBN 978-0-85255-475-3. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Ehret, Christopher (November 2004). "A Conversation with Christopher Ehret". World History Connected. 2 (1). Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Okwu AS (1979). "Life, Death, Reincarnation, and Traditional Healing in Africa". Issue: A Journal of Opinion. 9 (3): 19–24. doi:10.2307/1166258. JSTOR 1166258. Stanton, Andrea L. (2012). Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia. SAGE. ISBN 9781412981767. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. Baldick, Julian (1998). Black God: The Afroasiatic Roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Religions. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-0522-5. Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. Ehret, Christopher (5 November 2004). "A Conversation with Christopher Ehret". World History Connected. 2 (1). Christopher Ehret, (2002). The Civilizations of Africa. Charlottesville: University of Virginia, pp. 102–03, ISBN 0-8139-2085-X. Vontress, Clemmont E. (2005), "Animism: Foundation of Traditional Healing in Sub-Saharan Africa", Integrating Traditional Healing Practices into Counseling and Psychotherapy, SAGE Publications, pp. 124–137, doi:10.4135/9781452231648, ISBN 9780761930471, archived from the original on 31 October 2019, retrieved 2 November 2019 Davidson, Basil (1969). The African Genius, An Introduction to African Social and Cultural History. Little, Brown and Company: Boston, pp. 168–80. LCCN 70-80751. Eglash, Ron: "African Fractals: Modern computing and indigenous design." Rutgers 1999 ISBN 0-8135-2613-2 Richmond, Yale; Gestrin, Phyllis (2009). Into Africa: a guide to Sub-Saharan culture and diversity. Boston: Intercultural Press. ISBN 978-1-931930-91-8. Archived from the original on 1 October 2018. Retrieved 9 June 2016. "ScienceDaily.com". ScienceDaily.com. 18 June 2007. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "'Oldest' prehistoric art unearthed". BBC News. 10 January 2002. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009. Retrieved 9 April 2010. ">TARA – Trust for African Rock Art: Rock Art in Africa". 6 January 2009. Archived from the original on 30 January 2010. Retrieved 21 November 2009. "African Influences in Modern Art | Thematic Essay | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History | The Metropolitan Museum of Art". Metmuseum.org. 2 June 2014. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Alexandre, Marc(1998). World Bank Publication: DC. ISBN 978-0-8213-4195-7 Bowden, Rob(2007). Africa South of the Sahara. Coughlan Publishing: p. 40, ISBN 1-4034-9910-1. Christopher Ehret, (2002). The Civilizations of Africa. Charlottesville: University of Virginia, p. 103, ISBN 0-8139-2085-X. Njogu, K.; Ngeta, K.; Wanjau, M. (2010). Ethnic Diversity in Eastern Africa: Opportunities and Challenges. Twaweza Communications. pp. 78–79. ISBN 978-9966-7244-8-9. Archived from the original on 21 December 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2017. "Intangible Heritage Home –- intangible heritage – Culture Sector". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 17 November 2009. "Proclamation 2005: La fabrication des tissus d'écorce en Ouganda" [Proclamation 2005: Barcloth making in Uganda] (in French). UNESCO. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. "Prestige Panel [Democratic Republic of Congo; Kuba peoples] (1999.522.15) | Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History | the Metropolitan Museum of Art". Archived from the original on 17 February 2009. Retrieved 17 November 2009. "About.com". Goafrica.about.com. Archived from the original on 20 May 2009. Retrieved 26 December 2009. "AllAfrica.com". AllAfrica.com. 16 November 2009. Archived from the original on 18 November 2009. Retrieved 26 December 2009. "European Soccer's Racism Problem". Deutsche Welle. 2 December 2005. Archived from the original on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 26 December 2009. "Men's outdoor world records". iaaf.org. Archived from the original on 8 August 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. As can be seen: 800m is Kenya; 5000m is Ethiopia; 10000m is Ethiopia; marathon is Kenya. The two exceptions are the 1500m and 3000m steeplechase records, though the latter is held by Stephen Cherono, who was born and raised in Kenya. Tucker, Ross and Dugas, Jonathan. Sport's great rivalries: Kenya vs. Ethiopia, and a one-sided battle (at least on the track) Archived 20 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine, The Science of Sport, 14 July 2008. "Tourism in Africa : Harnessing Tourism for Growth and Improved Livelihoods" (PDF). Worldbank.org. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "South Africa: Political Issues: Constitution: Provincial Government". BBC. 29 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Malik, Nesrine (23 November 2009). "'Nubian monkey' song and Arab racism". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 9 April 2010. Towson.edu Archived 3 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine "Worldbank.org". Web.worldbank.org. 27 October 2006. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2009. "CDCdevelopmentSolutions.org". CDCdevelopmentSolutions.org. Archived from the original on 20 June 2010. "Where We Work | U.S. Agency for International Development". Usaid.gov. 29 May 2012. Archived from the original on 17 October 2011. Retrieved 29 September 2015. "Transparency International - The Global Anti-Corruption Coalition". www.transparency.org. Archived from the original on 13 April 2012. "U.N. doubles force in turbulent South Sudan [UPDATE 2". UPI.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Taking Action to Reduce Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa, World Bank Publications (1997), ISBN 0-8213-3698-3.  This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY-SA (license statement/permission). Text taken from Digital Services for Education in Africa​, Agence Française de Développement, Agence universitaire de la Francophonie, Orange & UNESCO, Agence Française de Développement & UNESCO. Chido, Diane E. "From Chaos to Cohesion: A Regional Approach to Security, Stability, and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa". Carlisle, Pa.: Strategic Studies Institute and U.S. Army War College Press, 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sub-Saharan Africa. African People website (archived) The Story of Africa – BBC World Service