Seyyed Ali Hosseini Khamenei (Persian: سید علی حسینی خامنه‌ای, romanized: Ali Hoseyni Xāmene’i, pronounced [ʔæˈliː hosejˈniː xɒːmeneˈʔiː] ; born 19 April 1939) is an Iranian Twelver Shia marja' and politician who has been the second supreme leader of Iran since 1989. He previously served as third president of Iran from 1981 to 1989. Khamenei is the longest-serving head of state in the Middle East, as well as the second-longest-serving Iranian leader of the last century, after Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. According to his official website, Khamenei was arrested six times before being sent into exile for three years during Mohammad Reza Pahlavi's reign. After the Iranian revolution overthrowing the shah, he was the target of an attempted assassination in June 1981 that paralyzed his right arm. Khamenei was one of Iran's leaders during the Iran–Iraq War in the 1980s, and developed close ties with the now powerful Revolutionary Guards which he controls, and whose commanders are elected and dismissed by him. The Revolutionary Guards have been deployed to suppress opposition to him. Khamenei served as the third president of Iran from 1981 to 1989, while becoming a close ally of the first supreme leader, Ruhollah Khomeini. Shortly before his death, Khomeini had a disagreement with the heir he had chosen – Hussein Ali Montazeri – so there was no agreed-on successor when Khomeini died. The Assembly of Experts elected Khamenei as the next supreme leader on 4 June 1989, at age 50. According to Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Khamenei was the man Khomeini had chosen as his successor before dying. Khamenei has been head of the servants of Astan Quds Razavi since 14 April 1979. As supreme leader, Khamenei is the most powerful political authority in the Islamic Republic. He is the head of state of Iran, the commander-in-chief of its armed forces, and can issue decrees and make the final decisions on the main policies of the government in many fields such as economy, the environment, foreign policy, and national planning in Iran. As supreme leader, Khamenei has either direct or indirect control over the executive, legislative and judicial branches of government, as well as the military and media. All candidates for the Assembly of Experts, the presidency and the Majlis (Parliament) are vetted by the Guardian Council, whose members are selected directly or indirectly by the Supreme Leader of Iran. There have also been instances when the Guardian Council reversed its ban on particular people after being ordered to do so by Khamenei. There have been major protests during Khamenei's reign, including the 1994 Qazvin protests, the 1999 student protests, the 2009 presidential election protests, the 2011–12 protests, the 2017–18 protests, the 2018–19 general strikes and protests, the 2019–20 protests, the 2021–22 protests, and the Mahsa Amini protests. Journalists, bloggers and others have been imprisoned in Iran for insulting Supreme Leader Khamenei, often in conjunction with blasphemy charges. Their sentences have included lashing and jail time; some have died in custody. Regarding the nuclear program of Iran, Khamenei issued a fatwa in 2003 forbidding the production, stockpiling and use of all kinds of weapons of mass destruction. Born to Seyed Javad Khamenei, an Alim and Mujtahid born in Najaf, and Khadijeh Mirdamadi [fa] (daughter of Hashem Mirdamadi [fa]) in Mashhad, Khamenei is the second of eight children. Two of his brothers are also clerics; his younger brother, Hadi Khamenei, is a newspaper editor and cleric. His elder sister Fatemeh Hosseini Khamenei died in 2015, aged 89. His father was an ethnic Azerbaijani from Khamaneh, while his mother was an ethnic Persian from Yazd. Some of his ancestors are from Tafresh in today's Markazi Province and migrated from their original home in Tafresh to Khamaneh near Tabriz. Khamenei's great ancestor was Sayyid Hossein Tafreshi, a descendant of the Aftasi Sayyids, whose lineage supposedly reached to Sultan ul-Ulama Ahmad, known as Sultan Sayyid, a grandchild of Shia fourth Imam, Ali ibn Husayn. Khamenei's education began at the age of four, by learning Quran at Maktab; he spent his basic and advanced levels of seminary studies at the hawza of Mashhad, under mentors such as Sheikh Hashem Qazvini and Ayatollah Milani. Then, he went to Najaf in 1957, but soon returned to Mashhad due to his father's unwillingness to let him stay there. In 1958, he settled in Qom where he attended the classes of Seyyed Hossein Borujerdi and Ruhollah Khomeini. Like many other politically active clerics at the time, Khamenei was far more involved with politics than religious scholarship. Khamenei was a key figure in the Iranian Revolution in Iran and a close confidant of Ruhollah Khomeini. Since the founding of the Islamic Republic, Khamenei has held many government posts. Muhammad Sahimi claims that his political career began after the Iranian Revolution, when the former President of Iran, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, then a confidant of Khomeini, brought Khamenei into Khomeini's inner circle. Later on, Hassan Rouhani, then a member of Parliament, arranged for Khamenei to get his first major post in the provisional revolutionary government as deputy defense minister. Khomeini appointed Khamenei to the post of Tehran's Friday prayers Imam in 1980, after the resignation of Hussein-Ali Montazeri from the post. He was briefly the vice Minister of National Defence from late July to 6 November 1979 and as a supervisor of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards. He also went to the battlefield as a representative of the parliament's defense commission. Khamenei narrowly escaped an assassination attempt by the Mujahedin-e Khalq when a bomb, concealed in a tape recorder, exploded beside him. On 27 June 1981, while Khamenei had returned from the frontline, he went to the Aboozar Mosque according to his Saturday's schedule. After the first prayer, he lectured to worshippers who had written their questions on paper. Meanwhile, a young man who pressed a button put a tape recorder accompanied by papers on the desk in front of Khamenei. After a minute the recorder began whistling, then suddenly exploded. "A gift of Furqan Group to the Islamic Republic" was written on the inner wall of the tape recorder. Ayatollah Khamenei's treatment took several months and his arm, vocal cords and lungs were seriously injured. He was permanently injured, losing the use of his right arm. In 1981, after the assassination of Mohammad-Ali Rajai, Khamenei was elected President of Iran by a landslide vote (97%) in the October 1981 Iranian presidential election in which only four candidates were approved by the Council of Guardians. Khamenei became the first cleric to be in the office. Ruhollah Khomeini had originally wanted to keep clerics out of the presidency but later changed his views. Khamenei was reelected in 1985 Iranian presidential election where only three candidates were approved by the Council of Guardians, receiving 87% of the votes. The only Iranian presidential election with fewer candidates approved by the Council of Guardians was the 1989 Iranian presidential election, where only two candidates were approved by the Council of Guardians to run, and Rafsanjani easily won 96% of the votes.[citation needed] In his presidential inaugural address, Khamenei vowed to eliminate "deviation, liberalism, and American-influenced leftists". According to the Iran Chamber, vigorous opposition to the government, including nonviolent and violent protest, assassinations, guerrilla activity and insurrections, was answered by state repression and terror in the early 1980s, both before and during Khamenei's presidency. Thousands of rank-and-file members of insurgent groups were killed, often by revolutionary courts. By 1982, the government announced that the courts would be reined in, although various political groups continued to be repressed by the government in the first half of the 1980s. Khamenei was one of Iran's leaders during the Iran–Iraq War in the 1980s and developed close ties with the now-powerful Revolutionary Guards. As president, he had a reputation for being deeply interested in the military, budget and administrative details. In its 10 April 1997 ruling regarding the Mykonos restaurant assassinations, the German court issued an international arrest warrant for Iranian intelligence minister Ali Fallahian after declaring that the assassination had been ordered by him with knowledge of Khamenei and Rafsanjani. Iranian officials, however, have categorically denied their involvement. The then-Iranian Parliament speaker Ali Akbar Nategh-Nouri dismissed the ruling as political, untrue and unsubstantiated. The ruling led to a diplomatic crisis between the governments of Iran and several European countries, which lasted until November 1997. The accused assassins, Darabi and Rhayel, were finally released from prison on 10 December 2007 and deported back to their home countries. Khamenei has fired and reinstated presidential cabinet appointments. Iran's Chief Justice Sadeq Larijani, a Khamenei appointee, has warned the president of Iran against voicing opposition to Khamenei. In 1989 Ayatollah Khomeini dismissed Ayatollah Montazeri as his political successor, giving the position to Khamenei instead. Because Khamenei was neither a marja or ayatollah, the Assembly of Experts had to modify the constitution to award him the position of Iran's new Supreme Leader (a decision opposed by several grand ayatollahs). Khamenei officially succeeded Ruhollah Khomeini after Khomeini's death, being elected as the new Supreme Leader by the Assembly of Experts on 4 June 1989. Initially, some members of the Assembly of Experts proposed the idea of a leadership council. Various lists were proposed and Khamenei was named in all of them. For instance, a council of three members, Ali Meshkini, Mousavi Ardebili and Khamenei, was proposed to lead Iran. According to Rafsanjani, he and Khamenei were against the proposal, while Ayatollah Haeri Shirazi [fa] and Ayatollah Ebrahim Amini were in favor of it. Supporters of the council proposal believed that having a council would produce a higher degree of unity in society and more positive characteristics would be found in a council. In contrast, the opposers believed that an individual leader was more efficient according to past experiences in the case of the Judiciary Council. Ebrahim Amini listed the summary of the reasons presented by the two sides. According to him, the opposers rejected the proposal because i) Evidence for Guardianship of the Islamic Jurist was true only for the guardianship of an individual and it was not clear who held the guardianship when there was a council. The guardianship of a council was not rooted in Hadiths and Islamic jurisprudence. ii) Previous council-type organizations, such as the broadcasting council and supreme judicial council, were not successful in practice and the leadership council would not do well for similar reasons. iii) People were accustomed to the leadership of an individual and a council of leaders was something unfamiliar to them. iv) An individual leader could act more decisively when dealing with critical and essential decisions and solving problems and crisis. On the other hand, the supporters of the proposal believed that: i) At the time, there were no Faqih equal to Khomeini or even two or three levels lower than him so that he could fulfill the expectation of people. ii) In the case of a council of leaders, the members could compensate each other, if any of them had some shortage in a field. Finally, 45 members voted against the leadership council proposal while more than 20 people were in favor of it and the proposal was rejected. After the assembly rejected the idea of a Leadership Council, Khamenei was elected Leader by 60 of the 74 members present with Grand Ayatollah Mohammad-Reza Golpaygani receiving the remaining 14 votes. Khamenei made protestations of his unworthiness -- "my nomination should make us all cry tears of blood" and debated with the mujtahids of the Assembly—but eventually accepted the post. Since Khamenei was not a marja' at the time—which the Iranian constitution required—he was named as the temporary Supreme Leader. Later, the constitution was amended to remove that requirement and the Assembly of Experts reconvened on 6 August 1989, to reconfirm Khamenei with 60 votes out of 64 present. On 29 April 1989, responding to the letter of Ayatollah Meshkini, the head of committee responsible for revising the Constitution, asking Khomeini's viewpoint regarding the 'marjaʿiyyat criteria, Khomeini said: "From the very beginning, I believed and insisted that there is no need for the requirements of marjaʿiyyat (authority in jurisprudence). A pious mujtahid (jurist-intellectual), who is approved by the esteemed Assembly of Experts (Majlis-i Khobregan), will suffice." In a video that surfaced during the 2017–18 Iranian protests, Khamenei is seen before the assembly said he was not religiously qualified to be a Supreme leader. Khamenei, who was ranked as a Hujjat al-Islam and not a Marja' as required by the Iranian constitution, said he would only be a "ceremonial leader", and was reassured by Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani the position would be "temporary" until a referendum, apparently planned for one year later. On August 29, 2022, al-Haeri announced his resignation from the position of Marja, due to old age and illness. This was described as the first time in history a Marja has ever resigned from his position. He called on his followers to follow Ali Khamenei, Supreme Leader of Iran as "the best person for the leadership of our people and removing the aggressors". Khamenei's era has differed from that of his predecessor. He has, however, continued Khomeini's policy of "balancing one group against another, making sure that no single side gains too much power." But lacking Khomeini's charisma and clerical standing, he has developed personal networks, first inside the armed forces and then among the clerics, while administering the major bonyads and seminaries of Qom and Mashhad. Having been Supreme Leader for three decades, Khamenei has been able to place many loyalists throughout Iran's major institutions, "building a system that serves and protects him". Former cleric Mehdi Khalaji and Saeid Golkar, describe Khamenei's system as having creating a "parallel structure" for each of the country's institutions (army, intelligence agencies, etc.) to keep those institutions weak. According to Vali Nasr of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, "[Khamenei] [took] many of the powers of the presidency with him and [turned] the office of the supreme leader into the omnipotent overseer of Iran's political scene". In Nasr's view, Khamenei is an "unusual sort of dictator". Officials under Khamenei influence the country's various powers, and sometimes bickering, institutions, including "the parliament, the presidency, the judiciary, the Revolutionary Guards, the military, the intelligence services, the police agencies, the clerical elite, the Friday prayer leaders and much of the media", as well as various "nongovernmental foundations, organizations, councils, seminaries and business groups". Khamenei issues decrees and makes the final decisions on the economy, environment, foreign policy and everything else in Iran. Khamenei regularly meets with the president, cabinet members, head and officials of the judiciary branch, parliamentarians, among others, and tells them what to do. Khamenei has also fired and reinstated presidential cabinet appointments. Khamenei meets with foreign dignitaries, however, he does not travel overseas; if anyone wishes to see him, that person must travel to Iran. Apart from his time in Najaf as a student, Khamenei traveled to Libya during his time as president. In his speeches, Khamenei regularly mentions many familiar themes of the 1979 revolution: justice, independence, self-sufficiency, Islamic government and resolute opposition to Israel and the United States, while rarely mentioning other revolutionary ideals such as democracy and greater government transparency. According to Karim Sadjadpour of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Khamenei has "resisted Rafsanjani's attempts to find a modus vivendi with the United States, Khatami's aspirations for a more democratic Islamic state, and Ahmadinejad's penchant for outright confrontation." In 2007, Khamenei called for privatizing state-owned companies, including the telephone company, three banks and dozens of small oil and petrochemical enterprises. After a few months, at a televised meeting with then-President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and his Cabinet ministers, important clerics, the leader of parliament and provincial governors, the heads of state broadcasting and the Iranian chamber of commerce, Khamenei ordered: "to pass some laws, sell off some businesses, and be quick about it." Khamenei warned that "those who are hostile to these policies are the ones who are going to lose their interests and influence." In 1994, after the death of Grand Ayatollah Mohammad Ali Araki, the Society of Seminary Teachers of Qom declared Khamenei a new marja. Several ayatollahs, however, declined to recognize him as such. Some of those dissidents clerics included Mohammad Shirazi, Hossein-Ali Montazeri, Hassan Tabatabai-Qomi, and Yasubedin Rastegar Jooybari. In 1997, for example, Montazeri "questioned the powers of the Leader" and was subsequently punished for his comments with the closure of his religious school, an attack on his office in Qom, and a period of house arrest. The table below lists some of the incumbent senior officeholders in Iran directly appointed by the supreme leader (sorted by date of appointment): Khamenei developed a cult of personality; with supporters describing him as a "divine gift to mankind" and in which Khamenei critics are persecuted. According to Karim Sadjadpour of the American Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, several factors have strengthened Khamenei in recent years: (1) A vast network of commissars stationed in strategic posts throughout government bureaucracies, dedicated to enforcing his authority; (2) the weak, conservative-dominated parliament, headed by Khamenei loyalist Gholam-Ali Haddad-Adel (whose daughter is married to the Leader's son); (3) the rapidly rising political and economic influence of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards, whose top leaders are directly appointed by Khamenei and have always been publicly obedient to him; (4) the political disengagement of Iran's young population ...; and (5) most significant[ly], the 2005 presidential election, which saw hardliner Mahmoud Ahmadinejad trounce Khamenei's chief rival ... Hashemi Rafsanjani ... According to Christopher Dickey, to consolidate his power base, Khamenei has developed close relations with the security and military establishment while also expanding the bureaucracy inside the government and around his Beit Rahbari compound. Writing in The Daily Telegraph, Damien McElroy and Ahmad Vahdat observed: "The ayatollah likes to cultivate an image of austerity but receives major commissions from the Iranian oil and arms industries and there have been regular claims that he and his son have amassed a fortune running into billions of dollars." A six-month investigation by Reuters has said that Khamenei controls a "financial empire" worth approximately US$95 billion that the Iranian Parliament does not oversee, a figure much larger than the estimated wealth of the late Shah of Iran. According to the Reuters investigation, Khamenei uses the assets of a company called Headquarters for Executing the Order of the Imam or "Setad" in Farsi, to increase his grip on power. Reuters "found no evidence that Khamenei is tapping Setad to enrich himself," but did find that he used Setad's funds, which "rival the holdings of the shah", for political expedience – "Setad gives him the financial means to operate independently of parliament and the national budget, insulating him from Iran's messy factional infighting." According to The Daily Telegraph, money from Setad is used to fund Khamenei's Beit Rahbari compound, which employs over 500 stewards, as was reported in 2013. Hamid Vaezi, Setad's head of public relations, said the information "was far from realities and is not correct". The six-month investigation by Reuters found that, regarding the source of Setad's funds, "Setad built its empire on the systematic seizure of thousands of properties belonging to ordinary Iranians: members of religious minorities like Vahdat-e-Hagh, who is Baha'i, as well as Shi'ite Muslims, business people and Iranians living abroad." Despite the negative accounts of Western sources, Iranian official authorities depict Setad as a vast charity foundation. In an interview in October 2014 with Islamic Republic News Agency, Muhammad Mukhber, the head of Setad, stated that over 90% of profits from Setad business activities are spent on improving infrastructure in the poor regions of the country, creating jobs and improving the well-being of people in these regions reflecting the top concerns of Iran's Supreme Leader, Khamenei for the Iranian society. He states that 85 percent of Setad's charitable works occur in poor Iran regions. He cited the construction of several hundred schools, mosques and hussainiyas, as well as direct and indirect contributions to the formation of over 350 thousand jobs expecting a total of 700 thousands for the upcoming three years. Mukhber also cited a sum total grant of 2.21 trillion rials of Qard al-Hasan, interest-free loans, to 41 thousands families in poor regions of the country. He also revealed plans of gradual sell-off of Setad profitable businesses in the stock market with the aim of transferring their ownership into the hands of Iranian people. He also envisioned the construction and delivery of 17 thousand housing units to families in poor regions of Iran by 2018. In mid-August 2009, a group of unnamed former reformist lawmakers appealed to the Assembly of Experts – the constitutional body charged with electing and (in theory) supervising and removing the Leader – to investigate Leader Ali Khamenei's qualification to rule. A week later another anonymous letter was issued "calling Iran's leader a dictator and demanding his removal", this one by a group of Iranian clerics. The letters were called a blow to Khamenei's "status as a neutral arbiter and Islamic figurehead" and an "unprecedented challenge to the country's most powerful man" though not a blow to his actual power as a leader. The New York Times reports "the phrase 'death to Khamenei' has begun appearing in graffiti on Tehran walls, a phrase that would have been almost unimaginable not long ago." The letter was addressed to the head of the Assembly of Experts, Ayatollah Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, a "powerful former president" who also questions the election results. According to the Associated Press, it is unlikely the letter's demands would be met as "two-thirds of the 86-member assembly are considered strong loyalists of Khamenei and would oppose" any investigation of him. According to The New York Times reporting in mid-August 2009, a "prominent Iranian cleric and a former lawmaker said on Sunday that they had spoken to some of the authors and had no doubt the letter was genuine". According to this cleric, the letter's signatories number "several dozen, and are mostly midranking figures from Qum, Isfahan and Mashhad", and that "the pressure on clerics in Qum is much worse than the pressure on activists because the establishment is afraid that if they say anything they can turn the more traditional sectors of society against the regime". Early in his presidency, Ahmadinejad was sometimes described as "enjoy[ing] the full backing" of the Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei, and even as being his "protege." In Ahmadinejad's 2005 inauguration the supreme leader allowed Ahmadinejad to kiss his hand and cheeks in what was called "a sign of closeness and loyalty," and after the 2009 election fully endorsed Ahmadinejad against protesters. However, as early as January 2008 signs of disagreement between the two men developed over domestic policies, and by the period of 2010–11 several sources detected a "growing rift" between them. The disagreement was described as centered on Esfandiar Rahim Mashaei, a top adviser and close confidant of Ahmadinejad and opponent of "greater involvement of clerics in politics", who was first vice president of Iran until being ordered to resign from the cabinet by the supreme leader. In 2009, Ahmadinejad dismissed Intelligence Minister Gholam-Hossein Mohseni-Eje'i, an opponent of Mashaei. In April 2011, another Intelligence minister, Heydar Moslehi, resigned after being asked to by Ahmadinejad but was reinstated by the supreme leader within hours. Ahmadinejad declined to officially back Moslehi's reinstatement for two weeks and in protest engaged in an "11-day walkout" of cabinet meetings, religious ceremonies, and other official functions. Ahmadinejad's actions led to angry public attacks by clerics, parliamentarians and military commanders, who accused him of ignoring orders from the supreme leader. Conservative opponents in parliament launched an "impeachment drive" against him, four websites with ties to Ahmadinejad reportedly were "filtered and blocked", and several people "said to be close" to the president and Mashaei (such as Abbas Amirifar and Mohammed Sharif Malekzadeh) were arrested on charges of being "magicians" and invoking djinns. On 6 May 2011, it was reported that Ahmadinejad had been given an ultimatum to accept the leader's intervention or resign, and on 8 May he "apparently bowed" to the reinstatement, welcoming back Moslehi to a cabinet meeting. The events have been said to have "humiliated and weakened" Ahmadinejad. However, the president denied that there had been any rift between the two, and according to the semiofficial Fars News Agency, he stated that his relationship with the supreme leader "is that of a father and a son." In 2012, Khamenei ordered a halt to a parliamentary inquiry into Ahmadinejad's mishandling of the Iranian economy. In 2016, Khamenei advised Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, his former ally with whom his relationship was strained after Ahmadinejad accused his son Mojtaba Khamenei of embezzling from the state treasury, to not run for president again. Khamenei rejected talks for referendums on the state's future, questioning people's judgment and causing public outrage. In 2024 he claimed that while speaking to his military he had been saying what words God put in his tongue. Khamenei has reportedly issued a fatwa saying the production, stockpiling, and use of nuclear weapons was forbidden under Islam. The fatwa was cited in an official statement by the Iranian government at an August 2005 meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Vienna. It's been widely discussed by international officials and specifically recognized by the US administration. The Iranian official website for information regarding its nuclear program has provided numerous instances of public statements by Khamenei wherein he voices his opposition to the pursuit and development of nuclear weapons in moral, religious and Islamic juridical terms. Khamenei's official website specifically cites a 2010 version of these statements in the fatwa section of the website in Farsi as a fatwa on "Prohibition of Weapons of Mass Destruction". Doubts have been cast by experts on the existence of the fatwa as it can be changed or modified as and when deemed necessary, as well as doubts on its authenticity, its impact, and its apparently religious nature. Gareth Porter believes that the fatwa is "sincere" and Gholam-Hossein Elham commented that it will not change. In 2000, Ali Khamenei sent a letter to the Iranian parliament forbidding the legislature from debating a revision of the Iranian press law to allow more press freedom. He wrote: "The present press law has prevented this big plague. The draft bill is not legitimate and in the interests of the system and the revolution." In 1996, he issued a fatwa stating, "The promotion of music [both traditional and Western] in schools is contrary to the goals and teachings of Islam, regardless of age and level of study." (Many music schools were closed and public (but not private) music instruction to children under 16 was banned thereafter.) Khamenei stated, In 1999, Khamenei issued a fatwa stating that it was permitted to use a third party (donor sperm, ova or surrogacy) in fertility treatments. This was different in "both style and substance" to the fatwa on Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) by Gad El-Hak Ali Gad El-Hak of Egypt's Al-Azhar University in the late 1980s which permitted ART (IVF and similar technologies) as long there is no third-party donation (of sperm, eggs, embryos, or uteruses). In 2002, he ruled that human stem cell research was permissible under Islam, with the condition that it be used to create only parts instead of a whole human. In 2002, after protests erupted in the capital, Khamenei intervened against the death sentence given to Hashem Aghajari for arguing that Muslims should re-interpret Islam rather than blindly follow leaders. Khamenei ordered a review of the sentence against Aghajari, which was later commuted to a prison sentence. Sayyid Ali Khamenei annually issues message(s) on the occasion of Hajj for all Muslims (pilgrims) in Hajj. He commenced to issue such messages since the start of his responsibility as the supreme leader of Iran (1989). He continually invites all Muslims to Tawhid, and afterward expresses the significance of Hajj in spiritual/social life. He also asks the Muslims to be aware of what he considers "the conspiracy of the enemies" by having a right comprehension and advises them to "not be deceived by them". So far, Iran's supreme leader has issued 32 messages (since 1989). A part of his last message (6 August 2019) is as follows: The ritual of Bara'ah which means refusing every instance of mercilessness, cruelty, wrongdoing and corruption of the tyrants of any time, and rising against intimidation and extortion by the arrogant throughout history, is one of the great blessings of Hajj, and an opportunity for oppressed Muslim nations. Khamenei was one of the Ulama signatories of the Amman Message, which gives a broad foundation for defining Muslim orthodoxy. as well as elaborating on the factors needed to create Islamic unity, he argues: "neither the Shia Muslims allied with the British MI6 are Shias, nor the Sunni mercenaries of the American CIA are Sunnis, as they are both anti-Islamic." In 2010, Khamenei issued a fatwa that bans any insult to the Sahabah (companions of Muhammad) as well as Muhammad's wives. The fatwa was issued to reconcile legal, social, and political disagreements between Sunni and Shia. In 2017, he issued a fatwa against women riding bicycles in public. Some regard Khamenei as the figurehead of the country's conservative establishment. Khamenei supported Mesbah Yazdi, describing him as one of Iran's most credible ideologues before the 2005 election, but has reportedly "recently been concerned about Mesbah's political ambitions." In 2007, Khamenei requested that government officials speed up Iran's move towards economic privatization. Its last move towards such a goal was in 2004 when Article 44 of the constitution was overturned. Article 44 had decreed that Iran's core infrastructure should remain state-run. Khamenei also suggested that ownership rights should be protected in courts set up by the Justice Ministry; the hope was that this new protection would give a measure of security to and encourage private investment. In 2007, Iranian police under the direction of Khamenei launched a "Public Security Plan", arresting dozens of "thugs" to increase public security. Additionally, Khamenei has stated that he believes in the importance of nuclear technology for civilian purposes because "oil and gas reserves cannot last forever." On 30 April 2008, Ali Khamenei backed President Ahmadinejad's economic policy and said the West was struggling with more economic difficulties than Iran, with a "crisis" spreading from the United States to Europe, and inflation was a widespread problem. The Iranian leader said that the ongoing economic crisis which has debilitated the world has been unprecedented in the past 60 years. "This crisis has forced the UN to declare state of emergency for food shortages around the globe but foreign radios have focused on Iran to imply that the current price hikes and inflation in the country are the results of carelessness on the part of Iranian officials which of course is not true", he said. Khamenei emphasized that no one has the right to blame the Iranian government for Iran's economic problems. He also advised people and the government to be content and avoid waste in order to solve economic problems. "I advise you to keep in your mind that this great nation is never afraid of economic sanctions", he added. As Supreme Leader, Khamenei has influence over elections in Iran since the Constitution of Iran allows him to appoint half of the members of the Guardian Council and the Chief Justice of Iran. The Constitution also establishes that the Council approves or disqualifies candidates for office. At the same time, the Chief Justice presents the other half of the members of the council to be selected by Parliament. These constitutional provisions give Khamenei direct and indirect influence over the council; an entity that, in turn, has direct influence over who can run for government. This influence was evident in the 2004 parliamentary elections, in which the Guardian Council disqualified thousands of candidates from running—including 80 incumbents, many of the reformist members of Parliament, and all the candidates of the Islamic Iran Participation Front party. Subsequently, the Conservatives won about 70 percent of parliamentary seats. The election became a key turning point in the country's political evolution as it marked the end of the campaign for political and social reform initiated by former President Mohammad Khatami. During the 2005 presidential election, Khamenei's comments about the importance of fighting corruption, being faithful to the ideals of the Islamic revolution, as well as on the superior intelligence and dynamism of those who studied engineering were interpreted by some as a subtle endorsement of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad (who had a PhD in traffic engineering). After the election, and until recently, Khamenei was outspoken in his support for Ahmadinejad, and "defended him publicly in ways which he never" had reformist president Khatami. Khamenei would later certify the results of the 2009 Iranian presidential election. Khamenei took a firm stand against the 2009–10 Iranian election protests, and stated that he would neither reconsider vote results nor bow to public pressure over the disputed reelection of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. "By Allah's favor, the presidential election was accurately held, and the current matters should be pursued legally." In a public appearance on 19 June, he expressed his support for the declared winner Ahmadinejad. He accused foreign powers—including Britain, Israel and the United States—of helping foment protest against the election results. In particular, he singled out Britain, perceiving the country as the "most evil" of its enemies. He said that the Iranian people would respond with an "iron fist" if Western powers meddle in Iran's internal affairs. In response to reformist gains in the 2015–2016 election cycle, Khamenei lamented the loss of conservative clerics from the Assembly of Experts and suggested changes to the law by which the Guardian Council vets candidates may be needed because it is currently too difficult for the Guardian Council to vet so large a number of candidates. Ali Khamenei has been supportive of scientific progress in Iran. He was among the first Islamic clerics to allow stem cell research and therapeutic cloning. In 2004, Khamenei said that the country's progress is dependent on investment in the field of science and technology. He also said that attaching a high status to scholars and scientists in society would help talents to flourish and science and technology to become domesticated, thus ensuring the country's progress and development. Khamenei has "direct responsibility" for foreign policy, which "cannot be conducted without his direct involvement and approval". He has a foreign policy team independent of the president's "which includes two former foreign ministers" and "can at any time of his choosing inject himself into the process and 'correct' a flawed policy or decision." His foreign policy is said to steer a course that avoids either confrontation or accommodation with the West. Khamenei condemned the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen and compared Saudi Arabia to Israel. Khamenei condemned the persecution of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar and called Myanmar's de facto leader and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung Sang Suu Kyi a "brutal woman". U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo criticized Khamenei for his refusal to condemn the Xinjiang re-education camps and human rights abuses against the Uyghur Muslim minority in China. He condemned UAE as useless on several occasions. The United States and Iran have had no formal diplomatic relations since the Iran hostage crisis of 1980 when US embassy was taken over and US diplomats were taken prisoner. According to study by Karim Sadjadpour, speeches by Khamenei regularly mention the principle of resolute opposition to the United States; and according to Karim Sadjadpour he has "resisted Rafsanjani's attempts to find a modus vivendi with the United States", and once told reformist president Mohammad Khatami that "we need the United States as an enemy". On 4 June 2006, Khamenei said that Iran would disrupt energy shipments from the Persian Gulf region (about 20% of the world's daily supply of oil passes from the Persian Gulf through the Strait of Hormuz very close to Iran's coast) should the country come under attack from the US, insisting that Tehran will not give up its right to produce nuclear fuel. On 14 September 2007, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei (on the 1st Friday prayer of Ramadan) predicted that George W. Bush and American officials would one day be tried in an international criminal court to be held "accountable" for the U.S. led invasion of Iraq. He asserts that the United States is the main cause of insecurity in Iraq. On 21 March 2009, a day after US President Barack Obama advocated a "new beginning" in diplomatic relations between the two countries, Khamenei said a change of US "words" was not enough and added: "We will watch and we will judge (the new US administration) ... You change, our behavior will change." He rejected US foreign policy since the Islamic revolution, insisted the United States is "hated in the world" and should end its interference in other countries. Khamenei criticized the NATO-led military intervention in Libya. On 21 March 2011, Khamenei accused the West of " coming after Libyan oil". He also stressed that "Iran utterly condemns the behavior of the Libyan government against its people, the killings and pressure on people, and the bombing of its cities... but it (also) condemns the military action in Libya". Khamenei stated that he support sending mediators rather than bombing the country. In June 2011, Khamenei accused the United States government of terrorism and rejected the American definition of terrorism; he was quoted as saying, "The U.S. and the European governments that follow it describe Palestinian combatant groups who fight for the liberation of their land as terrorists." In June 2012, Khamenei warned Western governments that the mounting sanctions on the country would only deepen the Iranians' hatred of the West. In October 2014, Khamenei said the U.S. and the U.K. created ISIS as a tool to fight Iran and "create insecurity" in the region. On 19 July 2015, while speaking at a mosque in Tehran, Khamenei said to his supporters that the policies of the United States in the region were "180 degrees" opposed to Iran's political and religious movement. The speech was punctuated by chants of "Death to America" and "Death to Israel". Khamenei said in regards to the 2015 nuclear deal that "Even after this deal, our policy towards the arrogant U.S. will not change." U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said that if the comments reflected policy, it was "very disturbing", and "very troubling". In March 2020, Khamenei warned against a United States offer of aid to fight COVID-19 because it could be a way to hurt Iran by further spreading the disease. He also suggested the US had developed a special variety of the virus "based on Iranian genetic information they have gathered", although he provided no evidence for the theory. Khamenei explained, "There are enemies who are demons, and there are enemies who are humans, and they help one another." In March 2022, Khamenei accused the U.S. of creating the conflict surrounding the Russo-Ukrainian War. In February 2024, it was announced that Meta Platforms has removed Khamenei's Facebook and Instagram accounts, citing repeated violations of its Dangerous Organizations & Individuals policy. After the September 11 attacks, Khamenei condemned the act and the attackers and called for a condemnation of terrorist activities all over the world, but warned strongly against a military intervention in Afghanistan. He is quoted as saying, "Mass killings of human beings are catastrophic acts which are condemned wherever they may happen and whoever the perpetrators and the victims may be." Khamenei is an opponent of the State of Israel and Zionism, and has been criticized for making threats against Israel and for anti-Semitic rhetoric. On 15 December 2000, Khamenei called Israel a "cancerous tumor of a state" that "should be removed from the region" and in 2013 called Israel a "rabid dog", as well as in 2014 during the Gaza war, for what he called attacking innocent people. In 2014, a tweet from an account attributed to Khamenei, claimed that there was no cure for Israel but its destruction. In a September 2008 sermon for Friday prayers in Tehran, Khamenei stated that "it is incorrect, irrational, pointless and nonsense to say that we are friends of Israeli people", because he believed that the occupation is done by means of them. "[U]surpation of houses, lands, and business [of Palestinian people] are carried out using these people. They are the background actors of Zionist elements," said Khamenei in his speech. "[W]e have no problem with Jews and Christians ... we have problem with the usurpers of Palestine land," he added. Also, he said that he had raised the issue "to spell an end to any debates". In 2013, Khamenei accused France of "kneeling" before Israel, while saying that Israel was led by people unworthy of the "title human". Nevertheless, according to anti-regime change activist Abbas Edalat, in 2005, Khamenei responded to a remark by then-President Ahmadinejad which had been widely translated as saying that the "regime occupying Jerusalem should be wiped off the map" by saying that "the Islamic Republic has never threatened and will never threaten any country." In a September 2009 sermon, Khamenei was quoted as saying that "the Zionist cancer is gnawing into the lives of Islamic nations." In another report of the same speech, he added that "we will support and help any nations, any groups fighting against the Zionist regime across the world, and we are not afraid of declaring this." Khamenei instead proposed that "Palestinian refugees should return and Muslims, Christians and Jews could choose a government for themselves, excluding immigrant Jews," adding, "No one will allow a bunch of thugs, lechers and outcasts from London, America and Moscow to rule over the Palestinians." On 10 September 2015, in a speech about Israel after agreement on the nuclear program of Iran, Khamenei made a remark "Israel will not exist in 25 years". For the first time, the remark was published in Khamenei's official website and his Twitter. This statement was reported as voted as the best and most important among Khamenei's statements in 2015 by an online poll conducted by his official website. On 21 February, at the 6th International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Intifada, Khamenei regarded the withdrawal of Israel from south Lebanon in 2000. From Gaza in 2005 as two major achievements so far. Also, he advised the Islamic countries to refrain from "useless" crises and differences and instead concentrate on the issue of Palestine which he regarded as the core issue of Islam. "Otherwise, the potentials and capabilities of the nations will go to waste in the face of vain struggles, which would provide opportunities for the Zionist regime to become even stronger," he added.[unreliable source?] Khamenei condemned the peace agreement between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and charged UAE with betraying the Islamic world, the Arab countries and Palestine. He stated that the normalization will be only temporary, but the UAE will forever have to bear the shame regarding the deal. In October 2023, Khamenei praised the Hamas attack on Israel, but denied Iran's involvement. He condemned Israel's bombing of the Gaza Strip in retaliation for the Hamas attack and accused Israel of committing genocide against the Palestinian people in Gaza. On 21 March 2014, during a morning speech marking the Persian New Year, Nowruz, Khamenei called into question the Holocaust. He said that "the Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened, it's uncertain how it has happened". Additionally he commented that "No one in European countries dares to speak about [the] Holocaust" (because of the potential legal consequences in some countries), and said that in the West, "speaking about [the] Holocaust and expressing doubts about it is considered to be a great sin." The Anti-Defamation League accused Khamenei in March 2014 of making statements of explicit Holocaust denial. On Holocaust Memorial Day, 27 January 2016, Khamenei posted a Holocaust-denying video on his official website. In the video (drawing on the March 2014 speech), lasting about three minutes, the video features images of Holocaust deniers Roger Garaudy, Robert Faurisson, and David Irving. In a series of tweets in mid-December 2019, he praised Garaudy: "The fight he engaged in against the Zionists is a #DivineDuty for all those who respect the #Truth." France's conviction of Garaudy, he said, was against the concept of freedom of speech. At least one source (Yair Rosenberg), argues that statements by Khamenei purporting to attack "Zionism", are following an anti-Semitic tradition of avoiding censorship by using "Zionism" as a dog whistle for "Jews". For example, an 8 June 2022 statement tweeted by Khamenei: "The Zionists have always been a plague, even before establishing the fraudulent Zionist regime. Even then, Zionist capitalists were a plague for the whole world." makes more sense (though is just as slanderous), if "Zionists" is replaced by "Jews". (The Zionist movement not have been founded until the late 19th century, Zionists are not likely to "have always been a plague".) Other accusations of Anti-Semitism have come from Victoria Coates and Ellie Cohanim, who notes his holocaust denial and find his "nine-point plan" to "wipe" Israel "off the face of the earth" uncomfortably reminiscent of Hitler's Final Solution; and the Jerusalem Post, who quote Khamenei's attack on the 2020 Israel–United Arab Emirates normalization agreement: The nation of Palestine is under various, severe pressures. Then, the UAE acts in agreement with the Israelis & filthy Zionist agents of the U.S. -- such as the Jewish member of Trump's family -- with utmost cruelty against the interests of the World of Islam." and argue "filthy Zionist agents", "the Jewish member of Trump's family" (i.e. Jared Kushner), and "cruel", are all words channeling "antisemitic tropes and dog whistles". Critics have accused Khamenei of overseeing the assassination of as many as 160 exiled defectors worldwide, the heavy-handed repression of protesters, the killings of tens of thousands of members of the M.E.K. (People's Mujahedin of Iran) paramilitary group, and of making dissident writers and intellectuals in Iran "a special target" of repression, among other infractions of human rights. However, Khamenei himself has insisted human rights are a fundamental principle underlying Islamic teachings that precedes Western concern for human rights by many centuries. He has attacked Western powers who have criticized the rights record of the Islamic Republic for hypocrisy, saying that these countries economically oppress people in Third World countries and support despots and dictators. In response to Western complaints of human rights abuses in Iran he has stated that the American administration has committed many crimes and is therefore not fit to judge the Islamic Republic. There have been several major protests during Khamenei's reign, including the 1994 Qazvin Protests—where, according to Al-Arabiya, around 40 people were killed and over 400 were injured— the 1999 Iranian student protests, the 2009 Iranian presidential election protests, when protesters chanted "death to the dictator", and ripped down pictures of Khamenei, as well as the 2011–12 Iranian protests and 2017–18 Iranian protests, among others. In 2016, Khamenei, who outlined the elections guidelines "in line with Article 110 of Iran's Constitution", asked to maximize the amount of transparency in elections in Iran, using modern technologies. During the Mahshahr massacre, protests expanded against "government corruption, failing institutions, lack of freedoms and the repressive rule of Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei." During the 2018–2019 Iranian general strikes and protests, Khameini demanded punishment for those "who disrupt economic security". According to Reuters, the remarks were "clearly intended to send a message to Iranians who may plan more demonstrations". During the 2019–2020 Iranian protests, Khamenei met with various officials and cabinet members, saying "he would hold the assembled officials responsible for the consequences of the protests if they didn't immediately stop them." According to an official, Khamenei "made clear the demonstrations required a forceful response" and that "rioters should be crushed." During the Ukraine International Airlines Flight 752 protests, thousands of protesters demanded Ayatollah Ali Khamenei's resignation. The Baháʼí Faith is the largest religious minority in Iran, with around 300,000 members (8,000,000 members worldwide) and is officially considered a dangerous cult by the Iranian government. It is banned in Iran and several other countries. Khamenei has approved new legislation against Baháʼís in Iran and lessen their influence abroad. According to a letter from the Chairman of the Command Headquarters of the Armed Forces in Iran addressed to the Ministry of Information, the Revolutionary Guard, and the Police Force, Khamenei has also ordered the Command Headquarters to identify people who adhere to the Baháʼí Faith and to monitor their activities and gather any and all information about the members of the Baháʼí Faith. In 2000, he was listed by the Committee to Protect Journalists as "one of the top ten enemies of the press and freedom of expression", and was named to the Time 100 in 2007. Opposition journalists Ahmad Zeidabadi, Mohsen Sazegara, Mohammad Nourizad and Akbar Ganji were arrested and investigated for spreading critical articles containing unproven charges against Khamenei's policies as the leader and some organizations. According to Iran's Press Law "spreading rumors and lies and distorts the words of others" is not allowed. Also, according to the law, "spreading libel against officials, institutions, organizations and individuals in the country or insulting legal or real persons who are lawfully respected, even by means of pictures or caricatures" is not allowed. In 2000, Ali Khamenei sent a letter to the Iranian parliament forbidding the legislature from debating a revision of the Iranian press law to allow more freedom. (The law had been used "to close more than 20 independent newspapers" from 1997 to 2000.) He wrote: "The present press law has prevented this big plague. The draft bill is not legitimate and in the interests of the system and the revolution." His was called a use of "extra-legislative power" by reformists and opposition groups. but Speaker of Parliament Mehdi Karroubi reminded "deputies that the constitution contained 'elements of the absolute rule of the supreme clerical leader'". Kayhan and Jomhuri-ye Eslami are two newspapers published under the management of Khamenei. Among his controversial actions were his rejection of a bill presented by the Iranian parliament in 2000 that aimed to reform the country's press law, and the disqualification of thousands of parliamentary candidates for the 2004 Iranian legislative election by the Guardian Council he appointed. In 2012, 2013, and 2014, Forbes selected Khamenei as the 21st, 23rd, and 19th most powerful person in the world, respectively, in the list of The World's Most Powerful People. Several journalists, bloggers, and other individuals were put on trial in Iran for insulting the Supreme Leader, often in conjunction with blasphemy charges. In 1996, Abbas Maroufi was sentenced to 35 lashes and six months imprisonment for spreading lies and insulting Khamenei. Maroufi was also banned from working as a journalist and his literary monthly Gardoon was closed. Maroufi had compared Khamenei to former Shah of Iran Mohammed Reza Pahlavi. In 2005, an Iranian was jailed for two years for insulting Khamenei and Imam Khomeini while being cleared of insulting the prophet. In 2009, Iranian blogger Omid Reza Mir Sayafi, who was arrested for insulting Khamenei in an internet post, died while in custody in Evin Prison. In 2010, opposition activist Ahmad Gabel was sentenced to 20 months in jail for insulting Khamenei, as well as 3 additional years for possessing a satellite receiver, a 3-year exile and a fine. In 2014, eight men, including a Briton, were sentenced to 19 to 20 years for insulting Khamenei and other charges relating to Facebook comments. In 2017, Sina Dehghan was sentenced to death for insulting the prophet, with an additional 16-month sentence for insulting Khamenei in a messaging application. In July 2007, Khamenei criticized Iranian women's rights activists and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW): "In our country ... some activist women, and some men, have been trying to play with Islamic rules to match international conventions related to women", Khamenei said. "This is wrong." Khamenei made these comments two days after Iranian women's rights activist Delaram Ali was sentenced to 34 months of jail and ten lashes by Iran's judiciary. Khamenei advocates the Islamic practice of Hijab. He believes that hijab is aimed at honoring women. To the Western objection to the compulsory hijab in Iran, he responds by pointing out the compulsory unveiling in certain Western countries and obstacles created for veiled Muslim women who want to enter universities. He further argues that women in the West have lost their honor by pointing out a perceived high rate of sexual violence in the West as well as the widespread exploitation of female sexual appeal for commercial purposes. Ali Khamenei believes in gender segregation. Khamenei also believes that gender equality is a Zionist plot with the purpose to "corrupt the role of women in society". On LGBT issues, Khamenei has said: "Today, homosexuality is a major problem in the Western world. They [western nations], however ignore it. But the reality is that homosexuality has become a serious challenge, pain and unsolvable problem for the intellectuals in the west." Khamenei is married to Mansoureh Khojasteh Bagherzadeh, with whom he has six children; four sons (Mostafa, Mojtaba, Masoud, and Meysam) and two daughters (Boshra and Hoda). One of his sons, Mojtaba, married a daughter of Gholam-Ali Haddad-Adel. His eldest son, Mostafa, is married to a daughter of Azizollah Khoshvaght. Another son, Masoud, is married to the daughter of Mohsen Kharazi. He has three brothers, including Mohammad Khamenei and Hadi Khamenei. One of his four sisters, Badri Hosseini Khamenei (wife of dissident Ali Tehrani), fled into exile in the 1980s. As Supreme Leader, Khamenei moved to a house in Central Tehran on Palestine Street. A compound grew around it that now contains around fifty buildings. Around 500 people are employed at this "Beit Rahbari compound" according to The Telegraph, "many recruited from the military and security services". According to Mehdi Khalaji, an Iran expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, Khamenei has a decent life "without it being luxurious". Robert Tait of The Daily Telegraph commented that Khamenei is "renowned for a spartan lifestyle." Dexter Filkins describes Khamenei as presenting himself "as an ascetic, dressing and eating simply". In an interview with a women's magazine, his wife declared that "we do not have decorations, in the usual sense. Years ago, we freed ourselves from these things." On the other hand, Mother Nature Network claims Khamenei has been seen riding around in a BMW car and published a picture of him exiting one. In a 2011 report in The Daily Telegraph, defectors from Iran claimed Khamenei has a considerable appetite of caviar and trout, a stable of 100 horses, collects items such as pipes and (reputedly) 170 antique walking sticks, and has a private court stretching over six palaces. Intelligence sources have also said his family has extensive international business interests. Khamenei's health has been called into question. In January 2007, rumors spread of his illness or death after he had not been seen in public for some weeks and had not appeared as he traditionally does at celebrations for Eid al-Adha. Khamenei issued a statement declaring that "enemies of the Islamic system fabricated various rumors about death and health to demoralize the Iranian nation", but according to the author Hooman Majd, he appeared to be "visibly weak" in photos released with the statement. On 9 September 2014, Khamenei underwent prostate surgery in what his doctors described in state news media as a "routine operation". According to a report by Le Figaro, Western intelligence sources said Khamenei has prostate cancer. In September 2022, it was reported that Khamenei had undergone surgery for bowel obstruction and had to cancel a number of meetings. On 24 June 2019, the United States imposed sanctions on Khamenei with the signing of Executive Order 13876. In late 1996, following a fatwa by Khamenei stating that music education corrupts the minds of young children and is against Islam, many music schools were closed and music instruction to children under the age of 16 was banned by public establishments (although private instruction continued). Khamenei has stated that "poetry must be the vanguard of the caravan of the [Islamic] revolution... [T]hrough the arts and literature, the revolution can be exported more easily and honestly." It has been suggested (by Dexter Filkins) that this might explain his interest in banning books, prohibiting newspapers and imprisoning artists. He has expressed interest in studying novels and stories since childhood and studied various world's credible novels. He was "fascinated by Jean-Paul Sartre and Bertrand Russell" in his youth. He praised the works of Mikhail Sholokhov, Alexei Tolstoy, Honoré de Balzac, and Michel Zévaco. However, Victor Hugo's Les Misérables "is the best novel that has been written in history." He explained: I've read The Divine Comedy. I have read Amir Arsalan. I have also read A Thousand and One Nights ... [But] Les Misérables is a miracle in the novel writing world... I have repeatedly said, go read Les Misérables once. This Les Misérables is a book of sociology, a book of history, a book of criticism, divine book, a book of love and feeling. He suggested reading The Grapes of Wrath to "an audience of writers and artists" and Uncle Tom's Cabin to the high-level state managers as he thought it shed light on the history of the United States. Isn't this the government that massacred the original native inhabitants of the land of America? That wiped out the American Indians? ... Today, one of the most tragic works of art is Uncle Tom's Cabin ... This book still lives after almost 200 years, Khamenei is fluent in Arabic in addition to his native languages, Persian and Azerbaijani. He has translated several books into Persian from Arabic, including the works of the Egyptian Islamic theoretician Sayyid Qutb. When it comes to poetry, in Mashhad he used to participate in literary associations along with known poets and used to critique poems. Writing some poems himself, he chose the pseudonym 'Amin' for himself. In the field of music, he is known to have a good singing voice and plays the tar, a traditional Iranian stringed instrument. In February 2011, Ali Khamenei supported the Egyptian uprising against their government, describing it as Islamic awakening instead of Arab Spring. Trying to communicate with Arab people, he addressed Egypt's protesters in Arabic. (Even though his native language is Persian.) He introduced himself as "your brother in religion", while praising the "explosion of sacred anger". Later, in "Islamic Awakening conferences" which were held in Tehran, Khamenei praised the Muslim youths of Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Yemen and Bahrain for what he described as Islamic awakening. He also paralleled these events with Islamic revolution in Iran during his Nowruz oration in 2011. However, major protests against the Iranian regime also broke out throughout Iran in 2011, and they became known as the 2011–12 Iranian protests. Four main books of Rijal An Outline of Islamic Thought in the Quran Honest leader Discourse on Patience (translation by Sayyid Hussein Alamdar available online) Iqbal: Manifestation of the Islamic Spirit, Two Contemporary Muslim Views ISBN 1-871031-20-6 Iqbal, the Poet-Philosopher of Islamic Resurgence is one of the "Two Contemporary Muslim Views", the other one is Ali Shariati's. Replies to Inquiries about the Practical Laws of Islam ISBN 964-472-000-8 (PDF version) Lessons from the Nahjul-Balaghah Human Rights in Islam The Charter of Freedom Essence of Tawhid: Denial of Servitude but to God Translations from Arabic: Future in the realm of Islam Collections: A 250 Years Old Person Palestine Iran portal Shia Islam portal Biography portal Khamenei family Motto of years in Islamic Republic of Iran Islamic Government (book by Khomeini) Muhammad Kazim Khurasani Mirza Husayn Tehrani Abdallah Mazandarani Mirza Ali Aqa Tabrizi Mirza Sayyed Mohammad Tabatabai Seyyed Abdollah Behbahani Fazlullah Nouri Hibatullah Akhundzada "letter to Hashemi Rafsanjani and resignation from presidency" (in Persian). Khamenei.ir. 16 August 1989. Retrieved 17 July 2018. "1982 Assembly of Experts Election", The Iran Social Science Data Portal, Princeton University, archived from the original on 19 October 2015, retrieved 10 August 2015 "چه کسی در نخستین انتخابات خبرگان اول شد؟ +جدول". 7 January 2014. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. "Parliament members" (in Persian). Iranian Majlis. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 28 October 2014. "A photo of Identity document of Ayatollah Khamenei" (in Persian). Khamenei.ir. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 14 January 2018. "روایتی از تاریخ دقیق تولد رهبر انقلاب از زبان معظم‌له+عکس". مشرق نیوز. 16 April 2016. "تصویری از شناسنامه حضرت آیت‌الله خامنه‌ای". "جامعه روحانيت مبارز جوان مي‌شود" [Combatant Clergy Association gets younger] (in Persian). Fararu. 8 July 2012. 118101. Archived from the original on 2 September 2016. Retrieved 25 June 2016. Kazemzadeh, Masoud (n.d.). "Ayatollah Khamenei's Foreign Policy Orientation". Comparative Strategy. 32 (5): 443–458. doi:10.1080/01495933.2013.840208. eISSN 1521-0448. ISSN 0149-5933. S2CID 153558136. Velayati, Ali Akbar. "Ayatollah Ali Khamenei". The Great Islamic Encyclopedia (in Persian). Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. Raee, Sajjad (Winter 2008). Ardestani, Hussein (ed.). نقش آیت‌الله خامنه‌ای در دفاع مقدس: سال اول جنگ [Ayatollah Khamanei's Role in the Sacred Defense: During the First Year] (PDF). Negin-e Iran: Quarterly for Studies of Iran–Iraq War (in Persian). 7 (26): 9–24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 April 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2018. Detailed biography of Ayatollah Khamenei, Leader of Islamic Revolution, Khamenei.ir, 23 September 2013, archived from the original on 10 April 2016, retrieved 17 March 2016 Entekhab.ir, پایگاه خبری تحلیلی انتخاب. "توضیحات مجلس خبرگان درباره جلسه انتخاب آیت‌الله خامنه‌ای به عنوان رهبر در سال 1368/ آیت‌الله گلپایگانی فقط 14 رأی داشت". پایگاه خبری تحلیلی انتخاب – Entekhab.ir. "Ali Khamenei". CGIE (fa). "taking look at the biography of Ali Khamenei". khamenei (fa). 21 March 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "Iran". State. 23 July 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. The government monitored meetings, movements, and communications of its citizens and often charged persons with crimes against national security and insulting the regime based on letters, e-mails, and other public and private communications. "Profile: Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei". BBC News. 17 June 2009. Archived from the original on 26 March 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2009. "The Supreme Leader – The Iran Primer". 2 October 2010. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. "Khamenei.ir". Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Khamenei has kept a low profile[permanent dead link] Agence France Presse, 20 June 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2009.[dead link] Maziar Bahari (6 April 2007). "How Khamenei Keeps Control". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 25 October 2010. Retrieved 29 September 2010. "Khamenei Will Be Iran's Last Supreme Leader". Newsweek. 17 November 2009. Archived from the original on 16 September 2017. referring to the enormous power Khamenei has given Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, which, under Khamenei's direct control, has brutally repressed demonstrators, human rights activists, and opposition journalists. Jamsheed K. Choksy. "Tehran Politics: Are the Mullahs Losing Their Grip?". World Affairs Journal. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017. Khamenei has strengthened alliances with militant commanders, especially within the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC), in the hope that all opposition to his authority will continue to be suppressed—as it was during the protests of 2009.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "انتصاب آیت‌الله خامنه‌ای به عنوان رئیس خدمه‌ی آستان قدس رضوی". farsi.khamenei.ir. khamenei.ir. 14 April 1979. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Profile: Iran's 'unremarkable' supreme leader Khamenei". BBC News. 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 18 February 2012. Ganji, Akbar, "The Latter-Day Sultan: Power and Politics in Iran", Foreign Affairs, November December 2008 "Iran's Khamenei hits out at Rafsanjani in rare public rebuke". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. "Khamenei says Iran must go green – Al-Monitor: the Pulse of the Middle East". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2016. Louis Charbonneau and Parisa Hafezi (16 May 2014). "Exclusive: Iran pursues ballistic missile work, complicating nuclear talks". Reuters. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. "IranWire – Asking for a Miracle: Khamenei's Economic Plan". Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. "Khamenei outlines 14-point plan to increase population". 22 May 2014. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Iran: Executive, legislative branch officials endorse privatization plan". Archived from the original on 5 January 2017. "Rafsanjani breaks taboo over selection of Iran's next supreme leader". The Guardian. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 18 December 2016. "Iran reverses ban on reformist candidates". The Guardian. 24 May 2005. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. "The Basij Mostazafan – A culture of martyrdom and death". Al Arabiya. 6 December 2016. Archived from the original on 7 December 2016. "Khamenei was the victim of an attempted assassination". LinkDay. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. "Police Are Said to Have Killed 10 in Iran Protests". The New York Times. 28 December 2009. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. "Several killed, 300 arrested in Tehran protests". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 December 2009. "IRAN 2015 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT" (PDF). United States State Department. During the year the government arrested students, journalists, lawyers, political activists, women's activists, artists, and members of religious minorities; charged many with crimes such as "propaganda against the system" and "insulting the supreme leader;" and treated such cases as national security trials (see sections 1.a. through 1.e.; section 6, Women; and section 7.a.). "IRAN 2016 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT" (PDF). United States State Department. "The Office of the Leader, Seyyed Ali Khamenei". Leader. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani. پیام تسلیت هاشمی به آیت‌الله خامنه‌ای/ اعلام برنامه وزرای کشاورزی و نیرو به هاشمی (in Persian). Archived from the original on 20 June 2013. Eternal Iran, in 1721. Patrick Clawson, 2005, ISBN 1-4039-6276-6, p.5. Robin Wright, The Last Great Revolution: Turmoil and Transformation in Iran, Alfred A. Knopf, 2000 "بیوگرافی خواهر متوفی رهبر انقلاب". baharnews.ir (in Persian). Bahar News. 23 March 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2020. Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East – Facts on File, Incorporated, 2009, p.79 "Iran and the Caucasus: The Triumph of Pragmatism over Ideology – Centre for World Dialogue". Worlddialogue.org. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014. "Azeris unhappy at being the butt of national jokes". UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. IRIN. 25 May 2006. Archived from the original on 14 August 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Iran at sea over Azerbaijan". Asia Times. 28 September 2004. Archived from the original on 23 April 2005. Retrieved 19 June 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Another ethnic Azeri is Rahim Safavi, the overall commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) and the most important military-security official in the country. Majd, Hooman (19 February 2009). "Change Comes to Iran". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 16 January 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2009. Ali Khamenei, ..., while ethnically Turkic is also half Yazdi, but he seems not to have inherited the timidity gene from his mother. Anaj News. 6 مرداد، سالروزسفر تاریخی رهبر معظم انقلاب به رشت (in Persian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2015. "(broken)". Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. "ShiaOnline.ir – شیعه آنلاین – نگاهی اجمالی به شجره نامه آیت الله خامنه ای". shia-online.ir. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. "Historic Personalities of Iran: Seyed Ali Khamenei". Iran Chamber. Archived from the original on 11 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Rahnema, Ali (2000). Ali Rahnemaré, An Islamic Utopian: A Political Biography of Ali Shariati, I.B. Tauris Publishers, London & New York, 1998, P.231. ISBN 1-86064-552-6. I. B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-86064-552-5. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Sahimi, Muhammad (8 May 2016). "Iran's Incredible Shrinking Ayatollah". National Interest. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. Nikola B. Schahgaldian, Gina Barkhordarian (March 1987), The Iranian Military Under the Islamic Republic (PDF), RAND, ISBN 978-0-8330-0777-3, archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2017, retrieved 15 January 2017 Nasr, Vali (9 December 2007). "Meet 'The Decider' of Tehran. It's Not the Hothead You Expect". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Retrieved 9 December 2007.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Maloney, Suzanne (2015). Iran's Political Economy since the Revolution. Cambridge University Press. p. 152. ISBN 978-0-521-73814-9. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Kahlili, Reza (2013). A Time to Betray: A Gripping True Spy Story of Betrayal, Fear, and Courage. Threshold Editions; Reprint edition. p. 155. ISBN 978-1-4391-8968-9. Qaffari, Mostafa. "Report about assassination attempt on adventure of 27 June 1981". Khamenei.ir. Archived from the original on 8 December 2016. Staff. "Terror of Tehran's popular Friday prayer by Munafiqs". Political Studies and Research Institute. Archived from the original on 20 April 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2017. Murphy, John (2007). Ali Khamenei. Chelsea House Publications. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-7910-9517-1. "Castro to Ayatollah Khamenei: "Why did you shake with your left hand instead of right?"". Khabaronline. Archived from the original on 16 April 2017. Retrieved 15 April 2017. Sadjadpour, Karim (2009). Reading Khamenei: The World View of Iran's Most Powerful Leader (PDF). Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2011. "History of Iran: Iran after the victory of 1979's Revolution". Iran Chamber. Archived from the original on 9 April 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Yossi Melman (11 October 2007). "Israel fails to prevent Germany freeing Iranian". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Roya Hakakian (4 October 2007). "The End of the Dispensable Iranian". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2009. "German court implicates Iran leaders in '92 killings". CNN. 10 April 1997. Archived from the original on 26 November 2013. Retrieved 26 January 2013. "Germany Deports Iranian jailed for 1992 murders". Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. "Iran: Terrorist Freed in Germany Is Welcomed By Tehran". Eurasia Net. 14 December 2007. Archived from the original on 4 April 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2013. "Iranian lawmakers warn Ahmadinejad to accept intelligence chief as political feud deepens". Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. "Middle East – Iranian vice-president 'sacked'". 25 July 2009. Archived from the original on 25 July 2009. "Iran's Rouhani warned against opposing supreme leader – World Bulletin". Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016. Mattair, Thomas R. (2015). Global Security Watch--Iran: A Reference Handbook. Praeger. p. 156. ISBN 978-0275994839. Mohammad, Mahboubi (7 June 2015). "Witnesses narrate the attempt of Rafsanjani to pass the suggestion of 'leadership council'". Raja News (in Persian). Archived from the original on 28 December 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2017. Khani, Elahe. "Why are the attacks are towards the leadership?". Borhan. Fars News. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2017. Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani (4 June 1989). چرا آیت الله خامنه ای وصیت امام را خواند؟/ پیشنهاد رهبری آیت الله گلپایگانی از سوی جامعه مدرسین. بازسازی و سازندگی (in Persian). Archived from the original on 20 June 2013. "خبرگان رهبری – رييس مجمع تشخيص مصلحت نظام: از مهمترين پيشرفت‌هاي واقعي انقلاب اسلامي، تأسيس سازماني براي ولايت فقيه بود[ايلنا]". Khobreganrahbari.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "هاشمي رفسنجاني: در سال 68 مهمترين مخالفت با رهبري يك فرد را، خود مقام معظم رهبري داشتند". Archived from the original on 26 March 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Filkins, Dexter (18 May 2020). "TheTwilight of the Iranian Revolution". New Yorker. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Analysis: Iran's Theological Community Contends With Changing World". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 16 September 2004. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Assembly of experts; From Montazeri to re-election of Khamenei". Political Studies and Research Institute (in Persian). Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Hovsepian-Bearce, Yvette (2015). The Political Ideology of Ayatollah Khamenei: Out of the Mouth of the Supreme Leader of Iran. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-60582-9. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Iran's supreme leader blames US-Israeli plot for protests, Financial Times, 9 January 2018 Leaked Video Embarrasses Iran's Khamenei, Implicates Rafsanjani, Asharq Al Aswat, 10 January 2018 Leaked video reveals new details about election of Iran's supreme leader Archived 19 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Al-Monitor, 11 January 2018 Shocking Video Clip From 1989 Shows Khamenei Elected Only For One Year As A Caretaker, Radio Farda, 9 January 2018 "العراق: المرجع كاظم الحائري يعلن عدم استمراره في المرجعية بسبب المرض". 29 August 2022. "بيان لسماحة السيد كاظم الحائري يعلن فيه عدم الاستمرار في التصدي للمرجعية بسبب المرض والتقدم في". 29 August 2022. "الاستقالة الأولى في تاريخ المرجعية.. مرجع ديني يقدم استقالته من التصدي لمنصب المرجع". baghdad-times.net. 29 August 2022. "تننن". Golkar, Saeid; Khalaji, Mehdi (12 June 2013). "The Islamic Republic's Will to Survive: Likely Nuclear Resistance, Unlikely Social Revolt". Washington Institute. Retrieved 8 June 2020. "Leader Meets President, Cabinet Members". 9 November 2004. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016. "Supreme Leader Meets with President Rouhani and Cabinet Members". Archived from the original on 6 August 2016. "Leader meets with President and Cabinet members". 14 July 2015. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. "Ayatollah Khamenei: Judiciary Should Pursue Violated Rights of Iranian Nation at the International Level". 2 July 2016. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016. "Iran's leader Khamenei warns of Western 'schemes' as new MPs meet". 28 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. "Tehran switches gear in its relationship with Tripoli after Qaddafi's death". 22 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2012. "Glimpses from the Life of Ayatullah al-Uzma Sayyid Ali Khamenei". Archived from the original on 12 June 2010. Retrieved 5 March 2012. "Iran's inner and outer circles of influence and power". Los Angeles Times. 31 December 2007. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. IR Leader appoints new IRGC commander, The Office of the Supreme Leader, 2 September 2007, archived from the original on 10 October 2017, retrieved 11 June 2017 Senior principlist cleric appointed as Iran's judiciary chief, Xinhua, 8 March 2019, archived from the original on 25 July 2020, retrieved 21 November 2019 Gen. Ashtari Appointed as Iran's New Police Chief, 9 March 2015, archived from the original on 10 October 2017, retrieved 11 June 2017 {{citation}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Leader Appoints New IKRF Head", Financial Tribune, 6 April 2015, retrieved 11 June 2017 "Ayatollah Khamenei appointed Sheikh Ahmad Marvi as the custodian of Astan Quds Razavi". khamenei.ir. 4 April 2019. Retrieved 13 May 2019. Leader of the Islamic Revolution Appoints New IRIB Chief, The Office of the Supreme Leader, 11 May 2016, archived from the original on 26 March 2017, retrieved 11 June 2017 Erdbrink, Thomas, Iran's Supreme Leader Shakes Up Military Command Archived 27 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times, 28 June 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Ayatollah Khamenei's Edict Appointing Dr. Velayati as the Head of the Islamic Azad University", The Office of the Supreme Leader, 7 March 2016, archived from the original on 10 October 2017, retrieved 11 June 2017 Leader Appoints New Chief Commander of the Islamic Republic of Iran's Army, The Office of the Supreme Leader, 11 September 2005, archived from the original on 10 October 2017, retrieved 11 June 2017 Amir Taheri (2010). The Persian Night: Iran Under the Khomeinist Revolution (reprint ed.). Encounter Books. p. 235. ISBN 9781594034794. "To Iran's supreme leader Khamenei, with love and squalor". the Guardian. 5 April 2012. "Khamenei Will See Sanctions on Him as a Direct Challenge to the Revolution". The Washington Institute. Brumberg, Daniel; Farhi, Farideh (4 April 2016). Power and Change in Iran: Politics of Contention and Conciliation. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253020796 – via Google Books. Daragahi, Borzou (22 July 2019). "How Iran's Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei turned his position into one 'Persian monarchs would have envied'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 11 April 2022. "Ayatollah Khamenei's Journey". Newsweek. 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. McElroy, Damien; Vahdat, Ahmad (2 May 2013). "Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei embroiled in German car dealer row". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Tait, Robert (12 November 2013). "Ayatollah Ali Khamenei controls £60 billion financial empire, report says". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Khamenei controls massive financial empire built on property seizures Archived 12 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine, reuters.com. Retrieved 2 September 2015 Steve Stecklow, Babak Dehghanpisheh and Yeganeh Torbati (11 November 2013). "Assets of the Ayatollah: The economic empire behind Iran's supreme leader – Khamenei controls massive financial empire built on property seizures". Reuters. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "بیش از 90 درصدسود فعالیت های اقتصادی ستاد اجرایی فرمان امام در مناطق محروم هزینه می شود". خبرگزاری جمهوری اسلامی (in Persian). Retrieved 11 June 2018. 'Investigate if Khamenei fit to rule' Archived 5 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Associated Press, 15 August 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2009. Robert F. Worth and Nazila Fathi, "Clerics' Call for Removal Challenges Iran Leader" Archived 24 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 16 August 2009 Fathi, Nazila (7 January 2008). "Ahmadinejad loses favor with Khamenei, Iran's top leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2011. Abdo, Geneive (26 April 2011). "Clash Over Mashaei Reveals Fissures Within the Iranian Regime". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 11 January 2017. Ahmadinejad gets key endorsement as Iran president, China Daily, 4 August 2009 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei backs Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in address at Friday prayers, The Telegraph, Damien McElroy, 19 June 2009 Dehghan, Saeed Kamali (5 May 2011). "Ahmadinejad allies charged with sorcery". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2011. Dareini, Ali Akbar (20 April 2011). "Iranian lawmakers warn Ahmadinejad to accept intelligence chief as political feud deepens". StAlbertGazette.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 11 January 2017. Daragahi, Borzou (2 May 2011). "Spy flap weakens Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad". Los Angeles Times. Beirut. Retrieved 11 January 2017. Peterson, Scott (9 May 2011). "Iran's Ahmadinejad survives the worst storm of his presidency". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 11 January 2017. Dehghan, Saeed Kamali (6 May 2011). "Iran's supreme leader tells Ahmadinejad: accept minister or quit". The Guardian. Erdbrink, Thomas (8 May 2011). "Iran's Ahmadinejad affirms Khamenei decision, tensions remain". The Washington Post. "Iran calls off Ahmadinejad parliament probe". Al Jazeera. 21 November 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2017. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Khamenei puts stop to Ahmadinejad's return". 27 September 2016. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2016. Bozorgmehr, Najmeh. "Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei blocks Ahmadinejad's comeback". The Irish Times. Dehghan, Saeed Kamali (28 September 2016). "Ahmadinejad blocked from running in Iran presidential elections". The Guardian. "Ahmadinejad Prohibited to Run for President ... based on Khamenei's Orders". Asharq Al-awsat. 27 September 2016. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2016. "Ahmadinejad vows to follow Khamenei's order not to run". english.alarabiya.net. 26 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2018. "Iran's Leading Sunni Cleric Calls Out Supreme Leader". 28 April 2023. "Iranians React After Supreme Leader Rejects Referendums". 20 April 2023. "توضیح درباره فیلم". "An Iran option the US prefers to ignore". Asia Times. 17 March 2006. Archived from the original on 16 March 2006.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Iran, holder of peaceful nuclear fuel cycle technology". Mathaba.net, IRNA. 25 August 2005. Archived from the original on 10 August 2013. Retrieved 13 August 2013. "Remarks by President Obama in Address to the United Nations General Assembly". whitehouse.gov. 24 September 2013. Archived from the original on 27 January 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2015 – via National Archives. "Legal Aspects–Fatwa against Nuclear Weapons". nuclearenergy.ir. Archived from the original on 11 July 2015. "Supreme Leader's Message to International Conference on Nuclear Disarmament". 17 April 2010. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. "حرمت سلاح کشتار جمعی". Official Website of Ayatollah Khamenei–Fatwas Section. Archived from the original on 8 July 2015. "Nuclear Fatwa: Religion and Politics in Iran's Proliferation Strategy". washingtoninstitute.org. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. "Jame'eye Baaz – The Flexibility of Khamenei's So-Called 'Nuclear Fatwa'". PBS. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. "Iran says nuclear fatwa exists; others don't buy it". USA Today. 4 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. Retrieved 31 January 2015. Kessler, Glenn (27 November 2013). "Fact Checker Did Iran's supreme leader issue a fatwa against the development of nuclear weapons?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 7 April 2015. Porter, Gareth (16 October 2014). "When the Ayatollah Said No to Nukes". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 22 August 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2015. Elham, Gholam-Hossein. "Is the fatwa banning production of nuclear weapons a 'political taqiya'?". Borhan. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 29 August 2015. "Middle East | Punch-up over press law". BBC News. 6 August 2000. Archived from the original on 24 June 2004. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "صدا و سیمای جمهوری اسلامی ایران". Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Yadegari, Shahrokh. "Introduction to Persian Traditional Music". Beyond the Veil. Archived from the original on 14 January 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Inhorn, Marcia C. (January 2006). "Fatwas and ARTs: IVF and Gamete Donation in Sunni v. Shia Islam (Id. vLex: VLEX-418643)". The Journal of Gender, Race & Justice – Nbr. 9-2, January 2006 (c/o Vlex.com). Archived from the original on 24 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Stem Cell Research Is Consistent With Shiite Islam". Muslimvoices.org. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 27 July 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. The message of Iran's supreme leader Archived 16 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine alkawthartv.com Imam Khamenei's message to pilgrims of Hajj 2019 in 40 languages abna24.com Hajj messages of Iran's supreme leader since before till now yjc.ir Hajj is a great opportunity to combat the Deal of the Century: Imam Khamenei khamenei.ir Retrieved 7 September 2019 Administrator. "The Official Website of The Amman Message – Grand Ayatollah Al-Sayyid Ali Khamenei". ammanmessage.com. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. "Mehr News Unity top priority of world of Islam: Leader". Mehr News. Archived from the original on 12 January 2015. "Al-Azhar Chancellor, Religious Leaders Hail Ayatollah Khamenei's Fatwa | AhlulBayt Islamic Mission (AIM)". Aimislam.com. 4 October 2010. Archived from the original on 1 January 2014. Retrieved 1 January 2014. "Khamenei Says Use Of Bicycles For Women Should Be Limited". RFE/RL. 27 November 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2021. The Significance of Iran's December Elections[permanent dead link] Mehdi Khalaji 11 December 2006 "Iran: Leader calls for acceleration of privatization program". Payvand.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. [1] Archived 8 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine "Thug" Crackdown Operation under Way in Iran (ROOZ :: English)". Roozonline.com. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2009. "Khamenei: Iran's Nuclear Program Important to Nation's Future". Voice of America. Archived from the original on 19 November 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Iran says will not halt uranium enrichment | International". Reuters. 18 February 2007. Archived from the original on 19 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Iran leader defends government handling of economy". Reuters. 30 April 2008. Archived from the original on 21 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Middle East Online". Middle East Online. 30 April 2008. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Iranians turn threats into opportunities: Leader". Tehran Times. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Irna". Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Article 91 of the Constitution of Iran Article 157 of the Constitution of Iran "Strategic Insights – Iranian Politics After the 2004 Parliamentary Election". United States Navy. 20 February 2004. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Ramin Mostaghim. "Iran's top digs in heels on election". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 28 June 2009. Supreme Leader Urges Mousavi to Proceed Through Legal Channels Archived 4 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine (Khamenei web site), 14 June 2009. Retrieved 2 July 2009. "Timeline: 2009 Iran presidential elections". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 April 2016. "Middle East – UK investigates Iran charge claim". BBC. 4 July 2009. "Iran's Supreme Leader Blasts Alleged 'Western Meddling' in Iran". Voice of America. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 9 July 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2010. "رهبر انقلاب در دیدار اعضای مجلس خبرگان:مجلس خبرگان باید انقلابی بماند/ مقایسه رفتار نجیبانه رای‌نیاورندگان انتخابات اخیر با رفتار نانجیبانه فتنه‌گران ۸۸/ نبودن آقایان مصباح و یزدی برای مجلس خبرگان خسارت است" [Supreme Leader meets members of the Assembly of Experts: Assembly of Experts should be revolutionary / compare gentlemanly behavior of those losing in recent elections with indecent behavior troublemakers in '09/ absence of Mr. Mesbah Yazdi is a loss for the Assembly of Experts] (in Persian). Tehran. Fars News Agency. 10 March 2016. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. Barnard, Anne (22 August 2006). "Iran looks to science as source of pride". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 26 May 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Science over ethics? – Channel 4 News". Channel 4. 8 March 2006. Archived from the original on 19 April 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Students, Scientific Olympiad Winners Meet the Leader". The Islamic Revolution Cultural-Research Institute for Preserving and Publishing Works by Ayatollah Seyyed Ali Khamenei. 31 October 2004. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Majd, The Ayatollah Begs to Differ, (2008), p.59 "Iran's supreme leader accuses Saudis of 'genocide' in Yemen". The Guardian. 9 April 2015. "The Latest: Indonesia sends 34 tons of aid for Rohingya". NY Daily News. Archived from the original on 16 September 2017. Retrieved 14 September 2017. "Iran's Careful Approach to China's Uyghur Crackdown". The Diplomat. 18 September 2018. "فیلم | رهبرانقلاب: امروز بلندترین برج منطقه در بی‌عُرضه‌ترین کشور است!". 21 February 2018. Ekmanis, Indra (3 January 2020). "The history of US-Iran relations: A timeline". The World. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "TODAY IN ENERGY". US Energy Information Administration. Retrieved 9 June 2020. Karimi, Nasser (14 September 2007). "Iran leader: Bush will be tried". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Iran sees no change in U.S. policy: Khamenei | International". Reuters. 21 March 2009. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Khamenei backs revolts, accuses Obama of lying". AFP. 21 March 2011. Retrieved 21 March 2011. "Iran's Khamenei: West should arm rebels, not bomb Libya". The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com. "Iran's supreme leader accuses U.S. of terrorism | CTV News". Winnipeg.ctv.ca. 25 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 March 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2014. "Khamenei threatens Israel with 'lightning' revenge". The Guardian. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. "Ali Khamenei". Counter Extremism Project. Archived from the original on 9 October 2016. "U.S. 'disturbed' by Iranian leader's criticism after deal". MSN. Archived from the original on 23 July 2015. "Kerry says Iran vow to defy U.S. is 'very disturbing'". AOL Article. 15 July 2016. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Ali Arouzi (18 July 2015). "Iran's Ayatollah Vows Opposition to 'Arrogant' U.S. Despite Nuke Deal". NBC News. Archived from the original on 20 July 2015. "Nuclear deal will not change Iran's relations with U.S.: supreme leader". Reuters. 18 July 2015. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Carol Morello. "Ayatollah says nuclear deal will not change Iran's relations with U.S." The Washington Post. "Iran nuclear: Ayatollah Khamenei chastises 'arrogant' US". BBC News. 18 July 2015. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Tom Brooks-Pollock (18 July 2015). "Iran nuclear deal: Ayatollah Khamenei says hostile policies towards 'arrogant' America will not change". The Independent. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. "Kerry says Iran vow to defy U.S. is 'very disturbing'". Yahoo News. 21 July 2015. Archived from the original on 31 March 2016. "Coronavirus: Iran's leader suggests US cooked up 'special version' of virus to target country". The Independent. 22 March 2020. Archived from the original on 23 March 2020. "Iran's supreme leader criticizes U.S. over Ukraine crisis". Reuters. "Meta removes Facebook and Instagram accounts of Iran's Supreme Leader". CNN. 9 February 2024. Retrieved 11 February 2024. BBC News, Middle East, Iran condemns attacks on US Archived 27 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 17 September 2001 Goldberg, Jeffrey (11 August 2015). "Why Iran's Anti-Semitism Matters". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 23 May 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. Richter, Elihu D.; Alex Barnea (Summer 2009). "Tehran's Genocidal Incitement against Israel". The Middle East Quarterly. XVI (3): 49–51. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 14 August 2013. Khamenei: 'Tumor' of Israel is world's biggest problem Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Ynet News. 19 August 2012 Iranian Leader: Israel A "Cancerous Tumor" Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine CBS News. 4 March 2009 Israel a 'cancerous tumor' and Middle East's biggest problem, Iranian supreme leader says Archived 23 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine The Times of Israel. 19 August 2012 "Kerry Calls Khamenei's 'Rabid Dog' Comment 'Inflammatory'". ABC News. 21 November 2013. Archived from the original on 21 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. "Iran leader calls Israel 'rabid dog', urges arms for Palestinians". Reuters. 29 July 2014. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. "The secret behind Leader's interpretations about the Zionist regime/ A rabid dog holding the reins of his supporters". Fars News. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 12 June 2017. "Khamenei on Twitter: No cure for barbaric Israeli regime but to be annihilated." Archived 10 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine The Jerusalem Post. 9 November 2014. 9 March 2015. Iran leader's call to 'annihilate' Israel sparks fury as nuclear deadline looms Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine CNN. 10 November 2014. Iran's Khamenei: No Cure for Barbaric Israel but Annihilation Archived 5 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine The Slatest. 9 November 2014 Iran's supreme leader Khamenei tweets reasons to 'eliminate' Israel Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Global News. 10 November 2014 Mostaghim, Ramin; Borzou Daragahi (20 September 2008). "Iran leader talks tough on Israel". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 November 2008. Retrieved 2 January 2010. "Expressing friendship with the people of Israel [is] false, irrational and absurd". Tabnak (in Persian). Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 12 June 2017. "Iran's Supreme Leader vows 'no retreat' as nuclear talks begin". The Daily Telegraph. 20 November 2013. Archived from the original on 22 November 2013. Edalat, Abbas (5 April 2007). "The US can learn from this example of mutual respect". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 April 2007. Retrieved 30 April 2007. Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei blasts Israel in sermon. The Times. "Ayatollah Khamenei says Iran will back 'any nations, any groups' fighting Israel". The Washington Post. "Iran leader urges destruction of 'cancerous' Israel". CNN. 15 December 2000. Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 30 April 2007. Karami, Arash (9 September 2015). "Khamenei: Israel will no longer exist in 25 years". Al Monitor. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. Rawling, Noah (10 September 2015). "Iran's Supreme Leader Says Israel Won't Exist in 25 Years". ADHD. Archived from the original on 11 June 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. Koski, Justin (10 September 2015). "Israel's Netanyahu Returns Fire After Iran Supreme Leader's Death Threat". Western Journalism. Archived from the original on 5 January 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. "The best 2015 year sentence of Iranian leader in view of Iranian people was selected". Jahan News Agency. 17 March 2016. Archived from the original on 30 March 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. "Iranian leader backs Palestinian liberation from Israel 'tumor'". i24NEWS. Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 23 April 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2017. Osman, Marwa. "6th International Conference in Support of the Palestinian Intifada". American Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 23 April 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2017. "Iran's Khamenei: UAE 'disgraced forever' by Israel deal". Reuters. 1 September 2020. "Iran's Khamenei lauds Hamas attack on Israel, again denies involvement". The Times of Israel. 10 October 2023. "Iran's Khamenei demands Israel stop bombardment of Gaza". Al Jazeera. 17 October 2023. Keinon, Herb (21 March 2014). "Iran's Khamenei questions 'certainty' of Holocaust". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 1 April 2014. Levitt, Joshua (21 March 2014). "Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei Says Reality of Holocaust is 'Uncertain'". The Algemeiner. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Maloney, Suzanne (21 March 2014). "Oops, He Did It Again: Iran's Supreme Leader Questions the Holocaust". The Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. "Ayatollah Khamenei During His National Address". Anti-Defamation League. 21 March 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Moore, Jack (28 January 2016). "Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei Posts Holocaust Denial Video on Remembrance Day". Newsweek. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Turner, Camilla (28 January 2016). "Supreme leader of Iran marks Holocaust Memorial Day by publishing Holocaust denying video". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Iranian Leader Khamenei Praises French Holocaust Denier on Twitter". The Algemeiner. JNS. 18 December 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Rosenberg, Yair (9 June 2022). "Why Twitter Won't Ban Its Most Powerful Anti-Semite". The Atlantic. Retrieved 11 June 2022. COATES, VICTORIA; COHANIM, ELLIE (20 July 2021). "Iran Sponsors and Foments Anti-Semitism, but Its People Embrace Israel | Opinion". Newsweek. Retrieved 12 June 2022. FRANTZMAN, SETH J. (2 September 2020). "Iran's Ali Khamenei slammed for antisemitic tweets against Jared Kushner". Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "BBC Mundo | Irán: advertencia con petróleo". BBC News. 4 June 2006. Archived from the original on 9 May 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Leader outlines elections guidelines, calls for transparency". 15 October 2016. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. "Iran finally admits it shot and killed 'rioters.' But it still won't say how many people died in last month's protests". The Washington Post. Dehghanpisheh, Babak (27 June 2018). "After protests, Iran's Khamenei demands punishment for those who harm the economy". Uk.reuters.com. "Special Report: Iran's leader ordered a crackdown on unrest - 'Do whatever it takes to end it'". Reuters. 23 December 2019. "Iranians marched in fiery protests to demand Ayatollah Khamenei's resignation after officials shot down a commercial plane". Business Insider. Tim Hume (10 November 2011). "Iran bans 'underground university,' brands it 'extremist cult'". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2013. UN Doc. E/CN.4/1993/41, Commission on Human Rights, 49th session, 28 January 1993, Final report on human rights in the Islamic Republic of Iran by the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights, Mr. Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, paragraph 310. Spotlight on Press Tyrants: CPJ Names Ten Worst Enemies of the Press. Archived 29 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine CPJ, 3 May 2000. Retrieved 24 September 2009. Ayatullah Seyed Ali Khamenei By Azadeh Moaveni Archived 16 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2009. "ادوار نيوز|شکنجه دکتر زیدآبادی غیرقابل انکار است/ توضیحات ادوارنیوز در مورد گزارش کذب صداوسیما". Advarnews.biz. Archived from the original on 31 May 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. "BBC فارسی – ايران – 'محروم کردن زندانی از درمان پزشکی، شکنجه است'". BBC. 16 July 2010. Archived from the original on 25 July 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. "Iran Human Rights Documentation Center" (PDF). Iranhrdc.org. 26 December 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2014. Copyright: gooya.com 2010. "gooya news :: politics : شکنجه اکبر گنجی در بیمارستان، گزارش سازمان عفو بین الملل". News.gooya.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 21 August 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "MIDDLE EAST – Iran journalist jailed for 23 months". BBC. 29 April 2002. Archived from the original on 24 January 2012. "0009.ws | Free Website Hosting with PHP". Mowjcamp.com. Archived from the original on 7 April 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. "Iran's Press Law". Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2016. Abdo, Geneive (7 August 2000). "Supreme Leader Backs Conservatives, Angering Parliament Reformers : Ayatollah Kills Effort To Remove Press Curbs". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "The 72 Who Rule The World". Forbes. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. "Aide to Ahmadinejad sentenced to a year in jail for insulting Khamenei". Archived from the original on 21 September 2016. "Journalist Gets 35 Lashes, Jail For Insulting Ayatollah". 28 January 1996. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. False Freedom: Online Censorship in the Middle East and North Africa Archived 11 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Human Rights Watch, 2005, page 56 Blogger jailed in Iran is dead, lawyer says Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, CNN, 19 March 2009 Activist sentenced to jail, exile and fine in Iran Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Gulf News (AP reprint), 16 December 2010 Briton among eight jailed in Iran for web insults Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, Saeed Kamali Dehghan, 27 May 2014 Iranian man sentenced to death for 'insulting Islam' through messaging app Archived 19 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Independent, 30 March 2017 "انتقاد رهبر ایران از تلاش برای تغییر قوانین زنان". Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "بیانات در دیدار دانشجویان دانشگاه‌های استان یزد (Address to the Students of Universities in Yazd Province)". Official Website for Khamenei Speeches and Works. 3 January 2008. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 4 September 2015. "Backlash: Gender Segregation in Iranian Universities". Isa-global-dialogue.net. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Lizzie Dearden (21 March 2017). "Iran's Supreme Leader claims gender equality is 'Zionist plot' aiming to corrupt role of women in society". The Independent. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. "بيانات رهبر معظم انقلاب اسلامى در ديدار گروه كثيرى از زنان نخبه در آستانهى سالروز ميلاد حضرت زهراى اطهر (سلاماللَّهعليها)". Archived from the original on 18 November 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "آشنایی با فرزندان مقام معظم رهبری". Seratnews. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2015. Mehrzad Boroujerdi; Kourosh Rahimkhani (11 October 2010). "Iran's Political Elite". United States Institute of Peace. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2013. Knowing the sons of Iran's supreme leader mashreghnews.ir Retrieved 18 November 2019 Seyyed Masoud Khamenei, beside his father-in-law (Seyyed Mohsen Kharazi) – Portrait aghigh.ir Retrieved 23 November 2019 Seyyed Masoud Khamenei, with his father-in-law --Seyyed Mohasen Kharazi[permanent dead link] tebyan.net Retrieved 9 December 2019 "Niece of Iran's supreme leader calls on other countries to cut ties with regime". the Guardian. 27 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Borger, Julian. "Mojtaba Khamenei: gatekeeper to Iran's supreme leader". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 September 2013. Yazdi, Ebrahim; Mousavi, Mir Hossein; Rahnavard, Dr. Zahra; Karroubi, Fatemeh; Karroubi, Mehdi. "Yazdi Released; Mousavi, Karroubi Children Write Letter to Nation". PBS Frontline – Tehran Bureau. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. "The Frugality of Iran's Supreme Leader". Payvand.com. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. "Iran's car market is opening up". MNN – Mother Nature Network. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. McElroy, Damien; Vahdat, Ahmad (31 December 2009). "Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei loves caviar and vulgar jokes, defector claims". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Reynolds, James (4 August 2011). "Profile: Iran's 'unremarkable' supreme leader Ayatollah Khamenei". BBC News. Retrieved 10 January 2020. Majd, Hooman, The Ayatollah Begs to Differ: The Paradox of Modern Iran, by Hooman Majd, Doubleday, 2008, p. 61 Iran's Top Leader Undergoes Prostate Surgery Archived 24 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. 8 September 2014. "Iran's supreme leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has prostate surgery". The Guardian. 8 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. "Iran : Guerre de succession en vue au sommet de l'État". 27 February 2015. Archived from the original on 4 August 2015. Retrieved 27 July 2015.. Le Figaro quoted Western intelligence officials saying that the cancer was discovered about ten years ago. "The cancer is in stage four, in other words, has spread." Doctors estimate "he has two years left to live." Ahmari, Sohrab (23 March 2015). "Iran's Coming Leadership Crisis". The Wall Street Journal: A13. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Fassihi, Farnaz (16 September 2022). "Iran's Supreme Leader Cancels Public Appearances After Falling Ill". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Imposing Sanctions With Respect to Iran". Federal Register. 26 June 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2020. GERECHT, REUEL MARC (12 December 2014). "Iran's Supreme Censor". Foundation for the Defense of Democracies. Retrieved 8 June 2020. Akbar Ganji (1 November 2013). "Ayatollah Khamenei and the Destruction of Israel". Boston Review. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016. Flood, Alison (27 February 2015). "Ayatollah Khamenei reveals himself as an '#AvidReader' of fiction". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 June 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2017. Ganji, Akbar (2013). "Who Is Ali Khamenei? The Worldview of Iran's Supreme Leader". Foreign Affairs. 92 (5): 24–48. JSTOR 23527515. "Khamenei sermon in Arabic". Irannegah.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Khamenei speaking Azeri about poetry". Irannegah. Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. Khamenei, Ali. "The History of Palestine and Its Occupation", Tehran Friday prayer sermons, 18 December 1999. Published 4 March 2008, Khamenei.ir – the Supreme Leader Seyed Ali Khamenei's official website. Retrieved 6 April 2009 MacFarquhar, Neil (15 June 2009). "In Iran, an Iron Cleric, Now Blinking". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 February 2018. "Iran's Khamenei praises Egyptian protesters, declares 'Islamic awakening'". Christian Science Monitor. 4 February 2011. Archived from the original on 13 February 2015. Retrieved 13 February 2015. Sadiki 2014, p. 534 Khamenei, Ali (1994). Discourse on Patience: Lectures of ... Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Discourse on Patience". Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 8 February 2016. Khamenei, Ali; Shariati, Ali; Sharīʻatī, ʻalī (1991). Iqbal: Manifestation of the Islamic ... ABC International. ISBN 978-1-871031-20-1. Replies to Inquiries about the ... 1997. ISBN 978-964-472-000-0.[permanent dead link] Khamenei, Seyyed Ali (1984). Lessons from the Nahjul-Balaghah. Lessons from the Nahjul Balagah[usurped] "The Charter of Freedom || Imam Reza (A.S.) Network". Imam Reza. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "The Charter of Freedom". Khamenei.de. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Great Ayatollah Sayyed Ali Khamenei". Archived from the original on 4 January 2007. Retrieved 19 June 2009. "Tawhid". 3 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Sadiki, Larbi (2014). Routledge Handbook of the Arab Spring: Rethinking Democratization. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-65004-1. Ali Khamenei at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official Official website The Office of the Supreme Leader of Iran Official English-language Twitter account Photo Pictures in Iran-Iraq War, tarikhirani.ir Ali Khamenei gallery in Khamenei's website[dead link] Media Appearances on C-SPAN Ali Khamenei at IMDb "Profile: Ayatollah Ali Khamenei". BBC News. 17 June 2009. Retrieved 1 January 2010. Ali Khamenei collected news and commentary at Al Jazeera English Ali Khamenei collected news and commentary at The Guardian Ali Khamenei collected news and commentary at The Jerusalem Post Ali Khamenei collected news and commentary at The New York Times Videos Video Archive of Ayatollah Khamenei Ayatollah Khamenei in the city of Ardabil reading different poems in Azerbaijani language about Imam Hussein and events in Karbala.