Horishni Plavni (Ukrainian: Горі́шні Пла́вні, pronounced [ɦoˈr⁽ʲ⁾iʃ.n⁽ʲ⁾i ˈpɫɑu̯.n⁽ʲ⁾i] ), before 2016 known as Komsomolsk-na-Dnipri (Ukrainian: Комсомо́льськ-на-Дніпрі) or simply Komsomolsk (Ukrainian: Комсомо́льськ), is a purpose-built mining city in central Ukraine, located on the left bank of the Dnieper, in Kremenchuk Raion of Poltava Oblast, practically conurbated with the larger neighboring city of Kremenchuk. Horishni Plavni hosts the administration of Horishni Plavni urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. Population: 49,854 (2022 estimate). Founded in 1960 as Komsomolsk-na-Dnipri, the city was purposely planned and built as the residential and civic area for the Poltava Mining and Extraction Combinat (now controlled by the Ferrexpo) - the most important iron ore-mining company in Ukraine. 80% of the city residents are employed by the mining industry. There are two gigantic open pit mines and several spoil tips on the city territory, to the north-east and south of the residential area. The industry is served by several railway stations. However, the passenger service was discontinued and the city relies on intercity and suburban bus links. The combinat operates its own freight river port. Due to the profitability of mining, small city of Horishni Plavni usually ranks high in all-Ukraine city rankings of birth rate, living standards, (un)employment and housing. On 15 May 2015 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko signed a bill into law that started a six months period for the removal of communist monuments and the mandatory renaming of settlements with a name related to Communism. On 19 May 2016, Verkhovna Rada adopted decision to rename Komsomolsk as Horishni Plavni and conform to the law prohibiting names of Communist origin. In 2013, Oleksandr Karnaukhov - a famous football player - moved here to work/ Until 18 July 2020, Horishni Plavni was designated as a city of oblast significance. As part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Poltava Oblast to four, the city was merged into Kremenchuk Raion. City park Museum of Horishni Plavni Mining and construction liceum Monument to Chernobyl liquidators Kostyantyn Zhevago "Горишнеплавновская городская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. Poroshenko signed the laws about decomunization. Ukrayinska Pravda. 15 May 2015 Poroshenko signs laws on denouncing Communist, Nazi regimes, Interfax-Ukraine. 15 May 20 Goodbye, Lenin: Ukraine moves to ban communist symbols, BBC News (14 April 2015) Рада перейменувала Дніпродзержинськ на Кам'янське (in Ukrainian). Українські Національні Новини. 19 May 2016. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. 17 July 2020. Media related to Horishni Plavni at Wikimedia Commons Ferrexpo corporate web site Law of Ukraine "On the change of city boundaries for the city of Komsomolsk, Poltava Oblast" (in Ukrainian)