Narendra Damodardas Modi (Gujarati: [ˈnəɾendɾə dɑmodəɾˈdɑs ˈmodiː] ; born 17 September 1950) is an Indian politician who has served as the 14th prime minister of India since May 2014. Modi was the chief minister of Gujarat from 2001 to 2014 and is the Member of Parliament (MP) for Varanasi. He is a member of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a right wing Hindu nationalist paramilitary volunteer organisation. He is the longest-serving prime minister from outside the Indian National Congress. Modi was born and raised in Vadnagar in northeastern Gujarat, where he completed his secondary education. He was introduced to the RSS at the age of eight. His account of helping his father sell tea at the Vadnagar railway station has not been reliably corroborated. At age 18, he was married to Jashodaben Modi, whom he abandoned soon after, only publicly acknowledging her four decades later when legally required to do so. Modi became a full-time worker for the RSS in Gujarat in 1971. The RSS assigned him to the BJP in 1985 and he held several positions within the party hierarchy until 2001, rising to the rank of general secretary. In 2001, Modi was appointed Chief Minister of Gujarat and elected to the legislative assembly soon after. His administration is considered complicit in the 2002 Gujarat riots, and has been criticised for its management of the crisis. A little over 1,000 people were killed, according to official records, three-quarters of whom were Muslim; independent sources estimated 2,000 deaths, mostly Muslim. A Special Investigation Team appointed by the Supreme Court of India in 2012 found no evidence to initiate prosecution proceedings against him. While his policies as chief minister, which were credited for encouraging economic growth, were praised, Modi's administration was criticised for failing to significantly improve health, poverty and education indices in the state. In the 2014 Indian general election, Modi led the BJP to a parliamentary majority, the first for a party since 1984. His administration increased direct foreign investment, and it reduced spending on healthcare, education, and social-welfare programmes. Modi began a high-profile sanitation campaign, controversially initiated the 2016 demonetisation of high-denomination banknotes and introduced the Goods and Services Tax, and weakened or abolished environmental and labour laws. Modi's administration launched the 2019 Balakot airstrike against an alleged terrorist training camp in Pakistan. The airstrike failed, and the deaths of six Indian personnel to friendly fire was later revealed: but the action had nationalist appeal. Modi's party won the 2019 general election which followed. In its second term, his administration revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, an Indian-administered portion of the disputed Kashmir region, and introduced the Citizenship Amendment Act, prompting widespread protests, and spurring the 2020 Delhi riots in which Muslims were brutalised and killed by Hindu mobs, sometimes with the complicity of police forces controlled by the Modi administration. Three controversial farm laws led to sit-ins by farmers across the country, eventually causing their formal repeal. Modi oversaw India's response to the COVID-19 pandemic, during which 4.7 million out of 1.4 billion Indians died, according to the World Health Organization's estimates. Under Modi's tenure, India has experienced democratic backsliding, or the weakening of democratic institutions, individual rights, and freedom of expression. As prime minister, he has received consistently high approval ratings. Modi has been described as engineering a political realignment towards right-wing politics. He remains a controversial figure domestically and internationally, over his Hindu nationalist beliefs and handling of the Gujarat riots, which have been cited as evidence of a majoritarian and exclusionary social agenda. Narendra Damodardas Modi was born on 17 September 1950 to a Gujarati Hindu family of oil presser (Modh-Ghanchi) which is an OBC category in Vadnagar, Mehsana district, Bombay State (present-day Gujarat). He was the third of six children born to Damodardas Mulchand Modi (c. 1915–1989) and Hiraben Modi (1923–2022). According to Modi, as a child, he had to work in his father's tea shop on the platform of Vadnagar railway station, but the evidence of his neighbours does not entirely corroborate this statement. During a protest against the government, his brother, Prahlad Modi, contradicted that he ever sold tea. According to him, his father had brought up six of his children by selling tea and people were making a mistake by calling the Prime Minister a "chai wala" (tea seller). Modi completed his higher secondary education in Vadnagar in 1967; his teachers described him as an average student and a keen, gifted debater with an interest in theatre. He preferred playing larger-than-life characters in theatrical productions, which has influenced his political image. When Modi was eight years old, he was introduced to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and began attending its local shakhas (training sessions). There, he met Lakshmanrao Inamdar, who inducted Modi as a balswayamsevak (junior cadet) in the RSS and became his political mentor. While Modi was training with the RSS, he also met Vasant Gajendragadkar and Nathalal Jaghda, Bharatiya Jana Sangh leaders who in 1980 helped found the BJP's Gujarat unit. As a teenager, he was enrolled in the National Cadet Corps. In a custom traditional to Narendra Modi's caste, his family arranged a betrothal to Jashodaben Chimanlal Modi, leading to their marriage when she was 17 and he was 18. Soon afterwards, he abandoned his wife, and left home. The couple never divorced but the marriage was not in his public pronouncements for many decades. In April 2014, shortly before the national election in which he gained power, Modi publicly affirmed he was married and that his spouse was Jashodaben. The marriage was unconsummated and Modi kept it secret because he would not have been able to become a pracharak in the puritanical RSS. Modi spent the following two years travelling across northern and north-eastern India. In interviews, he has described visiting Hindu ashrams founded by Swami Vivekananda: the Belur Math near Kolkata, the Advaita Ashrama in Almora and the Ramakrishna Mission in Rajkot. His stays at each ashram were brief because he lacked the required college education. Vivekananda has had a large influence in Modi's life. In mid 1968, Modi reached Belur Math but was turned away, after which he visited Calcutta, West Bengal and Assam, stopping in Siliguri and Guwahati. He then went to the Ramakrishna Ashram in Almora, where he was again rejected, before returning to Gujarat via Delhi and Rajasthan in 1968 to 1969. In either late 1969 or early 1970, he returned to Vadnagar for a brief visit before leaving again for Ahmedabad, where he lived with his uncle and worked in his uncle's canteen at Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation. In Ahmedabad, Modi renewed his acquaintance with Inamdar, who was based at the Hedgewar Bhavan (RSS headquarters) in the city. Modi's first-known political activity as an adult was in 1971 when he joined a Jana Sangh Satyagraha in Delhi led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee to enlist to fight in the Bangladesh Liberation War. The Indira Gandhi-led central government prohibited open support for the Mukti Bahini; according to Modi, he was briefly held in Tihar Jail. After the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, Modi left his uncle's employment and became a full-time pracharak (campaigner) for the RSS, working under Inamdar. Shortly before the war, Modi took part in a non-violent protest in New Delhi against the Indian government, for which he was arrested; because of this arrest, Inamdar decided to mentor Modi. According to Modi, he was part of a Satyagraha that led to a political war. In 1978, Modi received a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in political science from the School of Open Learning at the Delhi University. In 1983, he received a Master of Arts (MA) degree in political science from Gujarat University, graduating with a first class as an external distance learning student. There is a controversy surrounding the authenticity of his BA and MA degrees. In June 1975, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declared a state of emergency in India that lasted until 1977. During this period, known as "the Emergency", many of her political opponents were jailed and opposition groups were banned. Modi was appointed general secretary of the "Gujarat Lok Sangharsh Samiti", an RSS committee co-ordinating opposition to the Emergency in Gujarat. Shortly afterwards, the RSS was banned. Modi was forced to go underground in Gujarat and frequently travelled in disguise to avoid arrest, once dressing as a monk and once as a Sikh. He became involved in the printing of pamphlets opposing the government, sending them to Delhi and organising demonstrations. He was also involved with creating a network of safe houses for individuals who were wanted by the government, and in raising funds for political refugees and activists. During this period, Modi wrote a Gujarati-language book titled Sangharsh Ma Gujarat (In the Struggles of Gujarat), which describes events during the Emergency. While in this role, Modi met trade unionist and socialist activist George Fernandes and several other national political figures. Modi became an RSS sambhag pracharak (regional organiser) in 1978, overseeing activities in Surat and Vadodara, and in 1979, he went to work for the RSS in Delhi, where he researched and wrote the RSS's history of the Emergency. Shortly after, he returned to Gujarat and in 1985, the RSS assigned him to the BJP. In 1987, Modi helped organise the BJP's campaign in the Ahmedabad municipal election, which the party won comfortably; according to biographers, Modi's planning was responsible for the win. After L. K. Advani became president of the BJP in 1986, the RSS decided to place its members in important positions within the party; Modi's work during the Ahmedabad election led to his selection for this role. Modi was elected organising secretary of the BJP's Gujarat unit later in 1987. Modi rose within the party and was named a member of its National Election Committee in 1990, helping organise Advani's Ram Rath Yatra in 1990 and Murli Manohar Joshi's 1991–1992 Ekta Yatra (Journey for Unity). Modi took a brief break from politics in 1992 to establish a school in Ahmedabad, and due to friction with Shankersinh Vaghela, a BJP MP from Gujarat. Modi returned to electoral politics in 1994, partly at the insistence of Advani; as party secretary, Modi's electoral strategy was considered central to the BJP victory in the 1995 state assembly election. In November of that year, Modi was appointed BJP national secretary and transferred to New Delhi, where he assumed responsibility for party activities in Haryana and Himachal Pradesh. The following year, Shankersinh Vaghela, a prominent BJP leader from Gujarat, defected to the Indian National Congress (Congress) after losing his parliamentary seat in the Lok Sabha election. Modi, who was on the selection committee for the 1998 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election, favoured supporters of BJP leader Keshubhai Patel over those supporting Vaghela to end factional division in the party. His strategy was credited as central to the BJP winning an overall majority in the 1998 election, and Modi was promoted to BJP general secretary (organisation) in May of that year. In 2001, Keshubhai Patel's health was failing and the BJP lost a few state assembly seats in by-elections. Allegations of abuse of power, corruption and poor administration were made, and Patel's standing had been damaged by his administration's handling of the earthquake in Bhuj in 2001. The BJP national leadership sought a new candidate for the chief ministership, and Modi, who had expressed misgivings about Patel's administration, was chosen as a replacement. Advani did not want to ostracise Patel and was concerned about Modi's lack of experience in government. Modi declined an offer to become Patel's deputy chief minister, telling Advani and Atal Bihari Vajpayee he was "going to be fully responsible for Gujarat or not at all". On 3 October 2001, Modi replaced Patel as Chief Minister of Gujarat with the responsibility of preparing the BJP for the upcoming December 2002 election. On 7 October, Modi was sworn in and he entered the Gujarat state legislature on 24 February 2002 after winning a by-election in Rajkot II constituency, defeating Ashwin Mehta of the INC. On 27 February 2002, a train with several hundred passengers burned near Godhra, killing approximately 60 people. The train carried a large number of Hindu pilgrims who were returning from Ayodhya after a religious ceremony at the site of the demolished Babri Masjid. In a public statement, Modi said local Muslims were responsible for the incident. The next day, the Vishwa Hindu Parishad called for a bandh (general strike) across the state. Riots began during the bandh and anti-Muslim violence spread through Gujarat. The government's decision to move the bodies of the train victims from Godhra to Ahmedabad further inflamed the violence. The state government later stated 790 Muslims and 254 Hindus were killed during the riots; independent sources put the death toll at over 2,000, the vast majority of them Muslims. Approximately 150,000 people were driven to refugee camps. Numerous women and children were among the victims; the violence included mass rapes and mutilation of women. Scholars consider the Government of Gujarat to have been complicit in the riots, and it has received much criticism for its handling of the situation; some scholars explicitly blame Modi. The Modi government imposed a curfew in 26 major cities, issued shoot-at-sight orders and called for the army to patrol the streets; these measures failed to prevent the violence from escalating. The president of the state unit of the BJP expressed support for the bandh despite such actions being illegal at the time. State officials later prevented riot victims from leaving the refugee camps, which were often unable to meet the needs of those living there. Muslim victims of the riots were subjected to further discrimination when the state government announced their compensation would be half that offered to Hindu victims; this decision was later reversed after the issue was taken to court. During the riots, police officers often did not intervene in situations where they were able. Several scholars have described the violence as a pogrom and others have called it an example of state terrorism. According to Martha Nussbaum, "There is by now a broad consensus that the Gujarat violence was a form of ethnic cleansing, that in many ways it was premeditated, and that it was carried out with the complicity of the state government and officers of the law". Modi's personal involvement in the 2002 events has continued to be debated. During the riots, he said, "What is happening is a chain of action and reaction". Later in 2002, Modi said the way in which he had handled the media was his only regret regarding the episode. In March 2008, the Supreme Court of India reopened several cases related to the riots, including that of the Gulbarg Society massacre, and established a Special Investigation Team (SIT) to look into the issue. In response to a petition from Zakia Jafri, the widow of Ehsan Jafri, who was killed in the Gulbarg Society massacre, in April 2009, the court also asked the SIT to investigate Modi's complicity in the killings. The SIT questioned Modi in March 2010; in May, it presented to the court a report finding no evidence against him. In July 2011, the court-appointed amicus curiae Raju Ramachandran submitted his final report to the court. Contrary to the SIT's position, Ramachandran said Modi could be prosecuted based on the available evidence. The Supreme Court sent the matter to the magistrate's court. The SIT examined Ramachandran's report, and in March 2012 submitted its final report, asking for the case to be closed. Zakia Jafri filed a protest petition in response. In December 2013, the magistrate's court rejected the protest petition, accepting the SIT's finding there was no evidence against Modi. In 2022, the Supreme Court dismissed a petition by Zakia Jafri in which she challenged the clean chit given to Modi in the riots by the SIT, and upheld previous rulings that no evidence against him was found. Following the violence, calls for Modi to resign as chief minister were made from politicians within and outside the state, including leaders of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and the Telugu Desam Party—partners in the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance coalition—and opposition parties stalled Parliament over the issue. Modi submitted his resignation at the April 2002 BJP national executive meeting in Goa but it was not accepted. Despite opposition from the election commissioner, who said a number of voters were still displaced, Modi succeeded in advancing the election to December 2002. In the election, the BJP won 127 seats in the 182-member assembly. Modi made significant use of anti-Muslim rhetoric during his campaign, and the BJP profited from religious polarisation among voters. Modi framed the criticism of his government for human rights violations as an attack upon Gujarati pride, a strategy that led to the BJP winning 127 of the 182 seats—a two-thirds majority—in the state assembly. He won Maninagar constituency, defeating Congress candidate Yatin Oza. On 22 December 2002, Modi was sworn in for a second term. During Modi's second term, the government's rhetoric shifted from Hindutva to Gujarat's economic development. He curtailed the influence of Sangh Parivar organisations such as Bharatiya Kisan Sangh (BKS) and Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP). When the BKS staged a farmers' demonstration, Modi ordered the BKS's eviction from state-provided houses, and his decision to demolish 200 illegal temples in Gandhinagar deepened the rift with the VHP. Modi retained connections with some Hindu nationalists. He wrote a foreword to a 2014 textbook by Dinanath Batra, which made the unscientific claim that ancient India possessed technologies including test-tube babies. Modi's relationship with Muslims continued to attract criticism. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee distanced himself, reaching out to North Indian Muslims before the 2004 Indian general election, following which, Vajpayee called the violence in Gujarat a reason for the BJP's electoral defeat and said it had been a mistake to leave Modi in office after the riots. Western nations also raised questions about Modi's relationship with Muslims: the US State Department barred him from entering the United States in accordance with the recommendations of that country's Commission on International Religious Freedom, the only person to be denied a US visa under this law. The UK and the European Union (EU) refused to admit Modi because of what they saw as his role in the riots. As Modi rose to prominence in India, the UK and the EU lifted their bans in October 2012 and March 2013, respectively, and after his election as prime minister in 2014, the US lifted its ban and invited him to Washington, D.C. During the run-up to the 2007 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election and the 2009 Indian general election, the BJP intensified its rhetoric on terrorism. Modi criticised Prime Minister Manmohan Singh "for his reluctance to revive anti-terror legislation" such as the 2002 Prevention of Terrorism Act. In 2007, Modi wrote Karmayog, a 101-page booklet discussing manual scavenging. In it, he said scavenging is a "spiritual experience" for Valmiks, a sub-caste of Dalits. The book was not circulated at that time because of the election code of conduct. After the November 2008 Mumbai attacks, the Gujarat government authorised the deployment of 30 high-speed boats for coastal surveillance. In July 2007, Modi completed 2,063 consecutive days as chief minister of Gujarat, making him the longest-serving holder of that post. The BJP won 122 of 182 state-assembly seats in that year's election. Despite the BJP's shift away from explicit Hindutva, Modi's campaigns in 2007 and 2012 Gujarat Legislative Assembly elections contained elements of Hindu nationalism. He attended only Hindu religious ceremonies and had prominent associations with Hindu religious leaders. During his 2012 campaign, Modi twice refused to wear articles of clothing gifted by Muslim leaders. He did, however, maintain relations with Dawoodi Bohra. Modi's 2012 campaign included references to issues known to cause religious polarisation, including Afzal Guru and the death of Sohrabuddin Sheikh. The BJP did not nominate any Muslim candidates for the 2012 assembly election. During the 2012 campaign, Modi attempted to identify himself with the state of Gujarat, a strategy similar to that used by Indira Gandhi during the Emergency, and projected himself as protecting Gujarat against persecution by the rest of India. While campaigning for the 2012 Gujarat Legislative Assembly election, Modi made extensive use of holograms and other technologies, allowing him to reach a large number of people, something he repeated in the 2014 general election. Modi won the constituency of Maninagar, defeating Shweta Bhatt of the INC. The BJP won 115 of the 182 seats, continuing its majority during his tenure. After his election as Prime Minister of India, Modi resigned as the Gujarat chief minister and as MLA for Maninagar. Anandiben Patel succeeded Modi as chief minister. As chief minister, Modi favoured privatisation and small government, which was at odds with the philosophy of the RSS, which is usually described as anti-privatisation and anti-globalisation. Modi's policies during his second term have been credited with reducing corruption in Gujarat. He established financial and technology parks in the state and during the 2007 Vibrant Gujarat summit, real-estate investment deals worth ₹6.6 trillion (equivalent to ₹20 trillion or US$250 billion in 2023) were signed. The governments led by Patel and Modi supported NGOs and communities in the creation of groundwater-conservation projects. By December 2008, 500,000 structures had been built, of which 113,738 were check dams, which helped recharge the aquifers beneath them. Sixty of the 112 tehsils which had depleted the water table in 2004 had regained their normal groundwater levels by 2010. As a result, the state's production of genetically modified cotton increased to become the largest in India. The boom in cotton production and its semi-arid land use led to Gujarat's agricultural sector growing at an average rate of 9.6 percent from 2001 to 2007. Public irrigation measures in central and southern Gujarat, such as the Sardar Sarovar Dam, were less successful. The Sardar Sarovar project irrigated only 4–6% of the area intended. In 2008, Modi offered land in Gujarat to Tata Motors to set up a plant manufacturing the Nano car after popular agitation had forced the company to move out of West Bengal. Following Tata, several other companies relocated to Gujarat. The Modi government finished the process of taking electricity to every village in Gujarat its predecessor had almost completed. Modi significantly changed the state's system of power distribution, greatly impacting farmers. Gujarat expanded the Jyotigram Yojana scheme, in which agricultural electricity was separated from other rural electricity; the agricultural electricity was rationed to fit scheduled irrigation demands, reducing its cost. Early protests by farmers ended when those who benefitted found their electricity supply had stabilised but, according to an assessment study, corporations and large farmers benefited from the policy at the expense of small farmers and labourers. A contentious debate surrounds the assessment of Gujarat's economic development during Modi's tenure as chief minister. The state's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rate averaged 10% during his tenure, a rate similar to those of other highly industrialised states, and above that of India as a whole. Gujarat also had a high rate of economic growth in the 1990s, before Modi took office; some scholars have stated growth did not much accelerate during his tenure. Under Modi, Gujarat topped the World Bank's "ease of doing business" rankings among Indian states for two consecutive years. In 2013, a report measuring governance, growth, citizens' rights, and labour and business regulation among the country's 20 largest states, ranked Gujarat first among Indian states for "economic freedom". In the later years of Modi's government, Gujarat's economic growth was frequently used as an argument to counter allegations of communalism. Tax breaks and land for businesses were easier to obtain in Gujarat than in other states. Modi's policies of making Gujarat attractive for investment included the creation of Special Economic Zones in which labour laws were greatly weakened. Despite its growth rate, Gujarat had a relatively poor record on human development, poverty relief, nutrition and education during Modi's tenure. In 2013, Gujarat ranked 13th in India with respect to rates of poverty, and 21st in education. Nearly 45 percent of children under five were underweight and 23 percent were undernourished, putting the state in the "alarming" category on the India State Hunger Index. A study by UNICEF and the Indian government found Gujarat under Modi had a poor record in immunisation of children. From 2001 to 2011, Gujarat did not change its position relative to the rest of the country with respect to poverty and female literacy, remaining near the median of the 29 Indian states. It showed a marginal improvement in rates of infant mortality and its position with respect to individual consumption declined. The quality of education in government schools in Gujarat ranked below that of many Indian states. The state government's social policies generally did not benefit Muslims, Dalits and Adivasis, and generally increased social inequalities. Development in Gujarat was generally limited to the urban middle class, and citizens in rural areas and those from lower castes were increasingly marginalised. In 2013, the state ranked 10th of 21 Indian states in the Human Development Index. Under Modi, the state government spent less than the national average on education and healthcare. During its raids in 2013 and 2014, the CBI seized some diaries from two big Indian companies, Sahara Group and Aditya Birla Group. These diaries contained references of alleged payments made to leaders belonging to as many as 18 political parties including BJP, Congress, JDU, BJD etc. Among these were some entries mentioning "Gujarat CM" and "Ahmadabad Modiji". Citing these entries, on 21 December 2016, the opposition leader Rahul Gandhi alleged that Modi received cash bribes worth ₹65 crore (US$8.1 million) from Sahara Group and Aditya Birla Group when he was the Chief Minister of Gujarat. In November 2016, advocate Prashant Bhushan had filed a plea in the Supreme Court of India asking for investigation of the alleged bribe payments made to some senior public servants including Modi. A Supreme Court bench headed by Justice Arun Kumar Mishra dismissed the plea in January 2017 stating that the evidence provided was insufficient. Later on, Justice Mishra was criticised by a section of advocates and activists for siding with the Modi government in multiple judgements during his tenure at the Supreme Court. The Wire questioned the manner in which the Supreme Court buried the Sahara-Birla diaries' investigation. In September 2013, Modi was named the BJP's candidate for prime minister ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha election. Several BJP leaders, including BJP founding member L. K. Advani who cited concern with leaders who were "concerned with their personal agendas", expressed opposition to Modi's candidature. Modi played a dominant role in the BJP's 2009 general election campaign. Several people who voted for the BJP stated they would have voted for another party if Modi had not been the prime-ministerial candidate. The focus on Modi as an individual was unusual for a BJP election campaign. The election was described as a referendum on Narendra Modi. During the campaign, Modi focused on corruption scandals under the previous Congress government, and played on his image as a politician who had created a high rate of GDP growth in Gujarat. He projected himself as a person who could bring about "development" without focusing on specific policies. His message found support among young and middle-class people. The BJP under Modi was able to downplay concerns about the protection of religious minorities and Modi's commitment to secularism, areas in which he had previously received criticism. Prior to the election, Modi's media image had centred around his role in the 2002 Gujarat riots but during the campaign, the BJP focused on Modi's neoliberal ideology and the Gujarat model of development. The BJP sought to identify itself with political leaders who publicly opposed Hindu nationalism, including B. R. Ambedkar, Subhas Chandra Bose and Ram Manohar Lohia. Hindutva remained a part of the campaign; BJP leaders used Hindutva-based rhetoric in several states. Communal tensions were played upon, especially in Uttar Pradesh and Northeast India. A proposal for the controversial Uniform Civil Code was a part of the BJP's election manifesto. The BJP's campaign was assisted by its wide influence in the media. Modi's campaign blitz cost around ₹50 billion (US$630 million) and the BJP received extensive financial support from corporate donors. In addition to more-conventional campaign methods, Modi made extensive use of social media and addressed more than 1,000 rallies via hologram appearances. The BJP won 31 percent of the vote, and more-than-doubled its number of seats in the Lok Sabha to 282, becoming the first party to win a majority of seats on its own since 1984. Voter dissatisfaction with the Congress and with regional parties in North India, and support from the RSS were reasons for the BJP's success. In states such as Uttar Pradesh, where the BJP performed well, it drew exceptionally high support from upper-caste Hindus, and its Muslim vote increased to 10 percent. The BJP performed particularly well in parts of the country that had recently experienced violence between Hindus and Muslims. The magnitude of the BJP's victory led many commentators to say the election constituted a political realignment away from progressive parties towards the right-wing. Modi's tweet announcing his victory was described as being emblematic of the political realignment away from a secular, socialist state towards capitalism and Hindu cultural nationalism. Modi was a candidate for the Lok Sabha constituencies Varanasi and Vadodara. He won in both constituencies, defeating Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal in Varanasi by 371,784 votes and Madhusudan Mistry of the Congress in Vadodara by 570,128 votes. India's president appointed Modi, who was unanimously elected leader of the BJP, Prime Minister of India. To comply with the law prohibiting MPs from representing more than one constituency, he vacated the Vadodara seat. On 13 October 2018, Modi was named the BJP candidate for prime minister in the 2019 general election. The BJP's chief campaigner was its president Amit Shah. Modi launched the party's Main Bhi Chowkidar ("I too am a watchman") campaign ahead of the general election, against the INC's campaign slogan Chowkidar Chor Hai ("The watchman is a thief"). In 2018, the Telugu Desam Party split from the NDA over the campaign for special status for Andhra Pradesh. Amit Shah launched the BJP's election campaign on 8 April 2019. In the campaign, the opposition targeted Modi on allegations of corruption over the Rafale deal with the Government of France, highlighting the controversy surrounding the deal. Modi's campaign focused on defence and national security, especially after the Pulwama attack and the retaliatory Balakot airstrike, which was counted as an achievement of his administration. Other topics in the campaign were development and good foreign relations in the first premiership. Modi contested the Lok Sabha election as a candidate for Varanasi; he won the seat by a margin of 479,505 votes, defeating Shalini Yadav of the Samajwadi Party (SP), who stood as a candidate for the SP-BSP alliance. Modi was unanimously appointed prime minister for a second time by the National Democratic Alliance after the alliance won the election for the second time with 353 seats in the Lok Sabha; the BJP alone won 303 seats. After the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) won a landslide in the 2014 Lok Sabha election, Modi was sworn in as Prime Minister (PM) of India on 26 May 2014, becoming the first Indian PM to be born after the country's independence from the British Empire in 1947. Modi's second term as PM began in 2019 following the NDA's 2019 Lok Sabha election win. On 6 December 2020, he became the fourth-longest-serving Prime Minister of India and the longest-serving non-Congress prime minister. Modi's first year as PM saw significant centralisation of power. Modi, who initially lacked a majority in the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of Indian Parliament, passed a number of ordinances to enact his policies, leading to further centralisation of power. His administration enacted a bill to increase its control over the appointment of judges and reducing that of the judiciary. In December 2014, he abolished the Planning Commission, replacing it with the National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog), concentrating the power previously with the planning commission in the person of the PM. The Planning Commission had in previous years been criticised for creating inefficiency in the government and of not fulfilling its role of improving social welfare but since the economic liberalisation of the 1990s, it had been the major government body responsible for measures related to social justice. In its first year of administration, the Modi government launched investigations through the Intelligence Bureau into numerous civil society organisations and foreign non-governmental organisations (NGOs) on the grounds these organisations were slowing economic growth. The investigations were criticised as a witch hunt. International humanitarian aid organisation Medecins Sans Frontieres, and environmental nonprofit organisation Sierra Club and Avaaz were among the groups that were investigated. Cases of sedition and terrorism laws were filed against individuals who criticised the government. This led to discontent within the BJP about his style of functioning and drew comparisons to the governing style of Indira Gandhi. Modi repealed 1,200 obsolete laws in first three years as prime minister; 1,301 such laws had been repealed by previous governments in the previous 64 years. Modi launched the Digital India programme with the goal of ensuring government services are available electronically, build infrastructure to provide high-speed Internet access to rural areas, boost manufacturing of electronic goods in the country, and promote digital literacy. In 2019, a law to reserve 10 percent of educational admission and government jobs for economically disadvantaged individuals was passed. In 2016, Modi's administration launched the Ujjwala scheme to provide free liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) connections to rural households. The scheme led to an additional 24% of Indian households having access to LPG in 2019 as compared to 2014. In 2022, the government eliminated LPG subsidies for all citizens except those covered by the Ujjwala program. Since May 2023, ethnic tensions between some groups have resulted in violent clashes in Manipur. After 1 month of the violence, nearly 100 were killed and more than 36,000 people were displaced. Modi has been criticised for his lack of reaction towards the violence. The activities of a number of Hindu nationalist organisations increased in scope after Modi's appointment as prime minister, sometimes with the government's support. These activities included a Hindu religious conversion programme, a campaign against the supposed Islamic practice of "Love Jihad" and attempts to celebrate Nathuram Godse, the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi, by members of the right-wing organisation Hindu Mahasabha. Government officials, including the Home Minister, defended the conversion programmes. Links between the BJP and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) grew stronger under Modi. The RSS provided organisational support to the BJP's electoral campaigns while the Modi administration appointed RSS-affiliated individuals to prominent government positions. In 2014, Yellapragada Sudershan Rao, who had previously been associated with the RSS, became the chairperson of the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR). Historians and former members of the ICHR, including those sympathetic to the BJP, questioned Rao's credentials as a historian and stated the appointment was part of an agenda of cultural nationalism. During its first term, the Modi administration appointed other RSS members to lead universities and research institutions, and recruitment of faculty members favouring the RSS increased. According to scholars Nandini Sundar and Kiran Bhatty, many of these appointees did not possess the qualifications for their positions. The Modi administration also made numerous changes in government-approved history textbooks that de-emphasised the role of Jawaharlal Nehru and glorified that of Modi while also portraying Indian society as harmonious, and without conflict and inequity. In 2019, the Modi administration passed a citizenship law that provides a route to Indian citizenship for persecuted religious minorities from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan who are Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis or Christians, but does not grant eligibility to Muslims. This was first time religion had been overtly used as a criterion for citizenship under Indian law; it attracted global criticism and prompted widespread protests that were halted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Counter-demonstrations against the protests developed into the 2020 Delhi riots, caused chiefly by Hindu mobs attacking Muslims. Fifty-three people were killed in the protests, two-thirds of whom were Muslim. On 5 August 2020, Modi visited Ayodhya after the Supreme Court in 2019 ordered contested land in Ayodhya to be handed to a trust to build a Hindu temple and ordered the government to give alternative 5 acres (2.0 ha) of land to the Sunni Waqf Board for the purpose of building a mosque. Modi became the first PM to visit temples at Ram Janmabhoomi and Hanuman Garhi. Soon after Modi returned to power in 2019, he took three actions the RSS had long called for. The practice of Triple Talaq was made illegal and became a punishable act from 1 August 2019. The administration repealed Article 370 of the Indian constitution that granted autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir, and also abrogated its statehood, reorganising it into the union territories Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. The region was placed under a lockdown and internet services were suspended and were not completely restored until February 2021. Thousands of people, including hundreds of political leaders, were detained. The Supreme Court of India did not hear constitutional challenges to the reorganisation or the Citizenship Amendment Act. According to Bhatty and Sundar, this is an example of the subversion of the Supreme Court and other major institutions, which were filled with appointees favouring the BJP. The Modi government's economic policies focused on privatisation and liberalisation of the economy, and were based on a neoliberal framework. Modi liberalised India's foreign direct investment policies, allowing more foreign investment in several industries, including defence and railways. Other proposed reforms included making the forming of unions more difficult for workers, and making recruitment and dismissal easier for employers; some of these proposals were abandoned after protests. The reforms drew strong opposition from unions: on 2 September 2015, eleven of the country's largest unions—including one affiliated with the BJP—struck. The Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh (Indian Workers Union), a constituent of the Sangh Parivar (Family of the RSS), stated the underlying motivation of labour reforms favoured corporations over labourers. The funds dedicated to poverty-reduction programmes and social welfare measures were greatly reduced by Modi's administration. The money spent on social programmes declined from 14.6 percent of GDP during the previous Congress government to 12.6 percent during Modi's first year in office, and spending on health and family welfare declined by 15 percent. The government lowered corporate taxes, abolished the wealth tax, increased sales taxes, and reduced customs duties on gold and jewellery. In October 2014, the Modi government deregulated diesel prices. During Modi's first term, his government reduced spending on education as share of the budget: over five years, education spending dropped from 0.7 percent of GDP to 0.5 percent. The percentage of the budget spent on children's nutrition, education, health, and associated programmes was almost halved between 2014 and 2022. Capital expenditure on transport infrastructure significantly rose, increasing from less than 0.4 percent of GDP in 2014 to 1.7 percent in 2023. In September 2014, Modi introduced the Make in India initiative to encourage foreign companies to manufacture products in India with the goal of turning the country into a global manufacturing hub. Supporters of economic liberalisation supported the initiative but critics said it would allow foreign corporations to capture a greater share of the Indian market. Modi's administration passed a land-reform bill that allowed it to acquire private agricultural land without conducting a social impact assessment, and without the consent of the farmers who owned it. The bill was passed via an executive order after it faced opposition in Parliament but was eventually allowed to lapse. Modi's government passed the Goods and Services Tax, the biggest tax reform in the country since independence, subsuming around 17 taxes and became effective on 1 July 2017. In his first cabinet decision, Modi set up a team to investigate black money. On 9 November 2016, the government demonetised ₹500 and ₹1000 banknotes with the intention of curbing corruption, black money, terrorism and the use of counterfeit currency. The move led to severe cash shortages, and a steep decline in the Indian stock indices BSE SENSEX and NIFTY 50, and sparked widespread protests throughout the country. It is estimated 1.5 million jobs were lost and that one percent of the country's GDP was wiped out. Several deaths were linked to the rush to exchange cash. In the subsequent year, the number of income tax returns filed for individuals rose by 25 percent and the number of digital transactions steeply increased. Modi's administration has observed a decline in GDP growth and increasing joblessness compared to the previous administration under Manmohan Singh. During the first eight years of Modi's premiership, India's GDP grew at an average rate of 5.5% percent compared tho the rate of 7.03 percent under the previous government. Income inequality increased. An internal government report said in 2017, unemployment increased to its highest level in 45 years. The loss of jobs was attributed to the 2016 banknote demonetisation, and the effects of the Goods and Services Tax. GDP growth was 6.12 percent in the 2018–19 financial year, with an inflation rate of 3.4 percent. In the year 2019–20, the GDP growth rate slowed to 4.18 percent, while inflation increased to 4.7 percent. The Indian economy shrunk by 6.6 percent during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–21, and was estimated to grow at 8.2 percent the following financial year. In his first year as prime minister, Modi reduced the central government's healthcare spending. In January 2015, the Modi government launched its New Health Policy (NHP), which did not increase the government's spending on healthcare but emphasised the role of private healthcare organisations. This represented a shift away from the policy of the previous Congress government, which had supported programmes to assist public health goals, including a reduction in child and maternal mortality rates. The National Health Mission, which included public health programmes targeted at these indices, received nearly 20 percent less funding in 2015 than in the previous year. The Modi administration reduced the healthcare budget by a further 15% in its second year. The healthcare budget for the following year rose by 19%; private insurance providers positively viewed the budget but public health experts criticised its emphasis on the role of private healthcare providers and said it represented a shift away from public health facilities. The healthcare budget rose by 11.5% in 2018; the change included an allocation of ₹20 billion (US$250 million) for a government-funded health insurance program and a decrease in the budget of the National Health Mission. Modi emphasised his government's efforts at sanitation as a means of ensuring good health. On 2 October 2014, Modi launched the Swachh Bharat Mission ("Clean India") campaign. The campaign's stated goals included the elimination of open defecation and manual scavenging within five years. As part of the programme, the Indian government began constructing millions of toilets in rural areas and encouraging people to use them. The government also announced plans to build new sewage treatment plants, and planned to construct 60 million toilets by 2019. The construction projects faced allegations of corruption and severe difficulty in getting people to use the newly constructed toilets. Sanitation cover in India increased from 38.7% in October 2014 to 84.1% in May 2018 but use of the new sanitary facilities was lower than the government's targets. In 2018, the World Health Organization (WHO) stated at least 180,000 diarrhoeal deaths in rural India were averted after the launch of the sanitation effort. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Modi administration invoked the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897 and Disaster Management Act, 2005. The same month, all commercial domestic and international flights were suspended. Modi announced a 14-hour curfew on 22 March, and followed with a three-week "total lockdown" two days later. Restrictions were gradually lifted beginning in April, and were completely revoked in November 2020. A second wave of the pandemic that began in March 2021 was significantly more devastating than the first; some parts of India experienced shortages of vaccines, hospital beds, oxygen cylinders and other medical supplies. In late April India reported over 400,000 cases in a 24-hour period, the first country to do so. India began its vaccination programme in January 2021; in January 2022, India announced it had administered about 1.7 billion doses of vaccines and that more than 720 million people were fully vaccinated. In May 2022, the WHO estimated 4.7 million people had died of COVID-19 in India, mostly during the second wave in mid 2021—almost 10 times the Indian government's estimate. The Modi administration rejected the WHO's estimate. Foreign policy played a small role in Modi's election campaign and did not feature prominently in the BJP's election manifesto. Modi's foreign policy, similarly to that of the preceding Congress government, focused on improving economic ties, security and regional relations. Modi continued Manmohan Singh's policy of "multi-alignment". The Modi administration tried to attract foreign investment in the Indian economy from several sources, especially East Asia, with the use of slogans such as "Make in India" and "Digital India". The government also tried to improve relations with Islamic nations in the Middle East, such as Bahrain, Iran, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, as well as with Israel. India's relationship with the United States improved after Narendra Modi became PM. During the run-up to the general election, there was wide-ranging scepticism about future of the strategic bilateral relationship under Modi's premiership; in 2005, while Chief Minister of Gujarat, Modi was denied a US visa during the presidency of George W. Bush for his poor human-rights record. Sensing Modi's victory well before the election, US Ambassador to India Nancy Powell contacted Modi as part of greater rapprochement from the West. Following Modi's 2014 appointment as India's PM, President Obama congratulated him over the telephone and invited Modi to visit the US. The Modi government enjoyed a positive relationship with the US during the presidencies of Barack Obama and his successor Donald Trump. During the first few months after his appointment as PM, Modi visited a number of countries in support of his policy, and attended the BRICS, ASEAN and G20 summits. One of Modi's first visits as PM was to Nepal, during which he promised one billion US dollars in aid. Modi also made several visits to the US; this was described as an unexpected development because of the US's earlier denial of a US travel visa to Modi over his role in the 2002 Gujarat riots. The visits were expected to strengthen diplomatic and trade relations between the two countries. In 2015, the Indian parliament ratified a land-exchange deal with Bangladesh in the India–Bangladesh enclaves, which the government of Manmohan Singh had initiated. Modi's administration brought renewed attention to India's "Look East Policy", which was instituted in 1991. The policy, which was renamed the "Act East Policy", involved directing Indian foreign policy towards East Asia and Southeast Asia. The government signed agreements to improve land connectivity with Myanmar through the Indian state of Manipur; this represented a break with India's historic engagement with Myanmar, which prioritised border security over trade. China–India relations rapidly deteriorated following the 2020 China–India skirmishes. Modi pledged aid of $900 million to Afghanistan, which he visited twice and was honoured with Afghanistan's highest civilian honour in 2016. In September 2022, Modi appeared to have developed a strong personal relationship with Russia's President Vladimir Putin. India hosted the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit, during which the African Union joined the G20 as a permanent member. In an interview on 26 August 2023, Prime Minister Modi expressed optimism about the G20 countries' evolving agenda under India's presidency, shifting toward a human-centric development approach that aligns with the concerns of the Global South, including addressing climate change, debt restructuring through the G20's Common Framework for Debt, and a strategy for regulation of global cryptocurrencies. News sources CNN, Reuters and the Washington Post reported that in the lead up to the G20 meeting, the Indian authorities, including the Archaeological Survey of India embarked on a mass demolition drive against homeless shelters and slum neighborhoods across New Delhi resulting in the eviction of its marginalized residents The Indian government's press agency Press Information Bureau rejected the claims, and said that they were done as per the Supreme court of India orders and not linked to the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit. India's nominal military spending steadily increased under Modi. During Modi's tenure, the military budget declined, both as a fraction of GDP and when adjusted for inflation. A substantial portion of the military budget was devoted to personnel costs commentators wrote the budget was constraining Indian military modernisation. Modi promised to be "tough on Pakistan" during his election campaign and repeatedly called Pakistan an exporter of terrorism. On 29 September 2016, the Modi administration said Indian Army had conducted a surgical strike on terror launch pads in Azad Kashmir; the Indian media said up to 50 terrorists and Pakistani soldiers had been killed in the strike. Pakistan denied any surgical strikes to have taken place. Subsequent reports said India's statement about the scope of the strike and the number of casualties had been exaggerated. In February 2019, India carried out airstrikes against a supposed terrorist camp in Pakistan; no targets of significance were hit. Further military skirmishes, including cross-border shelling and the loss of an Indian aircraft, occurred. Eight months after the incident, the Modi administration admitted that six Indian military personnel had been killed by friendly fire. In May 2020, Chinese and Indian troops engaged in an aggressive skirmishes along the Sino-Indian border, including near the disputed Pangong Lake, Ladakh, and the Tibet Autonomous Region and near the border between Sikkim and the Tibet Autonomous Region. Additional clashes took place in eastern Ladakh along the Line of Actual Control (LAC). In 2020, skirmishes between the nations led to many border clashes, responses and reactions from both sides. A series of talks between India and China were held, using military and diplomatic means for peace. The first border clash reported in 2021 was on 20 January; this was referred to as a minor border clash in Sikkim. Modi has been criticised for maintaining silence over ceding about 2,000 sq km land to China since June 2020. In December 2021, Modi signed an agreement with Russian leader Vladimir Putin to extend military technical cooperation. The Modi government bought the S-400 missile system, an anti-missile striking system, strengthening the relationship between the two nations. India refused to condemn the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine and stayed neutral. The Indian government's Operation Ganga initiative sought to return Indians stranded in Ukraine during the war. More than 19,000 Indian nationals were evacuated, including some from neighbouring countries. While naming his cabinet, Modi renamed the Ministry of Environment and Forests the "Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change", and more-than-halved its money allocation in his administration's first budget. The new ministry removed or diluted a number of laws related to environmental protection, and others related to industrial activity. The government also tried to reconstitute the National Board for Wildlife so it would no longer have representatives from NGOs but the Supreme Court of India blocked this move. Other changes included a reduction of ministry oversight on small mining projects and ending the requirement for approval from tribal councils for projects inside forested areas. Modi also lifted a moratorium on new industrial activity in India's most-polluted areas. The changes were welcomed by businesspeople but criticised by environmentalists. Speaking with Assamese students in 2014, Modi downplayed climate change, saying, "Climate has not changed. We have changed. Our habits have changed. Our habits have got spoiled. Due to that, we have destroyed our entire environment." Later in his administration, however, he has called for climate action, especially with the proliferation of clean energy. In 2015, Modi proposed the International Solar Alliance initiative to encourage investment in solar energy. Holding developed countries responsible, Modi and his government have said India has had a negligible historical role in climate change. At the COP26 conference, Modi announced India would target carbon neutrality by 2070 and expand its renewable energy capacity. Indian environmentalists and economists applauded the decision, describing it as bold climate action. India has become the only major economy to be on track to meet its Paris Agreement goals. It has achieved 10 percent of ethanol blending five months ahead of schedule. Under Modi's tenure, India has experienced democratic backsliding. According to one study, "The BJP government incrementally but systemically attacked nearly all existing mechanisms that are in place to hold the political executive to account, either by ensuring that these mechanisms became subservient to the political executive or were captured by party loyalists". The Modi government has used state power to intimidate and stifle critics in the media and academia, undermining freedom of expression and alternative sources of information. His administration has been criticised for using a democratic mandate to undermine democratic processes, including focusing on Hindu-nationalist priorities rather than economic development. Modi's second term as PM, in particular, saw the erosion of civil rights and press freedom. Narendra Modi has received consistently high approval ratings during his premiership; he is often ranked in popular opinion polls as the greatest prime minister in Indian history. Modi is a vegetarian and teetotaller, who has a frugal lifestyle, and is a workaholic and introvert. On 31 August 2012, he posted on Google Hangouts, becoming the first Indian politician to interact with citizens on a live chat. Modi has been called a fashion icon for his signature crisply ironed, half-sleeved kurta, and for a suit with his name repeatedly embroidered in the pinstripes, which he wore during a state visit by US President Barack Obama, which drew public and media attention, and criticism. Scholars and biographers have described Modi's personality as energetic, eccentric, arrogant and charismatic. The nomination of Modi for the prime-ministership drew attention to his reputation as "one of contemporary India's most controversial and divisive politicians". During the 2014 election campaign, the BJP projected an image of Modi as a strong, masculine leader who would be able to take difficult decisions. Campaigns in which he has participated have focused on Modi as an individual, an unusual tactic for the BJP and RSS. Modi has relied upon his reputation as a politician able to bring about economic growth and development. Modi's role in the 2002 Gujarat riots continues to attract criticism and controversy. Modi's hardline Hindutva philosophy and the policies adopted by his government also continue to draw criticism, and have been seen as evidence of a majoritarian and exclusionary social agenda. During his premiership, Modi has received consistently high approval ratings; at the end of his first year in office, he received an overall approval rating of 87% in a Pew Research poll, with 68% of respondents rating him "very favourably" and 93% approving of his government. Modi's approval rating remained largely consistent at around 74% during his second year in office, according to a nationwide poll conducted by instaVaani. At the end of his second year in office, an updated Pew Research poll showed Modi continued to receive high overall approval ratings of 81%, with 57% of those polled rating him "very favourably". At the end of his third year in office, a further Pew Research poll showed Modi with an overall approval rating of 88%, his highest yet, with 69% of people polled rating him "very favourably". A poll conducted by The Times of India in May 2017 showed 77% of respondents rated Modi as "very good" and "good". In early 2017, a survey by Pew Research Center showed Modi to be the most popular figure in Indian politics. In a weekly analysis by Morning Consult called the Global Leader Approval Rating Tracker, Modi had the highest net approval rating as of 22 December 2020 of all government leaders in the 13 countries being tracked. Modi Kaka Ka Gaon (Modi uncle's town), a 2017 Indian Hindi-language drama film by Tushar Amrish Goel, is the first biopic about Modi. It stars Vikas Mahante in the titular role. PM Narendra Modi, a 2019 Hindi-language biographical drama film by Omung Kumar, stars Vivek Oberoi in the titular role and covers Modi's rise to the premiership. An Indian web series called Modi: Journey of a Common Man, which is based on the same premise, was released in May 2019 on the video streaming platform Eros Now with Ashish Sharma portraying Modi. 7 RCR (7, Race Course Road), a 2014 Indian docudrama political television series which charts the political careers of prominent Indian politicians, covered Modi's rise to the PM's office in the episodes "Story of Narendra Modi from 1950 to 2001", "Story of Narendra Modi in Controversial Years from 2001 to 2013", "Truth Behind Brand Modi", "Election Journey of Narendra Modi to 7 RCR", and "Masterplan of Narendra Modi's NDA Govt", with Sangam Rai in the role of Modi. India: The Modi Question, a 2023 BBC documentary, examines Modi's role in the 2002 Gujarat riots and his record as Prime Minister of India. The Indian government banned the documentary, drawing widespread criticism. Other portrayals of Modi include those by Rajit Kapur in the film Uri: The Surgical Strike (2019) and Vikram Gokhale in the web-television series Avrodh: The Siege Within (2020), both of which are based on the 2016 Uri attack and the subsequent Indian surgical strikes. Gokhale reprised the role in the sequel Avrodh: The Siege Within 2 (2022), which is based on the 2016 Indian banknote demonetisation. Pratap Singh played a character based on Modi in Chand Bujh Gaya (2005) which is set against the backdrop of the Gujarat riots. Modi appeared in an episode of Discovery Channel's show Man vs. Wild with the host Bear Grylls in July 2019, becoming the second world leader after Barack Obama to appear in the reality show. In the show, Modi treks through jungles, and talks about nature and wildlife conservation with Grylls. The episode was recorded in Jim Corbett National Park, Uttarakhand, and was broadcast in India and 180 other countries. Modi hosts Mann Ki Baat, a monthly radio programme on All India Radio, and has conducted the competition Pariksha Pe Charcha, and discussions for students and the issues they face in examinations. In March 2012 and June 2014, Narendra Modi appeared on the cover of the Asian edition of Time Magazine, becoming one of the few Indian politicians to have done so. In 2014, CNN-News18 (formally CNN-IBN) news network awarded Modi Indian of the Year. In June 2015, Modi was featured on the cover of Time Magazine. In 2014, 2015, 2017, 2020 and 2021, he was named one of Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People in the World. Forbes Magazine ranked him the 15th Most Powerful Person in the World in 2014 and the 9th Most Powerful Person in the World in 2015, 2016 and 2018. In 2015, Modi was ranked the 13th Most Influential Person in the World by Bloomberg Markets Magazine. In 2021, Time called Modi the third "pivotal leader" of independent India after Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi, who "dominated the country's politics like no one since them". Modi was ranked fifth on Fortune Magazine's first annual list of the "World's Greatest Leaders" in 2015. In 2017, Gallup International Association (GIA) conducted a poll and ranked Modi third-top leader of the world. In 2016, a wax statue of Modi was unveiled at Madame Tussauds wax museum in London. In 2015, Modi was named one of Time's "30 Most Influential People on the Internet" because he was the second-most-followed politician on Twitter and Facebook. In 2018, he was the third-most-followed world leader on Twitter and the most-followed world leader on Facebook and Instagram. In October 2018, Modi received United Nations' highest environmental award, the Champions of the Earth, for policy leadership by "pioneering work in championing" the International Solar Alliance and "new areas of levels of cooperation on environmental action". Modi was conferred the 2018 Seoul Peace Prize in recognition of "his dedication to improving international co-operation, raising global economic growth, accelerating the Human Development of the people of India by fostering economic growth and furthering the development of democracy through anti-corruption and social integration efforts". He is the first Indian to win the award. Following his second swearing-in ceremony as Prime Minister of India, a picture of Modi was displayed on the facade of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) building in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. The Texas India Forum hosted a community event in honour of Modi on 22 September 2019 at NRG Stadium in Houston, Texas. The event was attended by over 50,000 people and several American politicians, including President Donald Trump, making it the largest gathering for an invited foreign leader visiting the United States other than the Pope. At the event, Modi was presented with the Key to the City of Houston by Mayor Sylvester Turner. The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation awarded Modi the Global Goalkeeper Award on 24 September 2019 in New York City, in recognition of the Swachh Bharat Mission and "the progress India has made in providing safe sanitation under his leadership". In 2020, Modi was among eight world leaders who were awarded the parody Ig Nobel Prize in Medical Education "for using the COVID-19 viral pandemic to teach the world that politicians can have a more immediate effect on life and death than scientists and doctors can". On 21 December 2020, US President Donald Trump awarded Modi the Legion of Merit for improving India–United States relations. On 24 February 2021, Gujarat Cricket Association renamed Motera Stadium in Ahmedabad—the largest cricket stadium in the world—Narendra Modi Stadium. ^ = February 2002 by-poll election; and ♦ = December 2002 Assembly election. In 2008, Modi published a Gujarati book titled Jyotipunj, which contains profiles of RSS leaders. The longest was of M. S. Golwalkar, under whose leadership the RSS expanded and whom Modi refers to as Pujniya Shri Guruji ("Guru worthy of worship"). According to The Economic Times, Modi's intention was to explain the workings of the RSS to his readers, and to reassure RSS members he remained ideologically aligned with them. After becoming the Prime Minister he also authored a book called Exam Warriors, a guide for children to commendably face exams. Modi has written eight other books, mostly containing short stories for children. 'Abundance in Millets,' a song that includes Prime Minister Narendra Modi, has received a nomination in the Best Global Music Performance category for the 2024 Grammy Awards. Modi used to maintain a close and publicised relationship with his mother, Hiraben. Modi, Narendra (2004). Aapaatkaal Mein Gujarat (in Hindi) (Samskarana 1 ed.). New Delhi: Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 81-7315-466-X. OCLC 56367646. ——————— (2011). Convenient Action: Gujarat's Response to Challenges of Climate Change. New Delhi: Macmillan Publishers India. ISBN 978-0-230-33192-1. OCLC 696558495. ——————— (2015). Social Harmony. Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-93-5048-980-2. ——————— (2015). Jyotipunj (in Hindi). Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-93-5186-231-4. ——————— (21 December 2015). India's Singapore Story. ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute. ISBN 978-981-4695-73-2. ——————— (2017). Mann Ki Baat: A Social Revolution on Radio. BlueKraft Digital Foundation. ISBN 978-9350359907. ——————— (22 April 2014). A Journey: Poems by Narendra Modi. Translated by Manthi, Rajiv. Rupa Publications. ISBN 978-81-291-3386-1. ——————— (3 February 2018). Exam Warriors. Penguin India. ISBN 978-0-14-344150-2. ——————— (2018). Abode of Love. Rajpal Publishers. ISBN 978-9350642382. ——————— (2020). Letters to Mother [Saakshi Bhaav]. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-9353576325. ——————— (2018) [2017]. President Pranab Mukherjee: A Statesman. Translated by Joshi, Varun. The Statesman. ISBN 978-8192925554. Bal Narendra: Childhood Stories of Narendra Modi. Rannade Prakashan. 2014. ISBN 978-93-83923-78-6. Bharatiya Janata Party List of prime ministers of India Opinion polling on the Narendra Modi premiership Previously known as 7, Race Course Road Narendra Modi was born Narendrabhai Damodardas Modi on 17 September 1950. He uses Damodardas as his middle name—Gujaratis have a tradition of using the names of their fathers as their middle names—but he is widely known as Narendra Modi. (Marino 2014, pp. 4–5) Sources stating that RSS had a deep impact on the political hierarchy of the BJP, specially in the case of Narendra Modi. Sources describing Modi's administration as complicit in the 2002 violence. In 2012, a court stated that investigations had found no evidence against Modi. Sources stating that Modi has failed to improve human development indices in Gujarat. Sources describing that India has experienced a backslide in democracy: Sources discussing the controversy surrounding Modi. Applications were filed with the Prime Minister's Office (PMO) under the RTI Act seeking details of his arrest. In reply, the PMO said it maintains official records on Modi only since he became the prime minister in 2014. Despite this claim, the official website of the PMO contains information about Modi from the 1950s. Replying to an RTI query, the School of Open Learning said it did not have any data of students who received a BA degree in 1978. Jayantibhai Patel, a former political science professor of Gujarat University, said the subjects listed in Modi's MA degree were not offered by the university when Modi was studying there. In 2016, Delhi University deemed the BA degree to be authentic. The exact number of people killed in the train burning is variously reported. For example, the BBC says it was 59, while The Guardian put the figure at 60. "The Narendra Modi led government completed two years in power in May 2016 and the prime minister has made his mark on both the domestic and foreign policy fronts. It is important to assess how successful his initiatives have been in the arena of foreign affairs in comparison to his predecessors. In this regard, this paper identifies and examines the key trends and issues in foreign policy under the Modi led administration and the measures needed to translate speeches and policies into action. Modi government has also taken a serious node of relations with middle-east nations, as well as Iran and Israel." "Narendra Modi Fast Facts". CNN. 6 September 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Jashodaben, named by Narendra Modi as his wife, prays for him to become PM". NDTV. Press Trust of India. 11 April 2014. Archived from the original on 17 July 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020. Asrar, Nadim (26 February 2014). "Narendra Modi's political journey from RSS worker to BJP's PM candidate". NDTV. Archived from the original on 8 August 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2015. "PM Modi turns 69: A timeline of his political career". Deccan Herald. 17 September 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Tiwari, Ravish (27 November 2014). "The low-profile RSS apparatchik is the newface of power in the NDA". India Today. Retrieved 13 January 2021. Bobbio, Tommaso (1 May 2012). "Making Gujarat Vibrant: Hindutva, development and the rise of subnationalism in India". Third World Quarterly. 33 (4): 657–672. doi:10.1080/01436597.2012.657423. S2CID 154422056. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Nussbaum, Martha Craven (2008). The Clash Within: Democracy, Religious Violence, and India's Future. Harvard University Press. pp. 17–28, 50–51. ISBN 978-0-674-03059-6. JSTOR 27639120. Shani, Orrit (2007). Communalism, Caste and Hindu Nationalism: The Violence in Gujarat. Cambridge University Press. pp. 168–173. ISBN 978-0-521-68369-2. Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Buncombe, Andrew (19 September 2011). "A rebirth dogged by controversy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 25 December 2011. Retrieved 10 October 2012. Jaffrelot, Christophe (June 2013). "Gujarat Elections: The Sub-Text of Modi's 'Hattrick'—High Tech Populism and the 'Neo-middle Class'". Studies in Indian Politics. 1 (1): 79–95. doi:10.1177/2321023013482789. S2CID 154404089. Retrieved 29 August 2021. * Jaffrelot, Christophe (2021), Modi's India: Hindu Nationalism and the Rise of Ethnic Democracy, translated by Schoch, Cynthia, Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, pp. 40–41, ISBN 978-0-691-20680-6, archived from the original on 22 June 2023, retrieved 22 June 2023 Shahani, Nishant (2021), Pink Revolutions: Globalization, Hindutva, and Queer Triangles in Contemporary India, Critical Ethnic Studies Association series, Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press, ISBN 978-0-8101-4363-0, archived from the original on 22 June 2023, retrieved 22 June 2023 Dhattiwala, Raheel (2019), Keeping the Peace: Spatial Differences in Hindu-Muslim Violence in Gujarat in 2002, Cambridge University Press, p. 73, ISBN 978-1-108-49759-6, archived from the original on 22 June 2023, retrieved 22 June 2023 Kinnvall, Catarina (2019), "Populism, ontological insecurity and Hindutva: Modi and the masculinization of Indian politics", Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 32 (3): 238–302, 295, doi:10.1080/09557571.2019.1588851, S2CID 164991567 "India Gujarat Chief Minister Modi cleared in riots case". BBC News. BBC. 10 April 2012. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Dasgupta, Manas (10 April 2012). "SIT finds no proof against Modi, says court". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Lalwani, Sameer; Tallo, Emily (17 April 2019), "Did India shoot down a Pakistani F-16 in February? This just became a big deal: There are broader implications for India — and the United States", Washington Post, archived from the original on 30 November 2020, retrieved 27 January 2023 Hall, Ian (2019), "India's 2019 General Election: National Security and the Rise of the Watchmen", The Round Table: The Commonwealth Journal of International Affairs, 108 (5): 507–519, 510, doi:10.1080/00358533.2019.1658360, S2CID 203266692 Jaffrelot, Christophe (2021), Modi's India: Hindu Nationalism and the Rise of Ethnic Democracy, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-22309-4 "Book review: How Pulwama made Modi's Balakot response his 1971 moment". Business Standard India. 30 November 2019. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Akhtar, Rais; Kirk, William, Jammu and Kashmir, State, India, Encyclopaedia Britannica, archived from the original on 19 June 2015, retrieved 7 August 2019 (subscription required) Osmańczyk, Edmund Jan (2003), Encyclopedia of the United Nations and International Agreements: G to M, Taylor & Francis, pp. 1191–, ISBN 978-0-415-93922-5, archived from the original on 17 January 2023, retrieved 8 June 2023 Ellis-Peterson, Hannah; Azizur Rahman, Shaikh (6 March 2020), "'I cannot find my father's body': Delhi's fearful Muslims mourn riot dead", The Guardian, Delhi, archived from the original on 6 March 2020, retrieved 7 March 2020 Wamsley, Laurel; Frayer, Lauren (26 February 2020), In New Delhi, Days Of Deadly Violence And Riots, NPR, archived from the original on 4 March 2020, retrieved 25 March 2020 Abi-Habib, Maria (5 March 2020), "Violence in India Threatens Its Global Ambitions", The New York Times, archived from the original on 5 March 2020, retrieved 6 March 2020 Ellis-Peterson, Hannah; Azizur Rahman, Shaikh (16 March 2020), "Delhi's Muslims despair of justice after police implicated in riots", The Guardian, Delhi, archived from the original on 17 March 2020, retrieved 17 March 2020 Gettleman, Jeffrey; Abi-Habib, Maria (1 March 2020), "In India, Modi's Policies Have Lit a Fuse", The New York Times, archived from the original on 1 March 2020, retrieved 1 March 2020 Grimley, Naomi; Cornish, Jack; Stylianou, Nassos (5 May 2022). "Covid: World's true pandemic death toll nearly 15 million, says WHO". BBC News. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Biswas, Soutik (5 May 2022). "Why India's real Covid toll may never be known". BBC. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Welzel, Christian; Inglehart, Ronald; Bernhangen, Patrick; Haerpfer, Christian W. (2019), "Introduction", in Welzel, Christian; Inglehart, Ronald; Bernhangen, Patrick; Haerpfer, Christian W. (eds.), Democratization, Oxford University Press, pp. 4, 7, ISBN 978-0-19-873228-0 Chidambaram, Soundarya (2022), "India's Inexorable Path to Autocratization: Looking beyond Modi and the populist lens", in Widmalm, Sten (ed.), Routledge Handbook of Autocratization in South Asia, Routledge, pp. 130–148, doi:10.4324/9781003042211-11, S2CID 245210210 Brunkert, Lennart; Kruse, Stefan; Welzel, Christian (3 April 2019). "A tale of culture-bound regime evolution: the centennial democratic trend and its recent reversal". Democratization. 26 (3): 422–443. doi:10.1080/13510347.2018.1542430. ISSN 1351-0347. S2CID 148625260. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Khaitan, Tarunabh (26 May 2020). "Killing a Constitution with a Thousand Cuts: Executive Aggrandizement and Party-state Fusion in India". Law & Ethics of Human Rights. 14 (1): 49–95. doi:10.1515/lehr-2020-2009. hdl:11343/241852. ISSN 2194-6531. S2CID 221083830. Ganguly, Sumit (18 September 2020). "India's Democracy Is Under Threat". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020. "India: Freedom in the World 2021 Country Report". Freedom House. 2021. Archived from the original on 4 March 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. Goel, Vindu; Gettleman, Jeffrey (2 April 2020). "Under Modi, India's Press Is Not So Free Anymore". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 9 March 2021. Kaul, Volker; Vajpeyi, Ananya (2020). Minorities and Populism – Critical Perspectives from South Asia and Europe. Springer Publishing. p. 22. ISBN 978-3-030-34098-8. "Global Leader Approval Ratings". Morning Consult. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "PM Narendra Modi continues to be most popular global leader with approval rating of 74%: Survey". The Times of India. 12 August 2022. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Visweswaran, Kamala (April 2011). Visweswaran, Kamala (ed.). Perspectives on Modern South Asia: A Reader in Culture, History, and Representation. Wiley-Blackwell. p. 188. ISBN 978-1-4051-0062-5. OCLC 682895189. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Stepan, Alfred (7 January 2015). "India, Sri Lanka, and the Majoritarian Danger". Journal of Democracy. 26: 128–140. doi:10.1353/jod.2015.0006. S2CID 153861198. Ganguly, Sumit (October 2014). "India's Watershed Vote: The Risks Ahead". Journal of Democracy. 25 (4): 56–60. doi:10.1353/jod.2014.0077. S2CID 154421269. "Indian PM Narendra Modi still mired in controversy, says expert". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 16 April 2015. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Robinson, Simon (11 December 2007). "India's Voters Torn Over Politician". Time. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2012. Burke, Jason (28 March 2010). "Gujarat leader Narendra Modi grilled for 10 hours at massacre inquiry". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2012. Messina, Karyne E. (21 September 2022). Resurgence of Global Populism: A Psychoanalytic Study of Projective Identification, Blame-Shifting and the Corruption of Democracy. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-000-64640-5. Marino 2014, pp. 13, 15, 29–30, 74. "Heeraben Modi: Indian PM Modi's mother dies aged 99". BBC. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Chatterji, Angana P.; Hansen, Thomas Blom; Jaffrelot, Christophe (2019), "Introduction", in Chatterji, Angana P.; Hansen, Thomas Blom; Jaffrelot, Christophe (eds.), Majoritarian State: How Hindu Nationalism Is Changing India, Oxford University Press, p. 3, ISBN 978-0-19-007817-1 Roberts, Adam (2017), Superfast Primetime Ultimate Nation: The Relentless Invention of Modern India, Public Affairs, ISBN 978-1-61039-670-7 Roberts, Adam (23 May 2015), Special Report, India: Modi's many tasks (PDF), London: Economist, archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2021, retrieved 22 December 2021 "Who is Prahlad Modi? Claimed PM Modi Never Sold Tea in an Old Video". Janbharat Times. 28 December 2022. Archived from the original on 12 July 2023. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Jose, Vinod K. (1 March 2012). "The Emperor Uncrowned: The Rise of Narendra Modi". The Caravan. pp. 2–4. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2013. Mukhopadhyay 2013, p. 82. Raina, Shilpa (14 March 2014). "Modi's life dominates publishing space (Election Special)". newkerala.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 4 April 2014. Marino 2014, p. 24. Pathak, Anil (2 October 2001). "Modi's meteoric rise". The Times of India. Retrieved 11 April 2013. N.P., Ullekh (26 January 2015). War Room: The People, Tactics and Technology behind Narendra Modi's 2014 Win. Roli Books Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-5194-068-5. Gowen, Annie (25 January 2015). "Abandoned as a child bride, wife of Narendra Modi hopes he calls". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Schultz, Kai; Kumar, Hari (7 February 2018). "Narendra Modi's Estranged Wife Escapes Unhurt From Car Crash in India". The New York Times. Retrieved 31 August 2021. Gowen, Annie (25 January 2015). "Abandoned as a child bride, wife of Narendra Modi hopes he calls". The Washington Post. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Narendra Modi Fast Facts". CNN. 12 September 2018. Archived from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Narendra Modi: From tea vendor to PM candidate". India Today. 13 September 2013. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2014. Mukhopadhyay 2013, A time of difference. Marino 2014, p. 25. * Marino 2014, pp. 30–33 Mukhopadhyay 2013, pp. 128–129 "Narendra Modi invited to Ramakrishna Mission's headquarter in Belurmath". The Economic Times. 26 May 2014. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 17 October 2014. "The tale of two Narendras: Narendra Modi and Swami Vivekananda". The Statesman. 4 July 2016. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 18 February 2017. Marino 2014, pp. 26–29. Guha 2007, pp. 491–492; Panda 2016, pp. 96; Mahurkar 2017, pp. 7–9. Mukhopadhyay 2013, pp. 131, 138. Unnithan, Sandeep (19 May 2014). "The man behind Modi: Lakshmanrao Inamdar". India Today. Ahmedabad. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014. Mukhopadhyay, Nilanjan (14 May 2014). "Narendra Modi: The making of the political leader". Mint. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2014. Marino 2014, p. 35. Sengupta, Shubbhabrata (27 March 2021). "A Sataygrah [sic] and Asatyagraha: Narendra Modi and the Liberation of Bangladesh". The Wire. Retrieved 31 August 2021. Lahiri, Ishadrita (27 March 2021). "Was Modi Arrested for Bangladesh Satyagraha? Here's What We Know". The Quint. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Delhi confidential: The Satyagraha". The Indian Express. 27 March 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "Political slugfest over PM Modi's 'Satyagraha for Bangladesh' remarks". The Tribune. 26 March 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "Modi's satyagraha talk in Dhaka sparks online war". The Times of India. 27 March 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021. Mukhopadhyay 2013, p. 138. Marino 2014, pp. 35–40. "RTI filed seeking info on Modi's claim of his arrest for supporting Bangladesh's independence". Dhaka Tribune. 27 March 2021. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "PMO cites a cut-off year of 2014 for recordkeeping on Modi". Telegraph India. 19 June 2021. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Narendra Modi degree row: DU college says it has no data of students passing out in 1978". India Today. 14 March 2017. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. "Narendra Modi's degree 'authentic': Delhi University Registrar Tarun Das". The Hindu. 10 May 2016. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2017. Avasthi, Yogesh (10 May 2016). "Globetrotting PM Modi was weakest in 'International Relations'". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Modi proves to be an astute strategist". Hindustan Times. 23 December 2007. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2014. "Degree row- PM Modi MA with first class: Gujarat University". The Indian Express. 2 May 2016. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "The curious case of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's degree". National Herald. 16 June 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "The curious case of TOI's report on Modi's 'dear friend'". Newslaundry. 3 October 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Huge discrepancy in Modi's MA degree, claims ex-Gujarat University professor". India Today. 12 May 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Subjects listed in Narendra Modi's Gujarat University degree were not in syllabus, says ex-professor". Scroll.in. 13 May 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Narendra Modi's degree 'authentic': Delhi University Registrar Tarun Das". The Hindu. 10 May 2016. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Guha 2007, p. 493–494. Kochanek & Hardgrave 2007, p. 205. Marino 2014, pp. 36–40. Marino 2014, pp. 71–74; Natarajan and Pooja 2019, pp. 98–101 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFNatarajan_and_Pooja2019 (help). Marino 2014, p. 43. Mukhopadhyay 2013, p. 150. Marino 2014, p. 65; Natarajan and Pooja 2019, pp. 98–99 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFNatarajan_and_Pooja2019 (help); Sen 2016, pp. 145–151; Hall 2016, p. 90 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHall2016 (help); Mukhopadhyay 2013, pp. 56–57 Patel, Aakar (22 December 2013). "The poetic side of Narendra Modi". Deccan Chronicle. Archived from the original on 24 May 2014. Retrieved 25 May 2014. Mehta, Harit (28 June 2004). "Gujarat not enamoured by poet Narendra Modi". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2016. Marino 2014, pp. 38–43, 46–50. Shekhar, Himanshu (2015). Management Guru Narendra Modi. Diamond Pocket Books Pvt Ltd. p. 64. ISBN 978-81-288-2803-4. Marino 2014, pp. 45–48, 54–59. Guha 2007; Marino 2014, pp. 56; Panda 2016, pp. fontcover; Rao 2020, pp. 228. Mukhopadhyay 2013, pp. 68–69. Marino 2014, pp. 60–63. "Gujarat-CM candidates: Gujarat Assembly Elections 2012: Narendra Modi profile". Zee News. Gujarat. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 20 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. Jain & E 2018, pp. 17–21 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFJainE2018 (help); Komireddi 2019, pp. 67–69; Kochanek & Hardgrave 2007, pp. 44–49; Marino 2014, p. 49; Panda 2016, p. 95; Kanrad 2018, pp. 87–91. Mehta, Harit (1 April 2014). "Six-year banishment led to Narendra Modi's metamorphosis". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 1 April 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2014. Venkatesan, V. (26 October 2001). "A pracharak as Chief Minister". frontlineonnet.com (magazine). Vol. 18 – Issue 21. New Delhi: Frontline. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2013. Marino 2014, pp. 78–79; Mukhopadhyay 2013, pp. 78–95. Phadnis, Aditi (2009). Business Standard Political Profiles of Cabals and Kings. Business Standard Books. pp. 116–21. ISBN 978-81-905735-4-2. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014. Bunsha, Dionne (26 October 2001). "A new oarsman". Frontline. Vol. 18 – Issue 21. Archived from the original on 28 August 2006. Retrieved 11 April 2013. Srivastava, Ritesh K. (8 April 2014). "Narendra Modi – Leading the race to 7 RCR". Zee News. Archived from the original on 24 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. Dasgupta, Manas (7 October 2001). "Modi sworn in Gujarat CM amidst fanfare". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Venkatesan, V. (15 March 2002). "A victory and many pointers". Frontline. Vol. 19 – Issue 05. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Eleven sentenced to death for India Godhra train blaze". BBC News. 1 March 2011. Archived from the original on 24 June 2014. Retrieved 25 June 2014. Burke, Jason (22 February 2011). "Godhra train fire verdict prompts tight security measures". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2014. Ghosh, Partha S. (Institute of Social Sciences, New Delhi; formerly, ICSSR National Fellow, and Professor of South Asian Studies at Jawaharlal Nehru University): OP-ED: South Asia's leaders have failed their region," Archived 7 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine opinion and historical analysis, 15 November 2021, Dhaka Tribune, retrieved 15 November 2021 Jaffrelot, Christophe (July 2003). "Communal Riots in Gujarat: The State at Risk?". Heidelberg Papers in South Asian and Comparative Politics. doi:10.11588/heidok.00004127. Archived from the original on 7 June 2007. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Gujarat riot death toll revealed". BBC News. 11 May 2005. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Murphy, Eamon (2010). "'We have no orders to save you': state terrorism, politics and communal violence in the Indian state of Gujarat, 2002". In Jackson, Richard; Murphy, Eamon Murphy; Poynting, Scott (eds.). Contemporary State Terrorism. New York, New York, USA: Routledge. pp. 84–103. ISBN 978-0-415-49801-2. Desai, Bharat; Pathak, Anil (1 March 2002). "Mobs rule Ahmedabad streets". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Dasgupta, Manas (1 March 2002). "140 killed as Gujarat bandh turns violent". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Decision to bring Godhra victims' bodies taken at top level". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 10 February 2012. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Campbell, John; Seiple, Chris; Hoover, Dennis R.; et al., eds. (2012). The Routledge Handbook of Religion and Security. Routledge. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-415-66744-9. Brass, Paul R. (15 July 2005). The Production of Hindu-Muslim Violence in Contemporary India. University of Washington Press. p. 388. ISBN 978-0-295-98506-0. Filkins, Dexter (2 December 2019). "Blood and Soil in Narendra Modi's India". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 22 April 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2020. Santhosh, R. (11 August 2015), Jacobsen, Knut A. (ed.), "Muslims in Contemporary India", Routledge Handbook of Contemporary India (1 ed.), Routledge, p. 393, doi:10.4324/9781315682570-31, ISBN 978-1-315-68257-0, retrieved 22 December 2022 Sengupta, Somini (28 April 2009). "Shadows of Violence Cling to Indian Politician". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 August 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2013. Nielsen, Kenneth Bo; Nilsen, Alf Gunvald (30 December 2021), "Hindu nationalist statecraft and Modi's authoritarian populism", Routledge Handbook of Autocratization in South Asia (1 ed.), London: Routledge, pp. 92–100, doi:10.4324/9781003042211-10, ISBN 978-1-00-304221-1, S2CID 245165294 "The Republic", A History of India (6 ed.), Routledge, p. 287, 2016, doi:10.4324/9781315628806-8, ISBN 978-1-315-62880-6, archived from the original on 22 December 2022, retrieved 22 December 2022 Hampton, Janie (2002). Internally Displaced People: A Global Survey. Routledge. p. 116. ISBN 978-1-85383-952-8. Jaffrelot, Christophe (2015). "What 'Gujarat Model'?—Growth without Development— and with Socio-Political Polarisation". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 820–838. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1087456. ISSN 0085-6401. S2CID 146854210. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Jaffrelot, Christophe (25 February 2012). "Gujarat 2002: What Justice for the Victims?". Economic & Political Weekly. 47 (8). Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Ogden, Chris (2012). "A Lasting Legacy: The BJP-led National Democratic Alliance and India's Politics". Journal of Contemporary Asia. 42 (1): 22–38. doi:10.1080/00472336.2012.634639. S2CID 54615047. Pandey, Gyanendra (2006). Routine violence: nations, fragments, histories. Stanford University Press. pp. 187–188. ISBN 978-0-8047-5264-0. Baruah, Bipasha (2012). Women and Property in Urban India (PDF). University of British Columbia Press. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-7748-1928-2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021. Barry, Ellen (7 April 2014). "Wish for Change Animates Voters in India Election". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2014. "Timeline: Zakia Jafri vs Modi in 2002 Gujarat riots case". Hindustan Times. 26 December 2013. Archived from the original on 19 March 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "National Human Rights Commission vs. State of Gujarat & Ors. – Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 109/2003". Supreme Court of India. Archived from the original on 23 May 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Mahapatra, Dhananjay (3 December 2010). "SIT clears Narendra Modi of wilfully allowing post-Godhra riots". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Proceed against Modi for Gujarat riots: amicus". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 9 May 2012. Archived from the original on 5 July 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Dasgupta, Manas (10 May 2012). "SIT rejects amicus curiae's observations against Modi". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 5 July 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Khan, Saeed; Kaushik, Himanshu (26 December 2013). "2002 Gujarat riots: Clean chit to Modi, court rejects Zakia Jafri's plea". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 4 October 2014. Retrieved 4 June 2014. Tripathi, Ashish (24 June 2022). "'Appeal devoid of merit': SC junks Zakia Jafri plea, upholds clean chit given to Narendra Modi in Gujarat riots case". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Singh, Darpan. "Gujarat riots clean chit to PM: Two decades of legal battle and what's next". India Today. Archived from the original on 24 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Rajagopal, Krishnadas (24 June 2022). "2002 Gujarat riots | Supreme Court rejects Zakia Jafri's charges against Narendra Modi, 60 officials". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Congress demands Modi's resignation over Bannerjee report". Rediff.com. 3 March 2006. Archived from the original on 6 January 2008. Retrieved 17 November 2007. "BJP national exec rejects Modi's resignation". Rediff.com. 12 April 2002. Archived from the original on 3 March 2014. Retrieved 22 April 2014. Jaffrelot, Christophe (2015). "Narendra Modi and the Power of Television in Gujarat". Television & New Media. 16 (4): 346–353. doi:10.1177/1527476415575499. S2CID 145758627. "Statistical Report on General Election, 2002 to the Legislative Assembly of Gujarat" (PDF). New Delhi: Election Commission of India. p. 228. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Jaffrelot, Christophe (9 May 2016). "Narendra Modi Between Hindutva and Subnationalism: The Gujarati Asmita of a Hindu Hriday Samrat". India Review. 15 (2): 196–217. doi:10.1080/14736489.2016.1165557. S2CID 156137272. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Brasted, Howard V. (2005). Lahoud, Nelly; Johns, A. H. (eds.). Islam in World Politics. Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-415-32411-3. Corbridge, Stuart; John Harriss, Craig Jeffrey (2012). India Today: Economy, Politics and Society. Polity Press. p. 185. ISBN 978-0-7456-6112-4. Hardgrave, Robert L. Jr. (2005). "Hindu Nationalism and the BJP: Transforming Religion and Politics in India". In Dossani, Rafiq; Rowen, Henry S. (eds.). Prospects For Peace in South Asia. Stanford University Press. pp. 210–211. ISBN 978-0-8047-5085-1. "Modi wins Maninagar seat by 75,333 votes". The Times of India. TNN. 15 December 2002. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2014. "Narendra Modi sworn in as Gujarat CM". Rediff. 22 December 2002. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2014. Umat, Ajay (9 February 2013). "Once Hindutva twins, Narendra Modi and Pravin Togadia no longer conjoined". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2013. "Religious leaders demand rebuilding of temples". DNA India. Press Trust of India. 25 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Raman, Anuradha (11 August 2014). "Test-Tubes in Hastinapur". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014. Manor, James (2015). "A Precarious Enterprise? Multiple Antagonisms during Year One of the Modi Government". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 736–754. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1083644. S2CID 155472230. Tellis, Ashley J.; Wills, Michael (September 2007). Domestic political change and grand strategy. National Bureau of Asian Research. pp. 193–4. ISBN 978-0-9713938-8-2. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Yogendra, Kanwar (13 June 2004). "Not removing Modi was a mistake, says Vajpayee". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2013. Mann, James (2 May 2014). "Why Narendra Modi Was Banned From the U.S." The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 15 December 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "No entry for Modi into US: visa denied". The Times of India. 18 March 2005. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014. Burke, Jason (22 October 2012). "UK government ends boycott of Narendra Modi". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Germany delinks Narendra Modi's image from human rights issues". NDTV. 6 March 2013. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2013. "Readout of the President's Call with Prime Ministerial Candidate Narendra Modi of India". whitehouse.gov. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 14 June 2014 – via National Archives. Cassidy, John (16 May 2014). "What Does Modi's Victory Mean for the World?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 24 September 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Naqvi, Saba (22 December 2008). "When fear didn't enter the booth". Outlook India. pp. 26–28. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2013. "Mahatma on lips, Modi fights Centre". The Telegraph. Kolkata, India. 19 July 2006. Archived from the original on 11 June 2008. Retrieved 9 May 2008. Shah, Rajiv (24 November 2007). "'Karmayogi' swears by caste order 'Scavenging A Spiritual Experience For Valmiks'". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 8 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Narendra Modi is 'anti-Dalit': Congress". DNA. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Gupta, Smita (15 April 2014). "Modi against dalits". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 7 June 2014. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Modi wants 3-layer ring to secure coast". The Times of India. 28 November 2008. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2011. "Narendra Modi wins Maninagar by 70,000 votes". Hindustan Times. 20 December 2012. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "BJP adds 5 seats in Gujarat Assembly by-polls". Deccan Herald. 14 September 2009. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2011. "Big win for Narendra Modi, defeats Shweta Bhatt by huge margin". NDTV. Press Trust of India. 20 December 2012. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Ghassem-Fachandi, Parvis (2012). Pogrom in Gujarat: Hindu Nationalism and Anti-Muslim Violence in India. Princeton University Press. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-691-15177-9. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. "Anandiben Patel named new Gujarat chief minister". India Today. 21 May 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014. Shah, Tushaar (2011). Business Standard India 2011. Business Standard Books. pp. 195–199. ISBN 978-93-80740-04-1. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Mahurkar, Uday (4 June 2010). "A green rising". India Today. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. "Gujarat, Maharashtra record highest growth in farm sector". The Hindu. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 1 August 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. Shah, Tushaar; Gulati, Ashok; Hemant, P.; Shreedhar, Ganga; Jain, R. C. (26 December 2009). "Secret of Gujarat's Agrarian Miracle after 2000". Economic and Political Weekly. 44 (52): 45–55. JSTOR 25663939. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021.(subscription required) Schöttli, Jivanta; Pauli, Markus (2016). "Modi-nomics and the politics of institutional change in the Indian economy". Journal of Asian Public Policy. 9 (2): 154–169. doi:10.1080/17516234.2016.1165332. S2CID 155579981. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2020. Mishra, Mayank (20 July 2013). "Did Narendra Modi make Gujarat Vibrant?". Business Standard. Archived from the original on 20 April 2014. Retrieved 29 April 2014. Shah, Tushaar; Verma, Shilp (16 February 2008). "Co-Management of Electricity and Groundwater: An Assessment of Gujarat's Jyotirgram Scheme". Economic and Political Weekly. 43 (7): 59–66. JSTOR 40277613. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Basu, Dipankar; Misra, Kartik (June 2014). "BJP's Demographic Dividend in the 2014 General Elections: An Empirical Analysis". Economics Department Working Paper Series Via EconStor. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Ghatak, Maitreesh; Roy, Sanchari (12 April 2014). "Did Gujarat's Growth Rate Accelerate under Modi?". Economic and Political Weekly. 49 (15): 12–15. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Gujarat tops ease of doing business ranking among states – The Economic Times on Mobile". The Economic Times. 15 September 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018. Retrieved 16 September 2015. "Gujarat tops list of economically-free states". hindustantimes.com. 19 March 2014. Archived from the original on 19 March 2014. Retrieved 16 September 2015. Shah, Ghanshyam (June 2013). "Politics of Governance: A Study of Gujarat". Studies in Indian Politics. 1 (1): 65–77. doi:10.1177/2321023013482788. S2CID 155022285. (subscription required) Harriss, John (2015). "Hindu Nationalism in Action: The Bharatiya Janata Party and Indian Politics". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 711–718. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1089826. S2CID 147615034. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 9 September 2019. "Sparing Mr Modi's blushes". The Economist. 27 June 2015. Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2016. "Details in the Birla, Sahara Papers Reveal Why the Government Is Avoiding Inquiry". The Wire. 23 December 2016. "All You Need To Know About The Sahara-Birla Papers". Newslaundry. 23 December 2016. Simha, Vijay (4 March 2017). "The Zero Case: Deadly Implications of the Birla-Sahara Judgment". Economic and Political Weekly. "Did Modi receive over ₹55 crore from the Sahara Group as the chief minister of Gujarat?". Economic and Political Weekly. 19 November 2016. "Modi took bribes from Sahara, Birla: Rahul". The Hindu. 21 December 2016. Archived from the original on 19 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Sahara-Birla: Rahul Gandhi accuses Narendra Modi of taking cash payments". Zee Business. 21 December 2016. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Sahara Birla Diaries: Supreme Court To Hear Prashant Bhushan's Plea Today". NDTV. 11 January 2017. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Watch: Prashant Bhushan Explains the Sahara-Birla Diaries". The Wire. 24 November 2016. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Supreme Court dismisses plea seeking probe against Narendra Modi, others". Mint. 11 January 2017. Archived from the original on 24 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Sahara-Birla Diaries Case: SC throws out case alleging Modi took cash payments". Business Today. 11 January 2017. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Justice Arun Mishra's Six Most Controversial Cases in the SC". Mint. 4 September 2020. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Controversial judge who praised Modi appointed to lead Human Rights Commission in India". The Independent. 3 June 2021. Archived from the original on 20 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Five Questions We Have to Ask Before the Birla-Sahara Payoff Case is Buried Forever". The Wire. 11 April 2017. Archived from the original on 30 July 2023. Retrieved 30 July 2023. Chhibber, Pradeep K.; Ostermann, Susan L. (2014). "The BJP's Fragile Mandate: Modi and Vote Mobilizers in the 2014 General Elections". Studies in Indian Politics. 2 (2): 137–151. doi:10.1177/2321023014551870. ISSN 0958-4935. S2CID 155080682. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Reddy, B. Muralidhar (14 September 2013). "BJP announces Modi as prime ministerial candidate". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Jaffrelot, Christophe (2015). "The Modi-centric BJP 2014 election campaign: new techniques and old tactics". Contemporary South Asia. 23 (2): 151–166. doi:10.1080/09584935.2015.1027662. S2CID 142912068. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. "Advani grabs lifeline, meekly withdraws resignation". The Times of India. 12 June 2013. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2013. Srivastava, Ritesh K. (30 August 2011). "Election 2009 dissected: How parties cut the vote pie". Zee News. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 4 June 2014. Chakravartty, Paula; Roy, Srirupa (2015). "Mr. Modi Goes to Delhi: Mediated Populism and the 2014 Indian Elections". Television & New Media. 16 (4): 311–322. doi:10.1177/1527476415573957. S2CID 145151089. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Chacko, Priya; Mayer, Peter (2014). "The 'Modi lahar [wave]' in the 2014 Indian national election: A critical realignment?". Australian Journal of Political Science. 49 (3): 518–528. doi:10.1080/10361146.2014.937392. S2CID 154806289. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Srivastava, Sanjay (April 2015). "Modi-Masculinity: Media, Manhood, and "Traditions" in a Time of Consumerism". Television & New Media. 16 (4): 331–338. doi:10.1177/1527476415575498. S2CID 145367170. Narayan, Badri (17 May 2014). "Modi's Modus Operandi in the 2014 Elections". Economic & Political Weekly. 49 (20): 12–14. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Palshikar, Suhas (2015). "The BJP and Hindu Nationalism: Centrist Politics and Majoritarian Impulses". Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 719–735. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1089460. S2CID 147143160. "BJP, top choice of corporate donors in 2014–15". Business Line. 7 December 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. Sridharan, Eswaran (October 2014). "India's Watershed Vote: Behind Modi's Victory". Journal of Democracy. 25 (4): 20–23. doi:10.1353/jod.2014.0068. S2CID 154421269. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Palshikar, Suhas; Suri, K. C. (2014). "India's 2014 Lok Sabha elections: Critical shifts in the long term, caution in the short term". Economic and Political Weekly. 49: 39–76. Archived from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Kaur, Ravinder (2015). "Good Times, Brought to you by Brand Modi" (PDF). Television & New Media Via University of Copenhagen (Submitted manuscript). 16 (4): 323–330. doi:10.1177/1527476415575492. S2CID 53451635. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2018. "Narendra Modi files nomination in Vadodara after grand roadshow". NDTV. 9 April 2014. Archived from the original on 16 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Modi's Vadodara victory margin not highest-ever". Business Standard. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 12 April 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "President appoints Narendra Modi as Prime Minister, Oath taking ceremony on May 26". Rashtrapati Bhavan via National Informatics Centre. 20 May 2014. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Narendra Modi appointed PM, swearing-in on May 26". The Indian Express. Press Trust of India. 20 May 2014. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Modi thanks Vadodara, looks forward to serve Ganga". Hindustan Times. Press Trust of India. 29 May 2014. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. Retrieved 29 May 2014. "Narendra Modi: It's all about Narendra Modi as India prepares for mammoth 2019 election". The Economic Times. 13 December 2018. Archived from the original on 6 January 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "PM Modi launches 'Main Bhi Chowkidar' campaign for 2019 elections". The Times of India. 16 March 2019. Archived from the original on 6 January 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2020. Gunasekar, Arvind (21 June 2019). "In Setback For Chandrababu Naidu, 4 Lawmakers Of His Party Join BJP". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "'Chowkidar Narendra Modi': PM changes Twitter handle name to counter Rahul Gandhi's chor jibe". The Economic Times. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Singh, D. K. (27 February 2019). "5 ways Modi's Pakistan air strike 'bombed' opposition's election strategy". ThePrint. Archived from the original on 30 December 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Bommakanti, Kartik (27 December 2019). "Indian national security and defence in 2019: Modi ticks three boxes". ORF. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Election Results 2019: PM Narendra Modi storms to victory in Varanasi". India Today. 23 May 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Lok Sabha Election result 2019: Narendra Modi secures big lead in Varanasi; Congress' Ajay Rai trails". businesstoday.in. 23 May 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Narendra Modi to be sworn in as PM for 2nd term on May 30". The Economic Times. 26 May 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Alliance Wise Election Live Results 2019: Lok Sabha Elections Result Live Alliance Wise, Party Wise". News18. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "BJP wins 302 seats on its own in Lok Sabha election 2019, propels NDA alliance to a final tally of 353 seats in Lower House". Firstpost. 24 May 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Narendra Modi appointed Prime Minister, swearing in on May 26". The Times of India. 20 May 2014. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Sharma, Akhilesh; Divyanshu Dutta Roy (13 August 2020). "PM Modi Becomes Longest Serving Non-Congress Prime Minister". NDTV. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2020. Wyatt, Andrew (2015). "India in 2014: Decisive National Elections" (PDF). Asian Survey. 55 (1): 33–47. doi:10.1525/AS.2015.55.1.33. hdl:1983/e5eeb791-2072-45b8-94b5-fc003dbb5a24. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2018. Sen, Ronojoy (2015). "House Matters: The BJP, Modi and Parliament". Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 776–790. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1091200. S2CID 147683722. "Modi replaces Planning Commission, aiming to boost growth". Reuters. 1 January 2015. Archived from the original on 23 October 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Sengupta, Mitu (2015). "Modi Planning: What the NITI Aayog Suggests about the Aspirations and Practices of the Modi Government". Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 791–806. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1088609. S2CID 156027018. Ruparelia, Sanjay (12 January 2016). "'Minimum Government, Maximum Governance': The Restructuring of Power in Modi's India". Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 755–775. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1089974. ISSN 0085-6401. S2CID 155182560. Patnaik, Prabhat (24 January 2015). "From the Planning Commission to the NITI Aayog". Economic & Political Weekly. 50 (4). Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Jalihal, Shreegireesh; Sethi, Nitin (18 January 2024). "As PM, India's Modi secretly tried to massively cut state funds". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Hassan, Aakash (10 December 2021). "How a terrorism law in India is being used to silence Modi's critics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "Goodbye, old laws: Modi government scraps 1,200 redundant Acts, 1,824 more identified for repeal". India Today. 22 June 2017. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Mohan, Vishwa (19 May 2016). "1,159 obsolete laws scrapped by Modi govt; 1,301 junked in previous 64 years". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Report card: Two years later, here's how much Modi has delivered on his promises". Daily News and Analysis. 26 May 2016. Archived from the original on 24 November 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Kumar, Saurabh; Srivastava, Moulishree (29 December 2015). "Govt launches 22 new schemes under Digital India programme". Live Mint. Archived from the original on 8 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. D'Monte, Leslie; Srivastava, Moulishree (21 November 2014). "GST to take care of many of e-commerce firms' tax issues: IT minister". Live Mint. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Bill on 10% reservation for upper caste poor passes Parliament test: 10 things to know". Business Today. 10 January 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "10% quota Bill becomes law". The Hindu. 12 January 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "Ujjwala scheme boosts India's LPG consumption to a record high in FY19". Business Standard. 3 May 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "No LPG subsidy to households". Economic Times. 3 June 2022. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Parashar, Utpal (3 June 2023). "98 killed in Manipur clashes, 36k moved to relief camps, says govt". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Manipur: PM's silence adds to anger, frustration amid violence, flare-up". The Federal. 17 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Schultz, Kai; Raj, Suhasini; Kumar, Hari (11 April 2019). "Under Modi, a Hindu Nationalist Surge Has Further Divided India". New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. Serhan, Yasmeen (27 May 2022). "The Hinduization of India Is Nearly Complete". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. George, Varghese K. (9 May 2020). "Comment | Hindutva's extremist Twitterati now target Modi for Muslim appeasement". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Yasir, Sameer (4 February 2020). "Gandhi's Killer Evokes Admiration as Never Before". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. "Narendra Modi and the struggle for India's soul". The Economist. 2 March 2019. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019. Joshua, Anita (16 July 2014). "Choice of ICHR chief reignites saffronisation debate". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 2 December 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2014. Mukul, Akshaya (18 July 2014). "Right-wingers question ICHR chief selection". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 21 July 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2014. Bhatty, Kiran; Sundar, Nandini (17 September 2020). "Sliding from majoritarianism toward fascism: Educating India under the Modi regime". International Sociology. 35 (6). SAGE Publications: 632–650. doi:10.1177/0268580920937226. ISSN 0268-5809. S2CID 224896271. Bhatty, Kiran (2019). "School education: Denials and delusions". In Azad, Rohit; Chakraborty, Shouvik; Ramani, Srinivasan; Sinha, Dipa (eds.). A quantum leap in the wrong direction?. ISBN 978-93-5287-618-1. OCLC 1089418969. Citizenship Amendment Bill: India's new 'anti-Muslim' law explained Archived 12 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 11 December 2019. "Parliament passes the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2019". pib.gov.in. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Regan, Helen; Gupta, Swati; Khan, Omar. "India passes controversial citizenship bill that excludes Muslims". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 December 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Gringlas, Sam. "India Passes Controversial Citizenship Bill That Would Exclude Muslims". NPR. Archived from the original on 15 December 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Slater, Joanna (18 December 2019). "Why protests are erupting over India's new citizenship law". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Jayal, Niraja Gopal (2019). "Reconfiguring Citizenship in Contemporary India". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 42 (1): 33–50. doi:10.1080/00856401.2019.1555874. ISSN 0085-6401. S2CID 151037291. Ellis-Peterson, Hannah; Azizur Rahman, Shaikh (16 March 2020), "Delhi's Muslims despair of justice after police implicated in riots", The Guardian, Delhi, archived from the original on 17 March 2020, retrieved 17 March 2020 Gettleman, Jeffrey; Abi-Habib, Maria (1 March 2020), "In India, Modi's Policies Have Lit a Fuse", The New York Times, archived from the original on 1 March 2020, retrieved 1 March 2020 Gettleman, Jeffrey; Yasir, Sameer; Raj, Suhasini; Kumar, Hari (12 March 2020), "'If We Kill You, Nothing Will Happen': How Delhi's Police Turned Against Muslims", The New York Times, Photographs by Loke, Atul, archived from the original on 13 March 2020, retrieved 13 March 2020 Slater, Joanna; Masih, Niha (6 March 2020), "In Delhi's worst violence in decades, a man watched his brother burn", The Washington Post, archived from the original on 7 March 2020, retrieved 6 March 2020 Slater, Joanna; Masih, Niha (2 March 2020), "What Delhi's worst communal violence in decades means for Modi's India", The Washington Post, archived from the original on 3 March 2020, retrieved 15 March 2020 "Modi slammed as death toll in New Delhi violence rises". Al Jazeera. 26 February 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2020. Varadarajan, Siddharth (27 February 2020). "Narendra Modi's Reckless Politics Brings Mob Rule to New Delhi". The Wire. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 19 September 2020. "Ayodhya verdict live: Country's unity strengthened after verdict, say religious leaders". The Times of India. 10 November 2019. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Modi becomes first PM to visit Ram Janmabhoomi, Hanumangarhi temple in Ayodhya". The Financial Express. Press Trust of India. 5 August 2020. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2020. "Lok Sabha passes instant talaq bill; JDU walks out". The Economic Times. 25 July 2019. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Triple talaq bill passed in Rajya Sabha". India Today. 30 July 2019. Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Fresh triple talaq Bill introduced in Lok Sabha". The Economic Times. 21 June 2019. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. "Jammu & Kashmir Reorganisation Bill passed by Rajya Sabha: Key takeaways". The Indian Express. 5 August 2019. Archived from the original on 5 August 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "As 4G is restored in Jammu & Kashmir, Centre plans another trip for foreign envoys". Zee News. Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "At Least 2,300 People Have Been Detained During the Lockdown in Kashmir". Time. 21 August 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. "Kashmir city on lockdown after calls for protest march". The Guardian. 23 August 2019. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "Inside Kashmir's lockdown: 'Even I will pick up a gun'". BBC. 10 August 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "Thousands detained in Indian Kashmir crackdown, official data reveals". Reuters. 12 September 2019. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2022. Shah, Alpa; Lerche, Jens (10 October 2015). "India's Democracy: Illusion of Inclusion". Economic & Political Weekly. 50 (41): 33–36. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Cabinet approves raising FDI cap in defence to 49 percent, opens up railways". The Times of India. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 7 August 2015. Retrieved 27 July 2015. Zhong, Raymond (20 November 2014). "Modi Presses Reform for India—But Is it Enough?". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 29 March 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Modi renews labour reforms push as jobs regain focus before polls". The Economic Times. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 6 February 2019. Shrivastava, Rahul (18 October 2014). "Narendra Modi Government Deregulates Diesel Prices". NDTV. Archived from the original on 29 November 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "How successive govts are flunking education budgets, NDA worse". India Today. 31 January 2020. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Story in numbers: Spending on education in four years of Modi government". Business Standard News. 4 February 2018. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Chowdhury, Shreya Roy (26 January 2019). "The Modi Years: What have school children gained in the last five years?". Scroll.in. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Children's Share in Budget Has Nearly Halved Since Modi Took Charge". The Wire. 8 June 2021. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "India is getting an eye-wateringly big transport upgrade". The Economist. 13 March 2023. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2023. Choudhury, Gaurav (25 September 2014). "Look East, Link West, says PM Modi at Make in India launch". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 17 August 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Guha, Abhijit (2015). "Dangers of Indian Reform of the Colonial Land Acquisition Law". Global Journal of Human-Social Science. 15 (1). "3 years of Modi govt: 6 economic policies that have made BJP stronger, harder to defeat". Business Standard. 16 May 2017. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. "SIT formed to unearth black money – Narendra Modi Cabinet's first decision". The Times of India. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 22 December 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Rs 500, Rs 1000 currency notes stand abolished from midnight: PM Modi". The Indian Express. 9 November 2016. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Demonetisation: Chaos grows, queues get longer at banks, ATMs on weekend". The Indian Express. 12 November 2016. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "India demonetisation: Chaos as ATMs run dry". Al Jazeera. 9 November 2016. Archived from the original on 10 November 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016. "Queues get longer at banks, ATMs on weekend". The Hindu. 12 November 2016. Archived from the original on 9 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Rukhaiyar, Ashish (9 November 2016). "Sensex crashes 1,689 points on black money crackdown, U.S. election". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016. "Thousands Protest Across India Against Currency Policy". The New York Times. 28 November 2016. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2016. "Demonetisation drive that cost India 1.5m jobs fails to uncover 'black money'". the Guardian. 30 August 2018. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2021. "India: Demonetisation takes its toll on the poor". Al Jazeera. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. Vij, Shivam (15 November 2016). "Demonetisation Death Toll Rises To 25 And It's Only Been 6 Days". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 16 November 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2016. "PM Narendra Modi's demonetisation move pays off as income tax net widens". Business Today. 8 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Bhakta, Pratik (27 May 2017). "Demonetisation effect: Digital payments India's new currency; debit card transactions surge to over 1 billion". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017. Retrieved 8 June 2017. Inamdar, Nikhil; Alluri, Aparna (21 June 2021). "India economy: Seven years of Modi in seven charts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Tiwari, Amitabh (30 May 2022). "PM Narendra Modi's 8 Years: How He Has Performed Compared to Manmohan Singh". TheQuint. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. V., Harini (14 November 2018). "India's economy is booming. Now comes the hard part". CNBC. Archived from the original on 21 November 2018. Retrieved 6 February 2019. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Kumar, Hari (31 January 2019). "India's Leader Is Accused of Hiding Unemployment Data Before Vote". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2019. Kumar, Manoj; Ghoshal, Devjyot (31 January 2019). "Indian jobless rate at multi-decade high, report says, in blow to Modi". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 7 February 2019. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Archived from the original on 6 November 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2021. Beniwal, Vrishti (20 May 2019). "Lok sabha election: 2019 general elections: The winner gets an economy riddled with problems". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2021. Sheel, Alok (20 August 2022). "Assessing the Recent Indian Economic Growth". Economic & Political Weekly. 57 (34). Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Sharma, Dinesh C (May 2015). "India's BJP Government and health: 1 year on". The Lancet. 385 (9982): 2031–2032. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60977-1. PMID 26009217. S2CID 10544022. Bagcchi, Sanjeet (2 January 2015). "India cuts health budget by 20%". BMJ. 350: h4. doi:10.1136/bmj.h4. ISSN 1756-1833. PMID 25556025. S2CID 206906898. Karla, Aditya (23 December 2014). "Govt to cut health budget by nearly 20 per cent for 2014–15". businesstoday.in. Business Today. Reuters. Archived from the original on 28 April 2018. Retrieved 27 April 2018. Shetty, Adhil (15 March 2015). "Budget 2015 disappointed healthcare sector". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018. Mudur, Ganapati (2016). "Rise in India's health budget is "disappointing," say experts". BMJ. 352: i1338. doi:10.1136/bmj.i1338. PMID 26944481. S2CID 40551136. Retrieved 24 April 2018. Bhattacharya, Devika; Neelakantan, Shailaja (2 February 2018). "Budget 2018 boost for healthcare: Lessons for 'Modicare' from Obamacare". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 April 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018. Schmidt, Charles W. (November 2014). "Beyond Malnutrition: The Role of Sanitation in Stunted Growth". Environmental Health Perspectives. 122 (11): A298–303. doi:10.1289/ehp.122-a298. PMC 4216152. PMID 25360801. Jeffrey, Robin (2015). "Clean India! Symbols, Policies and Tensions". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 38 (4): 807–819. doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1088504. S2CID 147169571. Lakshmi, Rama (4 June 2015). "India is building millions of toilets, but that's the easy part". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2015. Gahlot, Mandakini (3 April 2015). "India steps up efforts to encourage use of toilets". USA Today. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "The Final Frontier". The Economist. 19 July 2014. Archived from the original on 6 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Chaudhary, Archana (18 May 2015). "India Plans 1.3-Billion Sewage Plants in Towns Along the Ganges". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. Retrieved 30 March 2016. "Swachh Bharat full marks for access, usage not upto the mark". The Times of India. 2 October 2018. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 2 October 2018. * Kaul, Rhythma (29 September 2018). "How Swachh Bharat transformed the way public hospitals function". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 30 September 2018. Sharma, Sanchita (21 September 2018). "How the Swachh Bharat mission has saved India's kids". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 22 September 2018. Awasthi, Prashasti (12 March 2020). "Centre invokes 'Epidemic Act' and 'Disaster Management Act' to prevent spread of coronavirus". @businessline. Archived from the original on 13 March 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2021. Sharma, Ayan (18 March 2020). "How Indian states are gearing up to tackle the coronavirus pandemic". Newslaundry. Archived from the original on 19 March 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2021. Sanyal, Anindita, ed. (12 March 2020). "India Suspends All Tourist Visas Till April 15 Over Coronavirus: 10 Facts". NDTV. Archived from the original on 11 March 2020. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "PM Modi calls for 'Janata curfew' on March 22 from 7 AM-9 PM". The Hindu @businessline. 20 March 2020. Archived from the original on 19 March 2020. Retrieved 26 April 2021. "India Covid-19: PM Modi 'did not consult' before lockdown". BBC News. 29 March 2021. Retrieved 26 April 2021. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Schultz, Kai (24 March 2020). "Modi Orders 3-Week Total Lockdown for All 1.3 Billion Indians". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 April 2021. "Ministry of Home Affairs Unlock 5.0 official guidelines on their official website" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs. "Unlock 6.0 latest guidelines: What do they mean for schools, colleges, other educational institutions". DNA India. 29 October 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. Safi, Michael (21 April 2021). "India's shocking surge in Covid cases follows baffling decline". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 April 2021. "Coronavirus | India becomes first country in the world to report over 4 lakh new cases on 30 April 2021". The Hindu. 30 April 2021. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "#IndiaFightsCorona COVID-19". MyGov.in. Govt of India. 16 March 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2021. Daily COVID-19 vaccine doses administered – India, Our World in Data. Retrieved 13 May 2021. "United with India: Supporting India's COVID-19 vaccination drive". UNSDG. 2 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Hall, Ian (2015). "Is a 'Modi doctrine' emerging in Indian foreign policy?". Australian Journal of International Affairs. 69 (3): 247–252. doi:10.1080/10357718.2014.1000263. S2CID 154260676. Hall 2016, pp. 278–281. sfn error: no target: CITEREFHall2016 (help) Hall 2020, pp. 283–285 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFHall2020 (help); Gupta 2019, pp. 3–9 sfnm error: no target: CITEREFGupta2019 (help); Madan 2020, pp. 65. "Readout of the President's Call with Prime Ministerial Candidate Narendra Modi of India". whitehouse.gov. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2021 – via National Archives. Sammon, Alexander (23 January 2020). "Barack Obama's Legacy Is Narendra Modi". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2021. "Obama, in reply to question on friendship with Modi, ends up praising Manmohan". India Today. 1 December 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2021. Mocko, Anne; Penjore, Dorji (2015). "Nepal and Bhutan in 2014". Asian Survey. 55 (1): 75–81. doi:10.1525/AS.2015.55.1.75. hdl:1885/13357. Pant, Harsh V. (Fall 2014). "Modi's Unexpected Boost to India-U.S. Relations". The Washington Quarterly. 37 (3): 97–112. doi:10.1080/0163660X.2014.978438. S2CID 154940836. Downie, Edmund (25 February 2015). "Manipur and India's 'Act East' Policy". The Diplomat. Retrieved 26 February 2015. "Modi takes veiled dig at China on visit to disputed border area". Al Jazeera. 3 July 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "President Ashraf Ghani's Congratulatory Message on the Occasion of India's 73rd Independence Day". President of Afghanistan. 15 August 2019. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. Retrieved 8 April 2021. "PM Modi conferred Afghanistan's highest civilian honour". The Indian Express. 4 June 2016. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "PM Modi And His Friendship With World Leaders". The Economic Times. 17 September 2022. Kugiel, Patryk (3 October 2022). "What Modi and Putin's 'unbreakable friendship' means for the EU". EUobserver. Mogul, Rhea (4 October 2022). "India's words are anti-war, but New Delhi's actions are propping up Putin's regime". CNN. "African Union formally joins G20, PM Modi calls for 'trust and reliance'". Hindustan Times. 9 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "PM Narendra Modi interview highlights: From G20 presidency to India as a manufacturing destination, PM lays out his expansive vision for the country". Business Today. 26 August 2023. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "Exclusive | PM Modi calls for global framework on cryptocurrency. Here's what he said". India Today. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "'G20 की अध्यक्षता कर पूरी दुनिया को नई राह दिखा रहा भारत', Exclusive इंटरव्यू में बोले पीएम मोदी". आज तक (in Hindi). 26 August 2023. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "India, advocate for the global poor, clears slums as G20 draw near". CNN. 5 September 2023. Archived from the original on 5 September 2023. Retrieved 5 September 2023. Mehrotra, Karishma; Shih, Gerry (20 March 2023). "As G-20 meetings come to India, Modi launches a public relations blitz". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 March 2023. Retrieved 5 September 2023. "Many New Delhi slums disappear ahead of G20 summit". Reuters. 5 September 2023. Archived from the original on 5 September 2023. Retrieved 5 September 2023. "PIB Debunks CNN's Claims About Delhi Slum Clearance for G20 Summit". www.newsx.com. 7 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. Manghat, Sajeet (1 February 2019). "Budget 2019: A 10 Percent Hike in Defence Capital Outlay". BloombergQuint. Retrieved 8 April 2019. Rajagopalan, Rajeswari Pillai (9 February 2019). "Why India's New Defense Budget Falls Short". The Diplomat. Retrieved 8 April 2019. "India spends a fortune on defence and gets poor value for money". The Economist. 28 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2019. Retrieved 8 April 2019. Sharma, Kiran (17 February 2019). "India's arms modernization hampered by populist budget". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 8 April 2019. "Reversing roles". The Economist. 6 October 2016. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 8 April 2019. "PM slams Pakistan on terror: 10 quotes from Narendra Modi's speech in Kozhikode". The Indian Express. 24 September 2016. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Balasubramanian, Shyam (5 September 2016). "One nation in South Asia spreading terrorism: PM Modi at G20 Summit". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "India's surgical strikes across LoC: Full statement by DGMO Lt Gen Ranbir Singh". Hindustan Times. 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 2 October 2016. "Uri avenged: 35–40 terrorists, 9 Pakistani soldiers killed in Indian surgical strikes, say TV reports". 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Negi, Manjeet Singh (29 September 2016). "Surgical strikes in PoK: How Indian para commandos killed 50 terrorists, hit 7 camps". India Today. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. Barry, Ellen; Masood, Salman (29 September 2016). "India Claims 'Surgical Strikes' Across Line of Control in Kashmir". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. Khan, M Ilyas (23 October 2016). "India's 'surgical strikes' in Kashmir: Truth or illusion?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 October 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "Balakot: Pakistan vows to respond after Indian 'air strikes'". BBC. 26 February 2019. Retrieved 8 April 2019. Lalwani, Sameer; Tallo, Emily (17 April 2019), "Did India shoot down a Pakistani F-16 in February? This just became a big deal: There are broader implications for India—and the United States", Washington Post Hall, Ian (2019), "India's 2019 General Election: National Security and the Rise of the Watchmen", The Round Table: The Commonwealth Journal of International Affairs, 108 (5): 507–519, 510, doi:10.1080/00358533.2019.1658360, S2CID 203266692 Slater, Joanna; Constable, Pamela (27 February 2019). "Pakistan captures Indian pilot after shooting down aircraft, escalating hostilities". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 3 March 2021. "Skirmishing between India and Pakistan could escalate". The Economist. 28 February 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 3 March 2021. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Kumar, Hari; Yasir, Sameer (2 March 2019). "Deadly Shelling Erupts in Kashmir Between India and Pakistan After Pilot Is Freed". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 3 March 2021. "India admits friendly fire downed Mi-17 helicopter in Kashmir". Washington, DC: The Defense Post. 4 October 2019. The Indian Air Force confirmed for the first time on Friday, October 4 that it shot down one of its own Mi-17 helicopters during clashes with Pakistan in February over Kashmir, killing all six on board. Deepak, B. R. (2020). India and China: Beyond the Binary of Friendship and Enmity. Springer Nature. pp. 11–14. ISBN 978-981-15-9500-4. Karackattu, Joe Thomas (26 May 2020). "The Corrosive Compromise of the Sino-Indian Border Management Framework: From Doklam to Galwan". Asian Affairs. 51 (3): 590–604. doi:10.1080/03068374.2020.1804726. ISSN 0306-8374. S2CID 222093756. Pattanayak, Banikinkar (9 September 2020). "Border clash fails to dampen India-China trade". The Financial Express. Retrieved 3 March 2021. Kaushik, Krishn (26 January 2021). "India, China troops clash in Sikkim; resolved, says Army". The Indian Express. Retrieved 3 March 2021. Hassan, Aakash (19 September 2022). "Indian government accused of ceding land in Himalayas to China". the Guardian. Siddiqui, Imran Ahmed (16 June 2023). "'Subjugation and surrender': Military veterans slam Modi government's continuing silence on Galwan". Telegraph India. Chellaney, Brahma (19 December 2022). "Modi's silence on China's land grabs will not be India's last word – Nikkei Asia". Nikkei Asia. Retrieved 9 July 2023. Siddiqui, Sabrina; Leary, Alex; Roy, Rajesh (5 March 2022). "Russian Invasion of Ukraine Strains U.S.'s Strategic Ties With India". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 5 March 2022. "Explained: S-400 purchase & implications". The Indian Express. 18 November 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Tharoor, Shashi (2 May 2022). "Modi's Big Mistake". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "All you need to know Operation Ganga, launched to evacuate Indians from Ukraine". The Indian Express. 28 February 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "31 Flights To Evacuate Over 6,300 Indians From Ukraine By March 8: Report". NDTV.com. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "PM Narendra Modi sends four Ministers to countries bordering Ukraine". The Hindu. 28 February 2022. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Shrivastava, Kumar Sambhav (11 July 2014). "Too little in environment ministry's kitty". www.downtoearth.org.in. Retrieved 11 February 2022. Kothari, Ashish (27 September 2014). "A Hundred Days Closer to Ecological and Social Suicide". Economic & Political Weekly. 49 (39). JSTOR i24478692. Barry, Ellen; Bagri, Neha Thirani (4 December 2014). "Narendra Modi, Favoring Growth in India, Pares Back Environmental Rules". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 December 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "Teachers Day speech: PM Modi says no climate change". India Today. 5 September 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "India set to exceed climate targets: Modi". The Hindu. 12 December 2020. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Kukreti, Ishan (3 November 2021). "Explainer: What Modi promised at the COP26 climate change meet – and what that means for India". Scroll.in. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "PM Narendra Modi to address Renewable Energy players on initiatives in energy resources". The Economic Times. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "PM Modi says India, Germany ties an example of success; both ink $10.5 bn green deal". Business Today. 2 May 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "ISA General Assembly promises to achieve USD 1 trillion investment in solar energy by 2030". The Economic Times. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "Narendra Modi pulls up rich nations on climate change". The Hindu. PTI. 30 November 2015. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Shrivastava, Rahul (1 November 2021). "Push for renewable by 2030, net-zero emissions by 2070: PM Modi's 5 commitments at COP26 summit". India Today. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "India pledges net-zero emissions by 2070 — but also wants to expand coal mining". NPR. 3 November 2021. "India largely on track to meet its Paris Climate Agreement targets, says new report". Business Line. PTI. 28 October 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2022. "10% ethanol blending ahead of schedule: PM". Hindustan Times. 6 June 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Welzel, Christian Peter (2017). "A Tale of Culture-Bound Regime Evolution". Democratization. doi:10.1080/13510347.2018.1542430. ISSN 1351-0347. S2CID 148625260. Finzel, Lydia (24 February 2020). "Democratic Backsliding in India, the World's Largest Democracy". www.v-dem.net. V-Dem Institute. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Ding, Iza; Slater, Dan (2 January 2021). "Democratic decoupling". Democratization. 28 (1): 63–80. doi:10.1080/13510347.2020.1842361. ISSN 1351-0347. S2CID 231643689. "MOTN: Narendra Modi voted India's best PM again, Atal Bihari Vajpayee comes second". India Today. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Guess who India thinks is the best prime minister of all time". The Indian Express. 23 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "India at 75 survey: Modi the most popular PM ever, Nehru second". mint. 14 August 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Singh, Raj (17 September 2015). "B'day Spl: 10 facts to know about Prime Minister Narendra Modi". Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 23 September 2018. Harding, Luke (18 August 2003). "Profile: Narendra Modi". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Naqvi, Saba (24 December 2007). "The Hawk in Flight". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 27 September 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Narendra Modi on Google Hangout, Ajay Devgn to host event". The Times of India. 31 August 2012. Retrieved 3 September 2012. "People ask, Narendra Modi answers on Google Plus Hangout". CNN-IBN. 1 September 2012. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 3 September 2012. Sharma, Swati (6 June 2014). "Here's what Narendra Modi's fashion says about his politics". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2015. Friedman, Vanessa (3 June 2014). "Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister of India: A Leader Who Is What He Wears". The New York Times: On The Runway. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 24 January 2015. Price, Lance (24 March 2015). The Modi Effect: Inside Narendra Modi's campaign to transform India. Quercus. pp. 179–180. ISBN 978-1-62365-938-7. Marino 2014, pp. 60–70. Ramaseshan, Radhika (2 July 2013). "Boomerang warning in article on 'polarising' Modi". The Telegraph. Kolkata. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. Malik, Ashok (8 November 2012). "Popular but polarising: can Narendra Modi be PM?". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. "NaMo, Ram the new mantra on Dalal Street!". The Economic Times. 15 September 2013. Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Retrieved 16 September 2013. Zainulbhai, Hani (17 September 2015). "Indians adore Modi". Pew Research. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Shashidhar, Karthik (23 May 2016). "PM Modi's approval rating remains high 2 years into term: poll". Mint. Archived from the original on 26 May 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. Stokes, Bruce (19 September 2016). "India and Modi: The Honeymoon Continues". Pew Research. Archived from the original on 17 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Najar, Nida (20 September 2016). "PM Narendra Modi retains broad support in India despite criticism, poll finds". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 16 November 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2016. Stokes, Bruce; Manevich, Dorothy; Chwe, Hanyu (15 November 2017). "Three Years In, Modi Remains Very Popular" (PDF). Pew Research. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 November 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2017. "Modi Govt gets high approval rating at three-year mark in TOI online poll". The Times of India. 23 May 2017. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2017. "PM Narendra Modi 'By Far' Most Popular Figure in Indian Politics: Pew Survey". NDTV. 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2017. "Modi's high approval rating a matter of pride for all Indians: Nadda". Press Trust of India. 2 January 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2021. "Global Leader Approval Tracker". Morning Consult. Retrieved 7 January 2021. Noorani, Reza. "Modi Kaka Ka Gaon Movie Review {1/5}: Critic Review of Modi Kaka Ka Gaon by Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 11 June 2021.. Bhatnagar, Gaurav Vivek (20 March 2019). "Does the Release of 'PM Narendra Modi' Violate Model Code of Conduct?". The Wire. Retrieved 19 March 2021. Farooqui, Maryam (27 March 2019). "With an eye on Lok Sabha polls, Eros Now to stream web series on PM Modi in April". moneycontrol.com. Retrieved 10 February 2021. First episode of 7 RCR on Narendra Modi. ABP News via YouTube. 12 January 2014. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2014. "India invokes emergency laws to ban BBC Modi documentary". the Guardian. 23 January 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2023. Lakshman, Sriram (25 January 2023). "BBC documentary | Second part of 'The Modi Question' airs in the U.K." The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "India's government scrambles to block a film about Modi's role in anti-Muslim riots". NPR. 25 January 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2023. Yasir, Samir (25 January 2023). "As India Tries to Block a Modi Documentary, Students Fight to See It". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Uri: The Surgical Strike". ZEE5. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "Watch Avrodh Web Series Online". SonyLIV. Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "Avrodh 2: The Siege Within' to release on June 24". The Times of India. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Salam, Ziya Us (13 August 2004). "Ideology shackled". The Hindu. Chennai. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Man vs Wild with Bear Grylls and PM Modi". Discovery+. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "PM Modi rows boat, makes weapon, goes on a wild adventure for Man vs Wild TV show". India Today. 29 July 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2019. Singh, Hemant (13 August 2019). "World leaders including PM Narendra Modi with Bear Grylls in Man vs Wild Program at Discovery India". Jagran Josh. Retrieved 14 August 2019. "Man Vs Wild: PM Modi walks in jungles of Jim Corbett with Bear Grylls, talks about conserving nature". Business Today. 13 August 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2019. "Taking Cue from PM's 'Man vs Wild' Episode, Tourism Ministry Makes 'Wildlife' Theme for Incredible India". News18. 12 August 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2019. "Mann Ki Baat". pmonradio.nic.in. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "Pariksha Pe Charcha 2021". MyGov.in. 5 April 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Thottam, Jyoti (16 March 2012). "Why Narendra Modi is India's Most Loved and Loathed Politician". Time. Archived from the original on 3 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Narendra Modi: The New Face of India". Time. Vol. 183 – No. 21. 2 June 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "List of winners of Indian of the Year 2014". CNN-IBN. 17 March 2015. Archived from the original on 8 May 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Gibbs, Nancy; Abdoolcarim, Zoher; Kumar, Nikhil (7 May 2015). "Exclusive Interview With Narendra Modi: 'We Are Natural Allies'". Time. Retrieved 22 December 2020. Zakaria, Fareed (23 April 2014). "The 100 Most Influential People: Narendra Modi". Time. US. Archived from the original on 25 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2014. Obama, Barack (16 April 2015). "The 100 Most Influential People: Narendra Modi". Time. US. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 15 December 2016. Mishra, Pankaj (20 April 2017). "The 100 Most Influential People: Narendra Modi". Time. US. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Vick, Karl (22 September 2020). "The 100 Most Influential People of 2020: Narendra Modi". Time. US. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. Zakaria, Fareed (15 September 2021). "The 100 Most Influential People of 2021: Narendra Modi". Time. US. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Narendra Modi". Forbes. November 2018. Archived from the original on 6 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2018. "2014 Ranking Of The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. 5 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Russian President Vladimir Putin Tops Forbes' 2015 Ranking Of The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. 4 November 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Ewalt, David M. (4 November 2015). "The World's Most Powerful People 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on 22 December 2016. Retrieved 15 December 2016. Ewalt, David M. (14 December 2016). "The World's Most Powerful People 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 15 December 2016. "Forbes Releases 2018 List Of The World's Most Powerful People". Forbes. 8 May 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. Ewalt, David M. (8 May 2018). "The World's Most Powerful People 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 May 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Dieterich, Robert S. (September 2015). "Bloomberg Markets 50 Most Influential". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 6 October 2015. Retrieved 9 June 2017. "PM Narendra Modi features in Time Magazine's list of 100 most influential people of 2021; 'dominating the country's politics', says report". The Financial Express. 16 September 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "PM Modi In TIME Magazine's '100 Most Influential People 2021' List; Mamata Banerjee, Adar Poonawalla Also Feature". Moneycontrol. 15 September 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "World's Greatest Leaders 2015: Narendra Modi". Fortune. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Narendra Modi and Kailash Satyarthi are world's greatest leaders, says Fortune Magazine". Business Insider. 27 March 2015. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "GIA poll: Modi ranks third after Merkel, Macron in global ratings of top world leaders; best ever rank for an Indian PM". firstpost.com. 11 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Rana, Abhishek (12 January 2018). "GIA Poll 2017: Narendra Modi ranks third, the highest for an Indian Prime Minister". www.newsfolo.com. Retrieved 13 January 2018. "London: PM Modi's wax statue unveiled at Madame Tussaud's Museum". The Indian Express. 28 April 2015. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Narendra Modi's wax statue unveiled at Madame Tussaud's Museum". Business Standard. 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2015. "The 30 Most Influential People on the Internet". Time. 5 March 2015. Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015. "PM Modi third most followed world leader on Twitter, Sushma Swaraj most popular among women leaders". Indian Express. 11 July 2018. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Agarwal, Surabhi (27 May 2017). "With 41.7 million followers, Modi becomes most followed world leader on Facebook". The Economic Times. Retrieved 28 May 2017. "PM Narendra Modi most followed world leader on Instagram". India Today. 6 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Narendra Modi – Policy Leadership Award | Champions of the Earth". web.unep.org. Retrieved 24 October 2018. "PM Narendra Modi receives UN's Champions of the Earth Award". The Economic Times. 3 October 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2018. "Prime Minister Modi Awarded the 2018 Seoul Peace Prize". Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India. 24 October 2018. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "PM Modi receives Seoul Peace Prize for 2018". Economic Times. 22 February 2019. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "Video: ADNOC marks Modi's inauguration as Prime Minister of India". Khaleej Times. 31 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. "'Howdy, Modi!': Trump hails Indian PM at 'historic' Texas rally". BBC. 22 September 2019. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019. "Texas India Forum – Howdy Modi". howdymodi.org. Retrieved 25 September 2019. Haidar, Suhasini (22 September 2019). "'Howdy Modi' in Houston: After Modi show, Trump tweets: 'The USA Loves India!'". The Hindu. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Gates Foundation [@gatesfoundation] (25 September 2019). "Prime Minister Narendra Modi received the Global Goalkeeper Award at tonight's Goalkeepers Global Goals Awards. This award recognizes the progress India has made in providing safe sanitation under his leadership. https://t.co/QSMD4UqxiU" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 24 April 2022 – via Twitter. D'Mello, Gwyn (26 September 2019). "Bill Gates' Foundation Gave PM Narendra Modi 'Global Goalkeeper' Award For Swachh Bharat Impact". indiatimes.com. Retrieved 27 September 2019. "Narendra Modi: 'Global Goalkeeper' award for PM Modi for Swachh Bharat Abhiyan". The Times of India. 25 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019. Tanne, Janice Hopkins (18 September 2020). "Donald Trump, Boris Johnson, and other leaders win Ig Nobel awards for teaching people about life and death". BMJ. pp. m3675. doi:10.1136/bmj.m3675. Retrieved 19 September 2020. Lakshman, Sriram (22 December 2020). "PM Modi awarded 'Legion of Merit' by Donald Trump". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "Donald Trump awards PM Narendra Modi with Legion of Merit for elevating India-US ties". Mumbai Mirror. Asian News International. 22 December 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2020. Aiyappa, Vikash (22 December 2020). "The message Trump sent out by awarding PM Modi the Legion of Merit". oneindia.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2020. Sharma, Aakriti (22 December 2020). "After UAE's 'Order of Zayed' Indian PM Narendra Modi & QUAD Allies Awarded 'Legion of Merit' By US Government". eurasiantimes.com. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "Largest cricket stadium in Motera, with seating capacity for over 1 lakh fans, renamed as Narendra Modi Stadium". India Today. 24 February 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Mahurkar, Uday (25 February 2002). "Rajkot II by-elections: Narendra Modi pushes his own image as a rising star of BJP". India Today. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Marino 2014, pp. 98; Bal Narendra 2014, pp. 67–69. Bhatt, Sheela (27 November 2007). "Union minister Dinsha Patel to take on Modi in Maninagar". Rediff. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "General Election To Lok Sabha Trends & Result 2014". ECI. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "Varanasi Election Result 2019: PM Modi' Varanasi is the star constituency". Hindustan Times. 23 May 2019. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "Narendra Modi on MS Golwalkar, translated by Aakar Patel – Part 1". The Caravan. 31 May 2014. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. "Jyotipunj: Narendra Modi writes on 'my organisation, my leaders'". The Economic Times. 9 April 2008. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2015. "Song Featuring PM Modi Nominated For Grammy Awards". NDTV.com. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Dave, Kapil (17 September 2016). "PM Narendra Modi takes blessings from mother Hiraba on his 66th birthday". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Chatterjee, Ankita (1 September 2020). "Humour in Narendra Modi memes on new media". South Asian Popular Culture. 18 (3): 227–245. doi:10.1080/14746689.2020.1815450. ISSN 1474-6689. S2CID 222214793. Gokhale, Nitin A. (2017). Securing India The Modi Way: Pathankot, Surgical Strikes and More. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-93-86643-88-9. Guha, Ramachandra (2007). India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy. Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-095858-9. Gupta, Surupa, et al. "Indian Foreign Policy under Modi: A New Brand or Just Repackaging?" International Studies Perspectives 20.1 (2019): 1-45. online[permanent dead link] Hall, Ian. Modi and the reinvention of Indian foreign policy (Bristol University Press, 2019) 221pp. Jaffrelot, Christophe. "Narendra Modi between Hindutva and subnationalism: the Gujarati asmita of a Hindu Hriday Samrat." India Review 15.2 (2016): 196-217. Jaffrelot, Christophe. Modi's India: Hindu nationalism and the rise of ethnic democracy (Princeton University Press, 2019) Jain, Varsha; B. E., Ganesh (2018). "Understanding the Magic of Credibility for Political Leaders: A Case of India and Narendra Modi". Journal of Political Marketing. 19 (1–2): 15–33. doi:10.1080/15377857.2019.1652222. ISSN 1537-7857. S2CID 202247610. Kamath, M. V.; Randeri, Kalindi (2013). The Man of the Moment: Narendra Modi. Wide Canvas. ISBN 978-93-259-6838-7. OCLC 1000812046. Kanrad, Bharat (2018). Staggering Forward: Narendra Modi and India's Global Ambition. Viking Publishers. pp. 2–541. ISBN 9789353051952. Kaul, Nitasha. "Rise of the political right in India: Hindutva-development mix, Modi myth, and dualities." Journal of Labor and Society 20.4 (2017): 523-548. online Kochanek, Stanley A.; Hardgrave, Robert L. (2007). India: Government and Politics in a Developing Nation. Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-00749-4. Komireddi, K. S. (31 July 2019). Malevolent Republic: A Short History of the New India. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-1-78738-294-7. Madan, Tanvi (29 January 2020). Fateful Triangle: How China Shaped US-India Relations During the Cold War. Penguin Random House India Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-5305-756-5. Mahurkar, Uday. Centrestage: inside the Narendra Modi model of governance (Random House India, 2014). Mahurkar, Uday (26 May 2017). Marching with a Billion: Analysing Narendra Modi's Government at Midterm. Random House Publishers India Pvt. Limited. ISBN 978-93-86495-84-6. Maiorano, Diego (3 April 2015). "Early Trends and Prospects for Modi's Prime Ministership". The International Spectator. 50 (2): 75–92. doi:10.1080/03932729.2015.1024511. ISSN 0393-2729. S2CID 155228179. Marino, Andy (2014). Narendra Modi: A Political Biography. HarperCollins Publishers India. ISBN 978-93-5136-218-0. Mohan, C. Raja (1 June 2015). Modi's World: Expanding India's Sphere of Influence. HarperCollins Publishers India. ISBN 978-93-5177-206-4. Mukhopadhyay, Nilanjan (2013). Narendra Modi: The Man, The Times. Westland. ISBN 9-789-383-26048-5. OCLC 837527591. Panda, Jaganath P. (2016). "Narendra Modi and his mode of governance". Journal of Asian Public Policy. 9 (2): 95–97. doi:10.1080/17516234.2016.1165444. ISSN 1751-6234. S2CID 155201252. Price, Lance. The Modi Effect – Inside Narendra Modi's Campaign To Transform India (2015) Rao, Shakuntala (2 July 2020). "Narendra Modi's social media election campaign and India's delegative democracy". The Communication Review. 23 (3): 223–241. doi:10.1080/10714421.2020.1829306. ISSN 1071-4421. S2CID 224981212. Sardesai, Rajdeep, et al. 2019: How Modi Won India (2019) Schakel, Arjan H.; Sharma, Chanchal Kumar; Swenden, Wilfried (27 May 2019). "India after the 2014 general elections: BJP dominance and the crisis of the third party system". Regional & Federal Studies. 29 (3): 329–354. doi:10.1080/13597566.2019.1614921. hdl:20.500.11820/9018a8ee-2771-4e06-9b96-f0461c410e2f. ISSN 1359-7566. S2CID 182486831. Sen, Ronojoy (3 May 2016). "Narendra Modi's makeover and the politics of symbolism". Journal of Asian Public Policy. 9 (2): 98–111. doi:10.1080/17516234.2016.1165248. ISSN 1751-6234. S2CID 155130008. Waikar, Prashant. "Reading Islamophobia in Hindutva: an analysis of Narendra Modi's political discourse." Islamophobia Studies Journal (2018). Scholia has a profile for Narendra Modi (Q1058). Library resources about Narendra Modi Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website Profile on Lok Sabha website Narendra Modi in libraries (WorldCat catalog) Narendra Modi at DNA India Narendra Modi collected news and commentary at The Guardian Narendra Modi collected news and commentary at The New York Times Narendra Modi at Curlie Narendra Modi at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Portals:  Biography  India  Politics Narendra Modi at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata