Svitlovodsk (Ukrainian: Світлово́дськ, Bright Waterway) is a city located on the banks of the Dnieper River in Oleksandriya Raion, part of Kirovohrad Oblast in central Ukraine. It is the administrative center of Svitlovodsk urban hromada, one of the many hromadas of Ukraine. The city has a population of around 43,130 (2022 estimate). Between 1962 and 1969, the city was briefly renamed Kremhes, reflecting its status as a satellite city of Kremenchuk. Until 18 July 2020, Svitlovodsk was designated as a city of oblast significance and belonged to the Svitlovodsk Municipality. It was the administrative center of Svitlovodsk Raion, even though it did not belong to the raion. As part of the administrative reform of Ukraine (which reduced the number of raions of Kirovohrad Oblast to four), Svitlovodsk Municipality was merged into Oleksandriia Raion. Svitlovodsk was created in the 1950s during Khrushchev's regime to replace Novogeorgievsk, a town in the flood plain of the dam for the new Kremenchuk Hydroelectric Power Plant, and to house the dam workers. The power plant was needed for the smelting of industry-grade metals and alloys, for defense purposes. The facility was secret for several years[citation needed], but is operating today as a private enterprise. When the dam was completed, Khrushchev attended the opening ceremonies. The city then expanded westward, along the coast. In local culture, the city is divided into Old Svitlovodsk and New Svitlovodsk.[citation needed] Schorndorf, Germany (2023) Transportation through the city is primarily through private-run bus lines with mini-buses, although the main buses still run. There is a working bus station near the east side of town. There is also a bus depot near the dam, as well as a train that runs along the dam and goes to the village.[citation needed] The town hall is in the Old Svitlovodsk area and the eternal fire memorial is just below near the airplane memorial. The city is a birthplace of the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Malenchenko and Ukrainian politician Mykola Martynenko. The market is located in New Svitlovodsk. There are two monuments near the market. Below them are a series of water fountains that go downward[clarification needed]. The aforementioned bus depot and train stations are also highlights.[citation needed] Yuri Malenchenko – cosmonaut. List of cities in Ukraine "Светловодская городская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1981–2010". World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original on 17 July 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2021.