Washington University in St. Louis (WashU) is a private research university in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. Founded in 1853, the university is named after George Washington, the first president of the United States. Washington University comprises eight undergraduate, graduate, and professional schools, including Arts and Sciences, George Warren Brown School of Social Work, Olin Business School, Washington University School of Medicine, McKelvey School of Engineering, Washington University School of Law, School of Continuing & Professional Studies, and Sam Fox School of Design & Visual Arts. Washington University enrolls approximately 16,550 students across its campuses from all 50 states and more than 110 countries. Washington University has been a member of the Association of American Universities since 1923 and is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity". In 2021, the National Science Foundation ranked Washington University 25th among academic institutions in the United States for research and development expenditures. The university's athletic teams, Washington University Bears, play in NCAA Division III as a founding member of the University Athletic Association. As of 2023, 26 Nobel laureates, 11 Pulitzer Prize winners, 4 United States Poet Laureates, and 6 MacArthur Fellows have been affiliated with the university as faculty or alumni. Washington University alumni also include 16 university presidents, 21 members of the United States Congress, 30 Rhodes Scholars, 7 Marshall Scholars and 2 Churchill Scholars. Washington University was conceived by 17 St. Louis business, political, and religious leaders concerned by the lack of institutions of higher learning in the Midwest. Missouri State Senator Wayman Crow and Unitarian minister William Greenleaf Eliot, grandfather of the poet T.S. Eliot, led the effort. The university's first chancellor was Joseph Gibson Hoyt. Crow secured the university charter from the Missouri General Assembly in 1853, and Eliot was named president of the board of trustees. Early on, Eliot solicited support from members of the local business community, including John O'Fallon, but Eliot failed to secure a permanent endowment. Washington University is unusual among major American universities in not having had a prior financial endowment. The institution had no backing of a religious organization, single wealthy patron, or earmarked government support. To this day, Washington University is controlled by a board of trustees that, by charter, appoints its own members. During the three years following its inception, the university had three different names. The board first approved "Eliot Seminary", but William Eliot was uncomfortable with naming a university after himself and objected to the establishment of a seminary which would implicitly be charged with teaching a religious faith. He favored a nonsectarian university. Under pressure from Eliot, the board of trustees created a task force charged with naming the university, headed by Samuel Treat. Several months later Treat's committee proposed naming the university the Washington Institute, after the nation's first president George Washington. In 1854, the board of trustees changed the name to "Washington Institute" in honor of George Washington and because the charter was coincidentally passed on Washington's birthday, February 22. Naming the university after the nation's first president, only seven years before the American Civil War and during a time of bitter national division, was no coincidence. During this time of conflict, Americans universally admired George Washington as the father of the United States and a symbol of national unity. The board believed that the university should be a force of unity in a strongly divided Missouri. In 1856, the university amended its name to "Washington University". Although chartered as a university, for many years Washington University functioned primarily as a night school located on 17th Street and Washington Avenue in downtown St. Louis. Owing to limited financial resources, Washington University initially used public buildings. Classes began on October 22, 1854, at the Benton School building. At first the university paid for the evening classes, but as their popularity grew, their funding was transferred to the St. Louis Public Schools. Eventually the board secured funds for the construction of Academic Hall and a half dozen other buildings. Later the university divided into three departments: the Manual Training School, Smith Academy, and the Mary Institute. In 1867, the university opened the first private nonsectarian law school west of the Mississippi River. By 1882, Washington University had expanded to numerous departments, which were housed in various buildings across St. Louis. Medical classes were first held at Washington University in 1891 after the St. Louis Medical College decided to affiliate with the university, establishing the School of Medicine. However, by the 1890s the university was on the brink of financial collapse until Robert Sommers Brookings, president of the board of trustees, undertook the task of rebuilding the university's finances and acquiring land for a new campus. Brookings was instrumental in raising money for the university, since Eliot, the primary fundraiser for the university, had died. In 1896, Holmes Smith, professor of Drawing and History of Art, designed what would become the basis for the modern-day university seal. The seal is made up of elements from the Washington family coat of arms and the symbol of Louis IX, whom the city is named after. Washington University spent its first half century in downtown St. Louis bounded by Washington Ave., Lucas Place, and Locust Street. By the 1890s, owing to the dramatic expansion of the medical school and a new benefactor in Robert Brookings, the university began to move west. The university board of directors began a process to find suitable ground and hired the landscape architecture firm Olmsted, Olmsted & Eliot of Boston. A committee of Robert S. Brookings, Henry Ware Eliot, and William Huse found a site of 103 acres (41.7 ha) just beyond Forest Park, located west of the city limits in St. Louis County. The elevation of the land was thought to resemble the Acropolis and inspired the nickname of "Hilltop" campus, renamed the Danforth campus in 2006 to honor former chancellor William H. Danforth. In 1899, the university opened a national design contest for the new campus. The renowned Philadelphia firm Cope & Stewardson (same architects who designed a large part of the University of Pennsylvania and Princeton University) won unanimously with its plan for a row of Collegiate Gothic quadrangles inspired by Oxford and Cambridge Universities. The cornerstone of the first building, Busch Hall, was laid on October 20, 1900. The construction of Brookings Hall, Ridgley, and Cupples began shortly thereafter. The university delayed occupying these buildings until 1905 to accommodate the 1904 World's Fair and 1904 Summer Olympics, which allowed the university to construct ten buildings instead of the seven originally planned. This original cluster of buildings set a precedent for the development of the Danforth Campus; Cope and Stewardson's original plan and its choice of building materials have, with few exceptions, guided the construction and expansion of the Danforth Campus to the present day. By 1915, construction of a new medical complex was completed on Kings Highway in what is now St. Louis's Central West End. In 1918, Washington University admitted its first women medical students. During World War II, as part of the Manhattan Project, a cyclotron at Washington University was used to produce small quantities of the newly discovered element plutonium via neutron bombardment of uranium nitrate hexahydrate. The plutonium produced there in 1942 was shipped to the Metallurgical Laboratory Compton had established at the University of Chicago where Glenn Seaborg's team used it for extraction, purification, and characterization studies of the exotic substance. After working for 22 years at the University of Chicago, Compton returned to St. Louis in 1946 to serve as Washington University's ninth chancellor. Compton reestablished the Washington University football team, making the declaration that athletics were to be henceforth played on a "strictly amateur" basis with no athletic scholarships. Under Compton's leadership, enrollment at the university grew dramatically, fueled primarily by World War II veterans' use of their GI Bill benefits. The desegregation of Washington University began in 1947 with the School of Medicine and the School of Social Work. The university ended racial segregation in its undergraduate divisions in 1952, making it the last local higher education institution to do so. During the 1940s, the university faced criticism from the local African American media, which included a letter-writing campaign by churches, the local Urban League, and legal briefs by the NAACP, seeking to strip the university of its tax-exempt status. In 1949, a student group, the Student Committee for the Admission of Negroes (SCAN), was founded and began advocating for full racial integration. In 1951, then-vice chancellor Leslie Buchan argued that full desegregation would isolate the university from the community and potentially lead to incidents on campus.[citation needed] The following year, in May 1952, the board of trustees passed a resolution desegregating the university's undergraduate divisions. During the latter half of the 20th century, Washington University transitioned from a commuter college to a world-renowned institution. In 1957, planning began for the construction of the "South 40", a complex of modern residential halls which primarily house freshmen and some sophomore students. With additional on-campus housing, the university, which had been predominantly attended by commuter students, began attracting a greater number of applicants from across the nation. By 1964, over two-thirds of incoming students came from outside the St. Louis area. In 1971, the board of trustees appointed Chancellor William Henry Danforth, who guided the university through the social and financial crises of the 1970s, strengthened the School of Medicine, and improved the often tense ties between the university and the St. Louis community. During his 24-year chancellorship, he established 70 new endowed professorships, constructed dozens of buildings, secured a $1.72 billion endowment, and tripled the amount of student scholarships. To better distinguish itself in national media, the university's board of trustees added the phrase "in St. Louis" in 1976. In 1995, Mark S. Wrighton, former provost at MIT, was elected the university's 14th Chancellor. During Chancellor Wrighton's tenure undergraduate applications to Washington University more than doubled. Since 1995, the university has added more than 190 endowed professorships, revamped its Arts & Sciences curriculum, and completed more than 30 new buildings. Washington University's reputation was enhanced by two major fundraising efforts since the 1980s. From 1983 to 1987, the "Alliance for Washington University" campaign raised $630.5 million, which was then the most successful fund-raising effort in national history. From 1998 to 2004, the "Campaign for Washington University" raised $1.55 billion, which was applied to additional scholarships, professorships, and research initiatives. In 2002, Washington University co-founded the Cortex Innovation Community in St. Louis's Midtown neighborhood. Cortex is the largest innovation hub in the midwest, home to offices of Square, Microsoft, Aon, Boeing, and Centene. The innovation hub has generated more than 3,800 tech jobs in 14 years. In 2005, Washington University founded the McDonnell International Scholars Academy, an international network of premier research universities, with an initial endowment gift of $10 million from John F. McDonnell. The academy, which selects scholars from 35 partnered universities around the world, was created to develop a cohort of future leaders, strengthen ties with top foreign universities, and promote global awareness and social responsibility. In Fall 2006, the St. Louis Metro opened the Cross–County extension of its light rail MetroLink system. Three of the nine new stations directly serve the university (Skinker, University City-Big Bend, and Forsyth). On July 1, 2006, the university began offering free Metro passes—the U Pass—to all full-time students, benefits-eligible faculty and staff, and full-time employees of qualified service providers. In June 2019, Andrew D. Martin, former dean of the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at the University of Michigan, was elected the university's 15th chancellor. On the day of his inauguration, Martin announced the "WashU Pledge", a financial aid program allowing full-time Missouri and southern Illinois students who are Pell Grant-eligible or from families with annual incomes of $75,000 or less to attend the university cost-free. In October 2021, Washington University announced it would invest an additional $1 billion in financial aid for students. The university practices need-blind admissions and meets 100% of admitted students' demonstrated needs. The new financial aid initiative, called Gateway to Success, included $800 million in endowed funding to support need-blind undergraduate admissions, meaning the university will not consider an applicant's financial situation when making admissions decisions while still meeting 100% of demonstrated financial need for admitted undergraduates. Another $200 million will be designated for financial aid for graduate and professional students in the university's Brown School, the School of Law and the School of Medicine, as well as in business, engineering, art and architecture, and Arts & Sciences. In 2022, Washington University was one of 10 universities picked to join the Kessler Scholars Collaborative, which provides support for selected first-generation and Pell-Grant eligible STEM students. The program aims to recruit 20 fully-funded Kessler scholars per year and provide additional opportunities to close the wealth gap. Also, in 2022, Washington University developed a needle-free nasal vaccine to combat COVID-19. Washington University has been selected by the Commission on Presidential Debates to host more presidential and vice presidential debates than any other institution in history. The campus was the venue for four Presidential debates, and one Vice-Presidential debate: the inaugural 1992 Presidential debate on October 11, 1992, the third 2000 Presidential debate on October 17, the second 2004 Presidential debate on October 8, the sole 2008 Vice Presidential debate between Joe Biden and Sarah Palin on October 2, and the second 2016 Presidential debate on October 9. The university was scheduled to host a debate in 1996, but that debate was cancelled when the number of scheduled debates was scaled back to two. Following the 2004 debate, Chancellor Wrighton initially expressed skepticism about hosting another debate but later changed his view. He acknowledged the unique educational opportunities for students and emphasized the role of these events in contributing to a national understanding of important issues. Wrighton also highlighted their impact in bringing national and international attention to the St. Louis region, positioning it as one of America's great metropolitan areas. Contrary to the majority opinion of the student body, the university opted not to host a 2020 presidential debate. The university's 169-acre Danforth Campus is bordered by the Forest Park section of St. Louis and Clayton and University City, Missouri. A large portion of the Danforth Campus is recognized as the Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District, which achieved National Historic Landmark status on February 27, 1987. The Barry Flanagan bronze statue, "Thinker on a Rock," widely known, simply, as "The Bunny", is currently on permanent loan to Washington University and features prominently near Olin Library, Graham Chapel and Mallinckrodt. Founded with a major gift from former U.S. Congressman Richard Gephardt. Major activities of the Gephardt Institute include the hosting of speakers series, internship and career placement services, granting of money to faculty and students for community-based teaching and learning, supporting co-curricular activities with the community service office, and a summer stipend program, where the university financially supports students who take uncompensated internships in the field of public service. The Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, established in 1881, is one of the oldest teaching museums in the country. The collection includes works from 19th-, 20th-, and 21st-century American and European artists, including George Caleb Bingham, Thomas Cole, Pablo Picasso, Max Ernst, Alexander Calder, Jackson Pollock, Rembrandt, Robert Rauschenberg, Barbara Kruger, and Christian Boltanski. Also in the complex is the 3,000 sq ft (300 m2) Newman Money Museum exhibiting the collection of American numismatist Eric P. Newman. In October 2006, the Kemper Art Museum moved from its previous location, Steinberg Hall, into a new facility designed by former faculty member Fumihiko Maki. The Kemper Art Museum is located directly across from Steinberg Hall, which was Maki's first commission in 1959. Washington University Medical Center comprises 186 acres (75.3 ha) spread over 18 city blocks, located along the eastern edge of Forest Park within the Central West End neighborhood of St. Louis. The campus is home to the Washington University School of Medicine and its associated teaching hospitals, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and St. Louis Children's Hospital. Many of the buildings are connected via a series of skyways and corridors. The School's 2,100 employed and volunteer faculty physicians also serve as the medical staff of Barnes-Jewish and St. Louis Children's hospitals, which are part of BJC HealthCare. Washington University and BJC have taken on many joint venture projects, such as the Center for Advanced Medicine, completed in December 2001. In 2019, Washington University was awarded a $7.6 million grant from the National Cancer Institute to create the Implementation Science Center for Cancer Control to address disparities in cancer care in parts of Missouri and Illinois. In 2022, Washington University's Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences was awarded a five-year $61 million grant from the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health, to focus on precision medicine, health equity, and diversity. Tyson Research Center is a 1,966.5-acre (3.07 sq mi; 795.81 ha) field station located west of St. Louis on the Meramec River. Washington University obtained Tyson as surplus property from the federal government in 1963. It is used by the university as a biological field station and research/education center. In 2010, the Living Learning Center was named one of the first two buildings accredited nationwide as a "living building" under the Living Building Challenge, opened to serve as a biological research station and classroom for summer students. Washington University's North Campus and West Campus principally house administrative functions that are not student focused. North Campus lies in St. Louis City near the Delmar Loop. The university acquired the building and adjacent property in 2004, formerly home to the Angelica Uniform Factory. Several university administrative departments are located at the North Campus location, including offices for Quadrangle Housing, Accounting and Treasury Services, Parking and Transportation Services, Army ROTC, and Network Technology Services. The North Campus location also provides off-site storage space for the Performing Arts Department. The West Campus is located about one mile (1.6 km) to the west of the Danforth Campus in Clayton, Missouri, and primarily consists of a four-story former department store building housing mostly administrative space. The West Campus building was home to the Clayton branch of the Famous-Barr department store until 1990, when the university acquired the property and adjacent parking and began a series of renovations. Today, the basement level houses the West Campus Library, the University Archives, the Modern Graphic History Library, and conference space. The ground level still remains a retail space. The upper floors house consolidated capital gifts, portions of university advancement, and information systems offices from across the Danforth and Medical School campuses. There is also a music rehearsal room on the second floor. Arts & Sciences is home to the College of Arts & Sciences as well as graduate programs across its many departments.The College of Arts & Sciences is the central undergraduate unit of the university with 330 tenured and tenure-track faculty along with over 100 research scientists, lecturers, artists in residence, and visitors serving more than 3,700 undergraduates in 40 academic departments divided into divisions of Humanities, Social sciences, and Natural sciences and Mathematics. The College of Arts & Sciences has an average class size of 18 students, with over 80% having fewer than 24. Almost one-half of the undergraduate classes have fewer than 10 students. The student-faculty ratio is 7:1. The College of Arts & Sciences offers courses in over a dozen languages, including Arabic, Hebrew, Spanish, German, French, Swahili, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Russian, Greek, Italian, Hindi, Portuguese, and Latin. The School of Continuing & Professional Studies in Arts & Sciences also offers course work in Swedish, Vietnamese, Irish, and Czech. Founded as the School of Commerce and Finance in 1917, the Olin Business School was named after entrepreneur John M. Olin in 1988. The school's academic programs include BSBA, MBA, Professional MBA (PMBA), Executive MBA (EMBA), Master of Science programs, Master of Accounting, Global Master of Finance Dual Degree program, and doctoral programs, as well as non-degree Executive Education. In 2002, an Executive MBA program was established in Shanghai, in cooperation with Fudan University. Olin has a network of more than 16,000 alumni worldwide. In 2004, the school's endowment increased to $213 million (2004) and annual gifts average $12 million per year. Simon Hall was opened in 1986 after a donation from John E. Simon. On May 2, 2014, the $90 million conjoined Knight and Bauer Halls were dedicated, following a $15 million gift from Charles F. Knight and Joanne Knight and a $10 million gift from George and Carol Bauer through the Bauer Foundation. The two buildings are joined by a three-story-high atrium and include spaces for lectures, faculty offices, and classrooms. Undergraduate BSBA students take 40–60% of their courses within the business school. Graduate students are able to pursue an MBA either full-time or part-time. Students may also take elective courses from other disciplines at Washington University, including law and many other fields. The Sam Fox School of Design & Visual Arts was founded in 2006, merging the existing academic units of Architecture and Art with the university's museum. The School comprises College of Architecture Graduate School of Architecture & Urban Design College of Art Graduate School of Art Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, considered one of the most distinguished university art collections in the country In October 2006 the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum moved into new facilities designed by Pritzker Prize-winning architect, and former faculty member, Fumihiko Maki. The art museum was first established in 1881 and was the first art museum west of the Mississippi River. It houses most of the university's art and sculpture collections, including pieces by Jackson Pollock, Robert Rauschenberg, Jenny Holzer, Pablo Picasso, Max Ernst, Willem de Kooning, Henri Matisse, Joan Miró, and Rembrandt van Rijn, among others. With approximately $27 million in annual research awards, the school focuses intellectual efforts on medicine and health, energy and environment, entrepreneurship, and security. On January 31, 2019, the School of Engineering & Applied Science was renamed to the James McKelvey School of Engineering. This renaming honored trustee and distinguished alumnus Jim McKelvey Jr., the co-founder of Square, following his substantial donation. In June 2023, Washington University announced its renamed and revamped University College as the School of Continuing & Professional Studies (CAPS). CAPS was established to focus on adult learners with a focus on rapidly growing and high paying fields like data analytics, education, healthcare, and management. The pre-nursing program was developed in partnership with Goldfarb School of Nursing at Barnes-Jewish College. Washington University School of Law offers joint-degree programs with the Olin Business School, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, the School of Medicine, and the School of Social Work. It also offers LLM programs, a Master of Juridical Studies (MJS), and a Juris Doctoris (JD). The law school offers 3 semesters of courses in the Spring, Summer, and Fall, and requires at least 85 credit hours of coursework for the JD. The law school offers a full-time day program, beginning in August, for the J.D. degree. The law school is located in Anheuser-Busch Hall (opened in 1997). The Washington University School of Medicine was founded in 1891. In the 2021 U.S. News & World Report rankings of U.S. medical schools, it was ranked sixth for research and tied for 31st for primary care. The McDonnell Genome Institute (directed by Richard K. Wilson) is housed within the Washington University School of Medicine; it is one of three NIH-funded major DNA sequencing centers in the U.S. and played a significant role in the Human Genome Project. In 2022, the Washington University School of Medicine ranked third among U.S. medical schools in terms of NIH funding received. The medical school partners with St. Louis Children's Hospital and Barnes-Jewish Hospital, where all physicians are members of the school's faculty. With roots dating back to 1909 in the university's School of Social Economy, the George Warren Brown School of Social Work was founded in 1925. Brown's academic degree offerings include a Master of Social Work (MSW), a Master of Public Health (MPH), a PhD programs. The school was endowed by Bettie Bofinger Brown and named for her husband, George Warren Brown, a St. Louis philanthropist and co-founder of the Brown Shoe Company. The school was the first in the country to have a building for the purpose of social work education, and it is also a founding member of the Association of Schools and Programs of Public Health. Founded as the Missouri Dental College in 1866, the Washington University School of Dental Medicine was the first dental school west of the Mississippi River and the sixth dental school in the United States. The school closed in 1991. Washington University is ranked 24th in the nation in the 2023 U.S. News & World Report National Universities ranking, and 11th by The Wall Street Journal in their 2018 rankings. The university is ranked 25th in the world for 2019 by the Academic Ranking of World Universities. Undergraduate admission to Washington University is characterized by the Carnegie Foundation and U.S. News & World Report as "most selective". The Princeton Review, in its 2020 edition, gave the university an admissions selectivity rating of 99 out of 99. The acceptance rate for the class of 2026 (those entering in the fall of 2022) was 11.3%, with students selected from more than 33,000 applications. Of students admitted, 91 percent were in the top 10 percent of their class. The Princeton Review ranked Washington University first for Best College Dorms and third for Best College Food, Best-Run Colleges, and Best Financial Aid in its 2020 edition. In its 2022 edition, Princeton Review also ranked Washington University as number 2 for "Top Entrepreneurship Under Ten Thousand Students", #1 for "Top Midwest Entreprenuerships", as a "Colleges That Create Futures" and of having a great quality of life. Niche listed the university as the best college for architecture and the second-best college campus and college dorms in the United States in 2020. The Washington University School of Medicine was ranked sixth for research by U.S. News & World Report in 2020 and has been listed among the top ten medical schools since the rankings were first published in 1987. Additionally, U.S. News & World Report ranked the university's genetics and physical therapy as tied for first place. QS World University Rankings ranked Washington University sixth in the world for anatomy and physiology in 2020. In January 2020, Olin Business School was named the Poets&Quants MBA Program of 2019. Washington University was named one of the "25 New Ivies" by Newsweek in 2006 and has also been called a "Hidden Ivy". A 2014 study ranked Washington University #1 in the country for income inequality About 22% of Washington University's students came from the top 1%, while only about 6% came from the bottom 60%. In response to this, in 2015, university administration announced plans to increase the number of Pell-eligible recipients on campus from 6% to 13% by 2020, and in 2019 15% of the university's student body was eligible for Pell Grants. In October 2019, then newly inaugurated Chancellor Andrew D. Martin announced the "WashU Pledge", a financial aid program that provides a free undergraduate education to all full-time Missouri and Southern Illinois students who are Pell Grant-eligible or from families with annual incomes of $75,000 or less. The American Talent Initiative found Washington University had the highest Pell growth rate among 130 major universities between the 2015–16 and 2019–20 academic years. More than 60% of undergraduates are involved in faculty research across all areas; it is an institutional priority for undergraduates to be allowed to participate in advanced research. According to the Center for Measuring University Performance, it is considered to be one of the top 10 private research universities in the nation. A dedicated Office of Undergraduate Research is located on the Danforth Campus and serves as a resource to post research opportunities, advise students in finding appropriate positions matching their interests, publish undergraduate research journals, and award research grants to make it financially possible to perform research. According to the National Science Foundation, Washington University spent $989 million on research and development in 2021, ranking it 25th in the nation. The university has over 150 National Institutes of Health funded inventions, with many of them licensed to private companies. Governmental agencies and non-profit foundations such as the NIH, United States Department of Defense, National Science Foundation, and NASA provide the majority of research grant funding, with Washington University being one of the top recipients in NIH grants from year-to-year. Nearly 80% of NIH grants to institutions in the state of Missouri went to Washington University alone in 2007. Washington University and its Medical School play a large part in the Human Genome Project, where it contributes approximately 25% of the finished sequence. NASA hosts its Planetary Data System Geosciences Node on the campus of Washington University. Professors, students, and researchers have been heavily involved with many unmanned missions to Mars. Professor Raymond Arvidson has been deputy principal investigator of the Mars Exploration Rover mission and co-investigator of the Phoenix lander robotic arm. Washington University professor Joseph Lowenstein, with the assistance of several undergraduate students, has been involved in editing, annotating, making a digital archive of the first publication of poet Edmund Spenser's collective works in 100 years. A large grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities was given to support this project centralized at Washington University with support from other colleges in the United States. In 2019, Folding@Home, a distributed computing project for performing molecular dynamics simulations of protein dynamics, was moved to Washington University School of Medicine from Stanford University. The project, currently led by Greg Bowman, uses the idle CPU time of personal computers owned by volunteers to conduct protein folding research. Folding@home's research is primarily focused on biomedical problems such as Alzheimer's disease, Cancer, Coronavirus disease 2019, and Ebola virus disease. In April 2020, Folding@home became the world's first exaFLOP computing system with a peak performance of 1.5 exaflops, making it more than seven times faster than the world's fastest supercomputer, Summit, and more powerful than the top 100 supercomputers in the world, combined. The McDonnell International Scholars Academy (MISA) is an alliance between universities that supports collaboration on research, development of joint educational opportunities, and joint research conferences. The program is named after John F. McDonnell, who provided an initial $10 million gift to establish the academy in 2005. MISA features a graduate-level endowed scholarship program for international students to study at Washington University. Founded in 2005, the academy's core mission is to develop a community of future global leaders from partner institutions worldwide. The program is believed to be the first of its kind in the United States. The Washington University library system comprises 12 libraries, with the main library, Olin Library, centrally located on the Danforth Campus. According to the American Library Association, it is the 44th largest library in the United States in terms of volumes held, containing over 5.3 million volumes. In 2020, the Princeton Review ranked the Olin Library among the top 10 "Best College Libraries" in the United States. The remaining 11 libraries in the system include: Kranzberg Art & Architecture Library Business Library Chemistry Library (closed 2023) East Asian Library Law Library Kenneth and Nancy Bernard Becker Medical Library Music Library Physics Library Social Work Library Special Collections & Archives West Campus Library In 2023, Washington University enrolled approximately 16,550 students who came from all 50 U.S. states and more than 110 countries. Of the 1,832 first year students enrolled in Fall 2023, 35% were Caucasian, 27% were Asian, 13% were Latino/Hispanic, 12% were Black/African-American, 11% were International, 1% were Native American/Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander and 1% did not identity; 52% were female and 48% were male. Washington University has over 300 undergraduate student organizations on campus. Most are funded by the Washington University Student Union, which, as of fiscal year 2024, has an annual budget of $4.2 million. The Student Union sponsors large-scale campus programs including WILD (a semesterly concert in the quad) and free copies of the New York Times, USA Today, and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch through The Collegiate Readership Program; it also funds the campus television station, WUTV, and the radio station, KWUR. KWUR was named best radio station in St. Louis of 2003 by the Riverfront Times despite the fact its signal reaches only a few blocks beyond the boundaries of the campus. The Congress of the South 40 (CS40) is a Residential Life and Events Programming Board, which operates outside of the SU sphere. CS40's funding comes from the housing activities fee of each student living in the South 40. Many of these organizations and other campus life amenities are housed in the $43 million Danforth University Center on the Danforth Campus, also dedicated in honor of emeritus Chancellor William Henry Danforth. The building opened on August 11, 2008. Washington University has a large number of student-run musical groups on campus, including 13 official a cappella groups. The Pikers, an all-male group, is the oldest such group on campus. The Greenleafs, an all-female group is the oldest (and only) female group on campus. The Mosaic Whispers, founded in 1991, is the oldest co-ed group on campus. They have produced 9 albums and have appeared on a number of compilation albums, including Ben Folds' Ben Folds Presents: University A Cappella! The Amateurs, who also appeared on this album, is another co-ed a cappella group on campus, founded in 1991. They have recorded seven albums and toured extensively. After Dark is a co-ed a cappella group founded in 2001. It has released three albums and has won several Contemporary A Capella Recording (CARA) awards. In 2008 the group performed on MSNBC during coverage of the vice presidential debate with specially written songs about Joe Biden and Sarah Palin. Washington University has eleven fraternities and nine sororities on campus. In 2020, a large number of Greek life members, primarily from sororities permanently deactivated from their chapters as a result of perceived systematic oppression, racism, and sexism. Some students called for the total abolition of Greek Life on campus. As of Spring 2021, approximately 14% of the student body participated in Greek life. Most of the residence halls on campus are located on the South 40, named because of its adjacent location on the south side of the Danforth Campus and its size of 40 acres (16 ha). It is the location of all freshman buildings as well as several sophomore buildings, which are set up in the traditional residential college system. All of the residential halls are co-ed. The South 40 is organized as a pedestrian-friendly environment wherein residences surround a central recreational lawn known as the Swamp. Bear's Den (the largest dining hall on campus), the Habif Health and Wellness Center (Student Health Services), the Residential Life Office, University police Headquarters, various student-owned businesses, and the baseball, softball, and intramural fields located on the South 40. Another group of residences, known as the Village, is located in the northwest corner of Danforth Campus. Only open to upperclassmen and January Scholars, the North Side consists of Millbrook Apartments, The Village, Village East on-campus apartments, and all fraternity houses except the Zeta Beta Tau house, which is off campus and located just northwest of the South 40. Sororities at Washington University do not have houses by their own accord. The Village is a group of residences where students who have similar interests or academic goals apply as small groups of 4 to 24, known as Living Learning Communities (LLCs), to live together in clustered suites . Like the South 40, the residences around the Village also surround a recreational lawn. In addition to South 40 and North Side residence halls, Washington University owns several other buildings within walking distance to Danforth Campus, which are open to upperclassmen. They include the Rosedale Apartments, University Drive apartments (consisting of approximately eight buildings directly across Forest Park Parkway from the Danforth Campus), Greenway Apartments, and the Lofts. Until Spring 2024, three additional buildings (520 Kingsland, 6678 Washington Ave, and 6665 Washington Ave) were offered as three-person apartments for upperclassmen but will be converted to graduate student housing after the 2023-2024 academic year. Washington University supports four major student-run media outlets. The university's student-run newspaper, Student Life, is published twice a week under the auspices of Washington University Student Media, Inc., an independent not-for-profit organization incorporated in 1999. The paper was first founded in 1878. KWUR (90.3 FM) serves as the students' official radio station; the station also attracts an audience in the immediately surrounding community due to its eclectic and free-form musical programming. WUTV is the university's closed-circuit television channel. The university's main student-run political publication is the Washington University Political Review (nicknamed "WUPR"), a self-described "multipartisan" monthly magazine. Washington University undergraduates publish two literary and art journals, The Eliot Review and Spires Intercollegiate Arts and Literary Magazine. A variety of other publications also serve the university community, ranging from in-house academic journals to glossy alumni magazines to WUnderground, the student-run satirical newspaper. Washington University was a founding member of the University Athletic Association of NCAA Division III and previously was a founding member of the Missouri Valley Conference. Between 1907 and 1942, Washington University played with what are now classified as NCAA Division I teams. The Bears have won 24 NCAA Division III Championships— two in women's cross country (2011, 2018), two in women's indoor track and field (2017, 2023), one in women's outdoor track and field (2017), one in men's tennis (2008), two in men's basketball (2008, 2009), five in women's basketball (1998–2001, 2010), ten in women's volleyball (1989, 1991–1996, 2003, 2007, 2009), and one in women's soccer (2016) – and 262 conference titles in 16 different sports. Washington University hosts 42 club sports. The Washington University men's club water polo team has been particularly successful, capturing the Collegiate Water Polo Association Division III Club National Championship title in 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. Funding for club sports comes from the Student Union budget, as each club is deemed a campus group. Washington University is home of Francis Olympic Field, site of the 1904 Summer Olympics. Francis Field is also home of the Washington University football, soccer, and track and field teams. WILD – Walk In, Lay Down, the semesterly concert in the Quad which brings in popular musical acts. The future of WILD remains unclear with multiple cancelled events due to COVID and university concerns an alternative event NAP was run in Fall 2023 off campus in an attempt to redefine WILD. Thurtene Carnival – The oldest and largest student-run carnival in the nation, run by Thurtene Honorary. Vertigo – A dance party put on by the Engineering School Council (EnCouncil), featuring an innovative 8-by-16-foot (2.4 by 4.9 m) computer-controlled modular LED illuminated dance floor built by students. Cultural shows – Each year Washington University student groups put on several multicultural shows. Ashoka, the South Asian student association, puts on a performance for Diwali, the Indian festival of lights, that includes a skit and dances. Black Anthology is a student-run performance arts show celebrating black culture. Lunar New Year Festival is a student group that puts on a performance in collaboration with a philanthropic partner organization to celebrate the Lunar New Year through various Asian performing arts. Africa Week and the African Film Festival are annual events hosted by the African Students Association. Finally, the Association of Latin American Students showcases various forms of Latin and Spanish dances during their performance, Carnaval. Brookings Hall – A superstition among students to never step on the university seal at Brookings Hall. It is said that doing so will prevent one from graduating on time. Convocation – A large gathering for new students and their families intended to welcome them to the university. Among others, it includes speeches from seniors and university leadership. DUC N' Donuts – Taking place on the first Friday of every month at the Danforth University Center (DUC), this tradition allows students to learn about monthly events while enjoying free coffee and donuts. Cheap Lunch – Every Wednesday, the Engineering School Council (EnCouncil), provides pizza, chips, and cookies for a low cost. Art Prom – Every Spring, students from the Sam Fox School of Design and Visual Arts host a “formal” dance with a creative twist. Underpass Panels – A series of panels along the walls of the underpass connecting the South 40 to the main Danforth Campus. Tradition involves the painting of each panel by students and clubs to advertise upcoming events. Located adjacent to the underpass is a large concrete ball, a concrete cube, and pyramid, also painted to advertise student events. Washington University has over 19,000 faculty and staff members and over 156,000 living alumni. Awards and honors recognizing Washington University alumni and faculty include the Nobel Prize, Pulitzer Prize, U.S. Poet Laureate, National Book Award, National Book Critics Circle Award, National Medal of Science, National Medal of Arts, Rhodes Scholarship, Guggenheim Fellowship, Fulbright Fellowship, Putnam Fellowship, MacArthur Prize, and membership in the National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, Royal Society of London, American Institute of Architects, American Academy of Arts and Letters, American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Law Institute, American Philosophical Society, National Academy of Medicine, and American Academy of Arts and Sciences Notable undergrad alumni feature prominent figures across various fields, such as the chairman of Manchester United Avram Glazer; Lionsgate Films CEO, Jon Feltheimer; Men's Wearhouse founder, George Zimmer; former Greenpeace executive director, Phil Radford; Gilead Sciences founder, Michael L. Riordan; Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Siniša Mali; Missouri Senator, Jim Talent; Nevada Senator, Chic Hecht; Nebraska Congressman, Hal Daub; Pulitzer Prize-winning journalists, Ken Cooper and Hank Klibanoff; Tony Award-winning theatrical producer, David Merrick; baseball player, Dal Maxvill; and the first director of the World Health Organization's Global Program on AIDS, Jonathan Mann. Additionally, the list includes science show host, Deanne Bell (Design Squad); New York Times best-selling author, Susannah Cahalan; character actress, Mary Wickes; television actor, Johnny Kastl; 41st Attorney General of Missouri, Chris Koster; Paralympic Gold Medalist, Kendall Gretsch; and radical feminist, Shulamith Firestone. Undergraduate alumni also include co-inventor of nylon Julian W. Hill; co-discoverer of the neutrino Clyde Cowan;, Governor of Illinois James R. Thompson; U.S. Ambassador to Belgium Sam Fox; Edward S. Holden, president of the University of California; Thomas Lamb Eliot, founder of Reed College; and Abram L. Sachar, founding president of Brandeis University. Graduates of the College of Architecture include George Hellmuth, Gyo Obata, and George Kassabaum, founders of HOK, the world's fourth-largest architectural firm. Graduate School alumni include Nobel laureates Earl Sutherland, Edwin Krebs, and Daniel Nathans who all graduated from the School of Medicine. Businessman and adventurer Steve Fossett earned his MBA from the business school. Law school graduate, Joseph Poindexter was governor of Hawaii during the Pearl Harbor attack. Doctoral alumni include the former presidents of Johns Hopkins, Clemson, Wake Forest, Morehouse, Mount Union, Yonsei, and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. Mike Simpson, the U.S. representative for Idaho's 2nd congressional district is a graduate of the Dental School. Notable individuals who attended but did not graduate include playwright Tennessee Williams (who left in protest at not winning a playwriting prize); Charles Eames, who was expelled for defending modernist architecture; Jack C. Taylor, the founder of Enterprise Rent-a-Car, who withdrew to fight in World War II; Pulitzer Prize winner and bestselling author Bill Dedman, who left to pursue a career as a newspaper reporter; and Marilyn vos Savant, the IQ-record holder, who left to assist with a family investment business. Peter Sarsgaard, Award-winning actor Harold Ramis, Actor/director, Ghostbusters, Caddyshack, Animal House, National Lampoon's Vacation (film series)) Tennessee Williams, 20th-century Playwright of American drama Robert Culp, Actor and screenwriter Robert Guillaume, Actor (Soap, The Lion King, Guys and Dolls, The Phantom of the Opera) Kristin Bauer van Straten, Actress (Once Upon a Time,True Blood, Seinfeld) Andrew McCabe, Former deputy director of the FBI William H. Webster, Only person to have served as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and director of Central Intelligence Pepper Schwartz, Sexologist and sociologist Rochelle Walensky, 19th Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Clark Clifford, Political adviser to presidents Harry S. Truman, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, and Jimmy Carter J. C. R. Licklider, Pioneer in artificial intelligence and the Internet Quinton Lucas, Mayor of Kansas City, Missouri Charles Nagel, Founder of the United States Chamber of Commerce Dave Garroway, Founding host and anchor of NBC's Today Jim McKelvey, co-founder and director of Block, Inc Fannie Hurst, Novelist Bob Behnken, NASA Astronaut and former Chief of the Astronaut Office Leana Wen, Former President of Planned Parenthood Joe Madison, Radio talk-show host on SiriusXM Urban View Scott Hadland, Chief of the Division of Adolescent and Young Adult Medicine at Harvard Medical School Stephanie D. Davis, Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit Steven Sater, Broadway lyricist and playwright (Spring Awakening) Andrea Palm, United States Deputy Secretary of Health and Human Services Notable faculty include 56th governor of Missouri Eric Greitens; economist Hyman Minsky; novelists Stanley Elkin and William H. Gass; poet Carl Phillips; architect Louis C. Spering; artist Max Beckmann; sex researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson; writer and culture critic Gerald Early; twice United States Poet Laurette, Howard Nemerov; founder of the American Association of University Professors, Arthur Oncken Lovejoy; chemist Joseph W. Kennedy, co-discoverer of the element plutonium; first woman Director of both the National Gallery of Canada and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Jean Sutherland Boggs; and chemist Holden Thorp, editor-in-chief of Science Magazine. Buckminster Fuller, Systems theorist, author, designer, inventor, and futurist Thomas Eagleton, United States Senator from Missouri Arthur Holly Compton, Discoverer of the Compton effect Luther Terry, Ninth Surgeon General of the United States who is best known for his warnings against the dangers and the impact of tobacco use on health Rita Levi-Montalcini, Neurologist and Nobel laurete for the discovery of nerve growth factor Joseph Erlanger, known for his contributions to the field of neuroscience Gerty Cori, First woman to be awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Peter Mutharika, Former President of Malawi Douglass North, Nobel Laureate Economist Bruce H. Mann, American legal scholar and husband of U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren Wiley Rutledge, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States Fumihiko Maki, United Nations' new building architect Barry Commoner, Leading ecologist and a founder of the modern environmental movement Ian Bogost, Game Studies scholar and video game designer Roger Nash Baldwin, co-founder and first executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union Alfred Hershey, Nobel Laureate bacteriologist known for the Hershey–Chase experiment Roy Vagelos, chairman and CEO of Merck & Co. E.T. Jaynes, Theoretical physicist and statistician Mona Van Duyn, United States Poet Laureate Wesley A. Clark, Credited for designing the first modern personal computer Mary Jo Bang, Guggenheim Fellow (2004) Lauren Ackerman, Championed the subspecialty of surgical pathology Henry Smith Pritchett, Head of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and 5th President of MIT Barbara Schaal, First woman to be elected vice president of the National Academy of Sciences Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say. The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students. The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum. Center for Social Development Central Institute for the Deaf Crow Observatory Whitney R. Harris World Law Institute Flory, Julie (20 September 2021). "Washington University Managed Endowment Pool generates record 65% return". The Source. Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 23 May 2022. "University Facts". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved Oct 9, 2020. "Current Enrollment & Graduation Data: Spring 2019". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on December 25, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Washington University in St. Louis (About)". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on January 3, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010. "History of Tyson – Tyson Research Center". Washington University in St. Louis – Biology Department. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved September 23, 2011. "IPEDS-Washington University in St Louis". Archived from the original on 2021-11-07. Retrieved 2021-11-07. "Color Palettes | Office of Public Affairs | Washington University in St. Louis". Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved 2016-08-03. "Washington University in St. Louis: Association of American Universities (AAU)". www.aau.edu. Archived from the original on 2020-04-12. Retrieved 2020-04-12. "Carnegie Classifications Institution Lookup". carnegieclassifications.iu.edu. Center for Postsecondary Education. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2020. "Universities Report Largest Growth in Federally Funded R&D Expenditures since FY 2011 | NSF - National Science Foundation". ncses.nsf.gov. Archived from the original on 2023-12-28. Retrieved 2023-12-28. Zalaznick, Matt (2023-01-06). "Billion-dollar business: These are higher ed's top 30 R&D performers". University Business. Archived from the original on 2023-12-24. Retrieved 2023-12-28. "Washington University in St. Louis: Nobel Prize awarded to WashU economist Philip Dybvig". India Education. 2022-10-20. Archived from the original on 2023-01-07. Retrieved 2023-01-07. Dybvig joins a prestigious list of 26 Nobel laureates affiliated with Washington University. Dybvig joined Olin's faculty in 1990. He previously taught at Princeton University and was tenured at Yale University. He has published two textbooks and more than 35 articles in leading journals. Rooney, Sonya. "Research Guides: WashU History FAQ: Awards & Honors - WU Faculty". libguides.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2023-09-29. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "U.S. Rhodes Scholarships Number of Winners by Institution U.S. Rhodes Scholars 1904 – 2023" (PDF). The Rhodes Trust. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 22, 2022. Retrieved January 5, 2023. Keaggy, Diane Toroian (2021-12-13). "Senior Kuziez named Marshall Scholar - The Source - Washington University in St. Louis". The Source. Archived from the original on 2024-01-01. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Churchill Scholarship". Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "About Arts & Sciences". Arts & Sciences. 2021-06-03. Archived from the original on 2022-04-19. Retrieved 2022-05-30. "Charter | Board of Trustees | Washington University in St. Louis". boardoftrustees.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2023-10-26. Retrieved 2023-10-20. "The Founding of Washington University". Washington University in St. Louis Magazine. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved January 8, 2009. Rectenwald, Miranda. "Research Guides: WU History FAQ: Origin of Washington University's Name". libguides.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2020-04-02. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Washington University". Northern Illinois University Libraries Digitization Projects. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved January 8, 2009. "History and Traditions". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2020-04-08. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Washington-University" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-10-24. Retrieved 2020-04-21. Gerfen, Katie (February 25, 2020). "Washington University's East End Transformation". Architect Magazine. Archived from the original on 2023-01-09. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Architecture of Danforth Campus". Wustl.edu. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved September 4, 2010. "Washington University Hilltop Campus, 1899-1951". St. Louis County. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2023. "Frederic Aldin Hall | Facts, History and Traditions | About | Washington University in St. Louis". Wustl.edu. March 8, 1918. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Arthur Holly Compton". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2021-01-31. Retrieved 2020-04-21. "History". www.mir.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2021-02-01. Retrieved 2020-04-21. Allison, Samuel K. (1965). "Arthur Holly Compton 1892–1962". Biographical Memoirs. 38. National Academy of Sciences: 81–110. ISSN 0077-2933. OCLC 1759017. "Arthur Holly Compton | Facts, History and Traditions | About | Washington University in St. Louis". Wustl.edu. February 22, 1946. Archived from the original on March 3, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Desegregation at Washington University in St. Louis". Washington University in St. Louis: University Libraries. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved September 11, 2008. Pfeiffenberger, Amy M. (Winter 1989). "Democracy at Home: The Struggle to Desegregate Washington University in the Postwar Era". Gateway-Heritage. 10 (3). Missouri Historical Society: 17–24. Seelye, Katherine (October 6, 2020). "William Danforth, Who Led Washington University, Dies at 94". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "South 40 Residential Colleges". Students. 2018-10-29. Archived from the original on 2021-02-05. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Ethan A.H. Shepley | Facts, History and Traditions | About | Washington University in St. Louis". Wustl.edu. October 14, 1958. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. O'Connor, Candace (2003). Beginning a Great Work: Washington University in St. Louis, 1853-2003. Washington University in St. Louis. p. 207. ISBN 9780972096645. "Origin of the 'Washington' Name". Washington University in St. Louis: University Libraries. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. "Wash U chancellor to resign in 2019". ksdk.com. 2017-10-06. Archived from the original on 2024-01-21. Retrieved 2024-01-10. "Mark Stephen Wrighton | Leadership | About | Washington University in St. Louis". Wustl.edu. Archived from the original on July 4, 2010. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Watts, Judy H. "Washington University in St. Louis Magazine". Magazine.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on September 6, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Winter, Greg (December 22, 2003). "A Mighty Fund-Raising Effort Helps Lift a College's Ranking". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved February 20, 2017. "Cortex Innovation Community". www.cortexstl.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved 2019-08-02. Wagner, Julie (2016-05-05). "In St. Louis, a gateway to innovation and inclusion". Brookings. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved 2019-08-02. Rhee, Helen. "Student Life Archives (2001-2008) » Blog Archive » New McDonnell International Scholars Academy announced". Archived from the original on 2021-02-05. Retrieved 2020-04-13. "Secretary-General's remarks at meeting with the McDonnell International Scholars Academy [as prepared for delivery]". United Nations Secretary-General. 2014-03-11. Archived from the original on 2021-02-03. Retrieved 2020-04-13. "McDonnell International Scholars Academy at Washington University in St. Louis". Archived from the original on 2021-02-05. Retrieved 2020-04-13. "McDonnell International Scholars Academy". Global. Archived from the original on 2020-09-30. Retrieved 2020-04-13. "WUSTL to provide free Metro passes". The Source. Washington University in St. Louis. 2022-06-26. Archived from the original on 2022-06-26. Retrieved 2022-06-26.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Bernhard, Blythe (2018-07-14). "From a student apartment to the chancellor's house, Wash U's new leader comes home". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2024-01-10. Retrieved 2024-01-10. Kirn, Jacob (October 3, 2019). "New Washington U chancellor unveils free tuition plan for families making $75K or less". St. Louis Business Journal. Archived from the original on January 2, 2024. Nelson, Alisa (October 4, 2019). "Prestigious private Missouri university to offer free college to qualifying students". Missourinet. Archived from the original on 2023-04-16. Retrieved 2023-04-16. Burt, Chris (2021-10-05). "Windfall at WashU! Endowment gains lead to $1 billion in financial aid to students". University Business. Archived from the original on 2024-01-10. Retrieved 2024-01-10. Nietzel, Michael T. "Washington University Is Going Need-Blind In Admissions". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2021-10-16. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Bernhard, Blythe (5 October 2021). "Washington University to boost student financial aid by $1 billion". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2023-04-16. Retrieved 2023-04-16. Donadel, Alcino (2023-05-25). "This program dedicated to boosting first-gen success rates is tripling down". University Business. Archived from the original on 2024-01-10. Retrieved 2024-01-10. "Washington University in St. Louis To Launch Scholars Program for First-Gen STEM Students". Diverse: Issues In Higher Education. 2022-04-13. Archived from the original on 2022-05-10. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "India and China clear needle-free COVID-19 vaccines". AP NEWS. 2022-09-06. Archived from the original on 2022-10-01. Retrieved 2022-10-17. "Vintage KSDK: The founding of Washington University in St. Louis". ksdk.com. 2022-03-24. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "The 4 times Washington U. has hosted presidential or vice-presidential debates". STLtoday.com. 2015-09-24. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Vice Presidential Candidates Debate | C-SPAN.org". www.c-span.org. Archived from the original on 2022-09-21. Retrieved 2022-10-12. Camia, Catalina. "Ready for debates? 16 sites eager to be 2016 hosts". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on 2022-10-17. Retrieved 2022-10-17. "First debate canceled; others still on schedule". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Wrighton: 2008 debate bid 'improbable' – News". Media.studlife.com. Archived from the original on February 9, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Washington University in St. Louis – Vice Presidential Debate 2008". Debate.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Board, the Editorial (2019-09-29). "St. Louis lost when Washington U. took a pass on hosting 2020 candidates". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District - National Historic Landmark". stlouis-mo.gov. Archived from the original on 2022-08-25. Retrieved 2022-08-25. "Washington University Hilltop Campus Historic District". LandmarkHunter.com. Archived from the original on 2023-01-12. Retrieved 2022-08-25. "Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum - St. Louis, MO". greatriverroad.com. 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 2022-10-17. Retrieved 2022-10-12. "Washington University Medical Campus". Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2018-12-04. Retrieved 2024-01-20. "Washington University Receives $7.6 Million Grant from National Cancer Institute". Diverse: Issues In Higher Education. 2019-10-20. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Barr, Diana (May 16, 2022). "Washington University researchers receive $61M federal grant for biomedical research". Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "Biology and Building—The Living Learning Center at Washington University's Tyson Research Center: A Journey on the Path to the Living Building Challenge" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 16, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Clendennen, Andy (July 23, 2004). "Sun rises on University's North Campus". Record. Archived from the original on August 29, 2006. Retrieved January 10, 2007. "Historical Campus Tour: West Campus". Washington University in St. Louis homepage. Archived from the original on October 13, 2006. Retrieved January 10, 2007. "Olin Business School | Alumni | Washington University Business School Alumni". Olin.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Washington University in St. Louis Endowment Fund". Endowments.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2017. Retrieved 2017-04-01. Eckmann, Sabine (2016). Spotlights: Collected by the Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum. Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum. ISBN 978-0936316420. "Fumihiko Maki". Architectuul. Archived from the original on 2024-01-01. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Wash U Receives Donation From Square Co-Founder And Renames School Of Engineering". STLPR. 2019-01-31. Archived from the original on 2024-01-10. Retrieved 2024-01-10. Barker, Jacob (2019-01-31). "Wash U renaming engineering school after Square co-founder Jim McKelvey". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2024-01-10. Retrieved 2024-01-10. Gieseke, Drew (2023-08-16). "WashU looks to the future for adult learners with new School of Continuing & Professional Studies". Ladue News. Archived from the original on 2024-01-23. Retrieved 2024-01-23. Best Medical Schools: Research Archived March 20, 2018, at the Wayback Machine (2019), U.S. News & World Report. Best Medical Schools: Primary Care Archived June 13, 2018, at the Wayback Machine (2019), U.S. News & World Report. "About the McDonnell Genome Institute". McDonnell Genome Institute. April 5, 2018. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. "Home | Blue Ridge Institute for Medical Research". brimr.org. 2022-10-27. Archived from the original on 2023-02-08. Retrieved 2023-02-08. Niemeyer, Kelly Wiese (2023-02-07). "WashU Medicine reaches new heights as it climbs to No. 3 in NIH research funding". The Source. Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2023-02-08. Retrieved 2023-02-08. "Longtime dentist going strong after six decades of work". Arkansas Online. 2012-09-30. Archived from the original on 2015-11-17. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Shapiro, Jordan (10 June 2015). "New St. Louis dental clinic looks to close gaps in coverage". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2023". Forbes. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023-2024 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "2024 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal/College Pulse. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "QS World University Rankings 2024: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "World University Rankings 2024". Times Higher Education. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "U.S. News & World Report College Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. 2020. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "College Rankings". WSJ. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved 2016-09-28. "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2019". Academic Ranking of World Universities. Archived from the original on August 15, 2019. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "WashU Selectivity Rating". Archived from the original on 2019-07-04. Retrieved 2020-04-08. "Washington University in St. Louis - The Princeton Review College Rankings & Reviews". www.princetonreview.com. Archived from the original on 2021-01-13. Retrieved 2020-04-08. "WU admits 3,600 students, record-low 10% of applicants, to Class of 2026 - Student Life". 15 April 2022. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. "Washington University in St. Louis - The Princeton Review College Rankings & Reviews". www.princetonreview.com. Archived from the original on 2020-09-28. Retrieved 2020-06-24. "Washington University in St. Louis - The Princeton Review College Rankings & Reviews". www.princetonreview.com. Archived from the original on 2021-01-13. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "2020 Washington University in St. Louis Rankings". Niche. Archived from the original on 2021-02-01. Retrieved 2020-03-18. "2021 Best Medical Schools: Research". Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. "Best Genetics Programs". Archived from the original on November 24, 2019. "Best Physical Therapy Programs". Archived from the original on February 5, 2020. "Anatomy & Physiology". Top Universities. 2020-02-24. Archived from the original on 2020-03-20. Retrieved 2020-03-20. Byrne, John A. (2020-01-14). "MBA Program Of The Year: Washington University's Newly Revamped MBA". Poets&Quants. Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. Retrieved 2020-01-25. "Common Data Set 2020–2021" (PDF). Washington University in St. Louis. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved Mar 18, 2022. "Common Data Set 2015–2016" (PDF). Washington University in St. Louis. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved Mar 18, 2022. "America's 25 New Elite 'Ivies'". Newsweek. 2006-08-20. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved 2020-03-18. Greene, Howard; Greene, Matthew (2016). The Hidden Ivies, 3rd Edition: 63 of America's Top Liberal Arts Colleges and Universities. New York: Cliff Street Books. ISBN 978-0-06-095362-1. "The Most Economically Diverse Top Colleges". The New York Times. 2014-09-08. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2019-12-24. Retrieved 2019-12-27. "Some Colleges Have More Students From the Top 1 Percent Than the Bottom 60. Find Yours". The New York Times. 2017-01-18. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved 2019-04-09. "A Distinction Washington U. Wants to Lose: Least Economically Diverse". The Chronicle of Higher Education. 2015-02-26. Archived from the original on 2020-11-08. Retrieved 2022-10-17. "At top colleges, diversity not just black-white". NBC News. 28 April 2011. Archived from the original on 2022-10-17. Retrieved 2022-10-17. Schienvar, Emily (22 January 2015). "University announces plan to increase Pell-eligible numbers". Student Life. Archived from the original on December 27, 2019. Retrieved 2019-12-27. Leonhardt, David (2015-01-15). "The Least Economically Diverse Top College, Seeking to Change". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2020-06-26. Retrieved 2020-06-24. "Washington University Made An Effort To Increase Diversity, And It's Working". HuffPost. 2015-06-29. Archived from the original on 2022-10-17. Retrieved 2022-10-17. Jenkins, Wesley (2019-12-18). "Washington U. Is No Longer America's Least Economically Diverse College. Is That Good Enough?". The Chronicle of Higher Education. ISSN 0009-5982. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved 2019-12-27. "Washington University unveils tuition-free aid program". AP NEWS. 2019-10-04. Archived from the original on 2020-11-26. Retrieved 2022-10-17. Kurzweil, Martin; LaViolet, Tania; Davidson Pisacreta, Elizabeth; Rabinowitz, Adam; Schwartz, Emily; Wyner, Josh. "Expanding Opportunity for Lower-Income Students" (PDF). American Talent Initiative. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-08-17. Retrieved 2022-08-25. "2021 Best Law Schools". Archived from the original on March 20, 2017. "2021 Best Business Schools". Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. "Top Health Schools". Usnews.com. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. Levy, Francesca; Rodkin, Jonathan. "These Are the Best Undergraduate Business Schools of 2016". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on April 26, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2016. "Reputation and World Rankings". Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved June 20, 2012. "More than 60% of undergraduates perform research". Washington University in St. Louis: Admissions. Archived from the original on July 14, 2008. Retrieved July 18, 2008. "The Top American Research Universities" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 5, 2015. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Office of Undergraduate Research | Washington University in St. Louis". Ur.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Research Activity, 2007 Annual Report" (PDF). Washington University in St. Louis: Office of Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 9, 2008. Retrieved July 18, 2008. "Genome Sequencing Center". Archived from the original on May 5, 2009. Fitzpatrick, Tony (June 12, 2008). "WUSTL plays key role in Phoenix Mars Mission". Record. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved July 18, 2008. "National Endowment for the Humanities Awards and Offers, June 2009" (PDF). June 1, 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "Computational biology project aims to better understand protein folding". The Source. Washington University in St. Louis. 2019-02-26. Archived from the original on 2020-04-10. Retrieved 2020-04-12. Patrizio, Andy (2020-04-01). "Thousands of PCs break exaFLOP barrier". Network World. Archived from the original on 2020-04-12. Retrieved 2020-04-12. "Folding@home stats report". archive.is. 2020-04-08. Archived from the original on 2020-04-08. Retrieved 2020-04-12. "Major Indo-US Advanced Bioenergy Consortium launches". Biodiesel Magazine. 2014-10-17. Archived from the original on 2020-07-25. Retrieved 2020-05-28. "IIT Delhi students to be mentored by Washington University". The Times of India. 2017-12-15. Archived from the original on 2020-11-01. Retrieved 2020-05-28. "Educating Future World Leaders". Washington Magazine. Archived from the original on 2020-10-22. Retrieved 2020-05-06. "Secretary-General's remarks at meeting with the McDonnell International Scholars Academy". United Nations. March 11, 2014. Archived from the original on 2021-02-03. Retrieved 2020-04-13. "Brisbane McDonnell academy symposium to tackle world's great challenges". Get STEM. 20 September 2016. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 25 July 2020. "Newly inaugurated Washington University Chancellor Andrew D. Martin makes 'WashU Pledge'". The Source. Washington University in St. Louis. 2019-10-03. Archived from the original on December 25, 2019. Retrieved 2020-03-18. "Library Statistics and Figures: The Nation's Largest Libraries: A Listing by Volumes Held". American Library Association. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2024. "Best College Library | The Princeton Review". www.princetonreview.com. Archived from the original on 2021-02-01. Retrieved 2020-04-08. Libraries, Washington University (2021-09-15). "STEM Libraries Closing". University Libraries | Washington University in St. Louis. Retrieved 2024-02-23. "University Facts". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2019-07-04. Retrieved 2024-01-23. "Our Students - Undergraduate Admissions | Washington University in St. Louis". Undergraduate Admissions. Archived from the original on 2023-11-26. Retrieved 2024-01-23. "College Scorecard: Washington University in St. Louis". United States Department of Education. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Directory of Student Groups". Washington University Student Union. Archived from the original on December 17, 2006. "SU passes general budget of $4.2 million - Student Life". Student Life - The independent newspaper of Washington University in St. Louis. 2023-03-30. Archived from the original on 2023-04-18. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Best of St. Louis". Riverfront Times. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved February 10, 2007. Volkmann, Kelsey (July 22, 2008). "Clayco completes $43M University Center at Washington University". www.bizjournals.com. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. Johnson, Julia (September 28, 2008). "Washington U. unveils $43 million student center". www.bizjournals.com. Archived from the original on 2013-05-17. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "After Dark website". Wuafterdark.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Wash U. Palin/Biden Love Song Archived October 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine" from "cbsnews.com" (October 3, 2008) accessed March 17, 2012 "As Wash U Students Reckon With Greek System, Some Want It Gone For Good". STLPR. 2021-03-18. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. Doores, Beth (July 29, 2021). "Sorority and Fraternity Life Spring 2021 Report" (PDF). Washington University in St. Louis. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2022. "WUnderground – WashU's Premier (and only) satirical newspaper!". Wunderground.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2019. "UNIVERSITY ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION | Encyclopedia of Cleveland History | Case Western Reserve University". case.edu. 2023-12-20. Archived from the original on 2024-01-23. Retrieved 2024-01-23. "Women's Basketball". Washington University Athletics. Archived from the original on April 8, 2007. Retrieved April 7, 2007. "Volleyball". Washington University Athletics. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved July 30, 2010. "WUSTL Athletics". WUSTL Athletics. Archived from the original on 2021-10-15. Retrieved 2021-01-27. "Washington University in St. Louis - Official Athletics Website". Washington University in St. Louis. Archived from the original on 2023-12-19. Retrieved 2024-01-07. "Some Days the Bears Get You: Washington University in St. Louis Paws Past Middlebury College, 14-9, to Capture 2015 Division III National Collegiate Club Championship: Collegiate Water Polo Association". Collegiatewaterpolo.org. Archived from the original on 2016-09-19. Retrieved 2016-08-22. "Three-Peat: Washington University in St. Louis Doubles Carnegie Mellon University, 14-7, to Capture 2016 Men's Division III National Collegiate Club Championship: Collegiate Water Polo Association". Collegiatewaterpolo.org. Archived from the original on 2016-11-21. Retrieved 2016-11-21. "Saint Motel headlining rebranded fall WILD, held off campus for the first time - Student Life". Student Life - The independent newspaper of Washington University in St. Louis. 2023-10-27. Retrieved 2024-02-23. "Thurtene Carnival is a highlight of spring". stltoday.com. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved 2018-01-04. "April 21-23, 2017". Thurtene.org. Archived from the original on April 2, 2017. Retrieved 2017-04-01. Schoenherr, Neil (April 19, 2006). "Let your imagination ride at Thurtene Carnival April 22–23". Washington University in St. Louis News & Information. Archived from the original on August 28, 2006. Retrieved September 10, 2006. "Campus Traditions | Undergraduate Admissions | Washington University in St. Louis". Undergraduate Admissions. Archived from the original on 2020-03-02. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Convocation | New Students | Washington University in St. Louis". newstudents.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2020-04-07. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Your guide to regularly scheduled free food opportunities at Wash. U. - Student Life". Student Life - The independent newspaper of Washington University in St. Louis. 2017-10-12. Archived from the original on 2022-11-30. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Cheap Lunch". WashU. 5 November 2018. Archived from the original on 2023-09-27. Retrieved 2023-09-27. "Art Prom". Students. 2018-11-05. Archived from the original on 2020-04-07. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Underpass Panels | Event Management | Washington University in St. Louis". eventmanagement.wustl.edu. Archived from the original on 2020-04-07. Retrieved 2020-04-07. "Avram Glazer: who is the Man Utd co-owner and what has he said about European Super League plot?". www.nationalworld.com. 2021-05-05. Archived from the original on 2021-06-12. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Piper-Shimizu, Stephane (2018-03-02). "Jon Feltheimer". Variety. Archived from the original on 2022-07-30. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Lee, Louise (November 1, 2004). "Spiffing Up Men's Wearhouse". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Geman, Ben. "Greenpeace appoints veteran organizer to its top post". archive.nytimes.com. Archived from the original on 2024-01-02. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Strategy Study: How Gilead Went From Unprofitable To Biopharmaceutical Giant". www.cascade.app. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Serbia's new finance minister vows to cut debt, keep fiscal stability". seenews.com. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Jim Talent". bipartisanpolicy.org. Archived from the original on 2022-07-05. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Chic Hecht, 77, Former Senator and Businessman From Nevada, Is Dead". The New York Times. Associated Press. 2006-05-18. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Seline, Libby (19 October 2018). "Board of Regents Incumbent Hal Daub plans to advocate for affordable tuition". The Daily Nebraskan. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Alumni Feature: Kenneth Cooper '70". Graland Country Day School. 2021-10-05. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Interview: Book on African-American leaders includes St. Louis connections". STLPR. 2015-03-03. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Biography - Mr Hank Klibanoff". ppww.hkbu.edu.hk. Archived from the original on 2016-04-22. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "David Merrick". The Official Masterworks Broadway Site. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Rich, Frank (2000-04-27). "David Merrick, 88, Showman Who Ruled Broadway, Dies". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Dal Maxvill – Society for American Baseball Research". Archived from the original on 2021-11-26. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Hilts, Philip J. (1998-09-04). "Jonathan Mann, AIDS Pioneer, Is Dead at 51". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Murnane, Kevin. "Deanne Bell's Future Engineers Program Connects Students With NASA And STEM". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2021-01-26. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Brain On Fire: Wash U. Alum Describes Encounter With Rare Autoimmune Disease". STLPR. Archived from the original on 2024-01-23. Retrieved 2024-01-23. Gussow, Mel (October 26, 1995). "Mary Wickes, 85, Character Actress for 50 Years". The New York Times. p. 8. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "Star Student | University of Iowa". magazine.foriowa.org. Archived from the original on 2022-11-03. Retrieved 2022-11-03. Ballentine, Summer. "Once a Republican, Koster seeks governorship as a Democrat". Springfield News-Leader. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Kendall Gretsch". TeamUSA.org. United States Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Faludi, Susan (2013-04-08). "Shulamith Firestone's Radical Feminism". The New Yorker. ISSN 0028-792X. Archived from the original on 2020-04-03. Retrieved 2024-01-23. Stout, David (1996-02-01). "Julian W. Hill, Nylon's Discoverer, Dies at 91". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2021-01-04. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Reines, Frederick (August 1, 1974). "Clyde L. Cowan Jr". Physics Today. 27 (8): 68–69. Bibcode:1974PhT....27h..68R. doi:10.1063/1.3128835. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "James Robert Thompson". National Governors Association. 12 January 2015. Archived from the original on 2020-08-07. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Council of American Ambassadors". Council of American Ambassadors. Archived from the original on 2021-07-24. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Campbell, W. W. (1916). "Edward Singleton Holden (1846-1914)". Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 51 (14): 891–894. JSTOR 20025640. Archived from the original on 2020-09-01. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Ritchie, Susan. "Eliot, Thomas Lamb (1841-1936) | Harvard Square Library". Archived from the original on 2021-08-05. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Lyons, Richard D. (1993-07-25). "Dr. Abram L. Sachar, Historian And 1st Brandeis U. President, 94". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2018-01-18. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "George Hellmuth; 'Sold' Architect Firm's Ideas". Chicago Tribune. 16 November 1999. Archived from the original on 2020-06-10. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Clancy, Sam (March 9, 2022). "Gyo Obata, legendary architect and founder of HOK, dies at 99". KDSK. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "George Kassabaum, Leading Architect; Headed Large Firm". The New York Times. United Press International. 1982-08-17. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2022-03-11. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1971". NobelPrize.org. Archived from the original on 2022-06-21. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1992". NobelPrize.org. Archived from the original on 2021-10-31. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Biographical Overview". Daniel Nathans - Profiles in Science. 2019-03-12. Archived from the original on 2022-05-19. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Fossett remembered by Washington University". The Denver Post. Associated Press. 2008-05-01. Archived from the original on 2022-10-17. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Lane, James B. (1971). "Joseph B. Poindexter and Hawaii during the New Deal". The Pacific Northwest Quarterly. 62 (1): 7–15. ISSN 0030-8803. JSTOR 40488873. Archived from the original on 2021-07-29. Retrieved 2022-07-31. 2011-2012 Official Congressional Directory, 112th Congress, Convened January 5, 2011. Government Printing Office. ISBN 978-0-16-088653-9. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2023. "What You Should Know About Rep. Mike Simpson". StateImpact Idaho. Archived from the original on 2024-01-23. Retrieved 2024-01-23. Schvey, Henry I. (2021). Blue Song: St. Louis in the Life and Work of Tennessee Williams. University of Missouri Press. pp. xi. ISBN 978-0826222305. Coleman, Nancy (August 23, 2021). "Staging 'The Glass Menagerie' on the Fire Escapes That Inspired It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved January 5, 2023. "USModernist". usmodernist.org. Archived from the original on 2021-08-11. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Jr, Robert D. Hershey (2016-07-03). "Jack Taylor, Founder of Enterprise Rent-A-Car, Dies at 94". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2023-07-05. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "Investigative Journalist And Author Bill Dedman To Speak At Baylor Monday". www.chattanoogan.com. 2014-03-04. Archived from the original on 2014-03-07. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Meet the World's Smartest Person". Chicago Tribune. 29 September 1985. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Cardenas, Felipe. "Q&A: Peter Sarsgaard on soccer and Socrates". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 2021-06-13. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Harold Ramis | Walk of Fame". Archived from the original on 2022-02-21. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Robert Culp, Star of I Spy and Other Series, Dies at 79". Television Academy. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Heuer, Alex (October 27, 2017). "'A quiet giant': Local actors reflect on St. Louis native Robert Guillaume's influence". STLPR. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Moore, Camille (2021-03-01). "10 Things You Didn't Know about Kristin Bauer van Straten". TVovermind. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Goldman, Adam; Apuzzo, Matt (2017-05-12). "Andrew McCabe Is Known at F.B.I. for His Precision and Intellect". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2017-05-12. Retrieved 2024-01-01. "William H. Webster, February 23, 1978 - May 25, 1987". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "William H. Webster". International Spy Museum. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Pepper Schwartz Ph.D. | Psychology Today". www.psychologytoday.com. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "CDC Director". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2021-10-06. Archived from the original on 2018-07-05. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Freyer, Felice (December 7, 2020). "Dr. Rochelle Walensky, Biden's choice for CDC chief, brings stellar reputation as scientist and communicator". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. Berger, Marilyn (October 11, 1998). "Clark Clifford, a Major Adviser To Four Presidents, Is Dead at 91". The New York Times. "Clark M. Clifford Oral History Interview, March 23, 1971 | Harry S. Truman". www.trumanlibrary.gov. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Tietz, Tabea (2019-03-11). "J.C.R. Licklider and Interactive Computing". SciHi Blog. Archived from the original on 2022-07-10. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Kite, Allison (August 1, 2019). "At swearing in, KC Mayor Quinton Lucas promises 'safer, healthier and stronger' city". The Kansas City Star. "Quinton Lucas sworn in as Kansas City's new mayor". Columbia Daily Tribune. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Nagel, Charles". www.tshaonline.org. Archived from the original on 2020-11-01. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Peace, Old Tiger. Time. July 18, 1969. Archived from the original on December 14, 2008. "WashU announces donation from Square co-founder to grow engineering school". TechCrunch. 31 January 2019. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-30. Atlas, Nava (2018-07-14). "Fannie Hurst, Author of Imitation of Life | LiteraryLadiesGuide". Literary Ladies Guide. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Tonnessen, Heather (2016-08-30). "Robert L. Behnken (Colonel, USAF, RET., PH.D.) NASA Astronaut". NASA. Archived from the original on 2022-04-14. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Leana Wen". Carnegie Corporation of New York. Archived from the original on 2021-09-23. Retrieved 2022-07-30. "Joe Madison". Finding Your Roots. Archived from the original on 2023-01-08. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Scott Hadland, MD, MPH -". Massachusetts General Hospital. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Biden Nominates Black Female Michigan Judge for U.S Court of Appeals". The Michigan Chronicle. 2022-02-02. Archived from the original on 2022-11-27. Retrieved 2022-11-27. "Dramatists Play Service, Inc". www.dramatists.com. Archived from the original on 2022-11-27. Retrieved 2022-11-27. "Andrea Palm". HHS.gov. 2021-05-12. Archived from the original on 2022-11-28. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Hancock, Jason (November 1, 2016). "Records shed light on Missouri candidate Eric Greitens' income, sources". Kansas City Star. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2023. Uchitelle, Louis (1996-10-26). "H. P. Minsky, 77, Economist Who Decoded Lending Trends". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Stanley Elkin | Walk of Fame". Archived from the original on 2021-08-18. Retrieved 2022-07-31. LeClair, Interviewed by Thomas (1977). "The Art of Fiction No. 65". The Paris Review. Interviews. Vol. Summer 1977, no. 70. ISSN 0031-2037. Archived from the original on 2019-10-29. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Gass Biography". Reading William Gass. Archived from the original on 2019-03-27. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "Cut & Paste: Poet Carl Phillips Explores The Politics Of The Everyday". STLPR. 2020-06-05. Archived from the original on 2022-06-13. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Toft, Carolyn Hewes. "Landmarks Association of St. Louis :: Architects :: Louis Clemens Spiering (1874-1912)". www.landmarks-stl.org. Archived from the original on 2022-09-26. Retrieved 2023-01-09. Rybka, Anne (2016-04-07). "The Story Of Max Beckmann, Germany's Mystery Painter". Culture Trip. Archived from the original on 2021-09-24. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Severo, Richard (2001-02-19). "William H. Masters, a Pioneer in Studying and Demystifying Sex, Dies at 85". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2017-08-13. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Greta (2012-02-15). "Virginia Johnson". Missouri Women. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Gerald Early | Walk of Fame". Archived from the original on 2022-02-27. Retrieved 2022-07-31. jen. "Howard Nemerov | Walk of Fame". Retrieved 2024-01-24. Pearson, Richard (1991-07-07). "HOWARD NEMEROV, PULITZER-WINNING POET, DIES AT 71". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Arthur O. Lovejoy". Philosophy. 2016-06-28. Archived from the original on 2023-01-09. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Joseph W. Kennedy - Nuclear Museum". Atomic Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Salisbury, Stephan (September 5, 2014). "Jean Sutherland Boggs; led Art Museum". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on 2022-11-27. Retrieved 2022-11-27. "AAAS names chemist Holden Thorp as editor-in-chief of Science". www.science.org. Archived from the original on 2022-03-21. Retrieved 2022-07-31. O'Neil, Tim (October 1, 2011). "A look back • Climatron, inspired by R. Buckminster Fuller, is a novel and enduring hit". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Clymer, Adam (2007-03-05). "Thomas F. Eagleton, 77, a Running Mate for 18 Days, Dies". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2018-09-22. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1927". NobelPrize.org. Archived from the original on 2021-05-15. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Finkel, Ed (March 1, 2004). "2004 Health Care Hall of Fame: He helped clear the air". Modern Healthcare. "The Nobel Prize | Women who changed science | Rita Levi-Montalcini". www.nobelprize.org. Archived from the original on 2022-05-06. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1944". NobelPrize.org. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "The Nobel Prize | Women who changed science | Gerty Cori". www.nobelprize.org. Archived from the original on 2022-03-31. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Cambria, Nancy (2 June 2014). "New president of Malawi taught at Washington University law school for nearly 40 years". STLtoday.com. Archived from the original on 2021-10-06. Retrieved 2022-07-31. "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 1993". NobelPrize.org. Archived from the original on 2022-07-12. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Schoenberg, Shira (2012-10-14). "Harvard Law Professor Bruce Mann adjusts to public role as 'Elizabeth Warren's husband'". masslive. Archived from the original on 2023-01-09. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Ferren, John M. (2004). Salt of the Earth, Conscience of the Court: The Story of Justice Wiley Rutledge. Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press. pp. 51–52, 57–59. ISBN 978-0-8078-2866-3. "Biography: Fumihiko Maki | The Pritzker Architecture Prize". www.pritzkerprize.com. Archived from the original on 2022-04-05. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Schudel, Matt (2012-10-02). "Barry Commoner, scientist and influential environmentalist, dies at 95". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 2020-03-01. Retrieved 2023-01-08. Lewis, Daniel (2012-10-01). "Scientist, Candidate and Planet Earth's Lifeguard". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2023-01-09. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Ian Bogost – International Symposium on Online Journalism". Archived from the original on 2023-06-03. Retrieved 2024-01-23. Pearson, Richard (August 27, 1981). "Roger Baldwin, a Founder of ACLU, Dies". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1969". NobelPrize.org. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Neill, Ushma S. (2014-06-02). "A conversation with P. Roy Vagelos". The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 124 (6): 2291–2292. doi:10.1172/JCI76755. ISSN 0021-9738. PMC 4089453. PMID 24892701. Clark, John W.; Norberg, Richard E.; Bretthorst, G. Larry (2000-01-01). "Edwin Thompson Jaynes". Physics Today. 53 (1): 71–72. doi:10.1063/1.4808482. ISSN 0031-9228. "Mona Van Duyn". Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Anderson, Marian (2018-04-03). "Wesley A. Clark". IEEE Computer Society. Retrieved 2024-01-24. "Mary Jo Bang". STLPR. Archived from the original on 2022-07-31. Retrieved 2022-07-31. Saxon, Wolfgang (1993-07-30). "Lauren Ackerman, 88, Professor And an Author of Medical Texts". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2024-01-24. Redmon, Michael (2014-08-06). "Henry Smith Pritchett Head of the Carnegie Foundation Benefited the City in Many Ways". The Santa Barbara Independent. Archived from the original on 2023-01-09. Retrieved 2023-01-08. "Washington U. scientist Barbara Schaal named to presidential panel". STLPR. 2009-06-08. Archived from the original on 2022-11-27. Retrieved 2022-11-27. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Washington University in St. Louis. Official website Washington University Athletics website "Washington University" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905. "Washington University" . Popular Science Monthly. Vol. 64. February 1904.