Year 1052 (MLII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Summer – Godwin, Earl of Wessex, sails with a large fleet up the Thames to London, forcing King Edward the Confessor to reinstate him into his previous position of power. Battle of Haydaran: The Zirid dynasty is defeated by the invading Bedouin Arab tribes of the Banu Hilal. Byōdō-in, a Japanese Buddhist temple (located in the Kyoto Prefecture), changes its name by order of Fujiwara no Yorimichi. May 23 – Philip I ("the Amorous"), king of France (d. 1108) Agnes of Aquitaine, countess of Savoy (approximate date) Conrad II ("the Child"), duke of Bavaria (d. 1055) Dirk V, count of Friesland (west of the Vlie) (d. 1091) Gleb Svyatoslavich, Kievan prince (approximate date) Jón Ögmundsson, Icelandic bishop and saint (d. 1121) Robert of Bellême, Norman nobleman (approximate date) Roman Svyatoslavich, Kievan prince (approximate date) March 6 – Emma of Normandy, queen consort of England (twice), Denmark and Norway (b. 984) May 6 – Boniface III, Italian prince and margrave (assassinated) June 19 – Fan Zhongyan, chancellor of the Song dynasty (b. 989) October 4 – Vladimir Yaroslavich, Grand Prince of Kiev (b. 1020) October 27 – Qirwash ibn al-Muqallad, Uqaylid emir December 14 – Aaron Scotus, Irish abbot and musician Amadeus I, count of Savoy (approximate date) Guaimar IV of Salerno, Italian nobleman (assassinated) Halinard, French archbishop (approximate date) Hugh II, count of Ponthieu (also lord of Abbeville) Pandulf III of Salerno, Lombard prince (assassinated) Pandulf of Capaccio, Lombard nobleman (assassinated) Rodulf, Norman missionary bishop and abbot Sweyn Godwinson (or Swein), English nobleman Xu Daoning, Chinese painter (approximate date) Xuedou Chongxian, Chinese Buddhist monk Gilbert Meynier (2010) L'Algérie cœur du Maghreb classique. De l'ouverture islamo-arabe au repli (658-1518). Paris: La Découverte; p. 53. Zetterstéen, K. V. (1927). "Ḳarwās̲h̲". The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Volume II: E–K. Leiden and London: E. J. Brill. pp. 781–782.