Chortkiv Raion (Ukrainian: Чортківський район) is a raion in Ternopil Oblast in western Ukraine. Its administrative center is the city of Chortkiv. It has a population of 322,293 (2022 estimate). In the Second Polish Republic, the area belonged to the County of Kopczynce, Tarnopol Voivodeship. Following the First Partition of Poland in 1772, it became part of the Habsburg monarchy's Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria. Following the Peace of Schönbrunn in 1809, the area was ceded to the Russian Empire but was returned to the Habsburg monarchy as a result of the Congress of Vienna in 1815. After the dissolution of Austria-Hungary in 1918, the area became part of the Second Polish Republic. After the Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939, it was incorporated into the Ukrainian SSR. Following the invasion of the Soviet Union by Nazi Germany in summer 1941, the area was administrated as part of the General Government. When the Soviet Union retook the area in 1944, the region returned to the Ukrainian SSR. Since the dissolution of the Ukrainian SSR and the Soviet Union in 1991, the area has been part of independent Ukraine. On 18 July 2020, as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, the number of raions of Ternopil Oblast was reduced to three, and the area of Chortkiv Raion was significantly expanded. Five abolished raions, Borshchiv, Buchach, Husiatyn, Monastyryska, and Zalishchyky Raions, as well as the city of Chortkiv, which was previously incorporated as a city of oblast significance and did not belong to the raion, were merged into Chortkiv Raion. The January 2020 estimate of the raion population was 42,832 (2020 est.) After the reform in July 2020, the raion consisted of 22 hromadas: Bilche-Zolote rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Bilche-Zolote, transferred from Borshchiv Raion; Bilobozhnytsia rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Bilobozhnytsia, retained from Chortkiv Raion; Borshchiv urban hromada with the administration in the city of Borshchiv, transferred from Borshchiv Raion; Buchach urban hromada with the administration in the city of Buchach, transferred from Buchach Raion; Chortkiv urban hromada with the administration in the city of Chortkiv, retained from Chortkiv Raion and transferred from the city of oblast significance of Chortkiv; Hrymailiv settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Hrymailiv, transferred from Husiatyn Raion; Husiatyn settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Husiatyn, transferred from Husiatyn Raion; Ivane-Puste rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Ivane-Puste, transferred from Borshchiv Raion; Khorostkiv urban hromada with the administration in the city of Khorostkiv, transferred from Husiatyn Raion; Kolyndiany rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Kolyndiany, retained from Chortkiv Raion; Kopychyntsi urban hromada with the administration in the city of Kopychyntsi, transferred from Husiatyn Raion; Koropets settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Koropets, transferred from Monastyryska Raion; Melnytsia-Podilska settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Melnytsia-Podilska, transferred from Borshchiv Raion; Monastyryska urban hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Monastyryska, transferred from Monastyryska Raion; Nahirianka rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Nahirianka, retained from Chortkiv Raion; Skala-Podilska settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Skala-Podilska, transferred from Borshchiv Raion; Tovste settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Tovste, transferred from Zalishchyky Raion; Trybukhivtsi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Trybukhivtsi, transferred from Buchach Raion; Vasylkivtsi rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Vasylkivtsi, transferred from Husiatyn Raion; Zalishchyky urban hromada with the administration in the city of Zalishchyky, transferred from Zalishchyky Raion; Zavodske settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Zavodske, retained from Chortkiv Raion; Zolotyi Potik settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Zolotyi Potik, transferred from Buchach Raion. Before the 2020 reform, the raion consisted of five hromadas: Bilobozhnytsia rural hromada with the administration in Bilobozhnytsia; Chortkiv urban hromada with the administration in Chortkiv, also included the city of Chortkiv; Kolyndiany rural hromada with the administration in Kolyndiany; Nahirianka rural hromada with the administration in Nahirianka; Zavodske settlement hromada with the administration in Zavodske. Subdivisions of Ukraine Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Борщівська района рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Бучацька районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Гусятинська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Монастириська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Заліщицька районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. "Чортківська районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України.