Year 915 (CMXV) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Summer – Battle of Garigliano: The Christian League, personally led by Pope John X, lays siege to Garigliano (a fortified Arab camp in the area of Minturno), which is blockaded from the sea by the Byzantine navy. After three months of siege, plagued by hunger, the Saracens decide to break out of Garigliano and find their way back to Sicily by any means possible. Christian hunting parties fall on the fleeing Arabs, and all are captured and executed. July – The Magyars (Hungarians), led by Zoltán, only son of the late Grand Prince Árpád, attack Swabia, Franconia and Saxony. Small units penetrate as far as Bremen, burning the city. December 3 – John X crowns the Italian sovereign Berengar I as the Holy Roman Emperor in Rome. Berengar returns to northern Italy, where Friuli is threatened by the Hungarians. January 13 – Al-Hakam II, Umayyad caliph (d. 976) Abu Shakur Balkhi, Persian poet Adalbert I, Frankish nobleman (approximate date) Al-Mutanabbi, Muslim poet (d. 965) Boleslaus I, duke of Bohemia (approximate date) Burchard III, Frankish nobleman (d. 973) Hasdai ibn Shaprut, Jewish diplomat (d. 970) Sunifred II, Frankish nobleman (d. 968) William III, Frankish nobleman (d. 963) April 23 – Yang Shihou, Chinese general November 4 – Zhang, Chinese empress (b. 892) Abu Salih Mansur, Samanid governor Adalbert II, Lombard nobleman Al-Nasa'i, Muslim scholar and hadith compiler Bi'dah al-Kabirah, was a songstress, and had been a slave of Arib. She died on 10 July 915. Abu Bakr ibn al-Muhtadi led the funeral prayers. She was also concubine of Abbasid caliph Al-Mamūn (r. 813–833) Bertila of Spoleto, queen of Italy Cutheard, bishop of Lindisfarne Domnall mac Áeda, king of Ailech (Ireland) Gonzalo Fernandez, count of Castile Gregory IV, duke of Naples Jing Hao, Chinese painter Leoluca, Sicilian abbot (approximate date) Li Yanlu, Chinese warlord Ratbod, archbishop of Trier Reginar I, Frankish nobleman Regino of Prüm, German abbot Spytihněv I, duke of Bohemia Sunyer II, Frankish nobleman Tuotilo, German composer (approximate date) Peter Partner (January 1, 1972). The Lands of St. Peter: The Papal State in the Middle Ages and the Early Renaissance (illustrated ed.). University of California Press. pp. 81-82. ISBN 9780520021815. al-Sāʿī, Ibn; Toorawa, Shawkat M.; Bray, Julia (2017). كتاب جهات الأئمة الخلفاء من الحرائر والإماء المسمى نساء الخلفاء: Women and the Court of Baghdad. Library of Arabic Literature. NYU Press. pp. 20, 22. ISBN 978-1-4798-6679-3.