Year 835 (DCCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian Calendar. Ragnar Lodbrok, a Norse Viking ruler, rises to power. He becomes the scourge of France and England (approximate date). Viking raids in Ireland on the Kingdom of Munster at Inish Cathaigh Danish Viking raiders ally with the Cornish, against the rule of King Egbert of Wessex (approximate date). The Isle of Sheppey (off the northern coast of Kent) is attacked by Vikings. December 14 – Sweet Dew Incident: Emperor Wen Zong plots to free the court from the influence of his palace eunuchs. In the northeast sector of the capital Chang'an, after the failure of the emperor's chancellor Li Zhongyan to subdue the eunuchs' influence, troops under the eunuchs' command slaughter many officials and other associates. November 1 – Pope Gregory IV promotes the celebration of the feast of All Saints, throughout the Frankish Empire. Ahmad ibn Tulun, Muslim governor (d. 884) Ahmad ibn Yusuf, Muslim mathematician (d. 912) Guaifer of Salerno, Lombard prince (approximate date) Lothair II, king of Lotharingia (d. 869) Louis the Younger, king of East Francia (or 830) Qian Kuan, Chinese warlord (approximate date) Berengar the Wise, Frankish nobleman Duan Wenchang, chancellor of the Tang dynasty (b. 773) Jia Su, chancellor of the Tang dynasty Jayavarman II, founder of the Khmer Empire John IV (the Peacemaker), bishop of Naples Kūkai, Japanese Buddhist monk (b. 774) Li Cou, prince of the Tang dynasty Li Fengji, chancellor of the Tang dynasty (b. 758) Li Zhongyan, chancellor of the Tang dynasty Lu Sui, chancellor of the Tang dynasty (b. 776) Lu Tong, Chinese poet (b. 790) Muhammad al-Jawad, 9th Twelver Shī'ah Imām (b. 811) Sabrisho II, patriarch of the Church of the East Song Ruoxian, Chinese scholar, lady-in-waiting and poet (b. 772) Shu Yuanyu, Chinese official and chancellor Vladislav, duke of Croatia (approximate date) Wang Shoucheng, Chinese eunuch and official Wang Ya, chancellor of the Tang dynasty Yang Zhicheng, Chinese governor (jiedushi) Zheng Zhu, Chinese general and official "Ireland's History in Maps (800 AD)". Dennis Walsh. Archived from the original on July 9, 2014. Retrieved on 26 July 2017. Parker, Philip (2015). The Northmen's Fury: A History of the Viking World. Penguin Random House. p. 423. ISBN 9780099551843.