The president of Mongolia is the executive head of state of Mongolia. The current president is Ukhnaagiin Khürelsükh. Political parties with representation in the State Great Khural nominate candidates. The president was originally limited to two four-year terms, but this was changed to a non-renewable six-year term starting with the 2021 presidential election. The president can be removed from office if two-thirds of the Khural find them guilty of abusing their powers or violating their oath. Before inauguration, however, the president-elect must suspend their membership of any political party. Nominating a candidate for the office of Prime Minister, who is then approved or rejected by the State Great Khural (parliament). This is a ceremonial responsibility, as the Khural will most likely reject any nominee who is not its own choice – in effect, the prime minister is appointed by the Khural. Vetoing the Khural's legislation (can be overridden with a two-thirds majority) Approving judicial appointments Appointing the chief judge of the Supreme Court of Mongolia Chairing the National Security Council of Mongolia Acting as commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Nominates the prosecutor general, the official in charge of implementing the laws, who is then approved or rejected by the Khural. Provides guidelines for the activities of the Government. Generally, Mongolian leaders have lived at the president's residence at the Ikh Tenger Complex (Mongolian: Их тэнгэр цогцолбор). The complex is a protected area in the Bogd Khan Mountain. The residence is located next to the mansions of the Speaker of Parliament and Prime Minister. In 2017, newly elected president Battulga said that he intended to live in the "Winter Palace" in central Ulaanbaatar, also known as the marshal's residence, in a departure from tradition. It is located in the heart of the capital between Peace Avenue and Seoul Street (next to the 1st School and the Russian Embassy). The two story-building was built in 1947 as the residence of Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan. It has two luxury rooms and five other rooms as well as 52-80 person capacity banqueting hall. List of heads of state of Mongolia Vice President of Mongolia Prime Minister of Mongolia Mongolian: Монгол Улсын Ерөнхийлөгч, romanized: Mongol Ulsiin Yörönkhiilögch, pronounced [ˌmɔɴɢɞ̆ɮ oɬˌsʲiŋ jɵɾɵ̆ɲˈçʲiɮɵk(ə)t͡ɕʰ] "Эрх зүйн акт дэлгэрэнгүй". Montsame News Agency. Mongolia. 2006, ISBN 99929-0-627-8, p. 42 Montsame News Agency. Mongolia. 2006, ISBN 99929-0-627-8, p. 43 Montsame News Agency. Mongolia. 2006, Montsame News Agency Foreign Service Office, ISBN 99929-0-627-8, p. 45 Montsame News Agency. Mongolia. 2006, Foreign Service office of Montsame News Agency, ISBN 99929-0-627-8, p. 44 "Khaltmaa Battulga refused to settle in state residence: Media". akipress.com. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "New president of Mongolia to live in walking distance from his office, unofficial sources say". MONTSAME News Agency. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "Mongolian President to live in 'Winter Palace' – News.MN". News.MN – The source of news. 17 July 2017. Retrieved 4 June 2021. Official website Official website (2008)