Tysmenytsia Raion (Ukrainian: Ти́сменицький райо́н, romanized: Tysmenytskyi raion) was an administrative raion (district) of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast (province) in western Ukraine. It was created on 8 December 1966, as Ivano-Frankivsk Raion. Since 28 March 1982 the name of raion was changed to Tysmenytsia when the administrative center of it became the city of Tysmenytsia. The raion was abolished on 18 July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast Oblast to six. The area of Tysmenytsia Raion was merged into Ivano-Frankivsk Raion. The last estimate of the raion population was 81,796 (2020 est.). At the time of disestablishment, the raion consisted of six hromadas: Lysets settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Lysets; Tysmenytsia urban hromada with the administration in Tysmenytsia; Uhryniv rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Uhryniv; Yamnytsia rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Yamnytsia; Yezupil settlement hromada with the administration in the urban-type settlement of Yezupil; Zahvizdia rural hromada with the administration in the selo of Zahvizdia. The raion was located near the eastern border of Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast. To the north it bordered Halych Raion, to the west – Kalush and Bohorodchany raions, to the south – Kolomyia and Nadvirna raions, and to the east – Tlumach Raion with small portion of an oblast demarcation line with Ternopil Oblast. The raion completely surrounded Ivano-Frankivsk Municipality with numerous villages bordering with it and are part of the city's infrastructure: Uhryniv, Yamnytsia, Drahomyrchany, Zahvizdya, and others. The administrative center of the raion, Tysmenytsia, is only 11 kilometres (6.8 mi) away from Ivano-Frankivsk. The oldest settlements in the raion were Cherniiv (1404), Stari Kryvotuly (1436), Uhryniv (1440), and others. Executive: Head of Raion State Administration – Volodymyr Semeniv Legislative: Raion Council (85 seats): Chairman – Mykola Nahornyi (Rukh) Tysmenytsia City municipality Yezupil Town municipality Lysets Town municipality 41 rural municipalities (communes) encompassing 48 villages There were 43 general education schools in the raion with the best ones located in Tysmenytsia, Yezupil, Lysets, Markivtsi, Radcha, Stari Kryvotuly, Chorny Lis, and Uhryniv.[citation needed] Tysmenytsia Raion was divided into several municipalities (councils) some which are urban, others are rural. There were two types of urban municipalities: city and settlement (township). Rural municipalities (communes) may consist of a single village or combined into several villages, however most of the rural municipalities consisted of a single village. Also, the city of Tysmenytsia carried a special status of independent administration within the raion. Urban (city, township) Yezupil Lysets Tysmenytsia Rural (communes) Berezivka Bratkivtsi Cherniiv Chornoliztsi Chukalivka Dobrovlyany Dovhe Drahomyrchany Hannusivka Khomiakivka Klubivtsi Kluziv Kozyna Kolodiivka Lypivka (Nova Lypivka, Studynets) Maidan (Nova Huta) Markivtsi (Odayi) Myluvannia Novi Kryvotuly (Ternovytsia) Pavlivka Pidluzhia Pidlissia Pidpechery Poberezhia Posich Pshenychnyky (Pohonya) Radcha Rybne Roshniv Silets Slobidka Staryi Kryvotuly (Krasylivka) Staryi Lysets Stebnyk Stryhantsi Tiaziv Uhryniv Uzyn Vilshanytsia Yamnytsia Zahvizdia Ten most populous Tysmenytsia 9,720 Cherniiv 3,972 Stary Lysets 3,795 Zahvizdya 3,684 Yamnytsia 3,358 Uhryniv 3,227 Stari Kryvotuly 3,112 Chornoliztsi 3,097 Radcha 3,062 Yezupil 3,026 Most of the populous municipalities were located next to Ivano-Frankivsk city virtually serving as the extraterritorial units of it (suburbs). The smallest municipality of the raion was the Posich municipality which in 2001 accounted to only 84 residents. Note that as a settlement Posich was not the smallest. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 18 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2020 року / Population of Ukraine Number of Existing as of January 1, 2020 (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2023. "Тисменицька районна рада (состав до 2020 г.)" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. (in Ukrainian) Verkhovna Rada website - Administrative divisions on the Tysmenytsia raion County of Tysmenytsia (English version)