Year 928 (CMXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. King Rudolph I loses the support of Herbert II, count of Vermandois, who controls the prison at Péronne in which former King Charles III (the Simple) is imprisoned. Herbert brings him before William I (Longsword), count of Rouen, for homage and then to Rheims as leverage to blackmail Rudolph to make him cede sovereignty over Laon (Northern France). June 5 – Louis III (the Blind), former king of Provence (Lower Burgundy), dies at Arles after a 27-year reign (of which 23 are sightless). He is succeeded by his brother-in-law Hugh I who is King of Italy. With the approval of his kinsman Rudolph I, Hugh strips Louis's son and heir, Charles Constantine, of his inheritance and proclaims himself as ruler of Provence. Winter – King Henry I (the Fowler) subdues the Polabian Slavs who live on the eastern borders. He then marches against the Slavic Hevelli tribes and seizes their capital, Brandenburg. Henry invades the Glomacze lands in the middle Elbe valley, where he besieges and destroys the main castle called Gana (the later Albrechtsburg) at Meissen (Saxony). King Hywel Dda (the Good) of Deheubarth makes a pilgrimage to Rome, he becomes the first Welsh ruler to undertake such a trip. Hywel begins the codification of medieval Welsh law and mints his own coinage. Summer – A Fatimid fleet under Sabir al-Fata raids Byzantine southern Italy. It captures a locality named al-Ghiran ('the caves') in Apulia and sacks the cities of Taranto and Otranto. The inhabitants are carried off to North Africa as slaves. Ishanavarman II dies after a 5-year reign and is succeeded by his uncle Jayavarman IV as king of the Khmer Empire (modern Cambodia). He moves the capital north from Angkor to Koh Ker. Summer – Pope John X is deposed and imprisoned in Castel Sant'Angelo at Rome by order of the Roman senatrix Marozia after a 14-year reign. He is succeeded by Leo VI as the 123rd pope of the Catholic Church. Leo VI abolishes the Nin Bishopric and transfers bishop Gregory (Croatian: Grgur Ninski) to Skradin. This ends the long running dispute between the Split and Nin Bishoprics in the Croatian kingdom. July 18 – Tryphon succeeds Stephen II as patriarch of Constantinople (until 931). August 14 – Qian Hongzuo, king of Wuyue (d. 947) Dub mac Maíl Coluīm, king of Scotland (d. 967) Pietro I Orseolo, doge of Venice (d. 987) Qian Hongzong, king of Wuyue (d. 971) Shi Shouxin, Chinese general (d. 984) January 20 – Zhao Guangfeng, Chinese official and chancellor June 5 – Louis the Blind, Frankish king and Holy Roman Emperor July 18 – Stephen II, patriarch of Constantinople November 8 – Duan Ning, Chinese general Al-Layth ibn Ali ibn al-Layth, Saffarid emir Diogo Fernandes, count of Portugal Huo Yanwei, Chinese general (b. 872) Ishanavarman II, king of the Khmer Empire John X, pope of the Catholic Church Siyahchashm, Justanid ruler (mahdi) Tomislav, duke and king of Croatia Wang, empress dowager of Wu Yusuf ibn Abi'l-Saj, Sajid emir Zhang Juhan, Chinese official (b. 858) Barford, Paul M. (2001). The Early Slavs: Culture and Society in Early Medieval Eastern Europe. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. p. 421. ISBN 0-8014-3977-9. Halm, Heinz (1991). Das Reich des Mahdi: Der Aufstieg der Fatimiden [The Empire of the Mahdi: The Rise of the Fatimids] (in German). Munich: C. H. Beck. pp. 214–215. ISBN 978-3-406-35497-7.