Year 916 (CMXVI) was a leap year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Sicilian Berbers in Agrigento revolt and depose the independent Emir Ahmed ibn Khorob. They offer Sicily to the Fatimid Caliphate in Ifriqiya (modern Tunisia). Caliph Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah welcomes this turn of events, but refuses to grant the Berber rulers their autonomy. He sends a Fatimid expeditionary force under Abu Said Musa which lands in Sicily and, with some difficulty, takes control of the island. Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah appoints Salam ibn Rashid as the emir of Sicily. Ahmed ibn Khorob is dispatched to Raqqada and executed. Lady Æthelflæd, daughter of the late King Alfred the Great and the widow of Earl Æthelred of Mercia, sends an army into Brycheiniog to avenge the murder of the Mercian abbot Ecbryht and his companions. They seize and burn the royal fort of King Tewdr of Brycheiniog at Llangorse Lake (Wales), and take the queen and thirty-three others captive. Abaoji, Khitan ruler and founder of the Liao Dynasty, adopts Chinese court formalities in which he declares himself emperor in the Chinese style and adopts an era name, Taizu of Liao. He names his eldest son Yelü Bei as heir apparent, a first in the history of the Khitan. Abaoji leads a campaign in the west, conquering much of the Mongolian Plains. Clement of Ohrid, Bulgarian scholar, writer and enlightener of the Slavs, dies. He is regarded as the first bishop of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church and the founder of the first Slavic Literary School. Clement is buried in his monastery, Saint Panteleimon, in Ohrid (modern North Macedonia). June 22 – Sayf al-Dawla, Hamdanid emir (d. 967) Theodoric I, German nobleman (approximate date) Yuan Zong, emperor of Southern Tang (d. 961) March 27 – Alduin I, Frankish nobleman May 25 – Flann Sinna, king of Meath Anarawd ap Rhodri, king of Gwynedd Bencion, Frankish nobleman Clement of Ohrid, Bulgarian scholar Ge Congzhou, Chinese general Mór ingen Cearbhaill, queen of Laigin Tighearnach ua Cleirigh, king of Aidhne Theodora, Roman politician Theodoric I, bishop of Paderborn Ziyadat Allah III, Aghlabid emir Italian History: Timeline - Lombard Leagues Board history-timeline?page=10. Charles-Edwards, T. M. (2013). Wales and the Britons 350–1064. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. p. 505. ISBN 978-0-19-821731-2. Mote, F. W. (2003). Imperial China: 900–1800. Harvard University Press. pp. 42–43. ISBN 978-0674012127.