Ilovaisk (Ukrainian: Ілова́йськ, pronounced [iɫoˈwajsʲk] ; Russian: Иловайск) is a city in Donetsk Raion, Donetsk Oblast, Ukraine; residence of Ilovaisk urban hromada. The city is de facto under the military occupation of Russia and administered by the Donetsk People's Republic. The city is known as a major regional railroad hub. It was also the site of a battle in the War in Donbas. The city has a population of 15,396 (2022 estimate), 17,620 (2001). Starting in mid-April 2014, Russian paramilitaries captured several towns in Donetsk Oblast, including Ilovaisk.[failed verification] On 19 August 2014, Ukrainian forces reportedly secured the city centre from the Russia-backed militants; fighting for control of other parts of the town continued. The next morning they claimed they had control over one half of the town, with the town divided by a railroad line. On 21 August, the Ukrainian Armed Forces claimed that heavy fighting continued "in some districts of Ilovaisk", while the Russia-backed forces claimed they had repelled the Ukrainian military and surrounded a contingent of Ukrainian troops. Fighting for control of the town continued over the next days. The Russian Armed Forces retook the city as of 1 September 2014. Ethnic composition according to the 2001 Ukrainian census. Native language as of the Ukrainian Census of 2001: Stanislav Hurenko (1936-2013), Ukrainian politician Mikhail Tolstykh (1980-2017), Ukrainian separatist and wanted war criminal Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. Ragozin, Leonid (16 April 2014). "Vladimir Putin Is Accidentally Bringing Eastern and Western Ukraine Together". The New Republic. "Donbass defenders put WWII tank back into service". "Ukrainian flag raised over Ilovaisk - Donbas battalion". "Combat conducted in Ilovaisk urban areas, Ukrainian army loses nine men killed". "Ukrainian army retakes over half of Ilovaisk, fighting continues – National Guard". "Ukrainian Interior Ministry, National Guard lose 16 servicemen in Ilovaisk battle". "Ukrainian military in Ilovaisk receive reinforcement". "Ukrinform News". www.ukrinform.ua. "Ukrinform News". www.ukrinform.ua. Marson, James; Cullison, Alan (2 September 2014). "Ukraine Suffers Harsh Defeat in Eastern Town". Wall Street Journal – via www.wsj.com. https://datatowel.in.ua/pop-composition/ethnic-cities "Офіційна сторінка Всеукраїнського перепису населення". www.ukrcensus.gov.ua. Media related to Ilovaisk at Wikimedia Commons v t e