Viņas melo labāk ('They [females] Lie Better') is a Latvian summer daytime soap opera broadcast by TV3 Latvia. It has been broadcast for 10 seasons and has featured well-known Latvian actors including Andris Bullis, Lauris Reiniks, Evija Skulte, and Karīna Tatarinova. The show was created by Sigita Račka and Rimvīds Martinaitis, and was watched by 784,000 Latvian residents on TV and video platforms in the first 4 weeks of airing. On May 27, 2019, the show's seventh season began airing from Mondays through Thursdays. The first series of soap opera “Viņas melo labāk” began on July, 2013 which was broadcast on TV3 Latvia. At the time, “Viņas melo labāk” was the only daytime soap opera after “UgunsGrēks” ended on TV3 Latvia. “Viņas melo labāk” new series airs each summer on weekdays. When Viņas melo labāk began in 2013, the TV series was about the lonely Kristīne, who is single, her friend Marta, who has been married, but spends time with other men, workaholic Margo, and Jolanta, who came to Riga from a small town in search of happiness. The women encounter unexpected adventures when many other characters join the soap opera. Within the first four weeks of the series, “Viņas melo labāk” achieved success on TV screens and on video streaming platforms and applications after it became watched by 784,000 Latvian residents. In the first season of “Viņas melo labāk,” there were four main female characters – Marta, Margarita, Jolanta and Kristīne. In season 6, there were 30 characters. In 5 years, including the current characters, there have been 47 actors who have appeared on this soap opera, including the well-known Latvian singer and actor Lauris Reiniks. Director – Sigita Račka Producer – Rimvīds Martinaitis Assistant – Gatis Upesleja TV Operators – Sandris Polis and Igors Stāds Sound engineer – Ainars Ašmanis Costume and make-up artist – Kristīne Anderosne Each season has started with the title song “Meitenes vēl pasakām tic” (“Girls Still believe in Fairy Tales”). The song is composed by Lithuanian composer Žilvins Lili, written by Guntars Račs, arranged by Gints Stankevičs and performed by Latvian singers Ieva Karēvica and IGO (Rodrigo Fomins). https://tvplay.skaties.lv/vinas-melo-labak/1396/episode/ "FOTO: iepazīstieties – "Viņas melo labāk" filmēšanas komanda". skaties.lv. August 12, 2017. ""Viņas melo labāk" kļuvis par skatītāko seriālu jūlijā". TVNET (in Latvian). 2013-07-31. "Zibēs plikumi un ieroči! Ekskluzīvs ieskats "Viņas melo labāk" jaunās sezonas notikumos". skaties.lv. April 24, 2019. Izklaide, DELFI (2013-07-01). "Foto: Spraigi sākas jaunais latviešu seriāls". delfi.lv (in Latvian). ""Viņas melo labāk" Lauris Reiniks debitēs kā bandīts Zobs". TVNET (in Latvian). 2018-06-20. "Seriālam "Viņas melo labāk" pievienojas tautā iemīļoti aktieri". TVNET (in Latvian). 2018-05-09. "Jaunā latviešu seriāla tituldziesma sāk savu ceļu pie klausītājiem Latvijas radiostacijās". TVNET (in Latvian). 2013-07-02. Kļaviņš, Ingars (July 11, 2013). "Igo un Kerēvica iedziedājuši jaunā seriāla tituldziesmu". nra.lv (in Latvian).