This is a list of airports in Latvia, sorted by location. Latvia (Latvian: Latvija), officially the Republic of Latvia (Latvijas Republika), is a country in the Baltic region of Northern Europe. It is bordered to the north by Estonia, to the south by Lithuania, to the east by the Russian Federation, and to the southeast by Belarus. Across the Baltic Sea to the west lies Sweden. The capital of Latvia is Riga. The local time is GMT+2 (GMT+3 DST). Riga International Airport is the only major airport in Latvia, carrying around 5 million passengers annually. It is the largest airport in the Baltic states and has direct flights to over 80 destinations in 30 countries. It is also the main hub of airBaltic. In the recent years airBaltic operated also in Liepāja International Airport as well as Ventspils International Airport but operations in both of these airports were soon ceased. In 2017 airBaltic started to fly to Liepāja International Airport again. As of 2019, airBaltic flies between Riga and Liepāja three times weekly in winter and five times weekly in summer. Currently there are plans for further development in several regional airports, including Jūrmala Airport, Liepāja, Ventspils as well as Daugavpils International Airport. Names shown in bold indicate airports with scheduled passenger service on commercial airlines. Map all coordinates using OpenStreetMap Download coordinates as: KML GPX (all coordinates) GPX (primary coordinates) GPX (secondary coordinates) Latvian Air Force Transport in Latvia List of largest airports in the Baltic states List of airports by ICAO code: E#EV - Latvia Wikipedia:WikiProject Aviation/Airline destination lists: Europe#Latvia "ICAO Location Indicators by State" (PDF). International Civil Aviation Organization. 17 September 2010. "IATA Airline and Airport Code Search". International Air Transport Association. "UN Location Codes: Latvia". UN/LOCODE 2012-1. UNECE. 14 September 2012. – includes IATA codes "Airports in Latvia". Great Circle Mapper. – IATA and ICAO codes, coordinates Airfields in Latvia - info and photos of airfields in Latvia