Veľké Kapušany (Slovak pronunciation: [ˈʋeʎkeː ˈkapuʂani]; Hungarian: Nagykapos) is a small town on the eastern plains of Slovakia, not far from the Ukrainian border. The name "Kapušany" is probably derived from the Hungarian word kapu, meaning "gate". The territory of the town has been settled since time immemorial (findings from the Neolithic period). From the second half of the 10th century until 1918, it was part of the Kingdom of Hungary. The first written references to the settlement stems from 1211 ("Kapos") and 1214 ("Copus"). The settlement was awarded town status in 1430. The town was the second largest settlement (after Uzhhorod) of the Ung County and frequently served as a temporary or permanent station for migrants (Germans, Rusyns, Poles, Hungarians etc.) from the east to the west. In the town square there is a garden with a plaque commemorating the day the Germans marched into Veľké Kapušany in 1944. This is significant as both Jews and Romas were persecuted and murdered by the Nazis during World War II. At that time, Veľké Kapušany was part of Hungary (based on the First Vienna Award). The following villages were merged with the town: Malé Kapušany (after 1913), Veškovce (1964). Veľké Kapušany proper Veškovce Wood processing, food and building materials industries and Slovak and Hungarian high schools are located there as is a railroad transfer facility for goods on the broad gauge railroad to Ukraine. Many Communist remnants remain, notably the apartment buildings of the Communist era, where mainly poor Roma people now live. The rest of the population lives in mostly comfortable-looking homes and farms outside of the main thoroughfare but still within the town's borders. There are several churches, but no synagogue in Veľké Kapušany. On the outskirts of the town there is a heavily damaged Jewish cemetery. According to the official census from 2001, the population include 56.98% Hungarians, 35.92% Slovaks, and 4.32% Roma. In 1910, 33.8% of the population was Jewish. Veľké Kapušany is twinned with: Vásárosnamény, Hungary In front of the Town Hall there's a monument of „Turul-bird” Greek Catholic Church The oldest building is the Reformed Church which roots goes back to abouth 14th century The Roman Catholic Church is already situated on territory of former Malé Kapušany and was built in 1807 Reformed church in Veškovce, a rural borough that is part of the municipality Slovak and Hungarian language gymnasium high school in Veľké Kapušany Within a 5 km proximity there is the Ortov Nature Reserve Turist Information Centre (TIC) Veľké Kapušany train station, with a ZSSK Class 812 DMU Dobó Square Memorial bust of Sándor Petöfi at Dobó Square In 2018, a statue was unveiled in the city park in memory Géza Herczeg. Medical Centre Municipal cultural community centre Saint Stephen statue. Created by sculptor Imre Bukóczy from Tokaj, it was unveiled in 2001. Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Hustota obyvateľstva - obce". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 2024-02-08. "Základná charakteristika". www.statistics.sk (in Slovak). Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic. 2015-04-17. Retrieved 2022-03-31. Statistical Office of the Slovak Republic (www.statistics.sk). "Počet obyvateľov podľa pohlavia - obce (ročne)". www.statistics.sk. Retrieved 2024-02-08. Mestská a obecná štatistika SR Archived May 13, 2007, at the Wayback Machine "Družobné mesta". vkapusany.sk (in Slovak). Veľké Kapušany. Retrieved 2019-09-05. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Veľké Kapušany. Official site Vel'ké Kapušany - ShtetLink