Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is an American television series created by Joss Whedon, Jed Whedon, and Maurissa Tancharoen for ABC based on the Marvel Comics organization S.H.I.E.L.D. (Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement, and Logistics Division), a peacekeeping and spy agency in a world of superheroes. The series was the first to be set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), and it acknowledges the continuity of the franchise's films and other television series. It was produced by ABC Studios, Marvel Television, and Mutant Enemy Productions, with Jed Whedon, Maurissa Tancharoen, and Jeffrey Bell serving as showrunners. The series stars Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson, reprising his role from the film series, alongside Ming-Na Wen, Brett Dalton, Chloe Bennet, Iain De Caestecker, and Elizabeth Henstridge. Nick Blood, Adrianne Palicki, Henry Simmons, Luke Mitchell, John Hannah, Natalia Cordova-Buckley, and Jeff Ward joined in later seasons. The S.H.I.E.L.D. agents deal with various unusual cases and enemies, including Hydra, Inhumans, Life Model Decoys, alien species such as the Kree and Chronicoms, and time travel. Several episodes directly cross over with MCU films or other television series, notably Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014), which significantly affected the series in its first season, and Agent Carter (2015–16), from which series regular Enver Gjokaj joined the cast for the seventh season. In addition to Gregg, other actors from throughout the MCU also appear in guest roles. Joss Whedon, writer and director of the MCU film The Avengers (2012), began developing a S.H.I.E.L.D. pilot in August 2012. Gregg was confirmed to reprise his role that October, and the series was officially picked up by ABC in May 2013. The series attempted to replicate the production value of the MCU films on a broadcast television budget while also having to work within the constraints of the MCU that were dictated by Marvel Studios and the films. Prosthetic makeup was created by Glenn Hetrick's Optic Nerve Studios, while Legacy Effects contributed other practical effects. Composer Bear McCreary recorded each episode's score with a full orchestra, and the visual effects for the series were created by several different vendors and have been nominated for multiple awards. The series premiered on ABC in the United States on September 24, 2013, and concluded with a two-part series finale on August 12, 2020, with 136 episodes broadcast over seven seasons. After starting the first season with high ratings, the ratings began to drop. Ratings continued to fall with subsequent seasons, but were more consistent within each season, while reviews for all seasons were consistently positive. Several characters created for the series have since been introduced to the comic universe and other media. An online digital series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot, centered on Cordova-Buckley's Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez, was released in December 2016 on ABC.com. Other spin-offs were planned but never materialized. The first season follows S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Phil Coulson as he puts together a small team of agents to handle strange new cases. They investigate Project Centipede and its leader, "The Clairvoyant", eventually uncovering that the organization is backed by the terrorist group Hydra, which has infiltrated S.H.I.E.L.D. In the second season, following the destruction of S.H.I.E.L.D. in Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Coulson becomes director of the organization and is tasked with rebuilding it while dealing with Hydra, a faction of anti-superhuman S.H.I.E.L.D. agents, and a newly revealed superhuman race called the Inhumans. During the third season, Coulson begins a secret mission to assemble the Secret Warriors, a team of Inhumans, as Hydra restores its ancient Inhuman leader Hive to power. After the defeat of Hive and Hydra, S.H.I.E.L.D. is made a legitimate organization once again with the signing of the Sokovia Accords. In the fourth season, Coulson returns to being a field agent so S.H.I.E.L.D. can have a public leader, and is tasked with tracking down more enhanced people, including Robbie Reyes / Ghost Rider. In addition, Agent Leo Fitz and Holden Radcliffe complete their work on the Life Model Decoy and Framework virtual reality projects. The fifth season sees Coulson and members of his team abducted to the space station Lighthouse in the year 2091, where they must try to save the remnants of humanity while figuring out how to get home. After returning to the present, where they are labeled fugitives, Coulson and his team work to prevent the future that they saw. They succeed in defeating a Gravitonium-powered Glenn Talbot, but Coulson dies due to his interactions with Ghost Rider in the previous season. As the sixth season begins, the S.H.I.E.L.D. agents divide into two groups: one heads to space to find Fitz, who is lost following the last season's time-traveling, while the other remains on Earth to face a team of mercenaries led by Sarge, a man that looks just like Coulson. Season seven finds the team, including a Life Model Decoy of Coulson, jumping throughout time to prevent the Chronicoms from establishing Earth as their new home, Chronyca-3, and eradicating S.H.I.E.L.D. from history. Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson and Sarge / Pachakutiq: Coulson is an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D., and later becomes the organization's director. In April 2013, Gregg agreed to join the series after hearing creator Joss Whedon's explanation for Coulson's resurrection, following the character's death in The Avengers, which he called "fascinating" and "true to the world of the comics". Gregg approached Coulson's promotion to director as getting his dream job, which at the same time forced the character to adopt a more level-headed attitude, like that of Nick Fury. After being possessed by the Spirit of Vengeance in the fourth season finale, the Kree blood that resurrected Coulson is burned away and he ultimately dies following the fifth-season finale. Gregg plays a new character, Sarge, in season six, and portrays a Chronicom-enhanced Life Model Decoy version of Coulson in season seven. Ming-Na Wen as Melinda May: Joss Whedon had the character, a S.H.I.E.L.D. ace pilot and weapons expert, nicknamed "the Cavalry", and originally listed with the name Agent Althea Rice on casting sheets, "rolling around in his head" for a long time. Wen was given some backstory for the character to prepare, but was not told how she gained her reputation; with May's past revealed in "Melinda", Wen called it "devastating ... To have learned what she had to do, for the good of the many ... I can understand why it would traumatize her so much and cause her to retreat." Wen called May "unconventionally maternal", and said that it is her relationship with Coulson that makes her stay at S.H.I.E.L.D., despite her past. Brett Dalton as Grant Ward and Hive: Ward is a Hydra agent who poses as a S.H.I.E.L.D. black ops specialist. From the conception of the series it was decided that he would be a traitor. Jed Whedon explained that they wanted to have "infiltration based on betrayal" on a small scale to represent the same thing happening on a massive scale, and to make the Hydra revelation more personal for the characters. Dalton felt that Ward was always more loyal to his Hydra superior John Garrett than to Hydra itself, and that he would become more of a wildcard after Garrett's death, though still an antagonist to S.H.I.E.L.D. Ward is killed by Coulson in season three, and his body is possessed by an ancient Inhuman, Hive. Hive is killed in the season three finale. Dalton returned to the series in its fourth season to portray Ward in the virtual reality Framework, where he is Johnson's boyfriend. Austin Lyon portrays a young Ward. Chloe Bennet as Skye / Daisy Johnson / Quake: An Inhuman S.H.I.E.L.D. agent with the ability to manipulate vibrations and create earthquakes. The character of Skye was always intended to become the MCU version of Johnson, having consequences for the character's relationships with the other S.H.I.E.L.D. agents, especially Coulson. Bennet felt that the character was someone who would wear her heart on her sleeve while having some control over her emotions. Wen noted that the character evolves from being "anti-establishment into suddenly being someone who wants to create an establishment that would help" the Inhumans. In the third season she no longer goes by "Skye" and gains the public name "Quake". Iain De Caestecker as Leo Fitz: An agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. who specializes in engineering, especially weapons technology. De Caestecker described the character as "quite passionate about what he does" but not emotionally intelligent. Fitz has a close relationship with Simmons; De Caestecker says they "just kind of fit each other in a very weird way." The character sustains brain injuries at the end of the first season. The writers researched brain trauma with doctors and experts before approaching it in the series. De Caestecker did his own research as well, feeling it is "something that should never be trivialized. It's a real and serious thing ... we just have to constantly be respectful towards it." Elizabeth Henstridge as Jemma Simmons: A S.H.I.E.L.D. biochemist who specializes in life sciences (both human and alien). Henstridge described her character as "intelligent and focused and curious...she's got a wonderful relationship with Fitz. They kind of bounce off each other." As Fitz and Simmons begin to spend time apart during the series, Henstridge noted that it "brings a whole new dynamic just to them as characters" since they have been nearly inseparable since first meeting. On the harsher side of Simmons seen in later seasons, Henstridge noted that the character has "always been very mathematical in a way". Simmons is "profoundly" changed after being trapped on the planet Maveth for six months. Nick Blood as Lance Hunter: A mercenary before agreeing to join S.H.I.E.L.D. Blood described Hunter as someone who "doesn't bow down to the etiquette of the S.H.I.E.L.D. hierarchy." He later elaborated that the character feels very independent, so would probably not want to admit no longer feeling like an outsider. Also, "he doesn't have too much respect for authority and titles...If Coulson does something he respects, that's all good. If he doesn't, he's going to say something." On Hunter's on-again, off-again relationship with Bobbi Morse, Blood said, "there is a lot of truth in it of those relationships you have where it's kind of, 'can't live with each other, can't kill each other'". Adrianne Palicki as Bobbi Morse: Hunter's ex-wife and an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. who spent time undercover within Hydra. Palicki was approached by the showrunners specifically for the part during season two. Palicki already had martial arts and gun training but had to learn to use the character's signature arnis sticks; she noted similarities between Morse's fighting style and that of Scarlett Johansson's Black Widow from the MCU films. Showrunner Jeffrey Bell said the character is more loyal to an idea than anything else, so what may seem in the short term as a betrayal by her is usually for what she sees as the greater good. Henry Simmons as Alphonso "Mack" Mackenzie: A S.H.I.E.L.D. mechanic with a distrust of the alien and superhuman. Simmons said the character is more worried about contributing in his own way and getting his job done away from the field. Mack does not like violence, but does "what he has to do." Mack reveals in the third season that he relies on his "faith", implying that he is a Christian. Dee Hogan of The Mary Sue described this as "a refreshingly positive portrayal of people of faith, as Mack demonstrates the quiet confidence and love rather than the aggression and bigotry that's so often associated with it." Mack becomes the new director of S.H.I.E.L.D. in season six. Luke Mitchell as Lincoln Campbell: An Inhuman with the ability to manipulate electrical charges. The character was introduced because the series already featured "a guy with no eyes" and "a woman who now is covered in thorns" but, like the X-Men, there are also Inhumans who are "just attractive people with powers", and so Campbell represents them in the series. Campbell dies in the third-season finale, making him the "Fallen Agent" that the series had been teasing for the entire second half of that season. The decision was made because the producers did not want "a body count show, but it is a real world with real stakes." John Hannah as Holden Radcliffe: A transhumanist who believes in the improvement of humanity through enhancement. Radcliffe initially worked with Hive before joining S.H.I.E.L.D., where he begins work on transferring his artificial intelligence AIDA to a Life Model Decoy, an old S.H.I.E.L.D. project. Natalia Cordova-Buckley as Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez: A Colombian Inhuman who can move at super speed for a beat of her heart, before returning to the point she started from. She reluctantly joins S.H.I.E.L.D. and becomes a part of the Secret Warriors, eventually growing close to Mack, who gives her the nickname "Yo-Yo". When first portraying the character, Cordova-Buckley smiled whenever Rodriguez was about to use her abilities, to show an adrenaline rush and the feeling of having such power. After positive fan responses to this, the actress morphed this trait into a more mischievous personality for the character. Jeff Ward as Deke Shaw: A "roguish scavenger" on the Lighthouse space station in the year 2091, who returns to the present with the S.H.I.E.L.D. team and learns he is the grandson of Fitz and Simmons. After The Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel Entertainment in 2009, they announced that a Marvel Television division was being formed under Jeph Loeb. In the following months, various pilots based on comics from Marvel's catalog went into development. In July 2012, Marvel Television entered into discussions with Disney-owned ABC to make a new series set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The series was described as "'a kernel of an idea' with a number of scenarios being explored, including a high-concept cop show." On August 7, 2012, Joss Whedon was announced to be involved in the series' development. Whedon had written and directed the successful MCU film The Avengers (2012). On August 8, Whedon, along with his brother Jed and sister-in-law Maurissa Tancharoen, met with Loeb to pitch him their idea for the series, with meetings in the following days with ABC Studios and ABC network.: 1:53:47  At the end of August, ABC ordered a pilot for a series called S.H.I.E.L.D., to be written and directed by Joss Whedon, with Jed Whedon and Tancharoen also writing. Disney CEO Bob Iger greenlit the series after watching the Marvel One-Shot short film Item 47. In April 2013, ABC announced that the series would be titled Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., and it was officially picked up for a full season of 22 episodes in May 2013. Jed Whedon, Tancharoen, and Jeffrey Bell served as the series' showrunners, with Bell joining the show to help the inexperienced former pair with hiring crew members and "navigating the politics of studios and networks", saying, "My job is to help them learn how to do that, to steer the ship while they learn." Joss Whedon assisted them before he started work on the sequel Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015). The series was renewed for a second season in May 2014, a third in May 2015, and a fourth in March 2016. In September 2016, discussing the eventual end of the series, Tancharoen said, "You always just forge ahead. Until someone tells us to stop, we will continue to move forward." Jed Whedon added, "There are always ideas in the back of your mind for how you'd wrap it up when they say, 'That's it guys,' but we're not there just yet." A fifth season was ordered in May 2017, and Bell said they had "a sense of how we'd like the show to end when it ends. We just need to know when that time is coming so we can build to it properly." Jed Whedon continued, "Our goal is to know ahead of time, because we would love to land the story in a way that's satisfying". The writers intended for the final episode of the fifth season to serve as both a season and series finale, with some elements that could be adjusted based on whether the series was renewed for a sixth season or not. Whedon added, "we're ready for if this is the end. We're definitely going to make it rewarding either way." Despite this, the series was renewed for a sixth season in May 2018, and a final seventh season in November 2018. Whedon likened these two seasons to bonus levels in a video game, allowing the writers to have "a bit of freedom". The idea of [Coulson] as the long-suffering bureaucrat who deals with Tony Stark's insufferability is delightful and hits the core of something I'm also writing about all the time—the little guy versus the big faceless organization....and that's what Clark Gregg embodies: the Everyman. —Creator Joss Whedon on the underlying themes of the series. Bell explained that he, Jed Whedon, and Tancharoen supervise all of the series' creative decisions, often consulting with Loeb. When the showrunners are writing the series, one person can write a script while the other two break stories, so that a story can be broken every few weeks. If the executive producers sign off on a story, a member of the series' writers room then produces an outline, gets notes on it from the showrunners, writes a full script, gets notes on it from ABC and the production crew, and then goes to set to produce the episode. In January 2013, Joss Whedon deflected any direct influences from other series, such as the efforts of Fox Mulder and Dana Scully in The X-Files, and explained that while the show would involve people with powers and the spectacle of science-fiction storytelling, it would focus on "the peripheral people...the people on the edges of the grand adventures." As the series began to introduce more powered individuals, Bell noted that audiences "seem to respond to powered people on the show and while it's not going to take over and become what the show's about, as a texture and flavor of the stories, we really enjoy that." Jed Whedon stated that the series would continue to emphasize the general public's response to powered people, saying, "The dynamic in the world has changed. There was one person with powers, and then by The Avengers there were maybe six total ... now they're much more prevalent, so there's reaction from the public based on that." On the balance between creating new material and drawing from existing mythology, Bell noted that telling stories that can entertain both Marvel fans and non-Marvel fans is challenging and that for the series, they try to add nods to the MCU films or the comics in a way that works well on its own for all viewers but could also mean more for a fan. On where the series can draw from the comics, Jed Whedon explained that there are areas of the comics that the series is not allowed to go to, and that ultimately they only use the comics for inspiration in generating their own story. Tancharoen elaborated that, "We're always going to be inspired and influenced by the comics, but of course on the show, we'll always be doing our spin to it." About comparisons between the scope of the series and that of the films, Bell said that ABC and Marvel had been very generous with the series' budget, and that the production could not complain for a network series, but that it was nothing compared to the films or even series like Game of Thrones. He explained that the series does attempt to create "Marvel moments" as best it can, but pointed out that some of the more memorable moments from the films are smaller, character moments—something that works really well on television—so the series strives for those when it cannot afford more scope and scale. Jed Whedon elaborated that they look at a sequence and try to keep only what is required to tell the story, so "If a monster is landing on a car, instead of showing the whole monster leaping through the skyline, we want to be in the car with the character having that experience." Actress Ming-Na Wen attributed the time slot shift between the first and second seasons (from 8 pm EST to 9 pm EST) for allowing the writers "a chance to be more serious with certain topics, a little bit more intense with the fight scenes" in the second season, since the first season had to be more reserved because of it airing during a family time slot. In September 2015, Bell looked back on the first two seasons and talked about the challenges of and changes in the series. He noted the negative reception from fans concerning the low number of recognizable characters like Coulson, but pointed out that fans seemed to have grown to like the series' original characters as they had been developed over time. He explained that with the increasing number of characters and complex relationships in the series, having different pairings and building new emotional relationships was important, and stated that "whether it's a quiet moment or in action, we [hope to] deepen the audience's love and concern, and hopes for these characters." A year later he reiterated the producer's intention to create a tradition moving forward of "finding new combinations and new conflicts" between different sets of characters, given "a lot of procedurals [see] the same people doing the same thing for five years and the character don't evolve or change at all." The producers and writers initially formed a general plan for the show through the end of a third season, after reading the screenplays for upcoming MCU films. In May 2016, Chloe Bennet likened the end of the third season to "the end of the first book of S.H.I.E.L.D. ... the end of something bigger and the beginning of a whole new tone for the show." She elaborated that "the storylines that we started at the beginning of season 1 really wrapped up at the end of season 3. We've had some major losses of people who have been with us on the show since season 1. From the table read to the first day on set, there's definitely a new energy of the show" moving forward. The series was moved to the later timeslot of 10 pm for the fourth season. Jed Whedon said the writers hoped to "skew a little darker because of" this change, with Loeb adding that "It absolutely offers opportunities. I don't know that it changes things all that dramatically [though]. I mean, at the end of the day, Marvel is always going to make shows that run somewhere between PG-13 and PG-16. We're not going to be making Deadpool anytime soon on [ABC]." Marvel "had a long talk with ABC about what can we get away with, so to speak" in the new timeslot, which led to the inclusion of Ghost Rider in the season over one of Marvel's Netflix television series, because Marvel felt "that this character was right to tell [darker and more violent] stories right now" and having him on S.H.I.E.L.D. aided that because "it was so unexpected". Loeb hoped that the combination of the later timeslot and the introduction of Ghost Rider would lead to some viewers who had stopped watching the series over the previous seasons giving it another chance. Sarah Halley Finn, the casting director of the MCU films, along with her associate Tamara Hunter, served as casting directors during the first season.: 21  In October 2012, a casting sheet for five lead roles was sent out, with Finn establishing offices in London, Australia, New York, Vancouver, Toronto, and Los Angeles to audition actors.: 21  At the New York Comic Con, Joss Whedon, Kevin Feige, and Clark Gregg announced that Gregg would be reprising his role as agent Phil Coulson from Iron Man, Iron Man 2, Thor, The Avengers, and the Marvel One-Shots in the pilot, and would "headline" the series. Also in October, actress Ming-Na Wen was cast as Melinda May. The next month, Elizabeth Henstridge and Iain De Caestecker were cast as Jemma Simmons and Leo Fitz, respectively, while newcomer Brett Dalton was cast as Grant Ward. Dalton gained 15 pounds (6.8 kg) of muscle before the start of filming for the role.: 21  In December, Chloe Bennet was chosen out of more than 400 actresses to play Skye, the sixth and final regular for the first season. Bell called the character "the hardest to find" since need to be "the quintessential Whedon heroine–strong, smart, and self-aware", which was difficult to find in a 20-year old.: 25  Skye is revealed in the second season to be Daisy Johnson, and no longer goes by "Skye" starting with the third. At the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con, Nick Blood was announced as cast in the role of Lance Hunter for the second season, while the character of Bobbi Morse was revealed to be appearing. That August, Henry Simmons joined the cast as Alphonso "Mack" Mackenzie, a recurring role, and Adrianne Palicki was cast as Morse in a guest role, to first appear in the episode "A Hen in the Wolf House". The next month, the entire first season principal cast were confirmed to be regulars for the second season, along with Blood. Palicki joined them with the episode "Aftershocks". In February 2015, Luke Mitchell was cast as Lincoln Campbell, a recurring role for the second half of the season. All season-two principal cast members returned for the third season, with Simmons and Mitchell joining them, promoted from their recurring roles. In October 2015, the Inhuman Hive was introduced; for the second part of season three, he possesses the corpse of Grant Ward, again portrayed by Brett Dalton. Also introduced were Natalia Cordova-Buckley and John Hannah, recurring as Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez and Holden Radcliffe, respectively. Blood and Palicki left the main cast following the season-three episode "Parting Shot", to star in the then-planned spin-off show Marvel's Most Wanted. Dalton and Mitchell also left following the deaths of their characters in the third-season finale. Gregg, Wen, Bennet, De Caestecker, Henstridge, and Simmons returned for the fourth and fifth seasons. They were joined by Hannah in the fourth, with Cordova-Buckley once again recurring as Rodriguez in the season, before being promoted to a series regular for the fifth season. Dalton returned as a guest during the third pod of the fourth season, while Blood returned for an episode of the fifth season. Introduced in the fifth season was Jeff Ward, who recurred as Deke Shaw. Wen, Bennet, De Caestecker, Henstridge, Simmons, and Cordova-Buckley return for the sixth and seventh seasons, and were joined by Ward. Given the events of the final episode of season five, in which it is implied that Coulson dies, Gregg noted "there is some interest in having me involved in" the sixth season, potentially with flashback, and was also unsure if he would be a series regular, should he return, as he had been for the previous five seasons. Gregg ultimately returned as a series regular in season six playing a new character, Sarge. For season seven, Gregg portrays a Life Model Decoy (LMD) version of Coulson, while De Caestecker is absent for much of the season due to scheduling conflicts with prior commitments, first appearing in the season's eleventh episode; he is credited as a special guest star for his appearances in the season. Betsy Heimann was the costume designer for the pilot, but left the series because of film commitments. Assistant costume designer Ann Foley took over for subsequent episodes, and worked closely with Tancharoen to create "very strong, different characters" whose "looks evolve along with the show." Foley also brought on concept artists Phillip Boutte Jr. and Josh Shaw to assist with the design process. Foley watched every MCU film, paying special attention to The Avengers, and was also inspired by such films as Skyfall (2012) and Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol (2011). In October 2016, Foley said that she was specifically following the aesthetic of Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014), "So any costume has to fit inside that world we've established and has to fit that tactical look." On the variety of costumes created for each character, Foley preferred to have set pieces in the characters' "closets", as "it's not a fashion show ... a guy like Ward isn't going to have twenty jackets in his closet. He is going to have one that he uses all of the time." After reading each script, Foley would do her own research, before discussing the look of the episode with the writers. She then studied the comics, general fashion, and history to get a look that is recognizable to fans, but fits into the more realistic world of the series. Costumes are either custom made or bought, and the actors are brought in for fittings before filming. This process was often challenging because of the series' eight-day-per-episode schedule. Foley stated that all costumes take a similar amount of time to create, whether they are based on the comics or not. Marvel CCO Joe Quesada is involved in the approval process when costuming preexisting characters, including Daisy Johnson's Quake costume, which is introduced in the third season. The Quake costume incorporates elements from the comic version of the character, and was intended to show that Quake "could easily be part of the Avengers". Foley took steps to differentiate the Quake costume from Scarlett Johansson's Black Widow costumes from the films, but was "flattered" by comparisons made between them. Foley was also adamant about showing that characters such as Quake "don't have to be sexualized, that they're powerful, strong women", and so avoided "a lot of cleavage, you don't see high heels. It's about practicality." The costumes go through a natural evolution in the series. There is a shift at the end of the first season to a darker look, and all the characters have "definitely grown up" during the second season. In the third season there is another shift, "from the ragtag group of soldiers and scientists to [a] more precise militaristic outfit". This change is also reflected in the series' color palette, going from "a much lighter tone, much more patterns" in the first season to having "stripped away a bit of color" by the third. Despite this increasing darkness in the costumes, Foley intended to define each character as they are introduced and to have them always be recognizable and identifiable. With the start of the fourth season, Foley said that "each season definitely has its own feel and this season will be no different. I think that you're going to see some subtle differences in the costumes of the characters"; she felt like Fitz and Simmons, in particular, had become "more adult looking", while all the cast had "a pretty specific ... civilian look" that would become more prominent as S.H.I.E.L.D. is re-legitimized and becomes more public. Foley left the series after the thirteenth episode of the fourth season, to work on the television series Altered Carbon, and was replaced with Amanda Riley. Riley used her previous experience recreating costumes to "blend in" with Foley's established look. Foley returned for the first two episodes of the fifth season, before handing costume design over to Whitney Galitz, who had assisted Foley on the previous few seasons, and Christann Chanell. Galitz eventually became sole costume designer for the series, before being joined by Jessica Torok during season seven. Torok took over for the second half of the season after Galitz left the series to give birth to her daughter. The series' props department is led by Scott Bauer. The pilot introduces the Incapacitating Cartridge Emitting Railgun, or I.C.E.R., tranquilizer weapons often used by the agents, with Joss Whedon having Bauer design "sci-fi"-looking guns, including a large rifle-like weapon. The series' further portrayal of the I.C.E.R.s was more subtle, with Bauer using airsoft guns that are safe to shoot others with over a small distance. I.C.E.R.-specific muzzle flashes are then added by the visual effects department. Bauer reused the I.C.E.R. rifle prop when making Mack's "Shotgun Ax", which appears in later seasons. The terrigen crystals that unlock Inhuman abilities in the series are 3D-printed from solid resin and then altered with extra details. Additional practical effects and props were created by Legacy Effects, which also works on the MCU films, notably creating Daisy Johnson's gauntlets for the third season. Prosthetic makeup for the series is designed in conjunction with Glenn Hetrick of Optic Nerve Studios. Hetrick began work on the series with the second season, to create Raina's Inhuman look, and returned for the third season to design and create the more unusual-looking Inhumans such as Lash. Throughout the series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. "[became] known for its signature use of changing title cards" to reflect the storyline being told and would define "a specific era of the series". The third season introduces a new title sequence for the series, replacing the one that appeared in the first two seasons. The title sequence in "4,722 Hours" is drastically different from the design introduced for the third season, with the series' title in the episode's typeface silently fading onto the screen over the back drop of the planet Simmons is stranded on. The fourth season sees new series title cards for the Ghost Rider and LMD pods, and an Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. title card for the Agents of Hydra pod that changes to say Agents of Hydra for episodes primarily set in the Framework. The Ghost Rider graphic is used again for the fourth-season finale. For the fifth season, the opening of "Orientation" is reminiscent of the sequence for "4,722 Hours", forgoing the title card and having the typeface silently fading onto the screen. The subsequent episodes of season five feature a title card with the series name in a new typeface against a backdrop of various depictions of Earth: episodes through "Past Life" feature a destroyed future Earth; episodes from "Principia" through "The Devil Complex" feature a present Earth; while episodes from "Rise and Shine" through "All Roads Lead..." feature the Earth beginning to crack. Each episode of season seven features a different title card and opening to reflect the time period and genre of the episode. Production for the pilot took place almost entirely in Los Angeles to accommodate Joss Whedon's schedule, while the rest of the series is primarily filmed at Culver Studios in Culver City, California. Additional filming has also taken place around the world, including in Paris, France, Stockholm, Sweden, and Old San Juan, Puerto Rico. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. used the working title R.A.G.T.A.G. throughout its production. The series is filmed on Arri Alexa cameras, with David Boyd serving as director of photography on the pilot, and Feliks Parnell, Jeff Mygatt, and Allan Westbrook doing so throughout the rest of the series. Garry Brown is the second unit director for the series, with stunts coordinated by Tanner Gill. The series is filmed in 2K resolution. FuseFX serves as the lead visual effects vendor for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., with additional work by Pixomondo, CoSA VFX, Greenhaus GFX, Lion VFX, and Synaptic. The series sees an average of 80 to 150 visual effects shots per episode, with 10 to 12 days to work on the effects for one episode once background plates have been received from filming. This equates to approximately 2000 visual effects shots per season. Mark Kolpack serves as visual effects supervisor for the series. David Altenau was the in-house supervisor at FuseFX for "Pilot" through episode eight, with Kevin Lingenfelser taking over for subsequent episodes. VFX producer Andrea D'Amico joined the team at FuseFX to work on the series in December 2015. Two separate production management and creative teams were established to work on the show, and producers, compositors and various artists were able to alternate episodes. This was important because most of the episodes had to be worked on concurrently, either two or three at a time. Typical effects for the series include the creation of character-driving effects animation, photo-realistic vehicles, CG set extensions, pyrotechnics, and atmospheric effects. Some assets, such as a Quinjet and Helicarrier, are shared from Industrial Light & Magic, though "those models are generally super heavy and dense with data" and need to be made "HD friendly or simply manageable to work in [a] TV schedule." Bear McCreary confirmed that he would compose music for the series in July 2013. Unlike on some of his previous scores, ABC and Marvel allowed McCreary to work with a full symphonic orchestra, typically featuring 50 or 70 players, with over 90 for "important" episodes. Orchestra recording for the series occurred at Warner Bros. Studios' Eastwood Stage, Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage, and Twentieth Century Fox Studios' Newman Scoring Stage. Complex synthesizer programming was also used, to give the score "a modern edge". Since Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was the first MCU television series, McCreary felt there was "a sense that it had to connect" to the consistent orchestra sound of the films but viewed through a television lens. McCreary composes on average 30 minutes of music per episode. Creating the main theme for the series, which McCreary also saw as Coulson's theme, was a process that took a lot of collaboration with the executive producers, who wanted a specific sound—"something big, that...belonged in the Marvel Cinematic Universe" but also "intimate because these aren't superheroes, these are regular people." McCreary had to work harder to make the theme heard, given that the show does not have a traditional title sequence. By the third and fourth seasons, McCreary noted "the score became a little more intense and more electronically driven... [E]lectronics really moved to the forefront as we got into more stories about Inhumans and the digital world our characters inhabit. But the orchestra is always our foundation." In 2014, after working as an intern for McCreary, Jason Akers was asked to provide additional music for the series. McCreary hired Akers as a full time staff member in 2015, and he began to have more artistic input into the series' music. Akers is credited as co-composer alongside McCreary for the seventh season. Some of McCreary's favorite pieces from the series included "Cello Concerto" from "The Only Light in the Darkness", and pieces that had "massive deviations" such as music for Ghost Rider, the Framework reality, and going to outer space.: 30:45–32:02  In September 2014, McCreary announced that there were plans for an Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. soundtrack, which was released digitally a year later by Marvel Music on September 4, 2015, and on CD on October 9. Featuring music from the first two seasons, the soundtrack was written and produced by McCreary and Steven Kaplan, with the album produced by Joe Augustine with McCreary. All music composed by Bear McCreary. Steve Bartek plays guitar on "Aftermath of the Uprising", Eric Byers plays cello on "Cello Concerto", and McCreary's wife, Raya Yarbrough, provides the vocals in "Alien DNA". The episode column in the table below indicates which episode(s) the music was featured in. Regarding the release of additional music from the series, McCreary said in August 2020 there were no immediate plans but would "love for that to happen", given he had been waiting until the series concluded to assess everything that had been produced for any potential future releases. He also hoped to get fan input regarding pieces of music they would like to hear on a release in addition to the tracks McCreary would want.: 28:52–30:44  We're part of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, and so...we pitch our stuff to Kevin Feige and his movie group to see if there's something we can tie into, to see if they're okay about us using a character, or a weapon[, etc.] —Executive producer Jeffrey Bell in September 2014, explaining the process of working in with the MCU. In July 2013, Jed Whedon said the series would work in tandem with the Marvel films, both past and upcoming, to weave in between the films, and to "try to make them more rewarding on both ends." He explained that each Marvel project is intended to stand alone first before there is any interweaving, and noted that the series has to work with the film division and be aware of their plans so as not to interfere when introducing someone or something to the universe. Bell elaborated that this was preferable so that people who do not watch the films can still follow the series, and vice versa. He stated that "ABC and Marvel both want the series to be able to make sense on its own", but that it was beneficial for the films to have the series fill in any "gaps" for them, due to having to be "big" and moving "quickly through a lot of huge pieces", unlike television which has time to deal with more nuances. In January 2016, Joss Whedon noted that this process "unfortunately just means the TV show gets, you know, leftovers." He stated that, for example, the series' creative team initially wanted to use Loki's scepter from The Avengers but were unable due to Whedon's plans for it in Age of Ultron. On how their ability to connect with the films changed over the life of the series, Jed Whedon said, "The rule when we started was we couldn't say anything about spies, we couldn't say anything about Hydra, we couldn't have any A.I. or robots or anything like that, because all of that was coming in movies that year or the year after. Since then, they've blown those doors wide open". He added, "We have relatively free rein [in what the series can introduce and connect to]; we just can't go anywhere that [the films are] going. They know their stories so much further out than we do, which is good for us to tee up things that we know are coming to them or avoid things that they want to be special on the big screen. As long as we are not covering bases that they're going to cover, we haven't been told "no" that much". As an example, Whedon noted the fourth season's Framework storyline as "something that's pretty significant in our world, but is also a little eddy in the river that doesn't affect anything else because it's an alternate universe. So those kinds of stories help us go big without sending ripples through the whole MCU." In May 2016, Chloe Bennet complained that Marvel did not acknowledge Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. in their film universe, despite pretending that the films and televisions series were all connected; she expressed interest in seeing the Avengers in the series. The series mimics the films' post credits scenes with "end tags", starting with the episode "0-8-4" which features a Samuel L. Jackson cameo as Nick Fury. Bell explained, "Sometimes it'll be funny, sometimes it'll be a mythology thing ... or an extra little reveal about" the episode. The end tag for "End of the Beginning" is a "directly lifted" scene from Captain America: The Winter Soldier. The series's first major tie-in episode with the wider MCU was "The Well", which begins immediately after Thor: The Dark World (2013). The episodes "End of the Beginning" and "Turn, Turn, Turn" revolve around the events of Captain America: The Winter Soldier, which led to a retooling of the series. Flashback sequences in "Shadows" and "The Things We Bury" featuring Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter served as marketing and set-up for the Agent Carter television series. The events of "The Frenemy of My Enemy" and "The Dirty Half Dozen" led up to the opening sequence of Avengers: Age of Ultron, while "Scars" deals with the aftermath of that film. The third season follows similar themes to the film Captain America: Civil War (2016), focusing on powered people and the different responses to them, leading up to the episode "Emancipation", which takes place after the film and shows how its events affect the series' powered characters. The episode "T.A.H.I.T.I." introduces the Kree alien race to the MCU, members of which play a significant role in Guardians of the Galaxy (2014). This begins a storyline that recurs throughout the series and introduces Inhumans to the MCU, with Jed Whedon saying that it was something "in the works" for a long time since Marvel Studios had plans for an Inhumans film in 2019, and this would be "one of the first instances where we get to start planting the seeds on the show before the film." The third season introduces the concept of the Secret Warriors, with new Inhuman characters inspired by the comic of the same name, while also retconning the history of Hydra in the MCU, tying it into the Inhumans storyline. Gregg noted in January 2016 that the "writer and director [of the Inhumans film] will have free rein to do what they want to do with the Inhumans, but hopefully there'll be some way that our Inhumans connect to that." When the film was removed from Marvel Studios' release schedule, Whedon noted that the series had "a little more freedom" and were "able to do a little bit more" with the species going into the fourth season, including the potential of introducing some of the "classic" Inhumans. Marvel's Inhumans, a television series centered on Black Bolt and other members of the Inhuman Royal Family, was announced in November 2016 to air on ABC in September 2017. It was not intended to be a spin-off of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. In the lead-up to Avengers: Age of Ultron, Joss Whedon explained that despite bringing Phil Coulson back to life to helm Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the MCU itself dealing with characters seemingly dying only to return later on like Loki, Nick Fury, and Bucky Barnes, "As far as the fiction of the movies, Coulson is dead", choosing to not reference Coulson's resurrection in Age of Ultron to not diminish the impact of his original death among the characters. Whedon further elaborated that due to his feeling that the audience of The Avengers doesn't necessarily seem to be the same one as the audience of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., in addition to introduce nineteen new characters, he would have been forced to explain Coulson's resurrecting once again to the film-only audience had Coulson been featured in Age of Ultron. Despite this, Jeph Loeb stated prior to the film's release that there was a plan for the Avengers to discover that Coulson was alive eventually. The fourth season explores the concept of Life Model Decoys, which were first referenced in The Avengers, and introduces the character Ghost Rider to the MCU. On why the series waited to begin exploring LMDs, Jed Whedon said that the series previously did not want to explore the concept before the release of Avengers: Age of Ultron, which sees the introductions of Ultron and Vision in a similar manner to LMDs. On introducing Ghost Rider, Whedon said that "with Doctor Strange (2016) coming out this year, the Marvel [Cinematic] Universe is moving into new waters," referring to the exploration of magic. "We felt that this was obviously a great character that we'd love to have on our show that we feel fits with that shift." The season also continues storylines from the second season of Agent Carter, with the reveal that the Momentum Energy Labs group is a successor to the Isodyne Energy company, with both companies connected by the parent company Roxxon, a mainstay of the MCU. The last four episodes of season five take place over a single day, and coincide with the events of Avengers: Infinity War (2018). In August 2017, Emily VanCamp said that discussions had taken place for her to reprise her role of Sharon Carter for the series, but there were conflicts with her starring role on the series Revenge. Patrick Brennan, who portrayed Marcus Daniels / Blackout in the series, appears as an unnamed bartender in the film Captain Marvel (2019). Marvel Studios producer Victoria Alonso alluded to the possibility that the two were the same character, given that film was set in the 1990s. Season seven sees Enver Gjokaj reprise his role as Strategic Scientific Reserve agent Daniel Sousa from Agent Carter, joining the main S.H.I.E.L.D. team. There was a discussion to retcon Officer Saunders, a character Gjokaj played in The Avengers, into Sousa by having Sousa time travel back to the Battle of New York and going undercover as a cop, but the idea was dropped due to conflicts with the established timeline. The Quantum Realm is also featured in the season, with Fitz using it to travel to the altered timeline created during the season and reunite with the S.H.I.E.L.D. team before bringing everyone back to the main timeline. Whedon added that, with this introduction into the series, they planned to mention how the realm could be used to survive the snap from Thanos, as seen in Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame (2019), but was ultimately cut. Reed Diamond, who portrayed elite member of Hydra Werner Reinhardt / Daniel Whitehall, had been approached by Marvel Studios regarding his availability for Avengers: Endgame, with visual effects company Cantina Creative eventually using a photo of Whitehall in imagery for the film's time heist information screens, which was ultimately cut. In May 2020, Bennet called Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. "the black sheep of the Marvel Universe" since "everyone was aware of the fact that we were supposed to be one thing when we started" and ultimately, the writers "had to side-step" many potential opportunities in order to not conflict with the plans for the films. Henstridge also added that in past seasons, all of the episodes had to be reviewed to ensure they would not show something the films would be covering, but for the final season, "there was just such a sense of just abandon" with all the ideas the writers came up with allowed to happen. Ahead of the series finale in August 2020, Gregg and Wen looked back at the early tie-ins the series had in season one. Both felt having to wait until the release of The Winter Soldier resulted in the early episodes "treading water" and "hampered the writers" creativity. Despite this, Gregg did feel the end of season one "holds up really well" once the Hydra twist was revealed. Both added the series took off once the writers were less tied to the MCU films and were able to focus on the stories of the characters in the series. Following the series finale, Bell looked back on the series and felt because of all the restrictions it faced from Marvel Studios until the Hydra reveal, it was "a tech series" when the audience was expecting "a superhero show with a lot of Marvel brand names". Tancharoen added that the series was "more case-of-the-week" when it first premiered, but that allowed them to plant various story devices that could be fully explored once they got past the Hydra reveal. Bell also revealed the series at one point had been given permission to use the character MODOK before Marvel retracted their access the character, hoping to work it into their storyline with Anton Ivanov / The Superior in season four. The series had also tried to incorporate the space-based counterpart organization, S.W.O.R.D., but was stopped from doing this by Marvel. The Darkhold, which was prominently featured in season four, was later featured in the Disney+ miniseries WandaVision (2021), but with a different design to the one it had in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Showrunner Jac Schaeffer said there were no "big conversations" amongst the writers regarding the Darkhold's previous appearance in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.; co-executive producer Mary Livanos pitched the idea to use the Darkhold in WandaVision to increase the level of danger Agatha Harkness posed to Scarlet Witch, with the new design being based to how the Darkhold looks in the comic books and its design trying to answer questions of what it could look like, how it had been created and how it would appear and disappear. Despite the redesign, director Matt Shakman opined that the Darkhold of WandaVision is same one of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Schaeffer said that the nature of the Darkhold would be further explored in future projects. The first episode of the Disney+ series Loki, "Glorious Purpose", revisits Coulson's death without acknowledging his return in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. When asked if they toyed with mentioning Coulson's resurrection, Loki head writer Michael Waldron said the idea could be "one other tendril of the multiverse, perhaps" and believed simply seeing Coulson again raised exciting questions. Social media accounts for the series were set up in January 2013, months before ABC officially ordered it, "a rarity for a pilot". By May 17, 2013, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. was the top new show of the television season in terms of social media activity, with the series' official Twitter account having over 46,000 followers and its official Facebook page having close to half a million likes. Many cast and crew members "live tweet" each episode, with J. August Richards noting that this brings instant feedback from viewers, and allows the crew to "watch the audience take that journey" in real time. In September 2013, ABC announced the weekly companion digital aftershow, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Declassified, hosted by Brett Erlich, The series aired on on ABC.com, Marvel.com, WatchABC.com, and the Watch ABC app from September 24, 2013, to May 13, 2014, comprising 23 episodes.[citation needed]. Three expanded installments with guests were planned for the first season for its more "provocative storylines". Verizon Wireless served as Declassified's sponsor and created a hub featuring the aftershow alongside "live social feeds, Twitter polling, and sharable clips and graphics". Verizon was also the presenting sponsor of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on Watch ABC. For the final six episodes of the first season, Marvel began the "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Art of Level Seven" initiative, in which a different image was released each Thursday before a new episode, depicting a first look at a key event from the upcoming episode. Bell stated that the initiative was a way to tie the series back to its comics roots, and was thought of at the beginning of the first season. The production team tried to pair specific artists to the teaser posters based on their previous work and how it connected to the themes and emotion of the intended episode. For the second season, the series returned as "The Art of Evolution", with an image for each of the final twelve episodes of the season. For season five, Marvel revived their marketing art program, with "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Road to 100", with five posters, one for each season of the series, representing "key pivotal moments of each season" to commemorate the series reaching 100 episodes. At the 2014 San Diego Comic-Con International, Marvel Custom Solutions and Lexus released a limited single-issue comic tie-in titled Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Chase, set between the season 1 episodes "Seeds" and "T.R.A.C.K.S." The comic was written by George Kitson, with art by Mirko Colak, Neil Edwards, and Mirco Pierfederici. Various marketing web series for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. were created. A five-part web series titled Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Double Agent, also sponsored by Lexus, was released from March 4 to May 6, 2015, on ABC.com. The web series follows a newly hired Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. production assistant, who acts as a double agent for the "Mastermind", portrayed by Stan Lee. Cast and crew members from the series, such as Gregg, also appear, with viewers having the ability to vote in an online poll after each episode to guess where the double agent would go in the next episode; votes entered viewers in a drawing to win prizes from the set of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Double Agent was nominated for Outstanding Digital Series at the 27th Producers Guild of America Awards. Another Lexus-sponsored five-part web series, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Academy, released from March 9 to May 4, 2016, on ABC.com and Watch ABC. In Academy, three Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. fans compete to play an agent in that series. Members of the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. cast also appear. All three fans ultimately made cameo appearances in the third-season finale. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Academy was nominated at the 28th Producers Guild of America Awards for Outstanding Digital Series. The series has been promoted with various subtitles at different times, including Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Uprising in season one, leading up to the Winter Soldier crossover; Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Fallen Agent for the end of the third season; Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Ghost Rider for the first "pod" of season four; and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: LMD for the second "pod" of season four. The third "pod" of season four was known as Agents of Hydra. In November 2020, props, costumes, and set pieces from the series were auctioned off. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. airs in the United States on ABC, in 720p high definition and 5.1 surround sound, despite delivering the episodes to ABC in 1080p. The first season aired on Tuesdays at 8 pm EST for the first season, and starting with the second season, the series aired on Tuesdays at 9 pm EST, before moving to the 10 pm time slot on Tuesdays for the fourth season. For its fifth season, the series aired on Fridays at 9 pm EST, on Fridays at 8 pm EST for season six, and aired at 10 pm EST on Wednesdays for season seven. The second and third seasons of the series were broadcast in two blocks each, with a season of Agent Carter airing in between. Bell explained that this decision was made following the challenge of producing 22 episodes for the first season to be aired over 36–40 weeks, which meant having repeats and "losing momentum". Instead, Agent Carter took up much of that gap in a row, leaving the back half of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s season to run uninterrupted. This format allowed the producers and writers to approach each season in two parts, each with distinct stories connected by carried-over elements. Ahead of the fourth season, Tancharoen explained, "For the past two seasons, we've been able to break our season down into two little mini-seasons because of the airdate schedule. This upcoming season, our airdate schedule is a little different, so we're breaking it into three pods. Story wise, the development of that has made our lives easier, to break it down in that way." The pod format was described as "7-10 episodes [that feature] little "enclosed plotlines" that formed a larger whole." Regarding whether they would break the fifth season into pods again as with season four, Bell said, "A 22-episode arc is a lot for people to hold on to. By breaking it up into either smaller arcs or different pods, by introducing a set of antagonists and putting them down, or moving from space to space, our experience has been that it's something the viewers enjoy, and it makes it a little easier to digest when you're telling some of these stories." Whedon also noted it would depend on how the season would be "broken up in terms of airing. If everything is running back to back, it feels weird to start calling it different things... We will try to have it in bite-sized chunks." The season began airing its episodes on December 1, 2017, once Inhumans had aired its eight episodes, with the intent for all 22 episodes to air mostly uninterrupted; a short hiatus was taken for the airing of the 2018 Winter Olympics. The season ultimately was formed by two pod story arcs. The sixth and seventh seasons each featured 13 episodes. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. has been licensed in 155 countries and territories: CTV holds the broadcast rights for Canada; Channel 4 aired the series in the United Kingdom for the first two seasons, before it moved to E4 for the third through sixth seasons, with season seven releasing on Disney+; in Australia, the series aired on Seven Network for the first two seasons, before moving to Fox8 starting with the third; and in New Zealand, the show airs on TV2. MyNetworkTV was awarded the series' syndication rights in the United States, and began broadcasting it in September 2016. The complete first season was first released on Blu-ray and DVD on September 9, 2014, with the complete second season released on September 18, 2015, as an Amazon.com exclusive. The first season was made available for streaming on Netflix in the United States on November 20, 2014, with the second season on June 11, 2015, the third on June 16, 2016, the fourth on June 15, 2017, the fifth on June 17, 2018, the sixth on September 1, 2019, and the seventh on October 30, 2020. The series was available on Netflix until February 28, 2022, before moving to Disney+ in the United States starting March 16; it was already available on Disney+ in other territories. In the United States, the premiere episode of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. earned a 4.7/14 rating in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic, with 12.12 million total viewers, making it the biggest network drama debut in four years. Though the series debuted to strong ratings against its competition, NCIS, its ratings declined considerably over the following two months, though it remained Tuesday's top show among men 18–49, and overall was the No. 3 show among upscale young adults behind Modern Family and The Big Bang Theory. It also enjoyed DVR recordings that, according to TV Guide, were "through the roof". In March 2016, Alisha Grauso of Forbes discussed the series and its ratings, describing the show as having "never quite been the ratings hit for ABC that the network had hoped it would be... It's hard enough to write a film script that fits within the continuity of the larger Marvel Cinematic Universe, even harder to do it with a full-length TV season that must act as connective tissue to the larger world while still being its own thing." Grauso opined that the series' ratings may improve if it either focused on trying to be the best series it could be (with fewer connections to the films, like the Marvel's Netflix television series) or on just being "support and tie-in to the world of the Avengers". Grauso concluded, "The end result for either scenario is that, hopefully, ratings move up and stay up. In the first case, fans might be lost by the disconnect from the MCU, but a stronger storyline and more consistent writing would bring them and new fans back. In the second scenario, fans would tune in every week for fear of missing out on a bit of story that's important to the larger world." In November 2018, Parrot Analytics, which measures "how viewers interact with a TV show's brand online, assessing everything from global file-sharing and peer-to-peer traffic to social media activity", ranked Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the top 0.03 percent of in-demand television series worldwide, classify it as "Amazing". Series with similar demand included Better Call Saul, Criminal Minds, and Vikings, while Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. had higher demand than series such as The Originals, Supergirl, Arrow, and Fear The Walking Dead. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. saw the season seven episode "A Trout in the Milk" earn a series low rating of 0.2 in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic, while fellow season seven episode "Brand New Day" earned the lowest initial viewers with 1.25 million. For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 88% approval rating, with an average rating of 7.8/10 based on 72 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is sure to please comic book fans, but the strong ensemble and brisk pacing help to make this better-than-average superhero show accessible to non-fanboys as well." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a "generally favorable" score of 74 based on 33 reviews. The second season has a 91% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.7/10 based on 33 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. relaxes into itself during its sophomore season, mitigating the show's growing pains by focusing on characters while amping up narrative thrills." The third season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8.2/10 based on 22 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Still evolving in its third season, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. further hits its stride with a blend of thrills, humor, and heart." The fourth season has a 96% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.8/10 based on 25 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. explores darker territory in its fourth season with the thrilling introduction of Ghost Rider, setting up an action-packed new chapter of Marvel's edgier mythologies." The fifth season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.9/10 based on 23 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. swings for the fences with large-scale storytelling and wild twists that elevate season 5 from the saturated MCU and into its own space". The sixth season has a 93% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 7.7/10 based on 15 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Six seasons in and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. continues to deepen its exploration of space and the relationships between its heroes." The seventh season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8/10, based on 15 reviews. The website's consensus reads, "Heartfelt and held together by the strength of its super cast's chemistry, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s final season is a fitting farewell to a beloved team". The way that the series is affected by the events of Captain America: The Winter Soldier has been called "miraculous", with Terri Schwartz at Zap2it writing "the fact that the movie so influenced the show is game-changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven", while Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times stated that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. "faces a future of perpetual re-invention, and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television's roller-coaster ride toward possible world domination." The fact that the series also depicts the rebuilding of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the MCU has also been highlighted, with Merrill Barr, reviewing "Beginning of the End" for Forbes, saying, "What Marvel's daring to say with this season finale is 'everything we do matters, and you need to pay attention to all of it.'" The series' introduction of the Inhumans was seen by Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club as making Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. an essential part of the MCU and Marvel Studios' plans, with the connections between the series and the films previously having always been reactive on the series' behalf, with "stuff" happening in the films and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. dealing with the fallout of it. However, the series would now be "making things happen, and these events will clearly impact the future of the MCU". Barr wrote that the series "does a most excellent job of standing on its own two feet in a way we've never seen it do before. Come the final frame [of the second season finale], all anyone—Marvel fan or otherwise—will be asking is when season three begins." The third season's paralleling of themes from Captain America: Civil War was called "topical and relevant" and "downright eerie" by The A.V. Club's Alex McCown and ScreenCrush's Kevin Fitzpatrick. McCown compared the series' approach to setting up "a world distrustful of superpowers" to the real life events surrounding Cliven Bundy and Donald Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, and said that "S.H.I.E.L.D. is taking full advantage of its medium in order to tell the story the upcoming Captain America film can't: A full and fraught exploration of the need to protect freedom and privacy, even for those with extraordinary abilities." Fitzpatrick added that this "topical bent...made for a great angle to build up that world mentality without feeling particularly subservient to the movies." Ahead of the fourth season, Collider's Kayti Burt opined that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is "the X-Men TV show you should be watching". Burt noted that the X-Men film franchise was expanding to television with the series Legion, but that S.H.I.E.L.D. already served that purpose well, highlighting the similarities between the X-Men and the Inhumans, both creations of Stan Lee and Jack Kirby during the 1960s consisting of a large group of super-powered people who "are our neighbors and our friends ... both heroes and villains", and face "the same fears and prejudices" from the wider community. Burt felt that the similarities between S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Inhumans and the X-Men became "particularly pointed" in the third season with the Hive storyline, which had a lot in common with the film X-Men: Apocalypse that was released around the same time; Burt was of the opinion that S.H.I.E.L.D. executed the storyline "much better" than the film did. Other similarities Burt discussed were the series' diverse and ensemble cast, its take on the mutant cure storyline, the parallels between Daisy Johnson's second season arc and the introduction of Rogue in the first X-Men film, and its social and political commentary. With the latter, Burt also discussed the similarities between the Watchdogs and Donald Trump, calling it "not very subtle, but social commentary doesn't have to be. I appreciate that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is attempting to comment on the current socio-political state of the country in a way that many of the other superhero TV shows don't even attempt to do. It's perhaps the show's most X-Men-like quality." Concluding, Burt said that though the X-Men characters cannot appear in the MCU due to 20th Century Fox holding the rights, "We still get to enjoy many of the themes prominent in the X-Men universe through S.H.I.E.L.D." Additionally, Marc N. Kleinhenz at Screen Rant discussed how the series "continues to resist a status quo", from the destruction and rebuilding of S.H.I.E.L.D., to the fallout from the Sokovia Accords. He noted that a major driving force behind the changes was the MCU films, with the series being forced "to constantly adapt to a changing narrative landscape that it has absolutely no control over." He also believed that the series was obligated to adapt various Marvel characters to screen which would not be appearing in films, such as Daisy Johnson, Mockingbird, and Ghost Rider. However, Kleinheinz felt that this mindset also came from within the series crew rather than just from Marvel, saying, "there's also the storytelling modus operandi that showrunners Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen have very obviously demonstrated during their four-year tenure. It seems that constantly staking out new ground from season to season is just as much a personal predilection as it is, possibly, a corporate mandate." During the Agents of Hydra pod in the fourth season, Collider's Evan Valentine noted how "[o]ne of the prevalent themes of this latter half of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s fourth season has been its jabs at the current Trump administration... When all's said and done, whether you support or disavow the current administration and what it's done with its time in office, does this commentary work here? Sure it does... We need to be able to laugh at what's going on in the world, regardless of whether we agree or disagree, but S.H.I.E.L.D. has managed to throw in some biting commentary this season." Ahead of the seventh and final season Shakeema Edwards of Vulture felt the series had "evolved into a science-fiction fantasia... exploring human mutation, artificial intelligence, virtual reality, space exploration, time travel, and even magic". Edwards continued, "what's most fascinating about S.H.I.E.L.D. as it enters its endgame is how it's committed to the practice of essentially adopting a new subgenre every ten or so episodes, particularly later in its run". Constantly shifting its genre focus allowed the series to have fewer "filler episodes" and could "maintain its momentum within and between seasons". Additionally, "the characters' ever-deepening devotion to each other has served as an emotional through line, a constant for the characters (and viewers) to hold on to as the narrative rapidly changes around them." Edwards concluded: "S.H.I.E.L.D. is going out on its own terms with season seven, a coveted planned conclusion in a television landscape rife with sudden cancellations. Fittingly, the show that originally brought the world of the MCU to the small screen will also serve as an outro to the cinematic universe's first phase in television". The Atlantic named "4,722 Hours" one of the best television episodes of 2015. The fifth season was recognized with The ReFrame Stamp for hiring people of underrepresented gender identities, and of color. By April 2015, Marvel was developing a spin-off series of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Developed by Bell and writer Paul Zbyszewski, it would star Palicki and Blood. ABC passed on the project by May 7, 2015, when they announced their series renewals and cancellations, and new series pickups. In August 2015, the spin-off series received new life as a reworked series, titled Marvel's Most Wanted, with a pilot order. Hunter and Morse were written off Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the episode "Parting Shot", both leaving S.H.I.E.L.D., as Palicki and Blood "physically had to go leave to shoot the pilot". In May 2016, the spin-off series was passed on by ABC once again. A six-part digital series, Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Slingshot, was revealed on December 6, 2016, to debut on ABC.com on December 13, 2016. It follows Elena "Yo-Yo" Rodriguez on a secret mission, shortly before the start of season four, with Cordova-Buckley reprising her role. Gregg, Jason O'Mara, Simmons, Bennet, Wen, De Caestecker and Henstridge all reprise their roles in the series as Coulson, Jeffrey Mace, Mack, Johnson, May, Fitz and Simmons, respectively. In May 2019, Hulu ordered Marvel's Ghost Rider to series, with Ingrid Escajeda set as showrunner and executive producer alongside Zbyszewski and Loeb. Gabriel Luna was set to reprise his role of Robbie Reyes / Ghost Rider from the fourth season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. in the new series. Rather than being a traditional spin-off from S.H.I.E.L.D., Hulu described the series as a new story that "lives unto its own" but is about the same character. In July 2019, Loeb confirmed that the new series would reference Reyes's role in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. In September 2019, it was announced that the series would not be going forward due to creative differences. At the 2014 San Diego Comic Con International, Marvel Comics announced an ongoing series titled S.H.I.E.L.D., to be set in the mainstream Marvel Universe and written by Mark Waid, beginning that December. Featuring art by a rotating group of artists including Carlos Pacheco, Alan Davis, and Chris Sprouse, the series is led by Agent Phil Coulson, and sees the canonical introduction of the characters Melinda May, Jemma Simmons, and Leo Fitz—who originated from the television series—to the Marvel comics universe, who Waid noted would be given "the Marvel Universe spin". Waid described the series as "done-in-one. Coulson and his team have a mission, and if we need someone for a mission, everyone in the Marvel Universe is available as a potential Agent". Waid added that though the comic does not share events with the television series, it maintains the characters' relationships and personalities. Marc Guggenheim relaunched the comic as Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. for Marvel Comics' All-New, All-Different Marvel line, and introduced the television series' character Grant Ward to the Marvel comic universe in May 2016. In September 2015, Phil Coulson, Daisy Johnson / Quake, Deathlok, Melinda May, Bobbi Morse, Lincoln Campbell, Sif, Raina and Gordon were announced to appear in the Marvel: Future Fight mobile role-playing video game. Their inclusion in the game was done to promote the start of the third season, as well as to allow Marvel to "extend storylines and build on backstories to engage fans in a brand-new experience", according to Marvel Games creative director Bill Rosemann. In March 2016, de Caestecker and Henstridge reprised their roles as Fitz and Simmons, respectively, in the episode "Lizards", of the animated series Ultimate Spider-Man vs the Sinister 6. Also in the month, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. downloadable content was revealed for Lego Marvel's Avengers. The content consisted of a mission based "on the events leading up to the season two finale", which involved facing Jiaying and Daisy in Afterlife while rescuing agents, as well as going up against Gordon and Cal Johnson who have occupied the S.H.I.E.L.D. Helicarrier. The content includes the playable characters Daisy Johnson, Leo Fitz, Agent Koenig, Melinda May, Bobbi Morse, Jemma Simmons, Cal Johnson / Mr. Hyde, Deathlok, Gordon, Grant Ward, Jiaying, Lincoln, and Raina, as well as the airplane the Bus. Ming-Na Wen reprised her role as Melinda May to provide new dialogue for the content. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." ABC Studios. April 6, 2013. Archived from the original on April 10, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2013. Han, Angie (September 3, 2014). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season 2 Trailer Hints at Dark Times Ahead". /Film. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2014. Couch, Aaron (December 9, 2014). "'Agents of SHIELD' Bosses on Skye Bombshell and Marvel Movie Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Lovett, Jaimie (May 12, 2015). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season 3 Synopsis Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2015. "Coulson Will Encounter the Secret Warriors on 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' on ABC". Marvel.com. June 26, 2015. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Burlingame, Russ (February 21, 2016). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Spoiler: Grant Ward's Villainous Identity Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2016. Lovett, Jamie (August 2, 2016). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season 4 Synopsis Released". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Agard, Chancellor (October 7, 2017). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 5 premiere date revealed at NYCC". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 8, 2017. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Bacon, Thomas (February 3, 2017). "The Agents of SHIELD Will Become the World's Most Wanted". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 3, 2018. Retrieved February 4, 2018. Outlaw, Kofi (January 28, 2019). "'Agents of SHIELD' Season 6 Trailer Released". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2019. Topel, Fred (April 12, 2019). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' – Jed Whedon and Maurissa Tancharoen Interview on Season 6". Showbiz Junkies. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Topel, Fred (April 1, 2019). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' – Elizabeth Henstridge and Jeff Bell Talk Season 6 and the Hunt for Fitz". Showbiz Junkies. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Dinh, Christine (March 30, 2019). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season 6 Returns on May 10". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2019. Agard, Chancellor (August 2, 2019). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. bosses explain what those twists mean for the final season". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Mitovich, Matt Webb (April 14, 2020). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Gets Final Season Premiere Date". TVLine. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. Cardona, Ian (June 29, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD Is Going Out on Top in Its Final Season". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020. "Full 2013–2014 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline Hollywood. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2015). "Full 2014–15 TV Season Series Rankings: Football & 'Empire' Ruled". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Retrieved May 22, 2015. de Moraes, Lisa (May 26, 2016). "Full 2015–16 TV Season Series Rankings: 'Blindspot', 'Life In Pieces' & 'Quantico' Lead Newcomers". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. de Moraes, Lisa (May 26, 2017). "Final 2016–17 TV Rankings: 'Sunday Night Football' Winning Streak Continues". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. de Moraes, Lisa; Hipes, Patrick (May 22, 2018). "2017-18 TV Series Ratings Rankings: NFL Football, 'Big Bang' Top Charts". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 25, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2018. "NYCC 2012: Coulson Lives in Marvel's S.H.I.E.L.D." Marvel.com. October 13, 2012. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2012. Nemiroff, Perri (April 20, 2013). "Clark Gregg Suggests Coulson's Return Could Mean 'The Avengers' Were Deceived". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 22, 2013. Retrieved April 20, 2013. Strom, Marc (September 22, 2014). "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Clark Gregg". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2014. Andreeva, Nellie (October 24, 2012). "Ming-Na To Star In Joss Whedon's ABC Pilot 'Marvel's S.H.I.E.L.D.'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2012. Roots, Kimberly (October 1, 2012). "S.H.I.E.L.D. Scoop: Meet the Members of Joss Whedon's New ABC Pilot!". TVLine. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2012. Fienberg, Daniel (September 24, 2013). "Interview: 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' star Ming-Na Wen talks stunts, The Whedonverse and punctuation". HitFix. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Mitovich, Matt Webb (April 13, 2015). "S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Ming-Na Wen Previews 'Devastating' Origin of 'The Cavalry,' Coulson's 'Massive' New Secrets". TVLine. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Phegley, Kiel (March 31, 2016). ""Agents of SHIELD'S" Bennet, Wen & Henstridge on Taking Charge & Earning a Happy Ending". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Strom, Marc (September 16, 2014). "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Ming-Na Wen". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 18, 2014. Retrieved December 29, 2014. Melrose, Kevin (July 10, 2013). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': Meet Agent Grant Ward in New Video". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2015. Strom, Marc (April 8, 2014). "Exclusive: Brett Dalton on Agent Ward's New Role in Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Marvel.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Wieselman, Jarett (May 14, 2014). "What The "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D." Bosses Learned From That Tumultuous First Season". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on May 14, 2014. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Connelly, Brendon (September 11, 2014). "Exclusive! Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Showrunner Talks Interconnection With Avengers: Age Of Ultron, Agent Carter, & Marvel Cinematic Universe". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2014. Strom, Marc (September 20, 2014). "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Brett Dalton". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Abrams, Natalie (May 13, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. postmortem: Is Ward past redemption?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Bucksbaum, Sydney (December 8, 2015). "'Agents of SHIELD' EP Explains What's Next After That Shocking Midseason Finale Death". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 11, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2015. Abrams, Natalie (February 21, 2017). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. welcomes back original cast member". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017. Towers, Andrea (May 7, 2014). "'Agents of SHIELD' react: A boy and his dog". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 4, 2015. Retrieved August 2, 2015. Abrams, Natalie (December 10, 2014). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' reveals Skye's true identity – what's next?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Strom, Marc (September 18, 2014). "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Chloe Bennet". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 31, 2014. Ratcliffe, Amy (July 10, 2015). "Comic-Con: Lash is Coming to Season 3 of Agents of SHIELD". IGN. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 11, 2015. Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 17, 2016). "'Agents of SHIELD' Bosses Talk Finale Deaths, Time Jump and Agent Carter's Future in the MCU". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (November 13, 2012). "Joss Whedon's 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' Pilot Adds Two Agents (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012. Retrieved November 13, 2012. Byrne, Craig (February 2, 2014). "S.H.I.E.L.D. On Set: Iain de Caestecker On Character Development, Sif & A Monkey For Fitz". SHIELD.SITE. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Goldman, Eric (July 16, 2013). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Iain De Caestecker on Agent Leo Fitz". IGN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Huver, Scott (March 24, 2015). ""Agents of SHIELD's" Henstridge & Caestecker on the Future of FitzSimmons". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Topel, Fred (November 5, 2013). "Exclusive Interview: Elizabeth Henstridge on 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Abrams, Natalie (October 7, 2013). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Elizabeth Henstridge: Fitz and Simmons Are "Like a Married Couple"". TV Guide. Archived from the original on October 7, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Abrams, Natalie (September 30, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. postmortem: Where the heck is Simmons?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (July 25, 2014). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Reveals New Characters, Carter Adds Captain Directors". TV Guide. Archived from the original on August 3, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014. "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Nick Blood". Marvel.com. September 17, 2014. Archived from the original on September 20, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Huver, Scott (March 17, 2015). ""Agents of SHIELD'S" Palicki & Blood on Mockingbird & Hunter's Rocky Relationship". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Khatchatourian, Maane (February 14, 2015). "'Agents of SHIELD' Promotes Adrianne Palicki to Series Regular". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2015. Towers, Andrea (January 17, 2015). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': How long will Mockingbird be sticking around?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Towers, Andrea (March 26, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Art of Evolution Mockingbird takes center stage – exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Strom, Marc (August 7, 2014). "Henry Simmons Joins Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Marvel.com. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. Strom, Marc (September 21, 2014). "Rebuilding S.H.I.E.L.D. With Henry Simmons". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 25, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Mitovich, Matt Webb (March 21, 2014). "Henry Simmons Talks S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Captain America 2 Flashbacks, Mack vs. Coulson and Lucy Lawless' Encore". TVLine. Archived from the original on April 1, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Smith, Jeremy (March 10, 2016). "God's Plan and Possibilities in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. [Geek Gospel]". Hacking Christianity. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016. Hogan, Dee (May 18, 2016). "Agents of SHIELD Recap: Season Three Finale ("Absolution"/"Ascension")". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016. Mitovich, Matt Webb (December 3, 2018). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Report to a New Director in Season 6 — But Is He Up to the Task? (2019 FIRST LOOK)". TVLine. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. "Luke Mitchell Joins 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' as Series Regular". Marvel.com. June 1, 2015. Archived from the original on June 2, 2015. Retrieved June 1, 2015. Towers, Andrea (April 2, 2015). "Loyalties are divided in new Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. art: Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015. Bucksbaum, Sydney (March 8, 2016). "'Agents of SHIELD' Bosses Address Flash-Forward Mystery, 'Agent Carter' Integration". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved March 10, 2016. "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Loses One of Its Own in Fallen Agent". Marvel.com. April 21, 2016. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 22, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (May 18, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. bosses on death twist and what's next". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Phegley, Kiel (April 19, 2016). "The Kree Return To An Expanding Marvel Cinematic Universe In New "Agents Of SHIELD" Synopsis". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Knox-Smith, Michael (September 21, 2016). "Agents of SHIELD: Season Four Premiere 'The Ghost' (Review)". Mike's Film Talk. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved September 23, 2016. Goldman, Eric (May 17, 2016). "Marvel's Agents of SHIELD: "Ascension" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Lovett, Jamie (February 16, 2016). "EXCLUSIVE: Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Casts Natalia Cordova-Buckley As Slingshot". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Patten, Dominic (October 5, 2017). "'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Ups Natalia Cordova-Buckley To Series Regular For Season 5 – NY Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. "Yo-Yo Bounces Back in This Week in Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." (Podcast). Marvel.com. October 14, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (November 2, 2017). "Meet the new season 5 Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. cast members — first look". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 2, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2017. Li, Shirley (July 21, 2018). "Agents of SHIELD ups Jeff Ward to series regular". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2018. Goldman, David (August 31, 2009). "Disney to buy Marvel for $4 billion". CNN. Archived from the original on September 2, 2009. Retrieved August 29, 2012. "Jeph Loeb Named Marvel's Executive VP of Television". Superhero Hype!. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved August 29, 2012. Pepose, David (June 29, 2010). "Animation And More: Jeph Loeb Talks Marvel TV Plans". Newsarama. Archived from the original on June 26, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2012. Schneider, Michael (December 17, 2010). "'Twilight' Screenwriter Sets Marvel Adaptation for TV". Variety. Archived from the original on December 20, 2010. Retrieved December 17, 2010. Molloy, Tim (May 15, 2012). "Screenwriter Sets Marvel Adaptation for TV". The Wrap. Archived from the original on May 17, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012. Andreeva, Nellie (July 27, 2012). "ABC And Marvel Eying 'Avengers'-Themed TV Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 28, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Graser, Marc (August 7, 2012). "Joss Whedon to write, direct 'Avengers' sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Tancharoen, Maurissa [@motancharoen] (August 8, 2020). "A snapshot of an email confirming our first lunch meeting with #JephLoeb and @mtbradner. Eight years ago today, Joss, @misterkarate and I pitched them our idea for @AgentsofSHIELD over sushi. Apparently they liked it". Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2020 – via Instagram. Henstridge, Elizabeth (August 12, 2020). Live with you! Agents of SHIELD Series Finale. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020 – via YouTube.{{cite AV media}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Littleton, Cynthia (August 28, 2012). "ABC orders Marvel 'S.H.I.E.L.D' pilot". Variety. Archived from the original on August 31, 2012. Retrieved August 29, 2012. Andreeva, Nellie (August 28, 2012). "ABC Greenlights 'S.H.I.E.L.D' Marvel Pilot, Joss Whedon To Co-Write & Possibly Direct". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 29, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2012. Andreeva, Nellie (May 10, 2013). "ABC Picks Up Marvel/Joss Wheden's 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' To Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Kondolojy, Amanda (October 10, 2013). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Gets Full Season Order". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved October 10, 2013. Hibberd, James (May 8, 2014). "ABC renews 'SHIELD' plus orders 'Captain America' spin-off". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014. Goldberg, Lesley (May 7, 2015). "ABC Renews 'Agents of SHIELD,' 'Agent Carter'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 10, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. Strom, Marc (March 3, 2016). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Renewed For Season 4". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved March 3, 2016. Radish, Christina (September 20, 2016). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' EPs Jed Whedon & Maurissa Tancharoen on Season 4, Ghost Rider, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved September 21, 2016. Goldberg, Leslie (May 11, 2017). "ABC Renews 'Agents of SHIELD,' 'American Housewife,' 'Designated Survivor'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 12, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2017. Schwartz, Terri (May 16, 2017). "Marvel's Agents of SHIELD Showrunners Talk Season 5 And Space Cliffhanger". IGN. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2017. Mitovich, Matt Webb (February 27, 2018). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Bosses Talk Season 5 (Possibly Series) Finale: 'If This Is the End, We're Ready'". TVLine. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018. Goldberg, Lesley (May 14, 2018). "'Agents of SHIELD' Renewed for Abbreviated Sixth Season at ABC". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 14, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Andreeva, Nellie; Petski, Denise (November 16, 2018). "'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D' Renewed For Season 7 By ABC". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 17, 2018. Patten, Dominic (July 18, 2019). "'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' To End After Season 7 On ABC – Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. McLevy, Alex (August 12, 2020). "The Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. showrunners reveal the plan behind that grand series finale". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Hibberd, James (September 24, 2013). "Joss Whedon: The definitive EW interview". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Retrieved September 28, 2013. Wigler, Josh (January 11, 2013). "Joss Whedon's 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' Is About 'Powers,' 'Spectacle' And 'Little Things' That Matter". MTV Splash Page. Archived from the original on January 14, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2013. Prudom, Laura (May 12, 2015). "'Marvel's Agents of SHIELD' Boss Talks Shocking Finale Cliffhanger, Skye's Secret Mission". Variety. Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2015. Damore, Meagan (July 29, 2016). ""Agents Of SHIELD" Reveals Ghost Rider Details, Talk Up The New Director & More". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2016. Ching, Albert (October 7, 2013). ""Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." EP Talks Ratings, Nick Fury Cameo". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 9, 2013. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Abrams, Natalie (September 24, 2014). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' postmortem: Bosses answer burning season 2 questions". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2014. Agard, Chancellor (August 11, 2020). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. stars and bosses reflect on the show's standout moments". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 15, 2020. Strauss, Gerry (September 9, 2015). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Executive Producer Jeff Bell on What to Expect In Season Three and Beyond". Paste. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved October 11, 2015. Ellwood, Gregory (March 23, 2014). "10 things we learned at the 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Paleyfest panel". HitFix. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014. Abrams, Natalie (May 17, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. to play hot potato of death in finale". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (September 15, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Has Daisy turned to the dark side?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 16, 2016. Schwartz, Terri (August 10, 2016). "Meet Marvel's New Ghost Rider, Gabriel Luna". IGN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2016. Benjamin, Troy (July 29, 2014). Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season One Declassified. Marvel Enterprises. ISBN 978-0-7851-8998-5. Sunu, Steven (October 13, 2012). "NYCC: Coulson Lives In Whedon's "S.H.I.E.L.D."". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2012. Ausiello, Michael (November 27, 2012). "Exclusive: Joss Whedon's Red-Hot S.H.I.E.L.D. Pilot Adds 'Deadly' New Agent". TVLine. Archived from the original on November 29, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2012. Goldberg, Lesley (December 19, 2012). "Joss Whedon's 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' Pilot Enlists 'Nashville' Actress (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2012. Smith, Ryan (March 15, 2016). "Chinese-American Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. star Chloe Bennet talks diversity in Hollywood". Chicago Reader. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (August 19, 2014). "'Agents of SHIELD' Enlists Adrianne Palicki as Marvel Favorite (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 26, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014. "Learn How Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Begins Its Second Season". Marvel.com. September 8, 2014. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2014. "Declassifying Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Aftershocks". Marvel.com. February 13, 2015. Archived from the original on February 14, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. Strom, Marc (March 19, 2015). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Adds Luke Mitchell". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Cavanaugh, Patrick (March 20, 2015). "Declassifying 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': Afterlife". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2015. Strom, Marc (June 4, 2015). "Henry Simmons Re-Enlists With 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' as Series Regular". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2015. Schwartz, Terri (March 22, 2016). "Agents of SHIELD EP Jeff Bell on Mockingbird and Hunter Departure and Marvel's Most Wanted". IGN. Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2016. "ABC's "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Star Natalia Cordova-Buckley Upped to Series Regular for Season Five of Hit Series" (Press release). The Futon Critic. October 5, 2017. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. Birnbaum, Debra (March 21, 2017). "'Agents of Shield' Star Natalia Cordova-Buckley Joins 'Bates Motel' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017. Retrieved July 31, 2017. Abrams, Natalie (September 8, 2017). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Nick Blood returning as Lance Hunter". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved September 8, 2017. Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 18, 2018). "'Agents of SHIELD' Star Clark Gregg on the Tragic Season 5 Finale". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 20, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. Jirak, Jamie (July 29, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD Finally Teases the Return of Fitz". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Matsumoto-Dyuan, Madeline (June 15, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD: Season 7's Biggest Mysteries (So Far)". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. Jirak, Jamie (August 5, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD: Did Fitz Finally Return?". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Freyer, Christopher (August 5, 2020). "Brand New Day". Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.. Season 7. Episode 11. Event occurs at 42:32. ABC. Kucharski, Joe (December 19, 2013). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Costume Design". Tyranny of Style. Archived from the original on September 22, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Mitchell, Maurice (March 10, 2014). "Exclusive: Interview with MARVEL'S: AGENTS OF S.H.I.E.L.D. Concept Artist Phillip Boutte Jr". Film Sketchr. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Strauss, Gerry (September 29, 2015). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Costume Designer Ann Foley on New Looks for Season Three". Paste. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Di Placido, Dani (October 13, 2016). "'Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Costume Designer Ann Foley Talks Superhero Costumes, Civilian Clothes, And Girl Power". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2016. Howland, Kara (August 19, 2014). "Hiatus Helper: Costume Designer Ann Foley Talks Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. [Exclusive Interview]". TV Goodness. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Strom, Marc (September 15, 2015). "Ann Foley Designs Daisy's New Look in 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2015. Phillips, Javon (September 14, 2015). "Exclusive: Chloe Bennet's new Quake costume in 'Agents of SHIELD'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 16, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Lovett, Jaimie (September 14, 2016). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Costume Designer Gives Details On Ghost Rider And AIDA's TV Look". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved September 15, 2016. Gregg, Clark [@clarkgregg] (February 15, 2017). "After 80 eps of #AgentsofSHIELD @afoley24 leaves us. Farewell u incredible artist/collaborator/geek. Can't wait for #alteredcarbon ❤️🔥👾👽" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017 – via Twitter. "This Week in Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Discusses Creating a Hydra World" (Podcast). Marvel Entertainment. April 12, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017 – via SoundCloud. Foley, Ann [@afoley24] (July 30, 2017). "I'm back for the first 2 eps & then @whitney_hg who assisted me S3 & 4 will be taking over w/ help from @Christann - They're gonna do great!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017 – via Twitter. Galitz, Whitney [@whitneyhg] (June 25, 2020). "Co-designed with the lovely @jessicadreamsdior don't miss tonight's groovy episode! My daughter was born shortly after this shot so sadly I had to bid my farewell from the dream team but can't want to watch every next episode as a fan". Archived from the original on December 26, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2020 – via Instagram. Chan, Robert (January 25, 2017). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': Props to the Prop Master". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. "Essential Avengers: Designing Iron Man". Marvel.com. March 23, 2012. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Retrieved September 16, 2015. Zalban, Alec (May 12, 2015). "Marvel's First Inhuman: The Inside Story Of How 'Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Transformed A Universe". MTV. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved May 12, 2015. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 26, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Casts NFL/NCIS Alum as Inhuman 'Monster' Lash". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 27, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Cardona, Ian (May 28, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD's Season 7 Title Card Is the Perfect Throwback". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (September 29, 2015). "Review: 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Breaks the 'Laws of Nature,' Gets Inhumanly Good in Season 3". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2015. Sava, Oliver (October 28, 2015). ""4,722 Hours" hits a series high point by ditching S.H.I.E.L.D. for space". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved November 8, 2015. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (October 27, 2015). "Review: 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Spends '4,722 Hours' on a Brilliant Gambit (With an 'Infinity' Twist)". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved November 8, 2015. Mangione, Nick (September 21, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. gives us the Ghost Rider we didn't know we wanted". Geek.com. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved September 23, 2016. McCabe, Joseph (January 11, 2017). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Recap: "Broken Promises" is an Exhilarating Evil AI Thriller". Nerdist. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017. Brand, Dana Leigh (April 5, 2017). "Agents of SHIELD Review: "What If..."". The Tracking Board. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. "Agents of SHIELD Season 4 Episode 21: The Return Recap". Metawitches. May 12, 2017. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. "Agents of Shield Season 4 Episode 22: World's End/ Season Finale Recap". Metawitches. May 21, 2017. Archived from the original on August 1, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2017. Lovett, Jamie (November 28, 2017). "'Agents of SHIELD' Goes to Infinity and Beyond in Season 5 Premiere". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Rouben, David (December 9, 2017). "Agents of SHIELD season 5, episode 3 recap: A Life Spent". FanSided. Time Inc. Archived from the original on February 4, 2018. Retrieved February 3, 2018. "Agents of SHIELD Season 5 Episode 15: Rise and Shine Recap". Metawitches. April 4, 2018. Archived from the original on May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018. Dinh, Christine (June 24, 2020). "Our Agents Head to the Seventies in New Episode of 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Topel, Fred (January 10, 2013). "ABC President Paul Lee Talks 'S.H.I.E.L.D.'". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014. Abramian, Alexandria (March 5, 2014). "Culver Studios Won't Become Condos, Says New Owner". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 25, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Romanello, Linda (September 1, 2015). "VFX: Marvel's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". Post. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Topel, Fred (October 22, 2013). "Exclusive Interview: Brett Dalton on 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". CraveOnline. Archived from the original on September 13, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2014. Coratelli, Carlo (October 15, 2013). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Interview with actress Pascale Armand". The White Space. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved September 7, 2014. Ramos, Debbie Molina (December 10, 2014). "Movies & TV shows filmed in Old San Juan, Puerto Rico". Legends of Puerto Rico. Archived from the original on December 12, 2010. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Vineyard, Jennifer (August 12, 2020). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': Behind the Scenes of the Emotional Series Finale". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. "Credits". David Boyd ASC. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Ward at the Wheel – Behind the Scenes of Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Marvel Entertainment. October 1, 2015. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015 – via YouTube. Jones, Simon (September 29, 2015). "The visual effects of Agents of SHIELD". HitFilm. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved December 12, 2016. "FuseFX Delivers Action-Packed VFX For "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D."". FuseFX. August 25, 2015. Archived from the original on September 1, 2015. Retrieved August 31, 2015. Bunish, Christine (April 1, 2014). "VFX for TV Series". Post Magazine. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2013. Coratelli, Carlo (July 4, 2014). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Interview with David Altenau (Fuse FX)". The White Space. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 5, 2013. Caranicas, Peter (December 11, 2015). "Artisans Booked on 'Fifty Shades Darker,' 'Mr. Robot,' 'Divorce' and 'Furious 8'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. Retrieved January 3, 2016. Boucher, Geoff (July 15, 2013). "'Agents of SHIELD': Clark Gregg's 'commanding presence' calls the tune for composer Bear McCreary". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. Kates, Rachael (July 30, 2013). "Bear McCreary on composing for Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D., The Walking Dead & more..." Den of Geek. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2014. McCreary, Bear (December 9, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Maveth". BearMcCreary.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Burlingame, Jon (August 23, 2017). "Composers for Marvel's TV Universe Strike a Different Chord". Variety. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. McCreary, Bear (August 14, 2020). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Saying Goodbye". BearMcCreary.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. McCreary, Bear (September 24, 2013). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Pilot". BearMcCreary.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2023. Retrieved August 31, 2023. McCreary, Bear (September 28, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Season 3 Begins". BearMcCreary.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. McCreary, Bear [@bearmccreary] (October 15, 2019). "I'm thrilled to share credits with long-standing members of my @SparksShadows team: Sam Ewing now officially co-composes with me on @WalkingDead_AMC, & Jason Akers on @AgentsofSHIELD. They started as interns, worked hard, and learned the craft. Bravo!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on October 15, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2020 – via Twitter. "Meet Jason Akers of Sparks and Shadows in Culver City". Voyage LA. October 8, 2019. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. McCreary, Bear [@bearmccreary] (September 28, 2014). "And @AgentsofSHIELD fans, soundtrack plans are afoot. Nothing official to confirm yet, but stay tuned. You will be very happy :)" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2014 – via Twitter. Nissim, Mayer (September 10, 2015). "Agents of SHIELD now has a CD soundtrack and they hope it meets your insanely high standards". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 13, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (Original Soundtrack Album)". Hollywood Records. September 4, 2015. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015 – via Apple Music. "Bear McCreary – Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. (Original Soundtrack Album)". Discogs. October 2, 2015. Archived from the original on April 30, 2021. Retrieved June 28, 2021. Hibberd, James (July 11, 2013). "'Agents of SHIELD' scoop: 5 things we've learned". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2013. Goldberg, Lesley (April 1, 2014). "'Agents of SHIELD' EPs Respond to Critics: Don't Expect a Marvel Movie Every Week". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2014. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (January 3, 2016). "Joss Whedon Defends 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Comments, Says Marvel TV Gets 'Leftovers'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2016. Johnston, Rich (May 15, 2016). "Chloe Bennet Asks Why The Marvel Movies Won't Acknowledge The TV Shows – At Wizard World Des Moines Comic Con". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (April 2, 2014). "Watch 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s 'Captain America: The Winter Soldier' Crossover From "End of the Beginning"". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2016. Hibberd, James (November 1, 2013). "'Agents of SHIELD' doing 'Thor' crossover directed by Jonathan Frakes". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Ellwood, Gregory (March 23, 2014). "10 things we learned at the 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Paleyfest panel". HitFix. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014. Schwartz, Terri (November 21, 2013). "'Agents of SHIELD' will get a 'Captain America: The Winter Soldier' crossover too". Zap2it. Archived from the original on April 5, 2014. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Truitt, Brian (April 6, 2014). "Film reveal retools TV's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved April 6, 2014. Solis, Jorge (September 27, 2014). "5 Ways Hayley Atwell's 'Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season 2 Appearance Sets-Up 'Marvel's Agent Carter!' [WATCH]". MSTARZ. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014. Strom, Marc (October 31, 2014). "Declassifying Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Things We Bury". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2014. Retrieved November 1, 2014. Truitt, Brian (April 20, 2015). "'S.H.I.E.L.D.' leads into 'Avengers' sequel". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2015. Abrams, Natalie (September 30, 2015). "Do the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. premiere Easter eggs hint at Civil War?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "ABC Announces May Sweeps Programming and Series Finale Dates". The Futon Critic. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016. Lovett, Jamie (March 26, 2014). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Blue Alien Confirmed As Kree". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2014. Logan, Michael (November 19, 2014). "It's All Connected: Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'s Alien Revealed". TV Guide. Archived from the original on November 21, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2014. Ching, Albert (December 9, 2014). ""Agents of SHIELD" Showrunners on the Midseason Finale's Marvel "Gamechanger"". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved December 12, 2014. Prudom, Laura (June 26, 2015). "Marvel's 'Secret Warriors' Are Coming to 'Agents of SHIELD' – and Comic-Con (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Lovett, Jamie (November 18, 2015). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Majorly Retconned Hydra's MCU Origin". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved November 29, 2015. Jeffery, Morgan (January 8, 2016). "Marvel's Inhumans movie will be "its own cinematic version", says Agents of SHIELD star Clark Gregg". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Trendacosta, Katharine (July 26, 2016). "How Doctor Strange Brought Ghost Rider to Agents of SHIELD". io9. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016. "'Marvel's The Inhumans' Coming To IMAX & ABC In 2017". Marvel.com. November 14, 2016. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (November 14, 2016). "Marvel, ABC Set 'The Inhumans' TV Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Schwartz, Dana (April 15, 2015). "Q&A: Joss Whedon on Super Heroes, the Pop Culture Mainstream". Mental Floss. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (January 3, 2016). "Joss Whedon Defends 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Comments, Says Marvel TV Gets 'Leftovers'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Abrams, Natalie (May 5, 2015). "Agents of SHIELD: Inside the tie-in to Avengers: Age of Ultron". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Damore, Meagan (May 19, 2016). ""Agents of SHIELD'S" "Squadron Supreme" Easter Egg Could Change the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2016. Prudom, Laura (May 17, 2016). "'Agents of SHIELD' Finale: Bosses Break Down Deaths, Time Jump and Final Scene". Variety. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (July 22, 2016). "Why Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. chose this Ghost Rider". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. Lachenal, Jessica (November 2, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Debrief Season 4, Episode 6: "The Good Samaritan"". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 3, 2016. Mitovich, Matt Webb (May 11, 2018). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Bosses Talk Team's Final Life-or-Deaths Dilemma, Looming Infinity War Threat". TVLine. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 2, 2017). "Emily VanCamp On New Fox Drama 'The Resident', Marvel Universe & Equal Pay – TCA". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2017. Eisenberg, Eric (June 7, 2019). "Captain Marvel Had A Secret Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Easter Egg". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Agard, Chancellor (April 15, 2020). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. brings back Agent Carter character in season 7 first look". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 15, 2020. Retrieved April 15, 2020. Moore, Trent (August 12, 2020). "Who Lives, Who's Lost: This is How it All Ends in the Series Finale of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Miller, Leon (March 21, 2022). "Avengers: Endgame Almost Involved an Agents of SHIELD Crossover". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Baysinger, Tim (May 27, 2020). "How 'Agents of SHIELD' Survived 7 Seasons as the 'Black Sheep' of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 29, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 9, 2020). "As Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Nears Its End, Series Vets Agree: Breaking Away From MCU Continuity Was Marvelous". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved August 10, 2020. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 18, 2020). "Yep, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Was Going to Introduce Crazy-Looking M.O.D.O.K." TVLine. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 18, 2020. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 12, 2020). "S.H.I.E.L.D. Series Finale Mystery: Is [Spoiler] Now an Agent of S.W.O.R.D.?". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Bacon, Thomas (March 7, 2021). "WandaVision Just Made Every Marvel TV Show Redundant". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Davis, Brandon (March 10, 2021). "WandaVision Head Writer Jac Schaeffer On Changes, Endings, and Vision's Beautiful Words (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Amaya, Erik (March 12, 2021). "WandaVision's Creative Team Discusses The Darkhold, the Scarlet Witch, and Fan Theories". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Deckelmeier, Joe (March 15, 2021). "Matt Shakman Interview: WandaVision". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Alter, Ethan (March 10, 2021). "'WandaVision' secrets revealed: The missing Doctor Strange cameo, a goofy 'Growing Pains' reference and the 'Contact' connection". Yahoo Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Barnhardt, Aaron (June 14, 2021). "Loki Writer on Agents of SHIELD Continuity: "That Is One Other Tendril of the Multiverse"". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2021. Ng, Philiana (May 17, 2013). "Fall TV: ABC's 'Agents of SHIELD,' NBC's 'Blacklist' Dominate Social Media Conversation". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 8, 2013. Retrieved October 25, 2014. "J. August Richards Talks AGENTS OF S.H.I.E.L.D., Seeing His Childhood Fantasy Come True, Reuniting with Joss Whedon, Deathlok's Future, and More". Collider. September 4, 2014. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved November 8, 2014. Steinberg, Brian (September 24, 2013). "Verizon To Sponsor Digital Companion To ABC's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Towers, Andrea (April 3, 2014). "'Agents of SHIELD' first-look art teases Clairvoyant reveal – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. Towers, Andrea (February 26, 2015). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. launches second year of art campaign, The Art of Evolution – exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved February 26, 2015. Dinh, Christine (December 18, 2017). "Marvel Debuts 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Road To 100' Art Program". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2017. "Marvel & Lexus Present The Chase". Marvel.com. July 24, 2014. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Kitson, George (w), Colak, Mirko, Neil Edwards, Mirco Pierfederici (p), D'Armata, Frank, Vero Gandini, John Rauch (i). Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: The Chase, no. 1 (July 24, 2014). Marvel Comics. "Preview – Lexus Presents: Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D in THE CHASE (2014) #1". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. "Go Undercover on the Set of Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D." Marvel.com. March 4, 2015. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Schick, Michael (May 6, 2015). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Double Agent' finale reveals Mastermind and sneak peek". Hypable. Archived from the original on January 8, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. "2016 Producers Guild Awards Nominees". Producers Guild of America. January 5, 2016. Archived from the original on January 6, 2016. Retrieved January 9, 2016. Roffman, Marisa (March 8, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Academy Makes Fans Compete to Be on the Show (VIDEO)". TV Insider. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2016. Roffman, Marisa (May 6, 2016). "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Finale Includes Superfans From Academy Web Series (PHOTOS)". TV Insider. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. "PGA Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. January 28, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Barr, Merrill (March 4, 2014). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Is About To Become The Show Everyone Wanted It To Be". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014. "Ghost Rider Burns Your Soul in First 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season 4 Footage". ScreenCrush. September 11, 2016. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2016. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (December 7, 2016). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Sets 'Slingshot' Digital Series for December Hiatus". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. Holub, Christian (April 4, 2017). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. recap: 'What If...'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 5, 2017. Retrieved April 5, 2017. Anderton, Ethan (August 4, 2020). "Marvel's 'Agents of SHIELD' Costumes and Props are Going Up for Auction This Fall". /Film. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved August 4, 2020. "Read the Official Synopsis For Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Ep. 1". Marvel.com. September 11, 2013. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014. Andreeva, Nellie (May 14, 2013). "ABC 2013-14 Schedule: Rebel Wilson Gets Post-'Modern Family' Slot, 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' On Tuesday, 'Dancing' Shrinks To One Night". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 16, 2014. Retrieved May 17, 2016. "ABC 2014-15 Primetime Schedule: 'Agents of SHIELD', 'Grey's Anatomy' & 'Scandal' Get New Timeslots + 'Black-ish' Gets Post 'Modern Family' Spot & 'Agent Carter' Held for Midseason". TV by the Numbers. May 13, 2014. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. Abrams, Natalie (May 17, 2016). "ABC schedule revealed: No Scandal this fall". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. Ausiello, Michael (May 16, 2017). "ABC Fall Schedule: Once Bumped to Friday, black-ish Shifts to Tuesday, Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. M.I.A." TVLine. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2017. Porter, Rick (April 10, 2019). "ABC Summer Premiere Dates: 'Bachelorette' and a Whole Lot of Game Shows". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 12, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2020. Petski, Denise (April 14, 2020). "ABC Sets Premiere Dates For 'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Final Season, Summer Fun & Games Lineup & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. Ching, Albert (September 29, 2015). ""Agents Of SHIELD" Showrunners Answer Your Pre-Season 3 Premiere Questions". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2015. Bundel, Ani (May 18, 2018). "How Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Became Marvel's Little Show That Could". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. Abrams, Natalie (May 16, 2017). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. bosses on those shocking finale twists". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2017. Abrams, Natalie (August 6, 2017). "Here's when Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. will return". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2017. Abrams, Natalie (November 30, 2017). "Why Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. is headed to space in season 5". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Winslow, George (October 7, 2013). "MIPCOM: Disney Sells 'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' In 155 Territories". Broadcasting & Cable. Archived from the original on March 16, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2014. Szklarski, Cassandra (June 6, 2013). "CTV adds Kirstie Alley sitcom, Marvel drama and nabs 'Person of Interest'". CTV News. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2013. Robinson, Abby (July 20, 2020). "Agents of Shield season 7 UK release date – what's going on?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Alexander, Susannah (October 15, 2020). "Agents of SHIELD's final season is finally getting a UK release". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2020. Yeap, Sue (June 5, 2013). "Aussie faces feature in US shows". The West Australian. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2013. Turner, Adam (September 23, 2015). "Foxtel snaps up Marvel's Agents of SHIELD as more free-to-air TV locked away". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. Regan (February 17, 2014). "TV Ratings: 16 February 2014". Throng. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2014. Kieswetter, John (June 13, 2016). "'The X-Files,' 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Reruns Added To MyNetworkTV Fall Lineup". WVXU. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 22, 2016. Fowler, Matt (May 30, 2014). "Marvel's Agents of SHIELD Blu-ray And DVD Details". IGN. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved May 30, 2014. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Season 1 (Limited Edition Digipack) [Blu-ray]". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on December 2, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2014. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 1". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Damore, Meagan (July 10, 2015). "SDCC: Jeph Loeb Unveils The Future Of "Agents Of SHIELD," "Agent Carter" & More". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Season 2 (Limited Edition Digipack) [Blu-ray]". Amazon.co.uk. Archived from the original on August 25, 2015. Retrieved August 22, 2015. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – Season 2". EzyDVD. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. "Marvel's Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. - Season 3 [Blu-ray] [2016] [Region Free]". Amazon.co.uk. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Agents Of SHIELD - Season 3". JB Hi-Fi. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved February 3, 2017. Marvel UK & Ireland [@MarvelUK] (May 11, 2018). "The robot apocalypse is finally here on Blu-ray and DVD. You can pre-order Season 4 of Marvel's @AgentsofSHIELD now, available July 2nd!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on June 5, 2018. Retrieved June 5, 2018 – via Twitter. "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season 4". Mighty Ape. Retrieved November 2, 2018. Marvel UK & Ireland [@MarvelUK] (August 9, 2018). "There's no turning back. Get ready for Season 5 of Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., landing October 1st on Blu-ray and DVD. Pre-order your copy today" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 17, 2018. Retrieved September 17, 2018 – via Twitter. "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. Season 5". Mighty Ape. Retrieved March 4, 2019. Lambert, David (September 16, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. – An Update About Extras for 'The Complete 2nd Season'". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2015. O'Keefe, Meghan (November 11, 2014). "Exclusive: 'Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Is Coming To Netflix November 20!". Decider. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved November 16, 2014. Jones, Nate (May 21, 2015). "What's New on Netflix: June 2015". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Retrieved May 21, 2015. Gennis, Sadie (May 23, 2016). "Here's What's Coming to Netflix in June". TV Guide. Archived from the original on May 24, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2016. "Netflix June 2017 Movie and TV Titles Announced". ComingSoon.net. May 23, 2017. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Budowski, Jade (May 22, 2018). "Here's When 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season 5 Hits Netflix (Exclusive)". Decider. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2018. Schaffstall, Katherine (August 30, 2019). "Netflix's New Releases Coming in September 2019". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 19, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2020. Bundel, Ani (October 30, 2020). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.': The Best Thing Marvel Released in 2020 Was the Show's Final Season". Collider. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Silverio, Ben F. (February 15, 2022). "Agents Of SHIELD Is Leaving Netflix Too — What This Could Mean For Marvel TV On Streaming". /Film. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Sharf, Zack (March 1, 2022). "'Daredevil' and Other Marvel Shows to Stream on Disney Plus in March After Netflix Exit". Variety. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Romano, Nick (March 1, 2022). "Daredevil, Jessica Jones, and other Defenders shows find new streaming home on Disney+". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 25, 2013). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.', 'The Voice' & 'NCIS' Adjusted Up; 'The Goldbergs' & 'Chicago Fire' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2013. Bibel, Sara (May 14, 2014). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'The Voice', 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' & 'The Goldbergs' Adjusted Up; 'The Originals', 'Supernatural' & 'About A Boy' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 15, 2014. Retrieved May 14, 2014. "Full 2013–2014 TV Season Series Rankings". Deadline Hollywood. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014. Kondolojy, Amanda (September 24, 2014). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.', 'Forever', 'The Voice', and 'Dancing With the Stars' Adjusted Up; 'Chicago Fire' & 'Person of Interest' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 26, 2014. Bibel, Sara (May 13, 2015). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'The Flash', 'NCIS', & 'American Idol' Adjusted Up; 'iZombie' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 16, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2015. de Moraes, Lisa (May 21, 2014). "Full 2014–15 TV Season Series Rankings: Football & 'Empire' Ruled". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved May 22, 2014. Dixon, Dani (September 30, 2015). "Tuesday Final Ratings: 'The Voice' + 'NCIS' Adjusted Up; 'Best Time Ever' Adjusted Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Porter, Rick (May 18, 2016). "Tuesday final ratings: 'NCIS' and 'Chicago Fire' finales adjust up". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. de Moraes, Lisa (May 26, 2016). "Full 2015-16 TV Season Series Rankings: 'Blindspot', 'Life In Pieces' & 'Quantico' Lead Newcomers". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. Porter, Rick (September 21, 2016). "Tuesday final ratings: 'NCIS,' 'Brooklyn Nine-Nine' adjust up, 'This Is Us' & 'Bull' steady". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved September 21, 2016. Porter, Rick (May 17, 2017). "'NCIS' finale and 'Bull' adjust up, 'The Middle' adjusts down: Tuesday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 17, 2017. de Moraes, Lisa (May 26, 2017). "Final 2016-17 TV Rankings: 'Sunday Night Football' Winning Streak Continues". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Porter, Rick (December 4, 2017). "'Blue Bloods' and 'The Exorcist' adjust down: Friday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Porter, Rick (May 21, 2018). "'Blindspot,' '20/20,' 'Life Sentence,' 'Harry & Meghan' special all adjust down: Friday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018. de Moraes, Lisa; Hipes, Patrick (May 22, 2018). "2017-18 TV Series Ratings Rankings: NFL Football, 'Big Bang' Top Charts". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2018. Welch, Alex (May 13, 2019). "'Last Man Standing' adjusts up: Friday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. Welch, Alex (August 5, 2019). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' and 'Masters of Illusion' adjust down: Friday final ratings". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Metcalf, Mitch (May 28, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Wednesday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 5.27.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Metcalf, Mitch (August 13, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Wednesday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 8.12.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020. Maglio, Tony (September 25, 2013). "Ratings: 'S.H.I.E.L.D.' Scores Biggest Drama Premiere in 4 Years (Update)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Retrieved September 25, 2013. Logan, Michael (November 11, 2013). "Smash: Marvel is making an impact on TV with the buzzy new cult fave". TV Guide. OpenGate Capital: 16–19. Grauso, Alisha (March 31, 2016). "Marvel's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Ratings Reveal The Challenge Of An Extended Universe". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Grauso, Alisha (March 31, 2016). "Marvel's 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Ratings Reveal The Challenge Of An Extended Universe". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. Bacon, Thomas (November 9, 2018). "EXCLUSIVE: Agents of SHIELD Is More Popular Than Any Marvel Netflix Show". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2018. Mitovich, Matt Webb (July 2, 2020). "TV Ratings: S.H.I.E.L.D. and The 100 Rebound From Series Lows". TVLine. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Metcalf, Mitch (August 6, 2020). "Updated: ShowBuzzDaily's Top 150 Wednesday Cable Originals & Network Finals: 8.5.2020". Showbuzz Daily. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 6, 2020). "TV Ratings: Big Brother Dominates With Opener, Coroner Outdraws The 100". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 3". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 4". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 5". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 6". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 7". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.: Season 1". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Schwartz, Terri (May 2, 2014). "'Marvel's Agents of SHIELD' shaped up to be an incredible show". Zap2it. Archived from the original on May 5, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. McNamara, Mary (May 13, 2014). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' is a true television marvel". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Barr, Merrill (May 12, 2014). "Review: The 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Season Finale Plants Marvel's Flag on The Small Screen". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 15, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Sava, Oliver (December 10, 2014). "Marvel's Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.: "What They Become"". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Barr, Merrill (May 11, 2015). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Cements Its Right to Exist in Season 2 Finale". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 15, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. McCown, Alex (March 29, 2016). "Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. makes progress fixing its two weakest links". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Fitzpatrick, Kevin (March 29, 2016). "Review: 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Gets Terrifyingly Topical With Marvel's 'Watchdogs'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Burt, Kayti (September 8, 2016). "Why 'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Is the X-Men TV Show You Should Be Watching". Collider. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. Kleinhenz, Marc N. (September 21, 2016). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Continues to Resist a Status Quo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. Valentine, Evan (April 25, 2017). "'Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Recap: "All the Madame's Men" – Unusual Politics". Collider. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017. Edwards, Shakeema (May 27, 2020). "Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Never Stopped Reinventing Itself". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 27, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Sims, David (December 18, 2015). "The Best Television Episodes of 2015". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 19, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2015. Pedersen, Erik (November 14, 2018). "ReFrame Gives 62 TV Shows Its Gender-Balance Seal Of Approval; Group's First Small-Screen Stamps". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 24, 2022. McNary, Dave (November 13, 2016). "'CHiPs,' 'Future Man,' 'Marvel's Agents of SHIELD' Win California Location Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2016. Lewis, Hilary; Howard, Annie (December 15, 2019). "California On Location Awards: 'Once Upon a Time in Hollywood' Snags 3 Trophies". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 24, 2022. "The BTJA Announces Icon Award Recipient and Most Exciting New Series Honorees". The Broadcast Television Journalists Association. June 10, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2013. Liptak, Andrew (August 4, 2017). "The 2017 Dragon Awards are a far-ranging sci-fi and fantasy reading list". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2017. "2017 Dragon Awards Winners". Locus Online. September 5, 2017. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Giardina, Carolyn (November 15, 2018). "HPA Awards: Avengers: Infinity War, Alpha Among Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "IFTA 2016 Nominees and Winners". Irish Film & Television Academy. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Barry, Aoife (January 11, 2018). "These are the nominations for this year's IFTA awards". TheJournal.ie. Archived from the original on January 11, 2018. Retrieved December 24, 2022. "Kids' Choice Awards 2015: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. March 28, 2015. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2016. "Kids' Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. March 12, 2016. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "Kids' Choice Awards: The Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. March 11, 2017. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2017. "People's Choice Awards 2014: The winners list". Entertainment Weekly. January 8, 2014. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "People's Choice Awards 2015: Full Winners List". Variety. January 7, 2015. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "66th Primetime Emmys Nominees and Winners". Emmys.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved October 25, 2014. "Creative Arts Emmys: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. September 12, 2015. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2015. "Winners & Nominees". PRISM Awards. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2016. Khatchatourian, Maane (January 17, 2014). "Game of Thrones Rules Golden Reel Awards TV Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Tapley, Kristopher (January 27, 2017). "'Arrival,' 'Rogue One,' 'Westworld' Lead MPSE Sound Editing Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017. Pond, Steve (March 1, 2021). "'News of the World,' 'Sound of Metal' Lead Motion Picture Sound Editors Nominations". TheWrap. Retrieved December 24, 2022. Pond, Steve (December 2, 2013). "12 Years a Slave Tops Satellite Award Nominations". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Johns, Nikara (February 25, 2014). "Gravity, The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug Lead Saturn Awards Noms". Variety. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved June 28, 2014. Blake, Emily (March 4, 2015). "2015 Saturn Awards: Captain America: Winter Soldier, Walking Dead lead nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Nakamura, Reid (February 24, 2016). "Star Wars: The Force Awakens Leads Saturn Awards Nominees". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. McNary, Dave (March 2, 2017). "Saturn Awards Nominations 2017: 'Rogue One,' 'Walking Dead' Lead". Variety. Archived from the original on March 3, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2017. McNary, Dave (March 15, 2018). "'Black Panther,' 'Walking Dead' Rule Saturn Awards Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Nordyke, Kimberly (August 10, 2014). "Teen Choice Awards: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2014. "Teen Choice Awards 2015 Winners: Full List". Variety. August 16, 2015. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2016. Crist, Allison; Nordyke, Kimberly (July 31, 2016). "Teen Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (August 13, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards: Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 14, 2017. Retrieved August 14, 2017. "Teen Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. August 12, 2018. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved December 24, 2022. Yang, Rachel (August 11, 2019). "Teen Choice Awards 2019: See the full list of winners and nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved December 24, 2022. Bacardi, Francesca (January 14, 2014). "Gravity Tops Visual Effects Society Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "Visual Effects Society Awards Nominations Announced". Deadline Hollywood. January 13, 2015. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 13, 2018). "Visual Effects Society Awards: War for the Planet of the Apes Wins Big". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 14, 2018. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Hibberd, James (April 9, 2015). "Marvel developing Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. spinoff for ABC – exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Retrieved April 9, 2015. Andreeva, Nellie (April 20, 2015). "Adrianne Palick & Nick Blood Eyed To Topline Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Spinoff". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2015. Andreeva, Nellie (May 7, 2015). "'Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Spinoff Not Going Forward At ABC". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2015. Goldberg, Lesley (August 20, 2015). "Adrianne Palicki, Nick Blood to Star in Marvel Pilot for ABC". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 21, 2015. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (May 12, 2016). "'Marvel's Most Wanted' Not Going Forward at ABC". Variety. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Watch Marvel's Agents of SHIELD: Slingshot in Full!". ComingSoon.net. December 13, 2016. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Goldberg, Lesley (May 1, 2019). "'Ghost Rider,' 'Helstrom' Marvel Live-Action Dramas a Go at Hulu". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019. Romano, Nick (May 1, 2019). "Ghost Rider and Helstrom join Hulu's roster of live-action Marvel series". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019. "SDCC '19: AGENTS OF S.H.I.E.L.D. cast reflect on the show's legacy". The Beat. July 21, 2019. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie (September 25, 2019). "'Marvel's Ghost Rider' Live-Action Series Not Going Forward At Hulu". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2019. Siegel, Lucas (July 27, 2014). "SDCC 2014: Marvel – Next Big Thing Panel Weapon X, S.H.I.E.L.D. Series Announced, More". Newsarama. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Ching, Albert (July 27, 2014). "SDCC: Marvel: Next Big Thing; "S.H.I.E.L.D." Series And More Announced". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. Lovett, Jamie (December 26, 2014). "Learn About Agent Phil Coulson In S.H.I.E.L.D. #1 Preview". ComicBook.com. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Lovett, Jamie (November 6, 2014). "Mark Waid Talks S.H.I.E.L.D. And Hints At New Members". ComicBook.com. Retrieved January 1, 2015. Wheeler, Andrew (July 1, 2015). "All New, All Different Marvel: Your Guide to the Marvel Universe Books". ComicsAlliance. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. Lovett, Jamie (May 5, 2016). "EXCLUSIVE Preview: Grant Ward Makes His Marvel Comics Debut In Agents Of S.H.I.E.L.D. #5". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Spangler, Todd (September 29, 2015). "ABC 'Marvel's Agents of SHIELD' Characters to Join 'Marvel Future Fight' Mobile Game". Variety. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Cavanaugh, Patrick (February 25, 2016). "Iain de Caestecker & Elizabeth Henstridge Teach at S.H.I.E.L.D. Academy". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved March 19, 2016. Lovitt, Jamie (March 17, 2016). "LEGO Marvel's Avengers Season Pass DLC Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved March 20, 2016. Snyder, Justin (May 19, 2016). "'Marvel's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.' Deploy to 'LEGO Marvel's Avengers'". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on October 4, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Wikiquote has quotations related to Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.. Official website[dead link] at ABC (archive) Official website at Marvel.com Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on Disney+ Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. at IMDb Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. at Disney A to Z Portals:  Television  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics