Year 907 (CMVII) was a common year starting on Thursday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Rus'–Byzantine War: Varangian prince Oleg of Novgorod leads the Kievan Rus' in a campaign against Constantinople, concluded by the Rus'–Byzantine Treaty (in which the city of Chernihiv in Ukraine is first mentioned). He lays siege to the Byzantine capital with some 2,000 ships (dugout boats), and secures trading rights from the world's leading center of commerce. July 4–6 – Battle of Pressburg: At "Brezalauspurc" (probably modern-day Bratislava in Slovakia), the advancing East Frankish army (60,000 men) is annihilated by the Hungarians led by Grand Prince Árpád. Duke Luitpold and Archbishop Dietmar I are killed, together with 19 dukes, 2 bishops and 3 abbots. The East Frankish Kingdom loses control of the March of Pannonia. Summer – The Hungarians invade Bavaria, causing great destruction, occupying many towns and, on their way home, defeating a Bavarian army at Lengenfeld. The Hungarian-Bavarian border is fixed on the Enns River. Lady Æthelflæd of Mercia refortifies Chester against Viking attacks. King Edward the Elder founds Romsey Abbey (Hampshire). Emir Isma'il ibn Ahmad dies after a 15-year reign in which he has extended his borders to Tabaristan and Khorasan. He establishes independence throughout the eastern part of his empire from his capital at Bukhara. Isma'il is succeeded by his son Ahmad Samani as ruler of the Samanid Empire. The Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period begins in China. February 27 – Abaoji, ruler (khagan) of the confederation of Khitans, proclaims himself emperor and establishes the Liao dynasty, killing most of the other Khitan chieftains. He occupies territories along China's northern border including parts of Hebei and Shanxi provinces. May 12 The short-lived Qi Kingdom is founded by the warlord Li Maozhen (Prince of Qi). His power is centered in Shaanxi province, in Northwest China. The Tang dynasty comes to an end after 289 years as Emperor Ai is forced to abdicate by chancellor Zhu Quanzhong. The short-lived Wu Kingdom is founded by Yang Wo (Prince of Hongnong) in Jiangdu (South Central China). He refuses to acknowledge the rule of Zhu Quanzhong. June 1 – Zhu Quanzhong (Zhu Wen) usurps the throne and proclaims himself the first emperor of Later Liang. China is controlled by successive short-lived kingdoms (until 960). June 8 – The Chu Kingdom is founded by the warlord Ma Yin (Prince of Chu) in Changsha. Present-day Hunan and Guangxi provinces (Southern China) are under his control. November 3 – The Former Shu Kingdom is founded by the warlord Wang Jian (Prince of Shu) in Chengdu. His power is centered in Sichuan province, in Southwest China. December 1 – The Wuyue Kingdom is founded by the warlord Qian Liu in Hangzhou. His proclaims himself king, his power is centered in Jiangsu province (Eastern China). February 1 – Nicholas I Mystikos is deposed as Patriarch of Constanstinople, (having fallen out with the Byzantine Emperor Leo VI), and is replaced by Euthymius I Syncellus. November 26 – Rudesind, Galician bishop (d. 977) Bertha of Swabia, Frankish queen (approximate date) Robert of Vermandois, Frankish nobleman (approximate date) Wenceslaus I, duke of Bohemia (approximate date) (k. 935) May 2 – Boris I, ruler (knyaz) of the Bulgarian Empire July 4 Dietmar I, archbishop of Salzburg Luitpold, margrave of Bavaria Alan I, duke ('king') of Brittany Árpád, Grand Prince of the Hungarians (approximate date) Herbert I, Frankish nobleman Isma'il ibn Ahmad, emir of the Samanid Empire Radelchis II, Lombard prince Rudesind I, bishop of Dumium (Spain) Aventius, Johannes. Annalium Boiorum Libri Septem, 1554 pp. 481-482 (in Latin). Retrieved 2015-06-26. Academia Sinica Chinese-Western Calendar Converter. Mote, F.W. (1999). Imperial China 900–1800. Harvard University Press. p. 14. New History of the Five Dynasties, vol. 66 "新五代史 考 世家 附錄". Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved April 20, 2007..