The Islamic State (IS), also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and by its Arabic acronym Daesh, is a transnational Salafi jihadist group and a former unrecognised quasi-state. Its origins were in the Jai'sh al-Taifa al-Mansurah organization founded by Abu Omar al-Baghdadi in 2004, which fought alongside al-Qaeda during the Iraqi insurgency. The group gained global prominence in 2014, when its militants successfully captured large territories in northwestern Iraq and eastern Syria, taking advantage of the ongoing Syrian civil war. By the end of 2015, it ruled an area with an estimated population of twelve million people, where it enforced its extremist interpretation of Islamic law, managed an annual budget exceeding US$1 billion, and commanded more than 30,000 fighters. After a protracted and intense conflict with American, Iraqi, and Kurdish forces, IS lost control of all its Middle Eastern territories by 2019. It subsequently reverted to insurgency tactics, operating from remote hideouts while continuing its propaganda efforts. These efforts have garnered it a significant following in northern and Sahelian Africa. Between 2004 and 2013, IS was allied to al-Qaeda (primarily under the name "Islamic State of Iraq") and participated in the Iraqi insurgency against the American occupation. The group later changed its name to "Islamic State of Iraq and Levant" for about a year, before declaring itself to be a worldwide caliphate, called simply the Islamic State (الدولة الإسلامية, ad-Dawlah al-Islāmiyah). As a self-proclaimed caliphate, it demanded the religious, political, and military obedience of Muslims worldwide, despite the rejection of its legitimacy by mainstream Muslims and its statehood by the United Nations and most governments. Over the following years, the Iraqi Armed Forces and the Syrian Democratic Forces pushed back the IS and degraded its financial and military infrastructure, assisted by advisors, weapons, training, supplies and airstrikes by the American-led coalition, and later by Russian airstrikes, bombings, cruise missile attacks and scorched-earth tactics across Syria, which focused mostly on razing Syrian opposition strongholds rather than IS bases. By March 2019, IS lost the last of its territories in West Asia, although it maintained a significant territorial presence in Africa as of 2023. Designated a terrorist organization by the United Nations and others, IS was known for its massive human rights violations. During its rule in Northern Iraq, it launched a genocide against Yazidis, engaged in persecution of Christians and Shia Muslims; publicized videos of beheadings of soldiers, journalists, and aid workers; and destroyed several cultural sites. The group has also perpetrated massacres in territories outside of its control in events widely described as terrorist attacks, such as the November 2015 Paris attacks, the 2024 Kerman bombings and the Crocus City Hall attack in March 2024. The Islamic State (IS) is also known as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL; /ˈaɪsɪl/), Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS; /ˈaɪsɪs/), and by its Arabic acronym Da'ish or Daesh (داعش, Dāʿish, IPA: [ˈdaːʕɪʃ]), and also as Dawlat al-Islam (Arabic: دولة الإسلام). In April 2013, having expanded into Syria, the group adopted the name ad-Dawlah al-Islāmiyah fī 'l-ʿIrāq wa-sh-Shām (الدولة الإسلامية في العراق والشام). As al-Shām is a region often compared with the Levant or Greater Syria, the group's name has been variously translated as "Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham", "Islamic State of Iraq and Syria" (both abbreviated as ISIS), or "Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" (abbreviated as ISIL). While the use of either one or the other acronym has been the subject of debate, the distinction between the two and its relevance has been considered not so great. Of greater relevance is the name Daesh, which is an acronym of ISIL's Arabic name ad-Dawlah al-Islamīyah fī l-ʻIrāq wa-sh-Shām. Dāʿish (داعش), or Daesh. This name has been widely used by ISIL's Arabic-speaking detractors, for example when referring to the group whilst speaking amongst themselves, although—and to a certain extent because⁠—it is considered derogatory, as it resembles the Arabic words Daes ("one who crushes, or tramples down, something underfoot") and Dāhis (loosely translated: "one who sows discord"). Within areas under its control, ISIL considers use of the name Daesh punishable by flogging. In late June 2014, the group renamed itself ad-Dawlah al-Islāmiyah (lit. 'Islamic State' or IS), declaring itself a worldwide caliphate. The name "Islamic State" and the group's claim to be a caliphate have been widely rejected, with the UN, various governments, and mainstream Muslim groups refusing to use the new name. The group's declaration of a new caliphate in June 2014 and its adoption of the name "Islamic State" have been criticised and ridiculed by Muslim scholars and rival Islamists both inside and outside the territory it controls. In a speech in September 2014, United States President Barack Obama said that ISIL was neither "Islamic" (on the basis that no religion condones the killing of innocents) nor was it a "state" (in that no government recognises the group as a state), while many object to using the name "Islamic State" owing to the far-reaching religious and political claims to authority which that name implies. The United Nations Security Council, the United States, Canada, Turkey, Australia, the United Kingdom and other countries generally call the group "ISIL", while much of the Arab world uses the Arabic acronym "Dāʻish" (or "Daesh"). France's Foreign Minister Laurent Fabius said "This is a terrorist group and not a state. I do not recommend using the term Islamic State because it blurs the lines between Islam, Muslims, and Islamists. The Arabs call it 'Daesh' and I will be calling them the 'Daesh cutthroats'." Retired general John Allen, the U.S. envoy appointed to co-ordinate the coalition; U.S. Army Lieutenant General James Terry, head of operations against the group; and Secretary of State John Kerry had all shifted towards use of the term Daesh by December 2014, which nonetheless remained a pejorative in 2021. In 2014, Dar al-Ifta al-Misriyyah dubbed ISIS as QSIS for "al-Qaeda Separatists in Iraq and Syria", arguing that ISIL does not represent the vast majority of Muslims. IS is a theocracy, proto-state, and a Salafi jihadist group. The organization's ideology has been described as a hybrid of Qutbism, Takfirism, Salafism, Salafi jihadism, Wahhabism, and Sunni Islamist fundamentalism. Although IS claims to adhere to the Salafi theology of Ibn Taymiyyah, it rebels against traditional Salafi interpretations as well as the four Sunni schools of law and anathematises the majority of Salafis as heretics. IS ideologues rarely uphold adherence to Islamic scholarship and law manuals for reference, mostly preferring to derive rulings based on self-interpretation of the Qur'an and Muslim traditions. According to Robert Manne, there is a "general consensus" that the ideology of the Islamic State is "primarily based upon the writings of the radical Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood theoretician Sayyid Qutb". The Muslim Brotherhood began the trend of political Islamism in the 20th century, seeking gradual establishment of a new Caliphate, a comprehensive Islamic society ruled by sharia law. Qutb's doctrines of Jahiliyya (pre-Islamic ignorance), Hakimiyya (Divine Sovereignty), and Takfir of entire societies formed a radicalised vision of the Muslim Brotherhood's political Islam project. Qutbism became the precursor to all Jihadist thought, from Abdullah Azzam to Zawahiri and to Daesh. Alongside Sayyid Qutb, the most invoked ideological figures of IS include Ibn Taymiyya, Abdullah Azzam, and Abu Bakr Naji. Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, the first Emir of ISI, was radicalised as a Muslim Brotherhood member during his youth. Motaz Al-Khateeb states that religious texts and Islamic jurisprudence "alone cannot explain the emergence" of Daesh since the Muslim Brotherhood and Daesh "draw on the same Islamic jurisprudence" but "are diametrically opposite" in strategy and behavior. Through the official statement of beliefs originally released by al-Baghdadi in 2007 and subsequently updated since June 2014, ISIL defined its creed as "a middle way between the extremist Kharijites and the lax Murji'ites".: 38  ISIL's ideology represents radical Jihadi-Salafi Islam, a strict, puritanical form of Sunni Islam. Muslim organisations like Islamic Networks Group (ING) in America have argued against this interpretation of Islam. ISIL promotes religious violence, and regards Muslims who do not agree with its interpretations as infidels or apostates. According to Hayder al Khoei, ISIL's philosophy is represented by the symbolism in the Black Standard variant of the legendary battle flag of Muhammad that it has adopted: the flag shows the Seal of Muhammad within a white circle, with the phrase above it, "There is no god but Allah". This symbolism is said to symbolize ISIL's belief that it represents the restoration of the caliphate of early Islam, with all the political, religious and eschatological ramifications that this would imply. Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir, an Egyptian Jihadist theoretician and ideologue is considered as the key inspiration for early figures of IS. Al-Muhajir's legal manual on violence, Fiqh ad-Dima (The Jurisprudence of Jihad or The Jurisprudence of Blood), was adopted by ISIL as its standard reference for justifying its extraordinary acts of violence. The book has been described by counter-terrorism scholar Orwa Ajjoub as rationalising and justifying "suicide operations, the mutilation of corpses, beheading, and the killing of children and non-combatants." His theological and legal justifications influenced ISIL, al-Qaeda, and Boko Haram, as well as several other jihadi terrorist groups. Numerous media outlets have compared his reference manual to Abu Bakr Naji's Management of Savagery, widely read among ISIS's commanders and fighters. ISIL adheres to global jihadist principles and follows the hard-line ideology of al-Qaeda and many other modern-day jihadist groups. For their guiding principles, the leaders of the Islamic State ... are open and clear about their almost exclusive commitment to the Wahhabi movement of Sunni Islam. The group circulates images of Wahhabi religious textbooks from Saudi Arabia in the schools it controls. Videos from the group's territory have shown Wahhabi texts plastered on the sides of an official missionary van. — David D. Kirkpatrick, The New York Times According to The Economist, Saudi practices followed by the group include the establishment of religious police to root out "vice" and enforce attendance at salat prayers, the widespread use of capital punishment, and the destruction or re-purposing of any non-Sunni religious buildings. Bernard Haykel has described ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi's creed as "a kind of untamed Wahhabism". Senior Saudi religious leaders have issued statements condemning ISIL and attempting to distance the group from official Saudi religious beliefs. What connection, if any, there is between Salafi-Jihadism of Daesh and Wahhabism and Salafism proper is disputed. ISIS borrowed two elements of Qutbism and 20th century Islamism into its version of Wahhabi worldview. While Wahhabism shuns violent rebellion against earthly rulers, ISIS embraces political call to revolutions. While historically Wahhabis were not champion activists of a Caliphate, ISIS borrowed the idea of restoration of a global Caliphate. Although the religious character of ISIS is mostly Wahhabi, it departs from Wahhabi tradition in four critical aspects: dynastic alliance, call to establish a global caliphate, sheer violence, and apocalyptism. ISIS did not follow the pattern of the first three Saudi states in allying the religious mission of the Najdi ulema with the Al Saud family, rather they consider them apostates. The call for a global caliphate is another departure from Wahhabism. The caliphate, understood in Islamic law as the ideal Islamic polity uniting all Muslim territories, does not figure much in traditional Najdi writings. Ironically, Wahhabism emerged as an anti-caliphate movement. Although violence was not absent in the First Saudi State, Islamic State's displays of beheading, immolation, and other forms of violence aimed at inspiring fear are not in imitation of early Saudi practices. They were introduced by Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, former leader of Al-Qaeda in Iraq, who took inspiration from the Egyptian Jihadi scholar, Abu Abdallah Al Muhajir. It is the latter's legal manual on violence, popularly known as Fiqh ad-Dima (The Jurisprudence of Blood), that is the Islamic State's standard reference for justifying its acts of violence. The Islamic State's apocalyptic dimension also lacks a mainstream Wahhabi precedent. ISIL aims to return to the early days of Islam, rejecting all innovations in the religion, which it believes corrupts its original spirit. It condemns later caliphates and the Ottoman Empire for deviating from what it calls pure Islam and seeks to revive the original Qutbist project of the restoration of a global caliphate that is governed by a strict Salafi-Jihadi doctrine. Following Salafi-Jihadi doctrines, ISIL condemns the followers of secular law as disbelievers, putting the current Saudi Arabian government in that category. ISIL believes that only a legitimate authority can undertake the leadership of jihad and that the first priority over other areas of combat, such as fighting non-Muslim countries, is the purification of Islamic society. For example, ISIL regards the Palestinian Sunni group Hamas as apostates who have no legitimate authority to lead jihad and see fighting Hamas as the first step towards confrontation by ISIL with Israel. Yemeni journalist Abdulelah Haider Shaye said: The Islamic State was drafted by Sayyid Qutb, taught by Abdullah Azzam, globalized by Osama bin Laden, transferred to reality by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, and implemented by al-Baghdadis: Abu Omar and Abu Bakr. — Hassan Hassan, The Sectarianism of the Islamic State: Ideological Roots and Political Context. The Islamic State added a focus on sectarianism to a layer of radical views. In particular, it linked itself to the Salafi-jihadi movement that evolved out of the Afghan jihad. — Hassan Hassan, The Sectarianism of the Islamic State: Ideological Roots and Political Context. One difference between ISIL and other Islamist and jihadist movements, including al-Qaeda, is the group's emphasis on eschatology and apocalypticism – that is, a belief in a final Day of Judgment by God. ISIL believes that it will defeat the army of "Rome" at the town of Dabiq. ISIL also believes that after al-Baghdadi there will be only four more legitimate caliphs. The noted scholar of militant Islamism Will McCants writes: References to the End Times fill Islamic State propaganda. It's a big selling point with foreign fighters, who want to travel to the lands where the final battles of the apocalypse will take place. The civil wars raging in those countries today [Iraq and Syria] lend credibility to the prophecies. The Islamic State has stoked the apocalyptic fire. ... For Bin Laden's generation, the apocalypse wasn't a great recruiting pitch. Governments in the Middle East two decades ago were more stable, and sectarianism was more subdued. It was better to recruit by calling to arms against corruption and tyranny than against the Antichrist. Today, though, the apocalyptic recruiting pitch makes more sense than before. — William McCants, The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State Since at latest 2004, a significant goal of the group has been the foundation of a Sunni Islamic state. Specifically, ISIL has sought to establish itself as a caliphate, an Islamic state led by a group of religious authorities under a supreme leader – the caliph – who is believed to be the successor to Muhammad. In June 2014, ISIL published a document in which it claimed to have traced the lineage of its leader al-Baghdadi back to Muhammad, and upon proclaiming a new caliphate on 29 June, the group appointed al-Baghdadi as its caliph. As caliph, he demanded the allegiance of all devout Muslims worldwide, according to Islamic jurisprudence (fiqh). ISIL has detailed its goals in its Dabiq magazine, saying it will continue to seize land and take over the entire Earth until its: Blessed flag...covers all eastern and western extents of the Earth, filling the world with the truth and justice of Islam and putting an end to the falsehood and tyranny of jahiliyyah [state of ignorance], even if America and its coalition despise such. — 5th edition of Dabiq, the Islamic State's English-language magazine According to German journalist Jürgen Todenhöfer, who spent ten days embedded with ISIL in Mosul, the view he kept hearing was that ISIL wants to "conquer the world", and that all who do not believe in the group's interpretation of the Quran will be killed. Todenhöfer was struck by the ISIL fighters' belief that "all religions who agree with democracy have to die", and by their "incredible enthusiasm" – including enthusiasm for killing "hundreds of millions" of people. When the caliphate was proclaimed, ISIL stated: "The legality of all emirates, groups, states and organisations becomes null by the expansion of the khilafah's [caliphate's] authority and the arrival of its troops to their areas." This was a rejection of the political divisions in Southwestern Asia that were established by the UK and France during World War I in the Sykes–Picot Agreement. All non-Muslim areas would be targeted for conquest after the Muslim lands were dealt with, according to the Islamist manual Management of Savagery. Documents found after the death of Samir Abd Muhammad al-Khlifawi, a former colonel in the intelligence service of the Iraqi Air Force before the US invasion who had been described as "the strategic head" of ISIL, detailed planning for the ISIL takeover of northern Syria which made possible "the group's later advances into Iraq". Al-Khlifawi called for the infiltration of areas to be conquered with spies who would find out "as much as possible about the target towns: Who lived there, who was in charge, which families were religious, which Islamic school of religious jurisprudence they belonged to, how many mosques there were, who the imam was, how many wives and children he had and how old they were". Following this surveillance and espionage would come murder and kidnapping – "the elimination of every person who might have been a potential leader or opponent". In Raqqa, after rebel forces drove out the Bashar al-Assad regime and ISIL infiltrated the town, "first dozens and then hundreds of people disappeared". Security and intelligence expert Martin Reardon has described ISIL's purpose as being to psychologically "break" those under its control, "so as to ensure their absolute allegiance through fear and intimidation", while generating "outright hate and vengeance" among its enemies. Jason Burke, a journalist writing on Salafi jihadism, has written that ISIL's goal is to "terrorize, mobilize [and] polarize". Its efforts to terrorise are intended to intimidate civilian populations and force governments of the target enemy "to make rash decisions that they otherwise would not choose". It aims to mobilise its supporters by motivating them with, for example, spectacular deadly attacks deep in Western territory (such as the November 2015 Paris attacks), to polarise by driving Muslim populations – particularly in the West – away from their governments, thus increasing the appeal of ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate among them, and to: "Eliminate neutral parties through either absorption or elimination". Journalist Rukmini Maria Callimachi also emphasises ISIL's interest in polarisation or in eliminating what it calls the "grey zone" between the black (non-Muslims) and white (ISIL). "The gray is moderate Muslims who are living in the West and are happy and feel engaged in the society here." A work published online in 2004 entitled Management of Savagery (Idarat at Tawahoush), described by several media outlets as influential on ISIL and intended to provide a strategy to create a new Islamic caliphate, recommended a strategy of attack outside its territory in which fighters would "Diversify and widen the vexation strikes against the Crusader-Zionist enemy in every place in the Islamic world, and even outside of it if possible, so as to disperse the efforts of the alliance of the enemy and thus drain it to the greatest extent possible." The group has been accused of attempting to "bolster morale" and distract attention from its loss of territory to enemies by staging terror attacks abroad (such as the 2016 Berlin truck attack, the 6 June 2017 attacks on Tehran, the 22 May 2017 bombing in Manchester, and the 3 June 2017 attacks in London that ISIL claimed credit for). Raqqa in Syria was under ISIL control from 2013 and in 2014 it became the group's de facto capital city. On 17 October 2017, following a lengthy battle that saw massive destruction to the city, the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) announced the full capture of Raqqa from ISIL. From 2013 to 2019, ISIL was headed and run by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the Islamic State's self-styled Caliph. Before their deaths, he had two deputy leaders, Abu Muslim al-Turkmani for Iraq and Abu Ali al-Anbari (also known as Abu Ala al-Afri) for Syria, both ethnic Turkmen. Advising al-Baghdadi were a cabinet of senior leaders, while its operations in Iraq and Syria are controlled by local 'emirs,' who head semi-autonomous groups which the Islamic State refers to as its provinces. Beneath the leaders are councils on finance, leadership, military matters, legal matters (including decisions on executions) foreign fighters' assistance, security, intelligence and media. In addition, a shura council has the task of ensuring that all decisions made by the governors and councils comply with the group's interpretation of sharia. While al-Baghdadi had told followers to "advise me when I err" in sermons, according to observers "any threat, opposition, or even contradiction is instantly eradicated". According to Iraqis, Syrians, and analysts who study the group, almost all of ISIL's leaders—including the members of its military and security committees and the majority of its emirs and princes—are former Iraqi military and intelligence officers, specifically former members of Saddam Hussein's Ba'ath government who lost their jobs and pensions in the de-Ba'athification process after that regime was overthrown. The former Chief Strategist in the Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism of the US State Department, David Kilcullen, has said that "There undeniably would be no Isis if we had not invaded Iraq." It has been reported that Iraqis and Syrians have been given greater precedence over other nationalities within ISIL because the group needs the loyalties of the local Sunni populations in both Syria and Iraq in order to be sustainable. Other reports, however, have indicated that Syrians are at a disadvantage to foreign members, with some native Syrian fighters resenting "favouritism" allegedly shown towards foreigners over pay and accommodation. In August 2016, media reports based on briefings by Western intelligence agencies suggested that ISIL had a multilevel secret service known in Arabic as Emni, established in 2014, that has become a combination of an internal police force and an external operations directorate complete with regional branches. The unit was believed to be under the overall command of ISIL's most senior Syrian operative, spokesman and propaganda chief Abu Mohammad al-Adnani until his death by airstrike in late August 2016. On 27 October 2019, the United States conducted a special operation targeting al-Baghdadi's compound in Barisha, Idlib, Northwest Syria. The attack resulted in al-Baghdadi's death; caught by surprise and unable to escape, al-Baghdadi detonated a suicide vest, deliberately killing both himself and two children who had been living in the compound prior to the assault. U.S. President Donald Trump stated in a televised announcement that Baghdadi had, in fact, died during the operation and that American forces used support from helicopters, jets and drones through airspace controlled by Russia and Turkey. He said that "Russia treated us great... Iraq was excellent. We really had great cooperation" and Turkey knew they were going in. He thanked Turkey, Russia, Syria, Iraq and the Syrian Kurdish forces for their support. The Turkish Defence Ministry also confirmed on Sunday that Turkish and U.S. military authorities exchanged and coordinated information ahead of an attack in Syria's Idlib. Fahrettin Altun, a senior aide to Turkish President Tayyib Erdogan, also stated, among other things, that "Turkey was proud to help the United States, our NATO ally, bring a notorious terrorist to justice" and that Turkey "will continue to work closely with the United States and others to combat terrorism in all its forms and manifestations." Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov declined to say if the United States had told Russia about the raid in advance but said that its result if confirmed, represented a serious contribution by the United States to combat terrorism. Russia had previously claimed Baghdadi was killed in May 2019 by their airstrike. In September 2019, a statement attributed to ISIL's propaganda arm, the Amaq news agency, claimed that Abdullah Qardash was named as al-Baghdadi's successor. Analysts dismissed this statement as a fabrication, and relatives were reported as saying that Qardash died in 2017. Rita Katz, a terrorism analyst and the co-founder of SITE Intelligence, noted that the alleged statement used a different font when compared to other statements and it was never distributed on Amaq or ISIL channels. On 29 October 2019, Trump stated on social media that al-Baghdadi's "number one replacement" had been killed by American forces, without giving a name. A U.S. official later confirmed that Trump was referring to ISIL spokesman and senior leader Abul-Hasan al-Muhajir, who was killed in a U.S. airstrike in Syria two days earlier. On 31 October, ISIL named Abu Ibrahim al-Hashemi al-Qurayshi as Baghdadi's successor. On 3 February 2022, it was reported by a US official that al-Hashimi killed himself and members of his family by triggering an explosive device during a counter-terrorism raid by the US Joint Special Operations Command. On 30 November 2022, ISIL announced that their unidentified leader had been killed in battle and named a successor, providing no additional information other than his pseudonym. A spokesman for U.S. Central Command confirmed that ISIL's leader had been killed in mid-October by anti-government rebels in southern Syria. On 16 February 2023, senior ISIS leader Hamza al-Homsi blew himself up in a U.S.-led raid in Syria. In 2014, The Wall Street Journal estimated that eight million people lived in the Islamic State. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has stated that IS "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and dominate every aspect of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the provision of services to those who obey". Civilians, as well as the Islamic State itself, have released footage of some of the human rights abuses. Social control of civilians was by imposition of IS's reading of sharia law, enforced by morality police forces known as Al-Hisbah and the all-women Al-Khanssaa Brigade, a general police force, courts, and other entities managing recruitment, tribal relations, and education. Al-Hisbah was led by Abu Muhammad al-Jazrawi. In 2015, IS published a penal code including floggings, amputations, crucifixions, etc. Estimates of the size of ISIL's military have varied widely, from tens of thousands up to 200,000. In early 2015, journalist Mary Anne Weaver estimated that half of ISIL fighters were foreigners. A UN report estimated a total of 15,000 fighters from over 80 countries were in ISIL's ranks in November 2014.[better source needed] US intelligence estimated an increase to around 20,000 foreign fighters in February 2015, including 3,400 from the Western world. In September 2015, the CIA estimated that 30,000 foreign fighters had joined ISIL. According to Abu Hajjar, a former senior leader of ISIL, foreign fighters receive food, petrol and housing, but unlike native Iraqi or Syrian fighters, they do not receive payment in wages. Since 2012, more than 3,000 people from the central Asian countries have gone to Syria, Iraq or Afghanistan to join the Islamic State or Jabhat al Nusra. ISIL relies mostly on captured weapons with major sources including Saddam Hussein's Iraqi stockpiles from the 2003–11 Iraq insurgency and weapons from government and opposition forces fighting in the Syrian Civil War and during the post-US withdrawal Iraqi insurgency. The captured weapons, including armour, guns, surface-to-air missiles, and even some aircraft, enabled rapid territorial growth and facilitated the capture of additional equipment. For example, ISIL captured US-made TOW anti-tank missiles supplied by the United States and Saudi Arabia to the Free Syrian Army in Syria. Ninety percent of the group's weapons ultimately originated in China, Russia or Eastern Europe according to Conflict Armament Research. The group uses truck and car bombs, suicide bombers and IEDs, and has used chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria. ISIL captured nuclear materials from Mosul University in July 2014, but is unlikely to be able to convert them into weapons. In September 2015 a US official stated that ISIL was manufacturing and using mustard agent in Syria and Iraq, and had an active chemical weapons research team. ISIL has also used water as a weapon of war. The group closed the gates of the smaller Nuaimiyah dam in Fallujah in April 2014, flooding the surrounding regions, while cutting the water supply to the Shia-dominated south. Around 12,000 families lost their homes and 200 square kilometres (77 sq mi) of villages and fields were either flooded or dried up. The economy of the region also suffered with destruction of cropland and electricity shortages. During the Battle of Mosul, commercially available quadcopters and drones were being used by ISIL as surveillance and weapons delivery platforms using improvised cradles to drop grenades and other explosives. One ISIL drone base was struck and destroyed by two Royal Air Force Tornado using two Paveway IV guided bombs. ISIL publishes material directed at women, with media groups encouraging them to play supportive roles within ISIL, such as providing first aid, cooking, nursing and sewing skills, in order to become "good wives of jihad". In 2015, it was estimated that western women made up over 550, or 10%, of ISIL's western foreign fighters. Until 2016, women were generally confined to a "women's house" upon arrival which they were forbidden to leave. These houses were often small, dirty and infested with vermin and food supply was scarce. There they remained until they either had found a husband, or the husband they arrived with had completed his training. After being allowed to leave the confinement, women still generally spent most of their days indoors where their lives are devoted to caring for their husbands and the vast majority of women in the conflict area have children. Mothers play an important role passing on ISIL ideology to their children. Widows are encouraged to remarry. In a document entitled Women in the Islamic State: Manifesto and Case Study released by the media wing of ISIL's all-female Al-Khanssaa Brigade, emphasis is given to the paramount importance of marriage and motherhood (as early as nine years old). Women should live a life of "sedentariness", fulfilling her "divine duty of motherhood" at home, with a few exceptions like teachers and doctors. Equality for women is opposed, as is education on non-religious subjects, the "worthless worldly sciences". According to a 2015 study by the Financial Action Task Force, ISIL's five primary sources of revenue are as follows (listed in order of significance): proceeds from the occupation of territory (including control of banks, petroleum reservoirs, taxation, extortion, and robbery of economic assets) kidnapping for ransom donations from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and other Gulf states, often disguised as meant for "humanitarian charity" material support provided by foreign fighters fundraising through modern communication networks Since 2012, ISIL has produced annual reports giving numerical information on its operations, somewhat in the style of corporate reports, seemingly in a bid to encourage potential donors. In 2014, the RAND Corporation analysed ISIL's funding sources from documents captured between 2005 and 2010. It found that outside donations amounted to only 5% of the group's operating budgets, and that cells inside Iraq were required to send up to 20% of the income generated from kidnapping, extortion rackets and other activities to the next level of the group's leadership, which would then redistribute the funds to provincial or local cells that were in difficulties or needed money to conduct attacks. In 2016, RAND estimated that ISIL finances from its largest source of income — oil revenues and the taxes it extracts from people under its control — had fallen from about US$1.9 billion in 2014 to US$870 million in 2016. In mid-2014, the Iraqi National Intelligence Service obtained information that ISIL had assets worth US$2 billion, making it the richest jihadist group in the world.[better source needed] About three-quarters of this sum was said to looted from Mosul's central bank and commercial banks in the city. However, doubt was later cast on whether ISIL was able to retrieve anywhere near that sum from the central bank, and even on whether the looting had actually occurred. In 2022 the company Lafarge was found guilty in paying ISIS for the operation of its facilities. "In 2013-2014 the company transferred $6,000,000 to ISIL so they could continue company operations. This allowed the company to earn $70 million in sales revenue from a plant it operated in northern Syria, prosecutors said." Lafarge, which merged with Holcim in 2015, agreed to pay $778 million in forfeiture and fines as part of a plea agreement not to be convicted and sentenced to prison for providing material support to a terrorist organization. No Lafarge executives were charged in the United States, while French authorities arrested some of the executives involved but didn't provide names. The U.S. court lists six unnamed Lafarge executives. Lafarge evacuated the cement plant in September 2014, Afterwards ISIS took possession of the remaining cement and sold it for an estimated $3.21 million. SIX Swiss Exchange trading suspended trading for Holcim shares before the news became public. After trading resumed shares rose by 3.2%. ISIL attempted to create a modern gold dinar by minting gold, silver, and copper coins, based on the coinage used by the Umayyad Caliphate in the seventh century. Despite a propaganda push for the currency, adoption appeared to have been minimal and its internal economy was effectively dollarised, even with regards to its own fines. The education in ISIL held territory was organised by the Diwan of Education. ISIL introduced its own curriculum which did not include lessons in history, music, geography or art, but included lectures in Islamic Law, Sharia, and Jihad. The Diwan of Education was often in competition with the Diwan of Outreach and Mosques which organised educational centres focused on the sharia. The group was founded in 1999 by Jordanian Salafi jihadist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi under the name Jamāʻat al-Tawḥīd wa-al-Jihād (lit. 'The Organisation of Monotheism and Jihad'). In a letter published by the Coalition Provisional Authority in February 2004, Zarqawi wrote that jihadis should use bombings to start an open sectarian war so that Sunnis from the Islamic world would mobilise against assassinations carried out by Shia, specifically the Badr Brigade, against Ba'athists and Sunnis. As a self-proclaimed worldwide caliphate, ISIL claims religious, political and military authority over all Muslims worldwide, and that "the legality of all emirates, groups, states, and organisations, becomes null by the expansion of the khilāfah's [caliphate's] authority and arrival of its troops to their areas". In Iraq and Syria, ISIL used many of those countries' existing governorate boundaries to subdivide territory it conquered and claimed; it called these divisions wilayah or provinces. By June 2015, ISIL had also established official "provinces" in Libya, Egypt (Sinai Peninsula), Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Algeria, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and the North Caucasus. ISIL received pledges of allegiance and published media releases via groups in Somalia, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Myanmar, Thailand and the Philippines, but it has not announced any further official branches, instead identifying new affiliates as simply "soldiers of the caliphate". By March 2019, ISIL had lost most of its territory in its former core areas in Syria and Iraq, and was reduced to a desert pocket as well as insurgent cells, which they lost in September 2020.[citation needed] Through late 2020 and early 2021, IS African affiliates had once again seized territory and settlements in conflicts such as the Boko Haram insurgency, in Nigeria and the Insurgency in Cabo Delgado, in Mozambique. Notable takeovers by IS include Mocímboa da Praia and the Sambisa Forest. On 17 November 2021, IS supporters urged establishment of "New Provinces" in Indonesia. In October 2022, IS's Sahel province captured the rural committee and town of Ansongo in Mali. The group has attracted widespread criticism internationally for its extremism, from governments and international bodies such as the United Nations and Amnesty International. On 24 September 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated: "As Muslim leaders around the world have said, groups like ISIL – or Da'ish – have nothing to do with Islam, and they certainly do not represent a state. They should more fittingly be called the 'Un-Islamic Non-State'." ISIL has been classified a terrorist organisation by the United Nations, the European Union and its member states, the United States, Russia, India, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and many other countries. Over 60 countries are directly or indirectly waging war against ISIL (see § Countries and groups at war with IS). The group was described as a cult in a Huffington Post column by notable cult authority Steven Hassan. Twitter has removed many accounts used to spread IS propaganda, and Google developed a "Redirect Method" which identifies individuals searching for IS-related material and redirects them to content which challenges IS narratives. The group's declaration of a caliphate has been criticised and its legitimacy has been disputed by Middle Eastern governments, by Sunni Muslim theologians and historians as well as other jihadist groups. Around the world, Islamic religious leaders have overwhelmingly condemned ISIL's ideology and actions, arguing that the group has strayed from the path of true Islam and that its actions do not reflect the religion's real teachings or virtues. Extremism within Islam goes back to the seventh century, to the Khawarijes. From their essentially political position, the Kharijites developed extreme doctrines which set them apart from both mainstream Sunni and Shia Muslims. They were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to takfir, whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed worthy of death. Other scholars have also described the group not as Sunnis, but as Khawarij. Sunni critics, including Salafi and jihadist muftis such as Adnan al-Aroor and Abu Basir al-Tartusi, say that ISIL and related terrorist groups are not Sunnis, but are instead modern-day Kharijites (Muslims who have stepped outside the mainstream of Islam) serving an imperial anti-Islamic agenda. ISIS has been excommunicated from Islam by a number of scholars. Sheikh Muhammad al-Yaqoubi enumerated in his book, Refuting ISIS, that their form of Kharijism has removed them from Islam and fighting them is a religious duty, stating: "ISIS' leaders are people of unbelief and misguidance, and Muslims should not be lured by their jihad or deceived by their propaganda, as their actions speak louder than their words." Abd al-Aziz ibn Baz, the former Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, also stated that Kharijites are not Muslims, saying: "the majority are of the opinion that they are disobedient and misguided innovators, though they do not deem them unbelievers. However, the correct opinion is that they are unbelievers." In late August 2014, the Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, Abdul-Aziz ibn Abdullah Al ash-Sheikh, condemned ISIL and al-Qaeda saying, "Extremist and militant ideas and terrorism which spread decay on Earth, destroying human civilization, are not in any way part of Islam, but are enemy number one of Islam, and Muslims are their first victims". In late September 2014, 126 Sunni imams and Islamic scholars—primarily Sufi—from around the Muslim world signed an open letter to the Islamic State's leader al-Baghdadi, explicitly rejecting and refuting his group's interpretations of Islamic scriptures, the Quran and hadith, which it used in order to justify its actions. "[You] have misinterpreted Islam into a religion of harshness, brutality, torture and murder ... this is a great wrong and an offence to Islam, to Muslims and to the entire world", the letter states. It rebukes the Islamic State for its killing of prisoners, describing the killings as "heinous war crimes" and its persecution of the Yazidis of Iraq as "abominable". Referring to the "self-described 'Islamic State'", the letter censures the group for carrying out killings and acts of brutality under the guise of jihad—holy struggle—saying that its "sacrifice" without legitimate cause, goals and intention "is not jihad at all, but rather, warmongering and criminality". It also accuses the group of instigating fitna—sedition—by instituting slavery under its rule in contravention of the anti-slavery consensus of the Islamic scholarly community. The group's persecution of Shia Muslims has also been condemned. The current Grand Imam of al-Azhar and former president of al-Azhar University, Ahmed el-Tayeb, has strongly condemned the Islamic State, stating that it is acting "under the guise of this holy religion and have given themselves the name 'Islamic State' in an attempt to export their false Islam". Citing the Quran, he stated: "The punishment for those who wage war against God and his Prophet and who strive to sow corruption on earth is death, crucifixion, the severing of hands and feet on opposite sides or banishment from the land. This is the disgrace for them in this world and in the hereafter, they will receive grievous torment." Although el-Tayeb has been criticised for not expressly stating that the Islamic State is heretical, the Ash'ari school of Islamic theology, to which el-Tayeb belongs, does not allow calling a person who follows the shahada an apostate. El-Tayeb has strongly come out against the practice of takfirism (declaring a Muslim an apostate) which is used by the Islamic State to "judge and accuse anyone who doesn't tow their line with apostasy and outside the realm of the faith" declaring "Jihad on peaceful Muslims" using "flawed interpretations of some Qur'anic texts, the prophet's Sunna, and the Imams' views believing incorrectly, that they are leaders of Muslim armies fighting infidel peoples, in unbelieving lands". In late December 2015, nearly 70,000 Indian Muslim clerics associated with the Indian Barelvi movement issued a fatwa condemning ISIL and similar organisations, saying they are "not Islamic organisations". Approximately 1.5 million Sunni Muslim followers of this movement have formally decried violent extremists. Mehdi Hasan, a political journalist in the UK, said in the New Statesman, Whether Sunni or Shia, Salafi or Sufi, conservative or liberal, Muslims – and Muslim leaders – have almost unanimously condemned and denounced ISIL not merely as un-Islamic but actively anti-Islamic. Hassan Hassan, an analyst at the Delma Institute, wrote in The Guardian that because the Islamic State "bases its teachings on religious texts that mainstream Muslim clerics do not want to deal with head on, new recruits leave the camp feeling that they have stumbled on the true message of Islam". Theologian and Qatar-based TV broadcaster Yusuf al-Qaradawi stated: "[The] declaration issued by the Islamic State is void under sharia and has dangerous consequences for the Sunnis in Iraq and for the revolt in Syria", adding that the title of caliph can "only be given by the entire Muslim nation", not by a single group. He also stated on his official website "United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the leaders of Daesh (ISIS/ISIL) terrorist group are from one species and they are two sides of the same coin". In a similar vein, the Syrian Islamic scholar Muhammad al-Yaqoubi says, "[t]he followers of ISIS do not want to adhere to Islamic law but rather they want to twist Islamic law to conform to their fantasies. To this end, they pick and choose the evidences that corroborate their misguidance, despite being weak or abrogated." Academics Robyn Creswell and Bernard Haykel of The New Yorker have criticised ISIL's execution of Muslims for breach of traditional sharia law while violating it simultaneously themselves (encouraging women to emigrate to its territory, travelling without a Wali—male guardian—and in violation of his wishes). as well as its love of archaic imagery (horsemen and swords) while engaging in bid'ah (religious innovation) in establishing female religious police (known as Al-Khansaa Brigade). Two days after the beheading of Hervé Gourdel, hundreds of Muslims gathered in the Grand Mosque of Paris to show solidarity against the beheading. The protest was led by the leader of the French Council of the Muslim Faith, Dalil Boubakeur, and was joined by thousands of other Muslims around the country under the slogan "Not in my name".[better source needed] French president François Hollande said Gourdel's beheading was "cowardly" and "cruel", and confirmed that airstrikes would continue against ISIL in Iraq. Hollande also called for three days of national mourning, with flags flown at half-mast throughout the country and said that security would be increased throughout Paris.[better source needed] According to The New York Times, "All of the most influential jihadist theorists are criticising the Islamic State as deviant, calling its self-proclaimed caliphate null and void" and they have denounced it for its beheadings of journalists and aid workers. ISIL is widely denounced by a broad range of Islamic clerics, including Saudi and al-Qaeda-oriented clerics. Muhammad al-Yaqoubi states, "It is enough of a proof of the extreme ideology of ISIS that the top leaders of Salafi-Jihadism have disclaimed it." Other critics of ISIL's brand of Sunni Islam include Salafists who previously publicly supported jihadist groups such as al-Qaeda: for example, the Saudi government official Saleh Al-Fawzan, known for his extremist views, who claims that ISIL is a creation of "Zionists, Crusaders and Safavids", and the Jordanian-Palestinian writer Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi, the former spiritual mentor to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who was released from prison in Jordan in June 2014 and accused ISIL of driving a wedge between Muslims. An Islamic Front sharia court judge in Aleppo, Mohamed Najeeb Bannan, stated: "The legal reference is the Islamic Sharia. The cases are different, from robberies to drug use, to moral crimes. It's our duty to look at any crime that comes to us... After the regime has fallen, we believe that the Muslim majority in Syria will ask for an Islamic state. Of course, it's very important to point out that some say the Islamic Sharia will cut off people's hands and heads, but it only applies to criminals. And to start off by killing, crucifying etc. That is not correct at all." In response to being asked what the difference between the Islamic Front's and ISIL's version of sharia would be, he said, "One of their mistakes is before the regime has fallen, and before they've established what in Sharia is called Tamkeen [having a stable state], they started applying Sharia, thinking God gave them permission to control the land and establish a Caliphate. This goes against the beliefs of religious scholars around the world. This is what [IS] did wrong. This is going to cause a lot of trouble. Anyone who opposes [IS] will be considered against Sharia and will be severely punished." Al-Qaeda and al-Nusra have been trying to take advantage of ISIL's rise, by attempting to present themselves as "moderate" compared to "extremist" ISIL, although they have the same aim of establishing sharia and a caliphate, but doing so in a more gradual manner. Al-Nusra has criticised the way in which ISIL fully and immediately institutes sharia in the areas that fall under its control, since it alienates people too much. It supports the gradual, slower approach favoured by al-Qaeda, preparing society to accept sharia and indoctrinating people through education before implementing the hudud aspects in sharia, which they believe supports punishments such as throwing homosexuals from the top of buildings, chopping limbs off, and public stoning. Al-Nusra and ISIL are both hostile towards the Druze. However, while al-Nusra has typically destroyed Druze shrines and pressured them to convert to Sunni Islam, ISIL regards the entire Druze community as a valid target for violence, as it does the Yazidis. In February 2014, Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of Al-Qaeda, announced that his group Al-Qaeda had cut ties with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and denounced ISIL after being unable to reconcile a conflict between them and the al-Qaeda affiliate al-Nusra Front. In September 2015, Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of al-Qaeda, called for consultation (shura) within the "prophetic method" to be used when establishing the caliphate, criticising al-Baghdadi for not following the required steps. Al-Zawahiri has called upon ISIL members to close ranks and join al-Qaeda in fighting against Assad, the Shia, Russia, Europe, and America and to stop the infighting between jihadist groups. He called upon jihadists to establish Islamic entities in Egypt and the Levant, slowly implementing sharia before establishing a caliphate, and has called for violent assaults against America and the West. The Jaysh al-Islam group within the Islamic Front criticised ISIL, saying: "They killed the people of Islam and leave the idol worshippers ... They use the verses talking about the disbelievers and implement it on the Muslims". The main criticism of defectors from ISIL has been that the group is fighting and killing other Sunni Muslims, as opposed to just non-Sunnis being brutalised. In one case, a supposed defector from ISIL executed two activists of a Syrian opposition group in Turkey who had sheltered them. Scholar Ian Almond criticised the media commentators, the lack of balance in reporting, and the "way we are learning to talk about ISIS." While there was talk about 'radical evil' and 'radical Islam', Almond found it striking because "some of the most revered and oft-quoted figures in our Western political tradition have been capable of the most vicious acts of savagery – and yet all we ever hear about is how much the Middle East has to learn from us." Almond goes on to cite how Winston Churchill "wanted to gas women and children", how Ronald Reagan's Central American policies "disembowelled more children than ISIS," how President Barack Obama's "planes and drones have dropped bombs on as many schoolchildren as ISIS," how former secretary of state Madeleine Albright commented on the deaths of Iraqi children killed by sanctions, how Henry Kissinger and Margaret Thatcher "assisted in the torture and disappearance of thousands of Chilean students and labour activists... For anyone familiar with the history of both U.S. and European torture and murder over the past 150 years, it might not be all that hyperbolic to say that in ISIS, what we see more than anything else is a more expansive, explicit version of our own cruelties. In bombing ISIS and its would-be imperialism, we are really bombing a version of ourselves." Author and commentator Tom Engelhardt attributed the rise of ISIL and the destruction that followed to what he dubbed as America's drive to establish its own caliphate in the region. A leader article in the New Scientist magazine contextualised ISIL within the nation state construct. Although the group is described as medieval in the pejorative sense, "it is also hyper-modern, interested in few of the trappings of a conventional state apart from its own brutal brand of law enforcement. In fact, it is more of a network than a nation, having made canny use of social media to exert influence far beyond its geographical base." The United Nations Security Council in its Resolution 1267 (1999) described Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda associates as operators of a network of terrorist training camps. The UN's Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee first listed ISIL in its Sanctions List under the name "Al-Qaida in Iraq" on 18 October 2004, as an entity/group associated with al-Qaeda. On 2 June 2014, the group was added to its listing under the name "Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant". The European Union adopted the UN Sanctions List in 2002. Many world leaders and government spokespeople have called ISIL a terrorist group or banned it, without their countries having formally designated it as such. The following are examples: The Government of Germany banned ISIL in September 2014. Activities banned include donations to the group, recruiting fighters, holding ISIL meetings and distributing its propaganda, flying ISIL flags, wearing ISIL symbols and all ISIL activities. "The terror organisation Islamic State is a threat to public safety in Germany as well", said German politician Thomas de Maizière. He added, "Today's ban is directed solely against terrorists who abuse religion for their criminal goals." Being a member of ISIL is also illegal in accordance with § 129a and § 129b of the German criminal code. In October 2014, Switzerland banned ISIL's activities in the country, including propaganda and financial support of the fighters, with prison sentences as potential penalties. In mid-December 2014, India banned ISIL after the arrest of an operator of a pro-ISIL Twitter account.[better source needed] Pakistan designated ISIL as a banned organisation in late August 2015, under which all elements expressing sympathy for the group would be blacklisted and sanctioned. After its 2022 Ulema gathering, the Taliban banned all Afghans from associating with the local Khorasan Province branch of IS in July 2022, and labeled it a "false sect". Media sources worldwide have described ISIL as a terrorist organisation. Following the D-ISIS Ministerial in June 2023, Minister Belkin announced Abdallah Makki Muslih al-Rufay’i and Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn ‘Ali al-Mainuki, as terrorists under Executive Order 13224. By 2014, ISIL was increasingly being viewed as a militia in addition to a terrorist group and a cult. As major Iraqi cities fell to ISIL in June 2014, Jessica Lewis, a former US Army intelligence officer at the Institute for the Study of War, described ISIL at that time as not a terrorism problem anymore, [but rather] an army on the move in Iraq and Syria, and they are taking terrain. They have shadow governments in and around Baghdad, and they have an aspirational goal to govern. I don't know whether they want to control Baghdad, or if they want to destroy the functions of the Iraqi state, but either way the outcome will be disastrous for Iraq. Lewis has called ISIL an advanced military leadership. They have incredible command and control and they have a sophisticated reporting mechanism from the field that can relay tactics and directives up and down the line. They are well-financed, and they have big sources of manpower, not just the foreign fighters, but also prisoner escapees. Former US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel saw an "imminent threat to every interest we have", but former top counter-terrorism adviser Daniel Benjamin derided such talk as a "farce" that panics the public. Former British Foreign Secretary David Miliband concluded that the 2003 invasion of Iraq caused the creation of ISIL.[better source needed] Writing for The Guardian, Pankaj Mishra rejects the idea that the group is a resurgence of medieval Islam, saying instead: In actuality, Isis is the canniest of all traders in the flourishing international economy of disaffection: the most resourceful among all those who offer the security of collective identity to isolated and fearful individuals. It promises, along with others who retail racial, national and religious supremacy, to release the anxiety and frustrations of the private life into the violence of the global. On 28 January 2017, President Donald Trump issued a National Security Presidential Memorandum which called for a comprehensive plan to destroy ISIL to be formulated by the Defense Department within 30 days. A United Nations report from May 2015[update] showed that 25,000 "foreign terrorist fighters" from 100 countries had joined "Islamist" groups, many of them working for ISIL or al-Qaeda. According to a June 2015 Reuters report that cited "jihadist ideologues" as a source, 90% of ISIL's fighters in Iraq were Iraqi, and 70% of its fighters in Syria were Syrian. The article stated that the group had 40,000 fighters and 60,000 supporters across its two primary strongholds in Iraq and Syria. According to scholar Fawaz Gerges writing in ISIS: A History, some "30 percent of the senior figures" in ISIL's military command were former army and police officers from the disbanded Iraqi security forces, turned towards Sunni Islamism and drawn to ISIL by the US de-Ba'athification policy following the US invasion of Iraq. A 2014 analysis of 2,195,000 Arabic-language social media posts cited by The Guardian had 47% of the postings from Qatar, 35% from Pakistan, 31% from Belgium and almost 24% from the UK classified as supportive of ISIL. According to a 2015 poll by Pew Research Center, Muslim populations of various Muslim-majority countries have overwhelmingly negative views of ISIL, with the highest percentage of those expressing favorable views not exceeding 14%. In most of these countries, concerns about Islamic extremism have been growing. ISIL's claims to territory have brought it into armed conflict with many governments, militias and other armed groups. International rejection of ISIL as a terrorist entity and rejection of its claim to even exist have placed it in conflict with countries around the world. The Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also referred to as the Counter-ISIL Coalition or Counter-DAESH Coalition, is a US-led group of nations and non-state actors that have committed to "work together under a common, multifaceted, and long-term strategy to degrade and defeat ISIL/Daesh". According to a joint statement issued by 59 national governments and the European Union on 3 December 2014, participants in the Counter-ISIL Coalition are focused on multiple lines of effort: Supporting military operations, capacity building, and training; Stopping the flow of foreign terrorist fighters; Cutting off ISIL/Daesh's access to financing and funding; Addressing associated humanitarian relief and crises; and Exposing ISIL/Daesh's true nature (ideological delegitimisation). Operation Inherent Resolve is the operational name given by the US to military operations against ISIL and Syrian al-Qaeda affiliates. Combined Joint Task Force – Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF–OIR) is co-ordinating the military portion of the response. The Arab League, European Union, NATO, and GCC are part of the Counter-ISIL Coalition: According to the Pentagon, by December 2017 over 80,000 ISIL fighters had been killed in Iraq and Syria by CJTF-OIR airstrikes. By then the coalition had flown over 170,000 sorties, 75–80% of combat sorties were conducted by the military of the United States, with the other 20–25% by Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, Belgium, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom. According to the UK-based monitoring group Airwars, the air strikes and artillery of US-led coalition killed as many as 6,000 civilians in Iraq and Syria by the end of 2017. Lebanon, which the U.S. considers part of the Global Coalition, fought off several incursions by ISIL, with the largest engagements taking place from June 2014 to August 2017, when several thousand ISIL fighters invaded from Syria and occupied Lebanese territory. The U.S. and UK-backed Lebanese Army succeeded in repulsing this invasion, killing or capturing over 1,200 ISIL fighters in the process. On 21 December 2019, over 33 Islamist militants were killed in Mali by French forces using attack helicopters, drones and ground troops, alongside the border with Mauritania where an Al-Qaeda-linked group operates.  Iran – military advisors, training, ground troops in Iraq and Syria, and air power in Syria, beside Iranian borders (see Iranian intervention in Iraq)  Russia – arms supplier to Iraqi and Syrian governments. Security operations within state borders in 2015. Airstrikes in Syria (see Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War).  Azerbaijan – security operations within state borders  Pakistan – Military deployment over Saudi Arabia-Iraq border. Arresting ISIL figures in Pakistan.  Yemen (Supreme Political Council)  Afghanistan – security operations within state borders (see Islamic State–Taliban conflict)  al-Qaeda al-Nusra Front—with localised truces and co-operation at times al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb Al-Shabaab  Taliban Hamas  Hezbollah  Houthis Kurdistan Workers' Party—ground troops in Iraqi Kurdistan and in Syrian Kurdistan Syrian Democratic Forces Nineveh Plain Protection Units – an Assyrian Christian militia in the Nineveh Plains in Northern Iraq Amal Movement Syrian Resistance – Suqur al-Furat[better source needed] Liwa al-Quds Liwa Abu al-Fadhal al-Abbas Abu al-Fadl al-Abbas Forces Islamic Jihad Movement in Palestine Arab Nationalist Guard Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine – General Command Fatah al-Intifada[citation needed] Syrian Revolutionary Command Council Mujahideen Shura Council (Syria) Unified Military Command of Eastern Ghouta Fatah Halab Mare' Operations Room Golan Regiment Mukhtar Army Al-Nusra Front is a branch of al-Qaeda operating in Syria. Al-Nusra has launched many attacks and bombings, mostly against targets affiliated with or supportive of the Syrian government. There have been media reports that many of al-Nusra's foreign fighters have left to join al-Baghdadi's ISIL. In February 2014, after continued tensions, al-Qaeda publicly disavowed any relations with ISIL. However, ISIL and al-Nusra Front still cooperate with each other occasionally when they fight against the Syrian government. The two groups [ISIL and al-Nusra] share a nihilistic worldview, a loathing for modernity, and for the West. They subscribe to the same perverted interpretations of Islam. Other common traits include a penchant for suicide attacks, and sophisticated exploitation of the internet and social media. Like ISIL, several Al Qaeda franchises are interested in taking and holding territory; AQAP has been much less successful at it. The main differences between Al Qaeda and ISIL are largely political—and personal. Over the past decade, Al Qaeda has twice embraced ISIL (and its previous manifestations) as brothers-in-arms. — Bobby Ghosh, "ISIL and Al Qaeda: Terror's frenemies", Quartz On 10 September 2015, an audio message was released by al-Qaeda's leader Ayman al-Zawahiri criticising ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate and accusing it of "sedition". This was described by some media outlets as a "declaration of war". However, although al-Zawahiri denied ISIL's legitimacy, he suggested that there was still room for cooperation against common enemies, and said that if he were in Iraq, he would fight alongside ISIL. The Islamic State has been widely condemned for crimes against humanity. In July 2014, the BBC reported the United Nations' chief investigator as stating: "Fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) may be added to a list of war crimes suspects in Syria." By June 2014, according to United Nations reports, ISIL had killed hundreds of prisoners of war. In November 2014, the UN Commission of Inquiry on Syria said that ISIL was committing crimes against humanity. A report by Human Rights Watch in November 2014 accused ISIL groups in control of Derna, Libya of war crimes and human rights abuses and of terrorising residents. Human Rights Watch documented three apparent summary executions and at least ten public floggings by the Islamic Youth Shura Council, which joined ISIL in November. It also documented the beheading of three Derna residents and dozens of seemingly politically motivated assassinations of judges, public officials, members of the security forces and others. Sarah Leah Watson, Director of HRW Middle East and North Africa, said: "Commanders should understand that they may face domestic or international prosecution for the grave rights abuses their forces are committing." ISIL members were also reported to perform human sacrifices, despite the act being forbidden in Islam. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has stated that the group "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and dominate every aspect of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the provision of services to those who obey". ISIL and Al-Qaeda were both reported for exploiting Turkey-Syria earthquake event for their propaganda. According to the Iraq Body Count project, the Islamic State's fighters killed a minimum of 25,645 Iraqi civilians from 2014 to 2016. Attributed to multiple sources: Arabic: الدولة الإسلامية, romanized: al-Dawla al-Islāmiyya ISIL Tunisia, ISIL Bengal, ISIL Greater Sahara (ISGS), and ISIL East Asia (ISEA) are not considered terrorist organizations by Japan. Gander, Kashmira (7 July 2015). "Isis flag: What do the words mean and what are its origins?". The Independent. Breslow, Jason M. (17 May 2016). "Who Was the Founder of ISIS?". Frontline. PBS. "Islamic State Confirms Death of Its Leader, Names Replacement" (3 August 2023). Reuters. Retrieved 7 August 2023. "Islamic state confirms death of its leader, names new chief". Reuters. 10 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan: MİT, DEAŞ'ın sözde liderini etkisiz hale getirdi" [President Erdoğan: The so-called leader of the terrorist organization DAESH was neutralized by the operation carried out by the MIT in Syria.]. TRT Haber (in Turkish). 30 April 2023. Retrieved 30 April 2023. Kourdi, Eyad (30 November 2022). "ISIS acknowledges the death of its leader, announces his successor". CNN. Retrieved 18 June 2023. "Islamic State confirms Baghdadi is dead, appoints successor". Reuters. 31 October 2019. Rubin, Alissa J. (5 July 2014). "Militant Leader in Rare Appearance in Iraq". The New York Times. Al-Tamimi, Aymenn Jawad (24 January 2016). "An Account of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi & Islamic State Succession Lines". Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi's Blog. "Islamic State Syria chief Maher al-Agal killed in US drone strike: Pentagon". 13 June 2022. "Eastern Libyan forces say they killed Islamic State leader". Reuters. 23 September 2020. "ISIS Leadership". Frontline. PBS. 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2015. *Lister, Charles (2014). "Islamic State Senior Leadership: Who's Who" (PDF). Brookings Institution. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2016. "Here's What We Know About the 'Caliph' of the New Islamic State". Business Insider. AFP. 29 June 2014. "ISIS Spokesman Declares Caliphate, Rebrands Group as Islamic State". Jihadist News. SITE Intelligence Group. 29 June 2014. Archived from the original on 29 June 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Pentagon Confirms U.S. Strike in Syria Killed ISIL Leader". DoD News. United States Department of Defense. 12 September 2016. Garland, Chad (14 July 2016). "Islamic State says top commander is dead; Pentagon unsure". Stars and Stripes. Worley, Will (13 July 2016). "Isis confirms death of hugely popular 'minister of war' Omar al-Shishani". The Independent. Starr, Barbara (15 March 2016). "U.S. assesses ISIS operative Omar al-Shishani is dead". CNN. "Tarkhan Tayumurazovich Batirashvili". Rewards for Justice. U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Diplomatic Security. 5 May 2015. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. "IS 'minister of war' killed in Syria air attack, claims Russia". Middle East Eye. 8 September 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Gulmurod Khalimov". Rewards for Justice. Archived from the original on 21 April 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Iraqi forces capture deputy of IS slain leader Baghdadi – PM". Reuters. 11 October 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021. "IS confirms death of propaganda chief Abu Mohammed al-Furqan". BBC News. 11 October 2016. Chulov, Martin (31 August 2016). "Abu Muhammad al-Adnani's death does not signal the demise of Isis". The Guardian. Retrieved 31 August 2016. "Islamic State group names its new leader as Abu Ibrahim al-Hashemi". BBC News. 31 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. 3 min (10 March 2022). "Islamic State names new leader, confirms death of predecessor". France24.com. Retrieved 14 March 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Mroue, Bassem (3 August 2023). "The Islamic State group says its leader was killed by militants in Syria and names his successor". ABC News. Holmes, Oliver (3 February 2014). "Al Qaeda breaks link with Syrian militant group ISIL". Reuters. Pool, Jeffrey (16 December 2004). "Zarqawi's Pledge of Allegiance to Al-Qaeda: From Mu'Asker Al-Battar, Issue 21". Terrorism Monitor. Vol. 2, no. 24. Jamestown Foundation. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.  • "Al-Qaeda disavows ISIS militants in Syria". BBC News. 3 February 2014. Laskar, Rezaul H. (29 January 2015). "IS announces expansion into AfPak, parts of India". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Elbagir, Nima; Cruickshank, Paul; Tawfeeq, Mohammed (7 March 2015). "Boko Haram purportedly pledges allegiance to ISIS". CNN. Gambhir, Harleen (23 June 2015). "ISIS Declares Governorate in Russia's North Caucasus Region". Institute for the Study of War. Prothero, Mitchell (4 February 2022). "ISIS Leader Killed in US Raid Was a SNITCH Who Orchestrated the Yazidi Genocide". VICE News. Archived from the original on 5 February 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2022. @MENASTREAM (19 February 2017). "#Egypt: #ISIS 'Misr' released video 'And fight the polytheists collectively..' focusing primarily on Egypt's #Coptic Christians" (Tweet). Retrieved 29 January 2023 – via Twitter. "IS Delineates 'Khorasan Province' from 'Pakistan Province' in Attack Claims, One Involving Targeted Killing in Rawalpindi". Jihadist Threat. SITE Intelligence Group. 24 November 2021. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Syrian army captures Mayadin from ISIS near Deir ez-Zor". Rudaw. 14 October 2017. Benhaida, Sarah; al-Rubaye, Ahmad (26 October 2017). "Iraq forces launch 'last big fight' against IS". Rudaw. "Anti-IS forces converge on Syria border town". Agence France-Presse. 4 November 2017 – via Yahoo News. Bussoletti, Francesco (29 June 2018). "Syria, the Isis pockets of resistance at Deir Ezzor are reduced to two". Difesa & Sicurezza. Aboufadel, Leith (13 December 2018). "Breaking: SDF captures Daesh's de facto capital in Syria". Archived from the original on 6 July 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "US-backed fighters seize east Syria village from ISIS". The National. 16 January 2019. Aboufadel, Leith (24 January 2019). "ISIL's reign over eastern Euphrates nearing its end – map". Al-Masdar News. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Callimachi, Rukmini (24 January 2019). "Down to Its Last 2 Villages in Syria, ISIS Still Fights Back". The New York Times. Aboufadel, Leith (7 February 2019). "ISIS squeezed into last areas as SDF troops capture 2 villages east of the Euphrates (MAP)". Al-Masdar news. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Hussein, Rikar (9 February 2019). "US-backed Fighters Launch Final Push to Defeat IS in Syria". Voice of America. "US-allied Syrian force declares victory over Islamic State". The Washington Post. 23 March 2019. Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Fairfield, Hannah; Wallace, Tim; Watkins, Derek (21 May 2015). "How ISIS Expands". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 May 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2020. Poljarevic, Emin (2021). "Theology of Violence-oriented Takfirism as a Political Theory: The Case of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)". In Cusack, Carole M.; Upal, Muhammad Afzal (eds.). Handbook of Islamic Sects and Movements. Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion 21. Boston; Leiden, Netherlands: Brill Publishers. pp. 485–512. doi:10.1163/9789004435544_026. ISBN 978-90-04-43554-4. ISSN 1874-6691. Manne, Robert (7 November 2016). "Sayyid Qutb: Father of Salafi Jihadism, Forerunner of the Islamic State". ABC Religion & Ethics. Australia: ABC Online. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Saltman, Erin Marie (3 November 2016). "The mind of Islamic State: more coherent and consistent than Nazism". The Guardian. ISBN 978-1-906603-98-4. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Manne, Robert (2017). Mind of the Islamic state: ISIS and the ideology of the caliphate. Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Prometheus Books. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-63388-371-0. ... several scholars have termed the ideology that provided the foundation of the Islamic State 'Qutbism'. Badara, Mohamed; Nagata, Masaki (November 2017). "Modern Extremist Groups and the Division of the World: A Critique from an Islamic Perspective". Arab Law Quarterly. 31 (4). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill Publishers: 305–335. doi:10.1163/15730255-12314024. ISSN 1573-0255. Bunzel, Cole (March 2015). "From Paper State to Caliphate: The Ideology of the Islamic State" (PDF). The Brookings Project on U.S. Relations with the Islamic World. 19. Washington, D.C.: Center for Middle East Policy (Brookings Institution): 1–48. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2020. Saltman, Erin Marie; Winter, Charlie (November 2014). Islamic State: The Changing Face of Modern Jihadism (PDF) (Report). Quilliam. ISBN 978-1-906603-98-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2015. Wood, Graeme (March 2015). "What ISIS Really Wants". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Crooke, Alastair (30 March 2017) [27 August 2014]. "You Can't Understand ISIS If You Don't Know the History of Wahhabism in Saudi Arabia". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 28 August 2014. Meleagrou-Hitchens, Alexander; Hughes, Seamus; Clifford, Bennett (2021). "The Ideologues". Homegrown: ISIS in America (1st ed.). London; New York City: I. B. Tauris. pp. 111–148. ISBN 978-1-78831-485-5. "4 years ago: the genocide against the Yazidis in northern Iraq (August 3, 2014)". Gesellschaft für bedrohte Völker e.V. (GfbV). Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Spencer, Richard (14 October 2014). "Isil carried out massacres and mass sexual enslavement of Yazidis, UN confirms". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Taylor, Lin (9 May 2017). "Nearly 10,000 Yazidis killed, kidnapped by Islamic State in 2014, study finds". Reuters. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Baele, Stephane J. (October 2019). Giles, Howard (ed.). "Conspiratorial Narratives in Violent Political Actors' Language" (PDF). Journal of Language and Social Psychology. 38 (5–6). SAGE Publications: 706–734. doi:10.1177/0261927X19868494. hdl:10871/37355. ISSN 1552-6526. S2CID 195448888. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. Rickenbacher, Daniel (August 2019). Jikeli, Gunther (ed.). "The Centrality of Anti-Semitism in the Islamic State's Ideology and Its Connection to Anti-Shiism". Religions. 10 (8: "The Return of Religious Antisemitism?"). Basel, Switzerland: MDPI: 483. doi:10.3390/rel10080483. eISSN 2077-1444. Ghasemi, Faezeh (2020). Anti-Shiism Discourse (PhD). University of Tehran. Rickenbacher, Daniel (2019). "The Centrality of Anti-Semitism in the Islamic State's Ideology and Its Connection to Anti-Shiism". Religions. 10 (8): 483–492. doi:10.3390/rel10080483. Ghasemi, Faezeh (2017). "Anti-Shiite and Anti-Iranian Discourses in ISIS Texts". Discourse. 11 (3): 75–96. Matthiesen, Toby (21 July 2015). "The Islamic State Exploits Entrenched Anti-Shia Incitement". Sada. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. "Islamic State claims Pakistan bombing that kills 56 at Shiite mosque". ABC News. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. The Islamic State affiliate in the region known as Islamic State in Khorasan province and headquartered in Afghanistan claimed Friday's devastating attack in a statement translated by the SITE Intelligence group. The statement was posted on the group's Amaq News Agency. The statement identified the attacker as Afghan, posted his picture and said 'Islamic State fighters are constantly targeting Shi'ites living in Pakistan and Afghanistan despite the intense security measures adopted by the Taliban militia and the Pakistani police to secure Shi'a temples and centers.' Rohrlich, Justin (25 March 2022). "Three ISIS Fanboys Plotted Spring Break Attack on Shia Mosque, Feds Say". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 27 March 2022. Soliman, Muhammad (20 March 2017). "From Cairo to Berlin: Why is ISIS Targeting Christians?". Fikra Forum. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Nassif, Hicham Bou (25 July 2014). "Here Are The Parts Of The Quran That ISIS Uses To Justify Violence Against Iraqi Christians". Business Insider. "Daesh Lay Claim To Target Killing Of Christian, Sikh Men In Peshawar". Voice PK. Pakistan. 3 April 2023. Dayal Singh, a Sikh trader, and Kashif Masih, a Christian sanitary worker, were gunned down in different incidents on March 31 and April 1 respectively. Separately, a Hindu ophthalmologist and former senior director of health at the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation (KMC), Dr. Birbal Genani was also shot dead by unknown assailants along the Lyari Expressway in Karachi on March 30. "ISIS claims responsibility for killing of Hindu priest in Bangladesh". The Guardian. 21 February 2016. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. "'Hindus need to be targeted in mass numbers in India', says militant in Islamic State magazine". Firstpost. 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. "ISIS threatens to rid India of Hindus in latest issue of its magazine". One India. 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. "11 killed in Kabul gurdwara attack, IS claims responsibility". The Times of India. 25 March 2020. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. "ISIS threatens India, Hindus with bloodshed; Claims role in Coimbatore, Mangaluru blasts". Hindustan Times. 7 March 2023. "ISIS claims attack on Sikhs, Hindus in Afghanistan". CTV News. 2 July 2018. "Anti-Gay Rhetoric in English-Language ISIS and Al Qaeda Magazines". Anti-Defamation League. 15 June 2016. "ISIS's Persecution of Gay People". Counter Extremism Project. May 2017. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. "The Islamic State's shocking war on homosexuals". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. "What ISIS Is Saying About the Orlando Shooter". Vice. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. "ISIS targets gay people using Facebook and phone contacts". Global News. Archived from the original on 19 December 2020. "Inside look at ISIS' brutal persecution of gays". CBS News. 2 December 2015. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. "Amid brazen, deadly attacks, gay Syrians tell of fear of ISIS persecution". CNN. 6 March 2015. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. *"Under Attack, ISIS Threatens Jews and Israel". Anti-Defamation League. 13 March 2015. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "ISIS Promotes Murdering Jews in New Online Campaign". Anti-Defamation League. 20 October 2015. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. "ISIS calls on operatives to target Jews with chemical weapons". The Jerusalem Post. 28 January 2020. "ISIS threatens Jews, Israel with 'big war' in second Hebrew video". The Jerusalem Post. 1 November 2015. "Turkey arrests ISIS members allegedly targeting Istanbul synagogues". Jewish Telegraph Agency. 6 February 2023. "ISIS Sympathizers Suspected of Bomb Plot on Northern Israeli High School". Haaretz. 2 October 2022. "Islamic State urges attacks against Jews in effort to thwart Trump plan". Reuters. 27 January 2020. "ISIS Plans Attacks on Jewish Children in Turkey". Business Insider. 29 March 2016. "ISIS suspects planned attacks on Jews in Mumbai". Wionews. 21 April 2018. "ISIS Suicide Bombers at Brussels Airport 'Targeted U.S. Airline, Jews'". Newsweek. 24 January 2017. The suicide bombers who attacked Brussels airport last year, killing 16 people, were targeting an American airline, its passengers and Jewish people, according to a report citing sources close to the investigation. Another source said that Laachraoui was standing among dozens of students before changing tack and following two Hasidic Jews, usually recognizable by their long beards, sidecurls known as peyot and dark overclothes. 'The attacker seemed to rush towards two Orthodox Jews,' the source said. 'He really, clearly wanted to kill a Jew.' "Islamic State Unleashes Propaganda Blitz Calling for Attacks Against Jews". Vice News. 19 October 2015. The Islamic State released a series of videos Sunday praising attacks against Jews in Israel and encouraging more violence. Cottee, Simon; Bloom, Mia (8 September 2017). "The Myth of the ISIS Female Suicide Bomber". The Atlantic. Retrieved 19 August 2022. Crockett, Emily (23 May 2017). "Why Manchester Bomber Targeted Girls". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "The Girl Who Beat Isis: My Story review – inside the horror of Isis". The Guardian. 1 August 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "Why Women Join ISIS". Time. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "Eighth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat" (PDF). United Nations Security Council. UN. 1 February 2019. "Operation Inherent Resolve and other overseas contingency operations" (PDF). US Department of Defense. 31 December 2018. Cockburn, Patrick (16 November 2014). "War with Isis: Islamic militants have army of 200,000, claims senior Kurdish leader". The Independent. Gartenstein-Ross, Daveed (9 February 2015). "How many Fighters Does the Islamic State Really Have?". War on the Rocks. "Saddam's former army is secret of Baghdadi's success". Reuters. 16 June 2015. Retrieved 1 July 2015. "Briefing With Special Representative for Syria Engagement and Special Envoy for the Global Coalition To Defeat ISIS Ambassador James Jeffrey". state.gov. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 11 May 2019. Shinkman, Paul D. (27 December 2017). "ISIS By the Numbers in 2017". U.S. News & World Report. Jones, Seth G.; Dobbins, James; Byman, Daniel; et al. (2017). "Rolling Back the Islamic State". RAND Corporation. Retrieved 1 April 2019. "After Shekau: Confronting Jihadists in Nigeria's North East". 29 March 2022. "Operation IMPACT". National Defence and the Canadian Armed Forces. 19 August 2014. Retrieved 6 March 2018. "IAF strikes kill 7 ISIS militants 200 meters from Golan Heights border". The Jerusalem Post. "Isis and Israel clash for first time after jihadis open fire on IDF". The Independent. "Islamic State claims Hadera attack; minister: the two terrorists were linked to IS". The Times of Israel. 28 March 2022. "México aparece entre los países amenazados por el ISIS" [Mexico appears among the countries threatened by ISIS]. El País (in Spanish). 25 November 2015. Khettab, Djamila Ould (30 December 2015). "Algeria a 'symbolic target' for ISIL". Al Jazeera English. "OKRA Home". Global Operations. Department of Defense, Government of Australia. Retrieved 25 October 2017. Stonington, Joel (9 September 2014). "Is This Cyclops Baby the Muslim Antichrist?". Vocativ. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "Bosnia donates 550 tonnes of arms to Iraq, more may follow: minister". Reuters. 16 March 2015. Romero, Simon; Schmidt, Michael (1 August 2016). "As ISIS Posts in Portuguese, U.S. and Brazil Bolster Olympics Security". The New York Times. Osbourne, Samuel (1 March 2017). "Isis threatens China and vows to 'shed blood like rivers'". The Independent. "Ethiopian authorities say Al-Shabaab, Islamic State planning attacks on hotels". Africanews. 23 September 2019. "Country Reports on Terrorism 2020". "Germany to strip dual-nationals who fight for Isis of citizenship". Financial Times.[full citation needed] Kalmouki, Nikoleta (25 September 2014). "Greece Brings War Against the Islamic State". Greekreporter.com. "L'Italia pronta a bombardare Isis in Iraq. La Difesa: ipotesi da valutare". Corriere della Sera. 6 October 2015. Kumenov, Almaz (14 May 2019). "Kazakhstan evacuates citizens from Syria, arrests some". Eurasianet. "Pro-Isis hackers attack North Korean airline Facebook page". The Guardian. AFP. 14 January 2015. Paraszczuk, Joanna (15 March 2015). "Kyrgyzstan Bans IS, Designates It as Terror Group". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (20 July 2018). "Malaysia launches crackdown on Isis after threats to kill the king and prime minister". The Guardian. Ucko, David H. (28 December 2017). "Trouble in Paradise: Mauritius Tries to Ward off Islamic Radicalization". World Politics Review. "Islamic State group: Nicaragua arrests four suspected members". BBC News. 26 June 2019. Johnson, Bridget (30 December 2018). "Barcelona Terror Alert Coincides with New Spanish-Language ISIS Threats". Homeland Security Today. "Sri Lanka bombings: Isis claims responsibility for deadly church and hotel attacks on Easter Sunday". The Independent. 23 April 2019. Callimachi, Rukmini; Kramer, Andrew E. (31 July 2018). "Video Purports to Show Tajikistan Attackers Pledging Allegiance to ISIS". The New York Times. McAdams, John (7 August 2017). "The President of Turkmenistans Anti-ISIS Propaganda Video is Straight out of an '80s Action Movie". Wide Open Spaces. Patience Atuhaire; James Gregory (17 June 2023). "Uganda school attack: Dozens of pupils killed by militants linked to Islamic State group". BBC News. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Uzbekistan to receive and rehabilitate 148 women and children from ISIS". Al Shahid Witness. 3 June 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Kajjo, Sirwan (25 August 2016). "Who Are The Turkey-backed Syrian Rebels?". Extremism Watch. Voice of America. Aydınlı, Ersel (2018). "The Jihadists after 9/11". Violent Non-State Actors: From Anarchists to Jihadists. Routledge Studies on Challenges, Crises, and Dissent in World Politics (1st ed.). London and New York: Routledge. pp. 110–149. ISBN 978-1-315-56139-4. LCCN 2015050373. "Badr Organization Destroys ISIS Car Bomb". Military.com. 5 June 2015. Illingworth, Andrew (22 December 2017). "Combat footage: Iraqi forces battle ISIS in east Syria". Al Masdar News. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Khader, Abdul Rahman (14 July 2020). "هيئة-تحرير-الشام"-تقتل-وتعتقل-منتمين-لـ"داعش"-في-إدلب ""هيئة تحرير الشام" تقتل وتعتقل منتمين لـ"داعش" في إدلب" [The Headquarters for the Liberation of Al-Sham kills and arrests ISIS-affiliates in Idlib]. The New Arab (in Arabic). Retrieved 14 July 2020. Musa, Rami (10 June 2015). "Al-Qaida-linked militants attack IS affiliate in Libya". Military Times. "الحشد الشعبي يوسع نطاق متابعة فلول داعش الى محافظة حمص السورية" [The Popular Mobilization Forces expands the scope of follow-up to ISIS remnants to the Syrian province of Homs]. Iraq Today (in Arabic). 13 April 2017. Kittleson, Shelly (11 April 2018). "Iraqi police who fought for tribal PMUs won't return to force". Al-Monitor. "ISIS kills 6 militants from Hezbollah-backed Quwat al-Ridha in Homs". Zamanalwsl.net. 23 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Aboufadel, Leith (21 March 2016). "Iranian special forces arrive in Palmyra to help liberate the city". Al-Masdar News. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "التعرف على جثة امر لواء زينبيون الايراني الذي قتل في سوريا بنيران داعش الارهابي قبل عامين" [Identification of the body of the order of the Iranian Zainabiyoun Brigade, who was killed in Syria by ISIS terrorist fire two years ago]. IraqNewspaper.net (in Arabic). 12 June 2019. "لماذا أوقفت كتائب الحر والجبهة الإسلامية قتال داعش في جنوب دمشق؟" [Why did the Free and Islamic Front Brigades stop the fight against ISIS in southern Damascus?]. akhbaralaan.net (in Arabic). 27 September 2014. "عملية نوعية لـ "كتائب البعث" خلف خطوط "داعش"" [A qualitative operation by the "Baath Brigades" behind the lines of ISIS]. DamPress.net (in Arabic). 5 October 2014. Juan Guaidó [@jguaido] (4 September 2019). "Desde la @AsambleaVE hemos declarado a la disidencia de las FARC, ELN, Hamas, Hezbollah e ISIS como grupos terroristas, ordenándoles a todos los cuerpos de seguridad del Estado proteger nuestra soberanía e integridad territorial frente a la amenaza que representan estos grupos" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Zelin, Aaron Y. (June 2014). The War between ISIS and al-Qaeda for Supremacy of the Global Jihadist Movement (PDF). Research Notes (Report). Vol. 20. The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2023. In early 2006, Zarqawi brought together a number of other Iraqi insurgent factions and established the Majlis Shura al-Mujahedin (MSM)... This process was further consolidated after Zarqawi's death on June 7, 2006. On October 15, a statement titled 'Announcing the Establishment of the Islamic State of Iraq' was released by Muharib al-Juburi, ISI's new information minister. And on November 10, AQI's replacement for Zarqawi, Abu Hamza al-Muhajir, pledged baya to the newly appointed leader of ISI, Abu Omar al Baghdadi. While Muhajir had called bin Ladin emir in his first audio release on June 13, 2006, he never actually officially pledged baya. ... Therefore, Zarqawi's death invalidated MSM's implied pledge to bin Ladin. This means that, in effect, the group and its subsequent incarnations have not technically been subordinate to al-Qaeda in eight years. * al-Ibrahim, Fouad (22 August 2014). "Why ISIS is a threat to Saudi Arabia: Wahhabism's deferred promise". Al Akhbar. Archived from the original on 24 August 2014. Wilson, Rodney (2015). Islam and Economic Policy. Edinburgh University Press. p. 178. ISBN 978-0-7486-8389-5. Cockburn, Patrick (3 March 2016). "End Times for the Caliphate?". London Review of Books. Vol. 38, no. 5. pp. 29–30. Pastukhov, Dmitry; Greenwold, Nathaniel. "Does Islamic State have the economic and political institutions for future development?" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2019. Pedler, John (2015). A Word Before Leaving: A Former Diplomat's Weltanschauung. Troubador. p. 99. ISBN 978-1-78462-223-7. Kerr, Michael; Larkin, Craig (2015). The Alawis of Syria: War, Faith and Politics in the Levant. Oxford University Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-0-19-045811-9. "John Kerry holds talks in Iraq as more cities fall to ISIS militants". CNN. 23 June 2014. Al-Salhy, Suadad; Arango, Tim (10 June 2014). "Sunni Militants Drive Iraqi Army Out of Mosul". The New York Times. Arango, Tim (3 August 2014). "Sunni Extremists in Iraq Seize 3 Towns From Kurds and Threaten Major Dam". The New York Times. "Al-Qaida offshoot in fierce offensive, carves out territory across Syria and Iraq". Reuters. 10 June 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2014. "Al Nusra pledges allegiance to Isil". Gulf News. Agence France-Presse. 25 June 2014. Retrieved 29 June 2014. C. Tucker, Spencer; G. Pierpaoli Jr., Paul (2016). "Syria". U.S Conflicts in The 21st Centiry (Volume 1). Santa Barbara, California, US: ABC-CLIO. p. 834. ISBN 978-1-4408-3878-1. Birke, Sarah (5 February 2017). "How ISIS Rules". The New York Review of Books. Gerges, Fawaz A. (2016). ISIS: A History. Princeton University Press. pp. 21–22. ISBN 978-0-691-17000-8. "ISIS far from defeated in Syria: 2019 outlook (maps)". Al-Masdar News. 1 January 2019. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2019. "US-Led Allies Finishing Off 'Caliphate'". VOA News. 1 March 2019. Retrieved 7 April 2019. "Al-Qaeda in Iraq confirms Syria's Nusra Front is part of its network". Al Arabiya. 9 April 2013. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Abouzeid, Rania (23 June 2014). "The Jihad Next Door: The Syrian roots of Iraq's newest civil war". Politico. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Roggio, Bill (29 June 2014). "ISIS announces formation of Caliphate, rebrands as 'Islamic State'". Long War Journal. Withnall, Adam (29 June 2014). "Iraq crisis: Isis changes name and declares its territories a new Islamic state with 'restoration of caliphate' in Middle East". The Independent. London. "What is Islamic State?". BBC News. 26 September 2014. "What does ISIS' declaration of a caliphate mean?". Al Akhbar. 30 June 2014. Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. See also: Kadi, Wadad; Shahin, Aram A. "Caliph, caliphate". In Bowering (2013). Akyol, Mustafa (21 December 2015). "A Medieval Antidote to ISIS". The New York Times. Airstrikes in Iraq and Syria (Report). US Department of Defense. 9 August 2017. "Once promised paradise, ISIS fighters end up in mass graves". The Straits Times. 15 October 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "42 months of Russian operations on the Syrian territory kill more than 8000 civilians including more than 18150 people in their raids and shelling". United Kingdom: Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 30 March 2019. Brian Carter; Kathryn Tyson; Liam Karr; Peter Mills (17 May 2023). "Salafi Jihadi Movement Weekly Update, May 17, 2023". ISW, Critical Threats. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Verkaik, Robert (13 January 2024). "A bloody attack by Islamic State provides a chilling warning of the terror group's resurgence". The Independent. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Irshaid, Faisal (2 December 2015). "Isis, Isil, IS or Daesh? One group, many names". BBC News. Retrieved 25 September 2021. "Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS)". The New York Times. Tharoor, Ishaan (18 June 2014). "ISIS or ISIL? The debate over what to call Iraq's terror group". The Washington Post. Retrieved 21 June 2014. "National Counterterrorism Center | Groups". www.dni.gov. Retrieved 26 December 2022. "Isis, Isil, IS or Daesh? One group, many names". BBC News. 24 June 2014. Retrieved 26 December 2022. * Schwartz, Felicia (23 December 2014). "One More Name for Islamic State: Daesh". The Wall Street Journal. Guthrie, Alice (19 February 2015). "Decoding Daesh: Why is the new name for ISIS so hard to understand?". Free Word Centre. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 22 November 2019. Gardner, Simon R. (31 December 2014). "The Islamic State Produced the Most Influential Song of the Year". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Archived from the original on 4 April 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020. Irshaid, Faisal (2 December 2015). "Isis, Isil, IS or Daesh? One group, many names". BBC. "AlQaeda in Iraq confirms Syria's Nusra Front is part of its network". Al Arabiya English. 9 April 2013. "Terrorist Designations of Groups Operating in Syria". United States Department of State. 14 May 2014. Randal, Collin (18 October 2014). "Why Does a Simple Word like Daesh Disturb Extremists so Much". The National. Abu Dhabi. Abouzeid, Rania (16 January 2014). "Syria's uprising within an uprising". European Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Mandhai, Shafik (7 July 2014). "Muslim leaders reject Baghdadi's caliphate". Al Jazeera English. "Iraq's Baghdadi calls for 'holy war'". Al Jazeera English. 2 July 2014. "Statement by the President on ISIL". whitehouse.gov. 10 September 2014 – via National Archives. "United Nations Official Document". United Nations. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 13 October 2014. Pugliese, David (3 October 2014). "Details about the Canadian government's motion about going to war against ISIL". Ottawa Citizen. "Turkish government files motion to Parliament to fight ISIL". Andalou Agency. 1 October 2014. "Australia says ready to strike ISIL in Iraq". Al Jazeera English. 3 October 2014. "ISIL: UK government response". Government of the United Kingdom. 13 October 2014. Taylor, Adam (17 September 2014). "France is ditching the 'Islamic State' name—and replacing it with a label the group hates". The Washington Post. Yuhasin, Alan (19 December 2014). "US general rebrands Isis 'Daesh' after requests from regional partners Leader of operations against group uses alternative name – a pejorative in Arabic that rejects fighters' claims on Islam". The Guardian. NABIH BULOS (30 August 2021). "Family says 7 children were killed in Kabul drone strike; U.S. is investigating". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Daesh?" he said, referring to Islamic State by its Arabic acronym, which is considered a pejorative by the group Kingsley, Patrick (27 August 2014). "Call Islamic State QSIS instead, says globally influential Islamic authority". The Guardian.  • "Meet 'QSIS': A new twist in what to call the extremist group rampaging in Iraq and Syria". The Washington Post. 26 August 2014. Tobey, Mark (2015). The ISIS Crisis: What You Really Need to Know. chapter 6 reference 13: Moody. ISBN 978-0-8024-9321-7. The final expression of Islamic government found in the Middle East would seem to be the purest, yet actually represents the most dangerous form: theocratic Islam.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link)  • Belanger-McMurdo, Adele (5 October 2015). "A Fight for Statehood? ISIS and Its Quest for Political Domination". Nevertheless, ISIS is neither a terrorist organization nor a political party; instead, it is a theocratic proto-state.  • Caldwell, Dan (2016). Seeking Security in an Insecure World. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 195. It is a theocratic state that considers itself unbound by the Westphalian principle of sovereignty with its corollaries of nonaggression and nonintervention Hassan, Hassan (24 January 2015). "The secret world of Isis training camps – ruled by sacred texts and the sword". The Guardian.  • Bradley, Matt (1 February 2015). "Islamic State Affiliate Takes Root Amid Libya's Chaos". The Wall Street Journal. Armstrong, Karen (27 November 2014). "Wahhabism to ISIS: how Saudi Arabia exported the main source of global terrorism". New Statesman. London. Archived from the original on 27 November 2014.  • Sells, Michael (22 December 2016) [First published 20 December 2016]. "Wahhabist Ideology: What It Is And Why It's A Problem". The Huffington Post. New York. Archived from the original on 8 April 2020. Al-Yaqoubi (2015), pp. xiii, 11, 18. Manne, Robert (3 November 2016). "The mind of Islamic State: more coherent and consistent than Nazism". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. There exists a more or less general consensus that the ideology of the Islamic State is founded upon the prison writings of the revolutionary Egyptian Muslim Brother Sayyid Qutb Al-Yaqoubi (2015), p. xii. Al-Khateeb, Motaz (3 December 2014). "Daesh's Intellectual Origins: From Jurisprudence to Reality". Al Jazeera Centre for Studies. G. Harris, MAJ Lucas (2018). ISIS vs. Al Qaeda: An Ideological Comparison. Fort Leavenworth, KS: US Army Command and General Staff College. pp. 2, 8, 9, 11.[permanent dead link] Law, Tara (27 October 2019). "Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Is Dead. Here's What to Know About the Deceased Islamic State Leader". Time. Al-Baghdadi is thought to have shown signs of radicalization years ago, joining an extreme branch of the Sunni dissident group the Muslim Brotherhood as a youth. Al-Khateeb, Motaz (3 December 2014). "Daesh's Intellectual Origins: From Jurisprudence to Reality". Al Jazeera Centre for Studies. While the Muslim Brotherhood and Daesh are diametrically opposite, they both draw on the same Islamic jurisprudence. In other words, religious texts and jurisprudence, in and of themselves, cannot explain the emergence of phenomena like Daesh, particularly given that the texts are centuries old as opposed to these new jihadi-political groups who use them to legitimise their existence Teti, Isabella Frances (6 November 2016). "The 'ISIS Phenomenon'". PennState Presidential Leadership Academy. Pennsylvania State University. "INGYouth: Frequently Asked Questions". Islamic Networks Group. Retrieved 30 November 2017. "Islamic State". Australian National Security. Australian Government. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Prusher, Ilene (9 September 2014). "What the ISIS Flag Says About the Militant Group". Time. Archived from the original on 9 September 2014. Speckhard, Anne (29 August 2014). "Endtimes Brewing". Huffington Post (UK). Archived from the original on 17 September 2014. al-Saud, Abdullah K.; Winter, Charlie (4 December 2016). "Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir: The Obscure Theologian Who Shaped ISIS". The Atlantic. Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Townsend, Mark (13 May 2018). "The core Isis manual that twisted Islam to legitimise barbarity". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 9 June 2018. Retrieved 5 July 2021. Ajjoub, Orwa (2021). The Development of the Theological and Political Aspects of Jihadi-Salafism (PDF). Lund: Swedish South Asian Studies Network (SASNET) at the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at Lund University. pp. 1–28. ISBN 978-91-7895-772-9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. Chulov, Martin (31 October 2019). "Islamic State names new leader after death of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi". The Guardian. Stout, Chris E. (2018) [2017]. "The Psychology of Terrorism". Terrorism, Political Violence, and Extremism: New Psychology to Understand, Face, and Defuse the Threat. Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 5–6. ISBN 978-1-4408-5192-6. OCLC 994829038. Wright, Lawrence (11 September 2006). "The Master Plan". The New Yorker. Retrieved 1 September 2014. McCoy, Terrence McCoy (12 August 2014). "The calculated madness of the Islamic State's horrifying brutality". The Washington Post. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Alastair, Crooke (30 June 2014). "The ISIS' 'Management of Savagery' in Iraq". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Ignatius, David (25 September 2014). "The 'Mein Kampf' of Jihad". The Washington Post. Retrieved 28 September 2014. Hassan, Hassan (8 February 2015). "Isis has reached new depths of depravity. But there is a brutal logic behind it". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Kirkpatrick, David (24 September 2014). "ISIS Harsh Brand of Islam Is Rooted in Austere Saudi Creed". The New York Times. "Crime and punishment in Saudi Arabia: The other beheaders". The Economist. 20 September 2014. Staff writer (19 August 2014). "'ISIS is enemy No. 1 of Islam,' says Saudi grand mufti". Al Arabiyah News English. "Some Saudi clerics condemn Isil but preach intolerance". Gulf News. Reuters. 10 September 2014. D. Kirkpatrick, David (24 September 2014). "ISIS' Harsh Brand of Islam Is Rooted in Austere Saudi Creed". The New York Times. The Islamic State's founder, Mr. Baghdadi, grafted two elements onto his Wahhabi foundations borrowed from the broader, 20th-century Islamist movements that began with the Muslim Brotherhood and ultimately produced Al Qaeda. Where Wahhabi scholars preach obedience to earthly rulers, Mr. Baghdadi adopted the call to political action against foreign domination of the Arab world that has animated the Muslim Brotherhood, Al Qaeda and other 20th-century Islamist movements.Mr. Baghdadi also borrowed the idea of a restored caliphate. Where Wahhabism first flourished alongside the Ottoman Caliphate, the Muslim Brotherhood was founded shortly after that caliphate's dissolution, in 1924 — an event seen across the world as a marker of Western ascent and Eastern decline. The movement's founders took up the call for a revived caliphate as a goal of its broader anti-Western project. Bunzel, Cole (18 February 2016). "The Kingdom and the Caliphate: Duel of the Islamic States". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. The religious character of the Islamic State is, without doubt, overwhelmingly Wahhabi, but the group does depart from Wahhabi tradition in four critical respects: dynastic alliance, the caliphate, violence, and apocalyptic fervor Bunzel, Cole (18 February 2016). "The Kingdom and the Caliphate: Duel of the Islamic States". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Mamouri, Ali (29 July 2014). "Why Islamic State has no sympathy for Hamas". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Hassan, Hassan (13 June 2016). "The Sectarianism of the Islamic State: Ideological Roots and Political Context". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. McCants, William (2015). The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State. New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 147. ISBN 978-1-250-08090-5. Beauchamp, Zack (2 September 2014). "17 things about ISIS and Iraq you need to know". Vox. Retrieved 5 September 2014.  • Abu Mohammad. "Letter dated 9 July 2005" (PDF). Office of the Director of National Intelligence. See page 2 onwards. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Johnson, M. Alex (3 September 2014). "'Deviant and Pathological': What Do ISIS Extremists Really Want?". NBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Kubba, Laith (7 July 2014). "Who is the U.S. targeting in Iraq air strikes?". Al Jazeera English. Joscelyn, Thomas (29 September 2015). "US counterterrorism efforts in Syria: A winning strategy?". Long War Journal. Withnall, Adam (21 December 2014). "Middle East. Inside Isis: The first Western journalist ever to be given access to the 'Islamic State' has just returned – and this is what he discovered". The Independent. Retrieved 3 October 2015. Greyvenstein, Hester Maria (15 January 2015). "Q&A: German journalist on surviving ISIL". Al Jazeera English. Retrieved 4 October 2015. Something that I don't understand at all is the enthusiasm in their plan of religious cleansing, planning to kill the non-believers... They also will kill Muslim democrats because they believe that non-ISIL-Muslims put the laws of human beings above the commandments of God. These were very difficult discussions, especially when they were talking about the number of people who they are willing to kill. They were talking about hundreds of millions. They were enthusiastic about it, and I just cannot understand that. Tran, Mark; Weaver, Matthew (30 June 2014). "Isis announces Islamic caliphate in area straddling Iraq and Syria". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 July 2014.  • McGrath, Timothy (2 July 2014). "Watch this English-speaking ISIS fighter explain how a 98-year-old colonial map created today's conflict". Los Angeles Times. GlobalPost. Retrieved 22 July 2014.  • Caillet, Romain (27 December 2013). "The Islamic State: Leaving al-Qaeda Behind". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Manne, Robert (June 2016). "The mind of the Islamic State: An ideology of savagery". The Monthly.  • Moghadam, Assaf; Fishman, Brian (10 May 2011). Fault Lines in Global Jihad: Organizational, Strategic, and Ideological Fissures. Taylor & Francis. p. 55. ISBN 978-1-136-71058-2.  • Moghadam, Assaf; Fishman, Brian, eds. (16 December 2010). Self-Inflicted Wounds: Debates and Divisions within al-Qa'ida and its Periphery (PDF) (Report). Harmony Project, Combating Terrorism Center at West Point. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2016. Reuter, Christoph (18 April 2015). "The Terror Strategist: Secret Files Reveal the Structure of Islamic State". Der Spiegel. Reardon, Martin (6 July 2015). "ISIL and the management of savagery". Al Jazeera English. Gude, Ken (November 2015). Anti-Muslim Sentiment Is a Serious Threat to American Security (PDF). Center for American Progress. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2023.  • Burke, Jason (14 November 2015). "Islamic State 'Goes Global' with Paris Attacks". The Observer. Gambhir, Harleen (February 2015). ISIS Global Intelligence Summary: January 7 – February 18 (PDF) (Report). Washington, DC: Institute for the Study of War. Chotiner, Isaac (12 July 2016). "The ISIS Correspondent [interview with Rukmini Callimachi]". Slate. Naji, Abu Bakr (23 May 2006). The Management of Savagery: The Most Critical Stage Through Which the Umma Will Pass (PDF). John M. Olin Institute for Strategic Studies at Harvard University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2015. McCoy, Terrence (12 August 2014). "The calculated madness of the Islamic State's horrifying brutality". The Washington Post. Retrieved 1 September 2014.  • Crooke, Alastair (30 June 2014). "The ISIS' 'Management of Savagery' in Iraq". HuffPost.  • Hassan, Hassan (8 February 2015). "Isis has reached new depths of depravity. But there is a brutal logic behind it". The Guardian. Wright, Lawrence (16 June 2014). "ISIS's Savage Strategy in Iraq". The New Yorker. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Atran, Scott; Hamid, Nafees (16 November 2015). "Paris: The War ISIS Wants". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 20 November 2015. Erdbrink, Thomas (7 June 2017). "Iran Assails Saudi Arabia After Pair of Deadly Terrorist Attacks". The New York Times. Hubbard, Ben (24 July 2014). "Life in a Jihadist Capital: Order With a Darker Side". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Weiss, Michael; Hassan, Hassan (15 April 2016). "Everything We Knew About This ISIS Mastermind Was Wrong". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Barrett, Richard (November 2014). The Islamic State (PDF) (Report). The Soufan Group. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2015.  • Moore, Jack (22 April 2015). "ISIS Replace Injured Leader Baghdadi With Former Physics Teacher". Newsweek. Retrieved 7 May 2015. Thompson, Nick; Shubert, Attika (18 September 2014). "The anatomy of ISIS: How the 'Islamic State' is run, from oil to beheadings". CNN. Retrieved 21 September 2014. Ruthven, Malise (9 July 2015). "Inside the Islamic State. Review of Islamic State: The Digital Caliphate by Abdel Bari Atwan". The New York Review of Books. Sly, Liz (5 April 2015). "How Saddam Hussein's former military officers and spies are controlling Isis". The Independent.  • Sly, Liz (4 April 2015). "The hidden hand behind the Islamic State militants? Saddam Hussein's". The Washington Post. Hubbard, Ben; Schmitt, Eric (27 August 2014). "Military Skill and Terrorist Technique Fuel Success of ISIS". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 August 2014.  • Sly, Liz (5 April 2015). "How Saddam Hussein's former military officers and spies are controlling Isis". The Independent. London. Retrieved 21 April 2015. But American officials didn't anticipate that they would become not only adjuncts to al-Qaeda, but core members of the jihadist group. They were instrumental in the group's rebirth from the defeats inflicted on insurgents by the US military, which is now back in Iraq bombing many of the same men it had already fought twice before. Dearden, Lizzie (4 March 2016). "Former US military adviser David Kilcullen says there would be no Isis without Iraq invasion". The Independent. Retrieved 8 March 2016. Lake, Eli (11 February 2015). "Foreign Recruits Are Islamic State's Cannon Fodder". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2015.  • "Iraqis, Saudis call shots in Raqa, ISIL's Syrian 'capital'". Channel NewsAsia. 19 June 2014. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Abi-Habib, Maria (9 March 2015). "Splits in Islamic State Emerge as Its Ranks Expand". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 April 2015.  • Trofimov, Yaroslav (4 February 2015). "In Islamic State Stronghold of Raqqa, Foreign Fighters Dominate". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 April 2015. "IS group unit known as 'Emni' aims to export terror around the world". France 24. 4 August 2016.  • Callimachi, Rukmini (3 August 2016). "How a Secretive Branch of ISIS Built a Global Network of Killers". The New York Times. Retrieved 7 August 2016. Browne, Ryan; Mattingly, Phil (27 October 2019). Zeleny, Jeff; Liptak, Kevin; Diamond, Jeremy (eds.). "ISIS leader al-Baghdadi believed to have been killed in a US military raid, sources say". CNN. Lubold, Gordon; Abdulrahim, Raja (27 October 2019). "Islamic State Leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Is Dead, Trump Says". The Wall Street Journal. "Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi killed in US raid, says Donald Trump – latest updates". The Guardian. 27 October 2019. "US targeted ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: US officials". Al Jazeera English. 27 October 2019. Newburger, Emma (27 October 2019). "Trump confirms ISIS leader Baghdadi is dead after US raid in Syria — 'He died like a coward'". CNBC. Perraudin, Frances (27 October 2019). "Isis leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi killed in US raid, says Donald Trump". The Guardian. "Turkish-U.S. military forces exchanged information ahead of U.S. operation in Syria". Reuters. 27 October 2019. Archived from the original on 27 October 2019.  • T.C. Millî Savunma Bakanlığı [@tcsavunma] (27 October 2019). "Prior to the US Operation in Idlib Province of Syria last night, information exchange and coordination between the military authorities of both countries took place" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Factbox: World reacts to announcement of Islamic State leader Baghdadi's death". Reuters. 27 October 2019. "Trump says U.S. may release parts of Baghdadi raid video". Reuters. 28 October 2019. Withnall, Adam (16 June 2017). "Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi dead: Russia says it may have killed Isis leader in Raqqa air strike". The Independent. "Al-Baghdadi nominates Iraqi Abdullah Qardash as his successor to lead Daesh". The Middle East Monitor. 9 August 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2019.  • Siegel, Jordan (22 August 2019). "Ailing Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi puts 'Professor' Abdullah Qardash in charge of Isis". The Times. Times Newspapers Limited. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 27 October 2019. "With Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi gone, what next for ISIL?". Al Jazeera English. 29 October 2019. Retrieved 29 October 2019. Katz, Rita [@Rita_Katz] (17 September 2019). "1)ALERT: w/ yesterday's #Baghdadi speech, false articles cont. to circulate about an #Amaq message that reported the successor of #ISIS leader" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Trump says al-Baghdadi's 'number one replacement' is dead". Al Jazeera English. 29 October 2019. "Trump says likely Baghdadi successor killed by U.S. troops". Reuters. 29 October 2019. "ISIS spokesman Al-Muhajir killed in U.S. airstrike in Syria". BNO News. 27 October 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2019. "Islamic State names its new leader". BBC News. 31 October 2019. "Statement by President Joe Biden". The White House. 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Hubbard, Ben (30 November 2022). "Islamic State Chief Is Dead and New One Is Picked. Both Are Unknown". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Martin, David; Patterson, William (17 February 2023). "Senior ISIS leader killed, 4 U.S. troops and working dog wounded in northeast Syria raid". CBS News. Retrieved 17 February 2023. The Islamic State: How Its Leadership Is Organized on YouTube "Rule of Terror: Living under ISIS in Syria" (PDF). United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2014. Two women release extraordinary footage of what life is really like living under Isis. Independent. 13 March 2016.  • "Deserters describe life under ISIL rule". Al Jazeera English. 13 October 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. McCoy, Terrence (13 June 2013). "ISIL, beheadings and the success of horrifying violence". The Washington Post. Retrieved 23 June 2014. Haytham Mustafa (31 December 2016). "Islamic State replaces Syrian officials by foreign jihadists in Raqqa". ARA News. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016. "These are the 'crimes' Isis punishes with amputation, stoning and crucifixion". Independent.co.uk. 22 January 2015. Cook and Vale. "From Daesh to 'Diaspora." International Centre for the Study of Radicalisation. King's College London. pp. 14–19. "Sa është numri i xhihadistëve të ISIS-it?" [How Many Jihadists ISIS?] (in Albanian). Tirana, Albania: Top Channel. Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 22 February 2015. Weaver, Mary Anne (19 April 2015). "Her Majesty's Jihadists". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 April 2015. "UN Report on 15,000 Foreigners Joining ISIS Fighters in Syria And Iraq Will Shock You". International Business Times. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014. Windrem, Robert (28 February 2015). "ISIS By the Numbers: Foreign Fighter Total Keeps Growing". NBC News. Retrieved 10 December 2015. Sarhan, Arme. "CIA: 30,000 foreign fighters have traveled to Syria and Iraq to join ISIS". Iraq News. 29 September 2015. "World's Richest Terror Army". BBC. 24 April 2015. p. 25:06 – within a 59 minute programme. excerpt from, interview with Abu Hajjar, a former "senior leader of IS": "How much money would a foreign fighter receive as a wage?" "A foreigner? They aren't given a salary. They are given food and housing, not money." "Kyrgyzstan: Abusive Crackdowns on 'Extremist' Material". Human Rights Watch. 17 September 2018. Ismay, John (17 October 2013). "Insight into How Insurgents Fought in Iraq". The New York Times. Retrieved 22 August 2014. Lister, Charles (7 August 2014). "Not Just Iraq: The Islamic State Is Also on the March in Syria". HuffPost. Retrieved 11 August 2014. "ISIS used US-made anti-tank missiles near Palmyra". Business Insider. 9 June 2015.  • "U.S. missile brought down Russian helicopter in Syria: report". Japan Times. 10 July 2016. Crawford, Jamie (14 December 2017). "Report details where ISIS gets its weapons". CNN. Retrieved 27 December 2017. "Treasury Targets ISIS Leader Involved in Chemical Weapons Development". United States Department of the Treasury. 12 June 2017. Al-Jaburi is an Iraq-based, ISIS senior leader in charge of factories producing improvised explosive devices (IEDs), vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices (VBIEDs), and explosives, and he is involved in the development of chemical weapons Cowell, Alan (10 July 2014). "Low-Grade Nuclear Material Is Seized by Rebels in Iraq, U.N. Says". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 July 2014.  • Sherlock, Ruth (10 July 2014). "Iraq jihadists seize 'nuclear material', says ambassador to UN". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2014. Blake, Paul (11 September 2015). "US official: 'IS making and using chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria'". BBC. Retrieved 16 September 2015.  • Dearden, Lizzie (11 September 2015). "Isis 'manufacturing and using chemical weapons' in Iraq and Syria, US official claims". Independent. London. Retrieved 16 September 2015. Water and Violence Link: Crisis of Survival in the Middle East (PDF) (Report). Mumbai, India: Strategic Foresight. December 2014. ISBN 978-81-88262-24-3. Eshel, Tamir (12 October 2016). "Weaponized Mini-Drones Entering the Fight". Defense Update. Retrieved 25 February 2017. Eshel, Tamir (17 January 2017). "RAF Strikes Daesh Drone Facility in Mosul". Defense Update. Retrieved 25 February 2017. Saul, Heather (31 October 2014). "Isis now targeting women with guides on how to be the 'ultimate wives of jihad'". Independent. London. Retrieved 22 January 2015. Perešin, Anita (2015). "Fatal Attraction: Western Muslimas and ISIS". Perspectives on Terrorism. 9 (3): 22. ISSN 2334-3745. JSTOR 26297379. The exact number of Muslim women from the West who joined ISIS is still not officially confirmed. It is estimated that their number exceeds 550, or that they represent 10 percent of the number of all ISIS' Western foreign fighters. Koninkrijksrelaties, Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en (14 December 2017). "Jihadist women, a threat not to be underestimated – Publication – pdf". AIVD. p. 6. Retrieved 1 December 2018. Abdul-Alim, Jamaal (8 March 2015). "ISIS 'Manifesto' Spells Out Role for Women". The Atlantic. Retrieved 23 November 2015. Winter, Charlie (5 February 2015). "QUILLIAM Translation and Analysis of Islamic State Manifesto on Jihadist Brides". Quilliam Foundation. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2015. "Inside the Islamic State kidnap machine". BBC News. 22 September 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2016. "Financing of the Terrorist Organisation Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant" (PDF). Financial Action Task Force. February 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. Khalaf, Roula; Jones, Sam (17 June 2014). "Selling terror: how Isis details its brutality". Financial Times. Retrieved 18 June 2014. Matthews, Dylan (24 July 2014). "The surreal infographics ISIS is producing, translated". Vox. Retrieved 25 July 2014. Allam, Hannah (23 June 2014). "Records show how Iraqi extremists withstood U.S. anti-terror efforts". McClatchy News. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 25 June 2014. The Editorial Board (12 March 2017). "Man Without an ISIS Plan". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 March 2017. Chulov, Martin (15 June 2014). "How an arrest in Iraq revealed Isis's $2bn jihadist network". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Moore, Jack (11 June 2014). "Mosul Seized: Jihadis Loot $429m from City's Central Bank to Make Isis World's Richest Terror Force". International Business Times. Retrieved 19 June 2014. McCoy, Terrence (12 June 2014). "ISIS just stole $425 million, Iraqi governor says, and became the 'world's richest terrorist group'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 18 June 2014.  • Carey, Glen; Haboush, Mahmoud; Viscusi, Gregory (26 June 2014). "Financing Jihad: Why ISIS Is a Lot Richer Than Al-Qaeda". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 19 July 2014. Windrem, Robert (24 June 2014). "U.S. Official Doubts ISIS Mosul Bank Heist Windfall". NBC News. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Daragahi, Borzou (17 July 2014). "Biggest bank robbery that 'never happened' – $400m Isis heist". Financial Times. Retrieved 21 July 2014. Freifeld, Karen (19 October 2022). "Lafarge pleads guilty to U.S. charge of supporting Islamic State, to pay $778 million". Reuters. "Isis to mint own Islamic dinar coins in gold, silver and copper". The Guardian. 21 November 2014.  • "Islamic State reportedly buying silver, gold as it prepares to issue currency". McClatchy. 20 November 2014. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 21 November 2014.  • Ensor, Josie (14 November 2014). "Islamic State announces its own currency". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 17 November 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2014.  • Jabbar, Marwan (3 September 2015). "Gold at End of Extremist Rainbow: Islamic State Release Their Own 'Fake' Currency". Niqash. Baghdad. Archived from the original on 24 November 2015. Retrieved 4 June 2022. Dearden, Lizzie (25 March 2016). "Isis fails to bring in own currency, relies on 'satanic' US dollars instead". The Independent. Retrieved 6 March 2018. Qaddour, Kinana (13 October 2017). "Inside ISIS' Dysfunctional Schools". Foreign Affairs. ISSN 0015-7120. Education in Mosul under the Islamic State (ISIS) 2015–2016 (PDF) (Report). Iraqi Institution for Development. Retrieved 5 May 2020 – via Global Campaign for Education. "Zarqawi Letter". 2001-2009.state.gov. Office of Electronic Information, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State. 12 February 2004. Retrieved 19 August 2022. Caris, Charles C.; Reynolds, Samuel (July 2014). "ISIS Governance in Syria" (PDF). Institute for the Study of War. "Exclusive: In turf war with Afghan Taliban, Islamic State loyalists gain ground". Reuters. 29 June 2015.  • "Islamic State and the crisis in Iraq and Syria in maps". BBC News. 18 October 2016.  • "Pakistan Taliban splinter group vows allegiance to Islamic State". Reuters. 18 November 2014. "Islamic State moves in on al-Qaeda turf". BBC News. 25 June 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2015. Weiss, Caleb (26 October 2016). "Islamic State in Somalia claims capture of port town". The Long War Journal. Roul, Animesh (May 2016). "How Bangladesh Became Fertile Ground for al-Qa'ida and the Islamic State". CTC Sentinel. 9 (5). Combating Terrorism Center at West Point. Archived from the original on 9 October 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "In New Special Publication, IS-Aligned Myanmarese Group Calls on Muslims to Join Armed Jihad". Jihadist Threat. SITE Intelligence Group. 3 January 2022. "IS Supporter Shares Alleged Video of "Soldiers of the Caliphate in Thailand"". Jihadist Threat. SITE Intelligence Group. 28 December 2021. Weiss, Caleb (24 June 2016). "The Islamic State grows in the Philippines". The Long War Journal. Winter, Charlie (22 July 2016). "Has the Islamic State Abandoned Its Provincial Model in the Philippines?". War on the Rocks. "Although they have been besieged by Russia, Iran, and the regime for two years, thousands of ISIS members are still within an area of 4000 km2 without any intention to launch a military operation against them". Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 20 February 2019. Fabricius, Peter (12 August 2020). "Mozambique: Mocimboa da Praia: Islamic State insurgents recapture strategic port town". Daily Maverick. "Boko Haram leader, Shekau, dead as ISWAP fighters capture Sambisa forest -- Report". Premium Times. 20 May 2021. "IS Supporters Urge Establishment of "New Provinces" in Indonesia". Jihadist Threat. SITE Intelligence Group. 17 November 2021. Diallo, Tiemoko (14 October 2022). "Islamist militants in Mali kill hundreds, displace thousands in eastern advance". Reuters. Ban Ki-Moon (24 September 2014). "Secretary-General's remarks to Security Council High-Level Summit on Foreign Terrorist Fighters". United Nations. Retrieved 18 November 2014. Hassan, Steven (21 October 2014). "ISIS Is a Cult That Uses Terrorism: A Fresh New Strategy". The World Post. Retrieved 10 November 2014. Richter, Elihu D.; Markus, Dror Kris; Tait, Casey (2018). "Incitement, genocide, genocidal terror, and the upstream role of indoctrination: can epidemiologic models predict and prevent?". Public Health Reviews. 39 (1): 30. doi:10.1186/s40985-018-0106-7. PMC 6196410. PMID 30377548. ""They're delusional": Rivals ridicule ISIS declaration of Islamic state". CBS News. 30 June 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2014. Hasan, Mehdi (10 March 2015). "Mehdi Hasan: How Islamic is Islamic State?". New Statesman. Retrieved 7 July 2015. Consider the various statements of Muslim groups such as the Organisation of Islamic Co-operation, representing 57 countries (Isis has "nothing to do with Islam"); the Islamic Society of North America (Isis's actions are "in no way representative of what Islam actually teaches"); al-Azhar University in Cairo, the most prestigious seat of learning in the Sunni Muslim world (Isis is acting "under the guise of this holy religion ... in an attempt to export their false Islam"); and even Saudi Arabia's Salafist Grand Mufti, Abdul Aziz al ash-Sheikh (Isis is "the number-one enemy of Islam"). Al-Yaqoubi (2015), pp. xvii–xviii. Khan, Sheema (29 September 2014). "Another battle with Islam's 'true believers'". The Globe and Mail. Toronto, Canada.  • Hasan, Usama (July 2012). The Balance of Islam in Challenging Extremism (PDF) (Report). Quilliam Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2014.  • Jebara, Mohamad (6 February 2015). "Imam Mohamad Jebara: Fruits of the tree of extremism". Ottawa Citizen. Al-Yaqoubi (2015), pp. xvii–xviii, see also p.8. "The slow backlash – Sunni religious authorities turn against Islamic State". The Economist. 6 September 2014. Al-Yaqoubi (2015), pp. 75–80. Bin Baz, Abdullah. "من هم الخوارج". binbaz.org.sa (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 13 May 2020. Retrieved 1 May 2020. "Saudi Arabia's Grand Mufti denounces Islamic State group as un-Islamic". Reuters. 25 August 2014. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Shaikh, Amad (1 October 2014). "Muslim Scholars Letter to al-Baghdadi of ISIS or ISIL – A Missed Opportunity". Muslim Matters. Retrieved 8 November 2014. Markoe, Lauren (24 September 2013). "Muslim Scholars Release Open Letter to Islamic State Meticulously Blasting Its Ideology". HuffPost. Religious News Service. Retrieved 25 September 2014.  • Smith, Samuel (25 September 2014). "International Coalition of Muslim Scholars Refute ISIS' Religious Arguments in Open Letter to al-Baghdadi". The Christian Post. Retrieved 18 October 2014. "Open Letter to Al-Baghdadi". September 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2014. Retrieved 25 September 2014. Milmo, Cahal (25 September 2014). "Isis is 'an offence to Islam', says international coalition of major Islamic scholars". Independent. London. Retrieved 8 October 2014. More than 120 Sunni imams and academics, including some of the Muslim world's most respected scholars, signed the 18-page document which outlines 24 separate grounds on which the terror group violates the tenets of Islam. "Ethnic cleansing on a historic scale: The Islamic State's systematic targeting of minorities in northern Iraq" (PDF). Amnesty International. 2 September 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 March 2015. "'Gruesome evidence of ethnic cleansing' in Iraq". Deutsche Welle. 2 September 2014. "Head of Egypt's al-Azhar condemns ISIS 'barbarity'". Al Arabiya English. Agence France-Presse. 3 December 2014.  • Al-Awsat, Asharq (13 December 2014). "Egypt's Al-Azhar stops short of declaring ISIS apostates – Azhar statement rejects practice of takfirism". Asharq Al Awsat. Archived from the original on 6 July 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. Maged, Amany (15 January 2015). "In search of 'renewal' – Al-Azhar is at the centre of an escalating controversy". Al Ahram Weekly. Archived from the original on 15 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015.  • Fouad, Ahmed. "Al-Azhar refuses to consider the Islamic State an apostate". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 6 October 2015. The sheikh of Al-Azhar, Ahmed al-Tayeb, repeated his rejection of declaring IS apostates on 1 Jan, during a meeting with editors-in-chief of Egyptian newspapers. This sparked criticism from a number of religious, political and media parties, especially since Al-Azhar could have renounced the Nigerian mufti's statement on IS without addressing the issue of whether or not Al-Azhar considers the group apostates "Sheikh Al-Azhar Speech in opening of conference". Muslim World League. 22 February 2015. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Agarwall, Priyangi (9 December 2015). "70,000 clerics issue fatwa against terrorism, 15 lakh Muslims support it". The Times of India. TNN.  • Jackson, Molly (10 December 2015). "70,000 Indian clerics issue fatwa against terrorists". The Christian Science Monitor.  • Mortimer, Caroline (10 December 2015). "70,000 Muslim clerics just issued a fatwa against terrorism". Independent. Strange, Hannah (5 July 2014). "Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi addresses Muslims in Mosul". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2014. Staff writers (2 August 2016). "Al-Qaradawi: Rulers Of UAE And Daesh Leaders Are Two Sides Of The Same Coin | English – Middle East Press News Agency". Middle East News Agency. Retrieved 4 August 2016. Al-Yaqoubi (2015), p. 37. Creswell, Robyn; Haykel, Bernard (8 June 2015). "Battle Lines". The New Yorker. In the most recent issue of Dabiq, ISIS's English-language magazine, a female writer encourages women to emigrate to "the lands of the Islamic State" even if it means travelling without a male companion, a shocking breach of traditional Islamic law. This may be a cynical ploy—a lure for runaways. But it is in keeping with the jihadists' attack on parental authority and its emphasis on individual empowerment, including the power of female believers to renounce families they do not view as authentically Muslim. Creswell, Robyn; Haykel, Bernard (8 June 2015). "Battle Lines". The New Yorker. It has also created a female morality police, a shadowy group called the al-Khansa' Brigades, who insure proper deportment in ISIS-held towns. ... Al-Khansa' was a female poet of the pre-Islamic era who converted to Islam and became a companion of the Prophet, and her elegies for her male relations are keystones of the genre [of Islamic poetry]. The name therefore suggests an institution with deep roots in the past, and yet there has never been anything like the Brigades in Islamic history, nor do they have an equivalent anywhere else in the Arab world. Halleck, Thomas (26 September 2014). "Thousands of French Muslims Protest Herve Gourdel Beheading". International Business Times. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "A Short History Of ISIS Propaganda Videos". The World Post. 11 March 2015. Al-Yaqoubi (2015), p. 19. Ghosts of Aleppo (Full Length). VICE News. 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 – via YouTube.  • "Ghosts of Aleppo (Full Length)". VICE News. October 2014. Joscelyn, Thomas (25 October 2015). "Al Qaeda appears 'moderate' compared to Islamic State, veteran jihadist says". Long War Journal.  • Joscelyn, Thomas (26 October 2015). "A rare interview with an experienced Al Qaeda commander shows how the group is using ISIS to make itself look 'moderate'". Business Insider. Retrieved 20 November 2015.  • Joscelyn, Thomas (5 June 2015). "The Al Nusrah Front's 'inherited jihad'". Long War Journal.  • Joscelyn, Thomas (20 July 2015). "Officials from Al Nusrah Front, Ahrar al Sham vow to continue fight against Islamic State". Long War Journal.  • Joscelyn, Thomas (9 February 2015). "Al Qaeda Uses ISIS to Try to Present Itself as Respectable, Even Moderate". The Weekly Standard. Rikab, Waleed (9 September 2015). "The Plight of Syria's Druze Minority and U.S. Options". Syria Comment. al-Taie, Khalid (13 February 2015). "Iraq churches, mosques under ISIL attack". Al-Shorfa. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015. "Al-Qaeda Cuts Ties with Syrian Rebel Group". The Atlantic. 4 February 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2020. Joscelyn, Thomas (2 November 2015). "Al Qaeda chief calls for jihadist unity to 'liberate Jerusalem'". Long War Journal. ar:Uncover the Mask with Evidence and Confidence كشف القناع بالحجة ولإقناع داعش on YouTube "Number of ISIS defectors growing, disillusioned with killing fellow Muslims: Study". The Straits Times. London. Agence France-Presse. 21 September 2015. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Neumann, Peter R. (22 September 2015). "Defectors: ISIS is killing Muslims, not protecting them". CNN. Retrieved 13 October 2015.  • Robins-Early, Nick (21 September 2015). "New Report Reveals Why Fighters Are Quitting ISIS". HuffPost. Retrieved 13 October 2015. "A 'disgraceful reality': Islamic State spies posing as defectors". Syria Direct. 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 5 November 2015. Almond, Ian (7 January 2015). "Are we ISIS?". Political Theology. Retrieved 21 April 2019. Engelhardt, Tom (3 September 2014). "How America made ISIS". Le Monde Diplomatique. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "In our world beyond nations, the future is medieval". New Scientist. 3 September 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2019. "Al-Qaida Sanctions List". United Nations. Archived from the original on 25 September 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014.  • "The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee – 1267". United Nations Web Services Section. United Nations. Archived from the original on 5 April 2015.  • "Security Council Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee Amends Entry". Retrieved 8 June 2015. Wahlisch, Martin (2010). "EU Terrorist Listing – An Overview about Listing and Delisting Procedures" (PDF). Berghof Foundation. Retrieved 3 November 2014. "Proscribed Terrorist Organisations, pp.13–15" (PDF). Home Office. 20 June 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2014. "Foreign Terrorist Organizations". Bureau of Counterterrorism. United States Department of State. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Listed terrorist organisations". Australian National Security. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Currently listed entities". Public Safety Canada. Retrieved 31 July 2014. Al Salhy, Suadad (4 February 2018). "Iraq issues 'most wanted' terror list". Arab News.  • الامن النيابية: داعش انتهى عسكريا في العراق بعد قتل واعتقال 75 الف عنصر. Al Sumaria (in Arabic). Retrieved 7 August 2018. Kaplan, Hilal (3 September 2014). "Charging Turkey for ISIS". Daily Sabah.Mahcupyan, Etyen (20 September 2014). "ISIS, Turkey and the US". Daily Sabah. "Saudi Arabia designates Muslim Brotherhood terrorist group". Reuters. 7 March 2014. "BNPT Declares ISIS a Terrorist Organization". Tempo. 2 August 2014. "List of terror groups published by United Arab Emirates". Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. "Malaysia designates ISIS as terrorist group, vows tough action: Report". The Straits Times. 25 September 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2014. "The Federal Council adopts Ordinance banning the Islamic State Group and related organisations". Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2019. "Court affirms ISIS' 'terrorist group' designation". Daily News Egypt. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014.  • "Egypt brands jihadist ISIL a 'terrorist group'". Hürriyet Daily News. 30 November 2014. "Banned Organisations". Archived from the original on 1 January 2015. Retrieved 16 December 2014. "India bans IS". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 16 December 2014. "Russia calls on all states to put Islamic State, Jabhat al-Nusra on terrorist lists". Russian News Agency TASS. 29 December 2015. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2014. Paraszczuk, Joanna (2 March 2015). "Kyrgyzstan Bans IS, Designates It As Terror Group". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Terrorism (Suppression of Financing) Act (Cap. 325), item 1 of First Schedule Manal. "Syria condemns terrorist acts in Iraq, expresses solidarity with Iraqi government, army and people". Syrian Arab News Agency. "Jordan launches airstrikes against ISIS". News Corp Australia. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 5 August 2015. "Report says ISIL terrorist group has a base near US". Iran Daily. 16 April 2015.  • "Larijani Reminds Regional States of Iran's Sacrifices against ISIL Terrorists". Fars News Agency. 12 March 2015. Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2017.  • "Iran Says Arrests ISIL Suspects at Border". Tasnim News Agency. 8 September 2014.  • "Iranian Official: US Not Serious about Countering ISIL Terrorists". Al-Alam. 26 September 2014. "No Room for terrorist". T&T Guardian. 5 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 April 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2023. Gishkori, Zahid. "Islamic State listed among proscribed outfits". The Express Tribune. "公安調査庁はトルコのクルディスタン労働者党、パレスチナのハマースを「世界のテロ・武装組織等」から削除（青山弘之） - エキスパート". Yahoo!ニュース (in Japanese). Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2023. 国際テロ組織 世界のテロ組織等の概要・動向 – 国際テロリズム要覧（Web版） – 公安調査庁 (in Japanese). Ministry of Justice (Japan). IS叫戰 點名台灣 (in Chinese (Taiwan)). Apple Daily. 25 November 2015. "Xi Jinping's speech on the event of a Chinese citizen being killed by terrorist organization" (in Chinese). mfa.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "Operation Pacific Eagle–Philippines Lead Inspector General Report To The United States Congress" (PDF). defense.gov. p. 20. Retrieved 31 December 2020. The U.S. Embassy in Manila reported that the Anti-Terrorism Act also streamlines designation of terrorist groups by automatically recognizing all UN terrorist group designations under Philippine law. "ATC labels CPP-NPA, IS East Asia terrorist organizations". GMA News. 31 December 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Azerbaijan jails 7 who joined militants in Syria, Iraq". The Washington Post. 16 November 2018. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. "Bahrain Terrorist List (Individuals – Entities)". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Kingdom of Bahrain. Retrieved 29 November 2020. "5 Kuwaitis acquitted of funding Daesh, Al-Nusra Front". Middle East Monitor. 7 January 2016. "The list of terrorists and extremists". Financial Monitoring Department. National Bank of Tajikistan. Retrieved 29 November 2020. "The list of prohibited foreign organizations in Kazakhstan". Government of Kazakhstan. 3 November 2020. Akbarzai, Sahar; Ehsan, Popalzai; Kottasová, Ivana (3 July 2022). "Taliban labels Islamic State affiliate a 'false sect'". CNN. Retrieved 4 July 2022. The Taliban has declared the Islamic State affiliate ISIS-K a corrupt "sect" and forbidden Afghans from contact with it. "Resolution 1267 (1999) Adopted by the Security Council at its 4051st meeting on 15 October 1999". UNHCR. Eddy, Melissa (12 September 2014). "Germany Bans Support for ISIS". The New York Times. Roberts, Janette (17 September 2014). "ISIL banned in Germany". Sixth Sense. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. "Drucksache 18/759" (PDF) (in German). Deutscher Bundestag. https://scholarlycommons.law.emory.edu/eilr/vol30/iss4/1/ (pdf) p. 537: "ISIS is furthermore banned in... Switzerland (since October 2014). Switzerland’s ban prohibits propaganda in favor of, and financial support for, ISIS in Switzerland" Pandey, Avaneesh (16 December 2014). "India Bans ISIS After Government Raises Concerns Over Group's Online Presence". International Business Times. Lister, Tim (13 June 2014). "ISIS: The first terror group to build an Islamic state?". CNN International. "Terrorist Designation of ISIS General Directorate of Provinces Leaders". state.gov. Vick, Karl; Baker, Aryn (11 June 2014). "Extremists in Iraq Continue March Toward Baghdad". Time. Retrieved 23 June 2014. Mazzetti, Mark; Schmitt, Eric; Landler, Mark (10 September 2014). "Struggling to Gauge ISIS Threat, Even as U.S. Prepares to Act". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 September 2014. Porter, Tom (10 August 2015). "Iraq War Created Isis, Concedes David Miliband". International Business Times. Retrieved 12 March 2015. Mishra, Pankaj (24 July 2015). "How to think about Islamic State". The Guardian. "National Security Presidential Memorandum no. 3" (PDF). Burke, Jason (26 May 2015). "Islamist fighters drawn from half the world's countries, says UN". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 May 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2015. Shiv Malik (28 November 2014). "Support for Isis stronger in Arabic social media in Europe than in Syria". The Guardian. "Views of ISIS Overwhelmingly Negative". Pew Research Center. 17 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023.  • Jacob Poushter191 comments. "Most dislike ISIS in Muslim countries | Pew Research Center". Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 21 May 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Concerns about Islamic Extremism on the Rise in Middle East | Pew Research Center". Pewglobal.org. July 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2016. "Coalition commanders seek plan to counter Daesh advance". Gulf News. Agence France-Presse. 14 October 2014. "Joint Statement Issued by Partners at the Counter-ISIL Coalition Ministerial Meeting" (Press release). US State Department. 3 December 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2014. "Special Report: Operation Inherent Resolve". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved 3 November 2017. Special Reports: Operation Inherent Resolve (Report). U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Ryan, Missy (18 January 2018). "Civilian deaths tripled in U.S.-led campaign against ISIS in 2017, watchdog alleges". The Washington Post.  • Ryan, Missy (18 January 2018). "US-led coalition killed up to 6000 civilians in fight against IS: watchdog says". The Sydney Morning Herald. Mroue, Bassem; Rosa, Andrea (22 June 2016). "Lebanese army slowly crushing extremists near Syria border". Associated Press.  • "Lebanese army slowly crushing extremists near Syria border". The Washington Post. Associated Press. 22 June 2016. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016.  • Saab, Bilal (May 2018). "The United States Has Not Lost Lebanon". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. "Mali: French forces kill 33 Islamist militants in Mali December 21". GardaWorld. Retrieved 26 December 2019. Dehghanpisheh, Babak (3 August 2014). "Iran's elite Guards fighting in Iraq to push back Islamic State". Reuters. Smith, Alexander (26 September 2014). "Russia Tells Iraq It's 'Ready' to Support Fight Against ISIS". NBC News. Retrieved 27 September 2014.  • Nordland, Rod (29 June 2014). "Russian Jets and Experts Sent to Iraq to Aid Army". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Russia 'kills 8 ISIS militants' in Caucasus raid". The Daily Star. Beirut, Lebanon. Agence France-Presse.  • Wood, L. Todd (30 June 2015). "Russia declares counter-terror ops regime in North Caucasus". The Washington Times. Payne, Ed; Starr, Barbara; Cullinane, Susannah (30 September 2015). "Russia launches first airstrikes in Syria". CNN. Retrieved 30 September 2015. Lomsadze, Giorgi (24 September 2014). "Azerbaijan Arrests Alleged ISIS and Other Islamic Fighters". EurasiaNet.org. Retrieved 18 February 2015.  • "Azerbaijani media: Embassy increases security in Baku because of ISIS threatening". Panorama. 26 January 2015. Retrieved 18 January 2015. "Security forces arrest local Islamic State commander in Lahore: sources". The Express Tribune. Lahore, Pakistan. Reuters. 21 January 2015. Retrieved 7 March 2015. الجيش واللجان الشعبية يستعيدون السيطرة على جبل نوفان الاستراتيجي. almasalah.com (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 30 May 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2023. "ISIL, Nusra Clash Fiercely on Qalmoun Barrens: 25 Killed, Injured". Al-Manar News. 17 December 2014. Todd, Brian (22 January 2015). "ISIS gaining ground in Yemen, competing with al Qaeda". CNN. Joscelyn, Thomas (9 July 2015). "Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb backs jihadists fighting Islamic State in Derna, Libya". Long War Journal. "Suspected Leader of Pro-IS Al-Shabab Faction Reported Killed". Voice of America News. 22 November 2015. O'Donnell, Lynne (12 January 2015). "ISIS reportedly moves into Afghanistan, is even fighting Taliban". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 13 February 2015.  • "ISIL and the Taliban". Al Jazeera English. 1 November 2015. Archived from the original on 12 December 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2022. "ISIL warns Hamas in video message". Al Jazeera English. 1 July 2015. Mortada, Radwan (19 May 2014). "Hezbollah fighters and the "jihadis": Mad, drugged, homicidal, and hungry". Al Akhbar. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. "Islamic State leader urges attacks in Saudi Arabia: speech". Reuters. 13 November 2014. Mohammed, A. Salih (1 September 2014). "PKK forces impress in fight against Islamic State". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Aboufadel, Leith (3 September 2016). "Assyrians fight back in Iraq, Badanah village liberated from ISIS". Al Masdar News. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. ""داعش" يقطع رأس شخصان منتسبان لـ "حركة أمل" – الوكالة العربية للأخبار". alarabi.press. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi (10 August 2017). "Suqur al-Furat: A Pro-Assad Sha'itat Tribal Militia :: Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi". aymennjawad.org. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Aboufadel, Leith (24 October 2015). "Breaking: Syrian Army Reopens the Ithriyah-Salamiyah Road in East Hama After Defeating ISIS". Al-Masdar News. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2022. ""الجهاد الإسلامي": "داعش" عاجز أمامنا" [Islamic Jihad: ISIS is helpless before us]. Wattan.net (in Arabic). 21 July 2015. "مقتل قائد مليشيا "الحرس القومي العربي" في سورية". The New Arab (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "مقتل قيادي في "الجبهة الشعبية – القيادة العامة" وجرح قيادات أخرى بينهم نجل أحمد جبريل على تخوم مخيم اليرموك – رأي اليوم". raialyoum.com. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 17 January 2021. مندي, سميرة علي (12 June 2015). "فصائل سورية مسلحة تتفق على إسقاط النظام ومحاربة داعش". إذاعة العراق الحر. Retrieved 17 January 2021. ""مشمش" لقيادة القتال ضد "داعش" في المنطقة الشرقية". kassioun.org. 28 May 2014. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "مسلّحو الغوطة الشرقية يتأهبون لمواجهة "داعش"!". al-akhbar.com. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "قائد "فتح حلب": أوقفنا تقدم داعش وانتقلنا لمرحلة الهجوم". aa.com.tr. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "قوات المعارضة تصدّ هجوماً جديداً لـ"داعش" شمال حلب". The New Arab (in Arabic). Retrieved 17 January 2021. "More reinforcements pour into Palmyra as the Syrian Army prepares to storm the city". Al-Masdar News. 22 March 2016. Archived from the original on 23 March 2016. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "بوابة الحركات الاسلامية: "جيش المختار".. الجسد عراقي والعقل إيراني". islamist-movements.com. Retrieved 17 January 2021. Roggio, Bill (11 June 2013). "Suicide bombers kill 14 in Damascus". Long War Journal. Retrieved 3 June 2015. Spencer, Richard (19 May 2013). "Syria: Jabhat al-Nusra split after leader's pledge of support for al-Qaeda". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Sly, Liz (3 February 2014). "Al-Qaeda disavows any ties with radical Islamist ISIS group in Syria, Iraq". The Washington Post. Retrieved 7 February 2014. Lilli, Eugenio (14 November 2014). "How would a deal between al-Qaeda and Isil change Syria's civil war?". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018.  • Prothero, Mitchell (4 March 2014). "ISIS joins other rebels to thwart Syria regime push near Lebanon". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2015. Ghosh, Bobby (12 January 2015). "ISIL and Al Qaeda: Terror's frenemies". Quartz. Meek, James Gordon (10 September 2015). "Al Qaeda Leader Al-Zawahiri Declares War on ISIS 'Caliph' Al-Baghdadi". ABC News – via Yahoo! News. Fahmy, Omar (9 September 2015). "Al Qaeda calls Islamic State illegitimate but suggests cooperation". Reuters. Retrieved 11 September 2015. Larson, Nina (14 November 2014). "UN probe: ISIS committing 'crimes against humanity' in Syria". The Daily Star. Beirut, Lebanon. "UN 'may include' Isis on Syrian war crimes list". BBC News. 26 July 2014. "Video shows Islamic State executes scores of Syrian soldiers". Reuters. 28 August 2014. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "ISIS accused of crimes against humanity". Dubai, United Arab Emirates: Al Arabiya. 14 November 2014. "Libya: Extremists Terrorizing Derna Residents". Human Rights Watch. 27 November 2014. "IS beheads Syrian captives in human 'Eid sacrifice'". The New Arab. 13 September 2016. "KITAB AL-ADAHI (BOOK OF SACRIFICES)". International Islamic University Malaysia. Botobekov, Uran (27 February 2023). "How ISIS and al-Qaeda Exploit the Earthquake in Turkey to Mobilize Support". Homeland Security Today. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Iraq Body Count database, accessed October 14, 2023. Abass, Ademola (2014). Complete International Law: Text, Cases and Materials (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Al-Yaqoubi, Muhammad (2015). Refuting ISIS: A Rebuttal Of Its Religious And Ideological Foundations. Sacred Knowledge. ISBN 978-1-908224-12-5. Boffey, Daniel. "'Islamic State' is a slur on our faith, say leading Muslims". The Guardian. Gerhard Böwering, ed. (2013). The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13484-0. Chulov, Martin (11 December 2014). "Isis: the inside story". The Guardian. Fishman, Brian (2008). "Using the Mistakes of al Qaeda's Franchises to Undermine Its Strategies". Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science. 618: 46–54. doi:10.1177/0002716208316650. JSTOR 40375774. S2CID 146236345. Fraile Ordonez, Siobhan (28 September 2015). "The Non-Islamic Non-State". St Andrews Foreign Affairs Review. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2020. Morris, Andrea Michelle. "Who Becomes a Foreign Fighter? Characteristics of the Islamic State's Soldiers" Terrorism and Political Violence 35#2 (2023) pp 1–19; DOI:10.1080/09546553.2022.2144730 Simon, Steven (2008). "The Price of the Surge: How U.S. Strategy Is Hastening Iraq's Demise". Foreign Affairs. Vol. 87, no. 3. pp. 57–72, 74–76. JSTOR 20032651. Tausch, Arno (Spring 2015). "Estimates on the Global Threat of Islamic State Terrorism in the Face of the 2015 Paris and Copenhagen Attacks" (PDF). Middle East Review of International Affairs. 19 (1). Rubin Center, Research in International Affairs, Idc Herzliya, Israel. SSRN 2702356. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 April 2018. Retrieved 22 November 2019. Islamic State at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote The Islamic State by Council on Foreign Relations ISIS, Counter Extremism Project profile "'Islamic State': Raqqa's loss seals rapid rise and fall" by BBC News Frontline: Losing Iraq (July 2014), The Rise of ISIS (October 2014), Obama at War (May 2015), Escaping ISIS (July 2015), documentaries by PBS The Islamic State, August 2014 documentary by Vice News "ISIS: Portrait of a Jihadi Terrorist Organization", report by the Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center Operation Inherent Resolve updates "The Group That Calls Itself a State" Archived 19 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, publication by the Combating Terrorism Center Letter dated 24 July 2023 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertaking at the Wayback Machine (archived 23 August 2023), publication by the United Nations Security Council