The Batman franchise, based on the fictional superhero Batman who appears in American comic books published by DC Comics, has seen the release of various films. Created by Bob Kane and Bill Finger, the character first starred in two serial films in the 1940s: Batman and Batman and Robin. The character also appeared in the 1966 film Batman, which was a feature film adaptation of the 1960s Batman TV series starring Adam West and Burt Ward, who also starred in the film. Toward the end of the 1980s, the Warner Bros. studio began producing a series of feature films starring Batman, beginning with the 1989 film Batman, directed by Tim Burton and starring Michael Keaton. Burton and Keaton returned for the 1992 sequel Batman Returns, and in 1995, Joel Schumacher directed Batman Forever with Val Kilmer as Batman. Schumacher also directed the 1997 sequel Batman & Robin, which starred George Clooney. Batman & Robin was poorly received by both critics and fans, leading to the cancellation of Batman Unchained. Following the cancellation of two further film proposals, the franchise was rebooted in 2005 with Batman Begins, directed by Christopher Nolan and starring Christian Bale. Nolan returned to direct two further installments through the release of The Dark Knight in 2008 and The Dark Knight Rises in 2012, with Bale reprising his role in both films. Both sequels earned over $1 billion worldwide, making Batman the second film franchise to have two of its films earn more than $1 billion worldwide. Referred to as "the Dark Knight trilogy", the critical acclaim and commercial success of Nolan's films have been credited with restoring widespread popularity to the superhero, with the second installment considered one of the best superhero movies of all time. After Warner Bros. launched their own shared cinematic universe known as the DC Extended Universe in 2013, Ben Affleck was cast to portray Batman in the new expansive franchise, first appearing in 2016 with the Zack Snyder-directed film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. The film would begin a sequence of further DC Comics adaptations, including Justice League and Zack Snyder's Justice League crossover films featuring other DC Comics characters, and the stand-alone films The Batman, directed by Matt Reeves, with Robert Pattinson as Batman, and Joker, starring Joaquin Phoenix. Affleck and Keaton both reprised the role of Batman in the DCEU film The Flash (2023). Keaton was also due to reprise his role in the Leslie Grace-led HBO Max film Batgirl, but it was shelved and is unlikely to ever be released. The series has grossed over $6.8 billion at the global box office, making it the ninth highest-grossing film franchise of all time. Batman has also appeared in multiple animated films, both as a starring character and as an ensemble character. While most animated films were released direct-to-video, the 1993 animated feature Batman: Mask of the Phantasm (based on the 1990s Batman: The Animated Series) and 2017's The Lego Batman Movie (a spin-off of 2014's The Lego Movie) were released theatrically. Having earned an unadjusted total of U.S. $2,783,118,504, the Batman series is the fourth-highest-grossing film series in North America. Batman was a 15-chapter serial film released in 1943 by Columbia Pictures and was the first appearance of the comic book character on film. The serial starred Lewis Wilson as Batman and Douglas Croft as Robin. Being a World War II era production, the movie serial like many of this period was used as war-time propaganda and had an anti-Japanese bent with J. Carrol Naish playing the Japanese villain, an original character named Dr. Daka. Rounding out the cast were Shirley Patterson as Linda Page (Bruce Wayne's love interest), and William Austin as Alfred. The plot is based on Batman, a US government agent, attempting to defeat the Japanese agent Dr. Daka, at the height of World War II. The film is notable for being the first filmed appearance of Batman and for providing two core elements of the Batman mythos. The film introduced "The Bat's Cave" and the Grandfather clock entrance. The name was altered to the Batcave for the comic. William Austin, who played Alfred, had a trim physique and sported a thin mustache, while the contemporary comic book version of Alfred was overweight and clean-shaven prior to the serial's release. The comics version of Alfred was altered to match that of Austin's, and has stayed that way. Batman and Robin was another 15-chapter serial film released in 1949 by Columbia Pictures. Robert Lowery played Batman, while Johnny Duncan played Robin. Supporting players included Jane Adams as Vicki Vale and veteran character actor Lyle Talbot as Commissioner Gordon. The plot dealt with the Dynamic Duo facing off against the Wizard, a hooded villain whose identity remains a mystery throughout the serial until the end. Batman (also known as Batman: The Movie) is a 1966 film adaptation of the popular Batman television series, and was the first full-length theatrical adaptation of the DC Comics character. The 20th Century Fox release starred Adam West as Batman and Burt Ward as Robin, as well as Lee Meriwether as Catwoman, Cesar Romero as the Joker, Burgess Meredith as the Penguin and Frank Gorshin as the Riddler. The film was directed by Leslie H. Martinson, who also directed for the series a pair of season one episodes: "The Penguin Goes Straight" and "Not Yet, He Ain't". In the late 1970s, Batman's popularity was waning. CBS was interested in producing a Batman in Outer Space film. Producers Michael Uslan and Benjamin Melniker purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3, 1979. It was Uslan's wish "to make the definitive, dark, serious version of Batman, the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939. A creature of the night; stalking criminals in the shadows." Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct, but the two turned down the offer. Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching Batman to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series. Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film. A disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled Return of the Batman to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film. Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of The Dark Knight Returns, which his script pre-dated by six years. In November 1979, producer Jon Peters and Casablanca FilmWorks, headed by Peter Guber, joined the project. The four producers felt it was best to pattern the film's development after that of Superman (1978). Uslan, Melniker and Guber pitched Batman to Universal Pictures, but the studio turned it down. The project was publicly announced with a budget of $15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York. Casablanca FilmWorks was absorbed into PolyGram Pictures in 1980. Guber and Peters left PolyGram Pictures in 1982 and took the Batman film rights with them, although PolyGram would retain at least 7.5% of the profits of said rights due to a contractual agreement. Guber and Peters immediately set up shop at Warner Bros., which finally decided to accept Batman. Tom Mankiewicz completed a script titled The Batman in June 1983, focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson's origins, with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains, and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest. Mankiewicz took inspiration from Steve Englehart's and Marshall Rogers's 1970s run in Detective Comics (later reprinted in the trade paperback Batman: Strange Apparitions), (ISBN 1-56389-500-5), with Rogers himself being hired to provide concept art. The Batman was then announced in late 1983 for a mid-1985 release date on a budget of $20 million. Originally, Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman, William Holden for James Gordon, David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth and Peter O'Toole as the Penguin, who Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature. Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983, so this would never come to pass. A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz' script, including Richard Rush, Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante. Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman. Eddie Murphy and Michael J. Fox were candidates for the role of Robin. Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers. Most of them were based on Strange Apparitions. However, Mankiewicz's script was still being used to guide the project. Tim Burton took over as director of the first Batman film in 1986. Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay. Numerous A-list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Michael Keaton was cast. Keaton was a controversial choice for the role since, by 1988, he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role. Jack Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated a high salary, a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule. Nicholson's final salary is reported to be as high as $50 million. Principal photography took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989. The budget escalated from $30 million to $48 million, while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out. Rewrites were performed by Warren Skaaren, Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems. Batman received positive reviews, broke numerous box office records, and won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction. The film grossed over $400 million, and left a legacy over the modern perception of the superhero film genre. Burton originally did not want to direct a sequel because of his mixed emotions over the previous film. Sam Hamm's first script had the Penguin and Catwoman searching for hidden treasure. Daniel Waters delivered a script that satisfied Burton, which convinced him to direct the film. Wesley Strick went uncredited for writing the shooting draft, deleting the Robin character, reworking the Penguin's characterization and "normalizing" all dialogue. Strick remained as the on-set writer throughout the production process and received top-billing screenplay credit the early trailers, while Waters had sole story credit. Various A-list actresses lobbied hard for the role of Catwoman before Michelle Pfeiffer was cast, while Danny DeVito signed on to portray the Penguin. Filming started at Warner Bros. in Burbank, California in June 1991. Batman Returns was released with financial success, but Warner Bros. was disappointed with the film's box office run because it earned less than its predecessor. However, Batman Returns was released to generally positive reviews, with praise for its action sequences, performances, Danny Elfman's score, effects and villains, although its dark tone and high level of violence for a PG-13 film was criticized. McDonald's shut down its Happy Meal tie-in for Batman Returns. Although Batman Returns was a financial success, Warner Bros. felt the film should have made more money. The studio decided to change the direction of the Batman film series to be more mainstream. Joel Schumacher replaced Tim Burton as director, while Burton decided to stay on as producer. However, Michael Keaton did not like the new direction the film series was heading in, and was replaced by Val Kilmer as Batman. Chris O'Donnell was introduced as Robin, Jim Carrey starred as The Riddler, while Tommy Lee Jones starred as Two-Face. Filming started in September 1994, and Schumacher found Kilmer and Jones difficult to work with. Batman Forever was released on June 16, 1995, with financial success, earning over $350 million worldwide and three Academy Award nominations. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with criticism directed towards the CGI, Kilmer's performance, costume designs and tonal departure from previous films, but praising the visuals, action sequences and performances of Carrey and Jones. After the release of Batman Forever, Warner Bros. started development on Batman & Robin, commissioning it on fast track for an adamant June 1997 release. Val Kilmer did not return, because of scheduling conflicts with The Saint, and was replaced by George Clooney. Arnold Schwarzenegger starred as Mr. Freeze, while Uma Thurman played Poison Ivy, Alicia Silverstone played Batgirl, and Robert Swenson played Bane. Chris O'Donnell reprised his role as Robin. Michael Gough and Pat Hingle are the only cast members to appear in all four films as Alfred Pennyworth and Commissioner Gordon respectively. Principal photography began in September 1996 and finished in January 1997, two weeks ahead of the shooting schedule. Batman & Robin was released on June 20, 1997, and received primarily negative reviews. Observers criticized the film for its toyetic and campy approach, and for homosexual innuendos added by Schumacher.[failed verification] The film was a financial success, but remains the least commercially successful live-action Batman film. Batman & Robin received numerous nominations at the Razzie Awards and ranks among the worst rated superhero films of all time. During the filming of Batman & Robin, Warner Bros. was impressed with the dailies, prompting them to immediately hire Joel Schumacher to reprise his directing duties for a third film. Writer Akiva Goldsman, who worked on Batman Forever and Batman & Robin, turned down the chance to write the script. In late 1996, Warner Bros. and Schumacher hired Mark Protosevich to write the script for a fifth Batman film. A projected mid-1999 release date was announced. Los Angeles Times described their film as "continuing in the same vein with multiple villains and more silliness". Schumacher, however, later claimed that the film would have been darker and closer in tone to the first two films in the series. Titled Batman Unchained but often incorrectly referred to as Batman Triumphant, Protosevich's script had the Scarecrow as the main villain and the Joker would return as a hallucination in Batman's mind caused by the Scarecrow's fear toxin. Harley Quinn would appear as a supporting character, written as the Joker's daughter trying to kill Batman to avenge her father's death. The film would have depicted the Scarecrow and Harley Quinn teaming up to drive Batman insane and have him committed to Arkham Asylum. After their defeat, the film would have ended with Bruce Wayne traveling to Bali and entering a cave, where he allows himself to be swarmed by bats to symbolize that he has conquered fear. Clooney, O'Donnell, and Silverstone were set to reprise the roles of Batman, Robin, and Batgirl. Schumacher had also approached Nicolas Cage for the role of Scarecrow in Batman & Robin as a cameo appearance to set up an appearance in Batman Unchained, before ultimately casting Coolio. A fifth film would likely have appeared 18 months to two years after the fourth. When Batman & Robin received negative reviews and failed to outgross any of its predecessors, and a $150 million Superman film was canceled three months before shooting began, Warner Bros. became unsure of its plans for the fifth film. Despite Warner Bros. and Schumacher's interest with Year One, Lee Shapiro, a comic book fan, and Stephen Wise pitched the studio with a script titled Batman: DarKnight in mid-1998. DarKnight, which was largely inspired by The Dark Knight Returns, had Bruce Wayne giving up his crime fighting career after becoming disillusioned with his alias's inability to inspire fear and mystique in his enemies, and Dick Grayson attending Gotham University. Dr. Jonathan Crane uses his position as professor of psychology at Gotham University and as head psychiatrist at Arkham Asylum to conduct his fear experiments (this element would later appear in Batman Begins). During a vengeful confrontation with a colleague, Dr. Kirk Langstrom, Crane unknowingly initiates Kirk's transformation into the creature known as Man-Bat. Citizens of Gotham believe Man-Bat's nightly activities to be Batman's "bloodthirsty" return. Bruce once again becomes Batman "to clear his name," and solve the mystery of Man-Bat. Kirk struggles with his "man-vs.-monster" syndrome, as he longs to both reunite with his wife and get revenge on Crane, while Crane exacts revenge on those responsible for his dismissal from both Arkham and the university while encountering truths about his past. As with Schumacher's idea for Batman Unchained, the film would have had a darker tone. Warner Bros. Pictures formally decided not to move forward with the project in 2001, and passed on Batman: DarKnight in favor of other projects. In 2015, the screenplay was released on Amazon. Chris O'Donnell revealed in a 2012 interview with Access Hollywood that a Robin spin-off had been considered; the project was canceled after Batman & Robin. In December 2021, Keaton was revealed to be appearing in the DC Extended Universe film Batgirl, reprising his role from Batman and Batman Returns. Keaton had been expected to first reprise the role for the DCEU in The Flash prior to that film's delay to 2023. Batgirl was ultimately canceled in post-production. The Batman OnStar commercials were a series of six television commercials featuring Batman, created by ad-agency Campbell-Ewald and aired from 2000 to the beginning of 2002. The ads were based on the Tim Burton and Joel Schumacher films of the 1980s and 1990s, and used aesthetics, props, and settings from the series, in addition to the Elfman theme from the Tim Burton films. Actor Bruce Thomas portrayed Batman in these ads, while Michael Gough reprised his role of Alfred Pennyworth in one of the ads. Baywatch actress Brooke Burns played Vicki Vale in an ad as well. Actor Brian Stepanek played the Riddler in one ad and Curtis Armstrong played the Joker in another. In 1999, new Warner studio head Alan Horn promised five tent-poles a year. He wanted to revive the Batman and Superman franchises as tentpoles. Wolfgang Petersen was to direct Superman: Flyby, but Andrew Kevin Walker pitched Warner Bros. an idea titled Batman vs Superman with Peterson as director. Superman: Flyby was put on hold, and Akiva Goldsman was hired to rewrite Walker's Batman vs. Superman. Goldsman's draft, dated June 21, 2002, had Bruce Wayne going through a mental breakdown after his five-year retirement from crime fighting. Dick Grayson, Alfred Pennyworth, and Commissioner Gordon are all dead, but Bruce finds some solace in his fiancée, Elizabeth Miller. Meanwhile, Clark Kent is struggling because of a recent divorce from Lois Lane. Clark and Bruce are close friends, and Clark is Bruce's best man. After the Joker kills Elizabeth on their honeymoon, Bruce swears revenge, while Clark tries to hold him back. Bruce blames Clark for her death, and the two go against one another. Ultimately, Lex Luthor is revealed to have masterminded the entire plot to get Batman and Superman to destroy each other. The two decide to team up and stop Luthor. Bale was approached to portray Batman, while Josh Hartnett was offered the role of Superman. Filming was to start in early 2003, with plans for a five- to six-month shoot. The release date was set for the summer of 2004. However, Warner Bros. canceled development to focus on individual Superman and Batman projects after J. J. Abrams submitted another draft for Superman: Flyby. According to Petersen "[Warner Bros.' chief] Alan Horn was so torn, because it's such a fascinating concept to do a Batman versus Superman film". Horn reportedly preferred Abrams' optimistic Superman script to the darker Batman vs. Superman script; studio executives voted 11-1 for the former. Many comic book fans agreed; David S. Goyer said, "'Batman Vs. Superman' is where you go when you admit to yourself that you've exhausted all possibilities ... somewhat of an admission that this franchise is on its last gasp". Since the decision left the studio without a Batman film for 2004, Warner quickly made Catwoman, which performed poorly at the box office and is considered among the worst films ever made. The studio decided it was best to consider a live-action Batman Beyond film and an adaptation of Frank Miller's Batman: Year One. Warner Bros. would then greenlight whichever idea suited them the most. By September 2000, Warner Bros. was developing a live action screen adaptation of Batman Beyond, written by Paul Dini, Neal Stephenson and Boaz Yakin, with the possibility of Yakin directing. Despite interest from Schumacher, the studio amazed and pleased fans by hiring Darren Aronofsky to direct and co-write with Miller, whom he previously collaborated with on an unproduced script for Ronin. Yakin developed one draft of the Batman Beyond screenplay with the writers but soon lost interest. Warner Bros. abandoned Batman Beyond almost instantly in favor of an adaptation of Frank Miller's 1987 comic book story arc Batman: Year One. After Batman and Robin, Schumacher felt he "owe[d] the Batman culture a real Batman movie. I would go back to the basics and make a dark portrayal of the Dark Knight." He had approached Warner Bros. to adapt Batman: Year One in mid-1998. Aronofsky and Miller intended to reboot the Batman franchise, "it's somewhat based on the comic book," Aronofsky said. "Toss out everything you can imagine about Batman! Everything! We're starting completely anew." Regular Aronofsky collaborator, Matthew Libatique, was set as cinematographer. At the same time, Warner Bros. was moving forward on a Catwoman spin-off. Christian Bale had been approached for the role of Batman. Bale would later be cast in the role for Batman Begins. Aronofsky pursued Joaquin Phoenix for the lead role while Warner Bros. favored Freddie Prinze, Jr. The Aronofsky-Miller script had a brooding Batman and realistic violence, and would also have been R-rated. The studio decided to abandon the film due to creative differences between Aronofsky and Miller. In February 2007, during pre-production for The Dark Knight, Warner Bros. hired husband and wife screenwriting duo Michelle and Kieran Mulroney to script a Justice League film featuring a younger Batman in a separate franchise. George Miller was hired to direct the following September, with Armie Hammer cast as Batman a month later and Teresa Palmer as Talia al Ghul. Filming had nearly commenced at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, but was pushed back over the Writers Guild of America strike, and once more when the Australian Film Commission denied Warner Bros. a 45 percent tax rebate over lack of Australian actors in the film. Production offices were moved to Vancouver Film Studios in Canada for an expected July 2008 start and a planned summer 2009 theatrical release date, but Warner Bros. ultimately canceled Justice League following the success of The Dark Knight. Hammer's option on his contract lapsed and the studio was more willing to proceed with Christopher Nolan to finish his trilogy separately with The Dark Knight Rises. The Dark Knight trilogy consists of Batman Begins (2005), The Dark Knight (2008), and The Dark Knight Rises (2012), all directed by Christopher Nolan. Collectively grossing over $2.4 billion at the worldwide box office, the trilogy has been ranked among the greatest ever made. Following a rejected Batman origin story reboot Joss Whedon pitched in December 2002, Warner Bros. hired Christopher Nolan and David S. Goyer to script Batman Begins. The duo aimed for a darker and more realistic tone, with humanity and realism being the basis of the film. The film was primarily shot in the United Kingdom and Chicago, and relied on traditional stunts and scale models with minimal use of computer-generated imagery. Christian Bale starred as Batman, Liam Neeson as Ra's al Ghul, and Cillian Murphy as Jonathan Crane/The Scarecrow. Katie Holmes appears in the movie as Wayne's love interest, Rachel Dawes, a role created for the film. Alfred Pennyworth was played by Michael Caine, Jim Gordon was portrayed by Gary Oldman and Lucius Fox by Morgan Freeman. A new Batmobile (called the Tumbler) and a more mobile Batsuit were both created specifically for the film. The film begins with the death of Bruce's parents and then explores his decision to leave Gotham and his training under the League of Shadows, with Ra's al Ghul, before he rebels against the League and adopts the guise of Batman, recognising that he cannot condone their use of lethal force. The League attempt to attack Gotham using Jonathan Crane's weaponised fear toxin, but Batman is able to defeat them. Batman Begins was both critically and commercially successful. The film opened on June 15, 2005, in the United States and Canada in 3,858 theaters. It grossed $48 million in its opening weekend, eventually grossing over $372 million worldwide. The film received an 85% overall approval rating from Rotten Tomatoes. Critics noted that fear was a common motif throughout the film, and remarked that it had a darker tone compared with previous Batman films. The film was listed at No. 81 on Empire's "500 Greatest Movies of All Time". Christopher Nolan reprised his duties as director, and brought his brother, Jonathan, to co-write the script for the second installment. The Dark Knight featured Christian Bale reprising his role as Batman/Bruce Wayne, Heath Ledger as The Joker, and Aaron Eckhart as Harvey Dent / Two-Face. Katie Holmes turned down her role as Rachel, and Maggie Gyllenhaal was cast instead. Principal photography began in April 2007 in Chicago and concluded in November. Other locations included Pinewood Studios, Ministry of Sound in London and Hong Kong. On January 22, 2008, after he had completed filming The Dark Knight, Ledger died from an accidental overdose of prescription medication. Warner Bros. had created a viral marketing campaign for The Dark Knight, developing promotional websites and trailers highlighting screen shots of Ledger as the Joker, but after Ledger's death, the studio refocused its promotional campaign. The film depicts Batman fighting The Joker, aided by the prosecution of charismatic District Attorney Harvey Dent. The Joker tests Batman's resolve when he causes Rachel's death and Dent's transformation into the disfigured criminal Two-Face. Although Batman is able to stop the Joker from forcing two ferries - one loaded with civilians and the other with prisoners - to destroy each other, he is forced to take the blame for the murders committed by Dent to ensure that Gotham's citizens do not lose hope for the future. The Dark Knight received broad critical acclaim, and set numerous records during its theatrical run. With just over $1 billion in revenue worldwide, it became the 4th-highest-grossing film of all time, unadjusted for inflation. The film received eight Academy Award nominations; it won the award for Best Sound Editing and Ledger was posthumously awarded Best Supporting Actor. Critics and film writers often cite The Dark Knight as one of the best films of the 2000s and all time, with it frequently being hailed as one of the greatest superhero films ever. Nolan wanted the story for the third and final installment to keep him emotionally invested. "On a more superficial level, I have to ask the question," he reasoned, "how many good third movies in a franchise can people name?" He returned out of finding a necessary way to continue the story, but feared midway through filming he would find a sequel redundant. The Dark Knight Rises is intended to complete Nolan's Batman trilogy. By December 2008, Nolan completed a rough story outline, before he committed himself to Inception. In February 2010, work on the screenplay was commencing with David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan. When Goyer left to work on the Superman reboot, Jonathan was writing the script based on the story by his brother and Goyer. Tom Hardy was cast as Bane and Anne Hathaway plays Selina Kyle. Joseph Gordon-Levitt was cast as Robin John Blake, and Marion Cotillard was cast as Miranda Tate. Filming began in May 2011 and concluded in November. Nolan chose not to film in 3-D but, by focusing on improving image quality and scale using the IMAX format, hoped to push technological boundaries while nevertheless making the style of the film consistent with the previous two. Nolan had several meetings with IMAX Vice-President David Keighley to work on the logistics of projecting films in digital IMAX venues. The Dark Knight Rises featured more scenes shot in IMAX than The Dark Knight. Cinematographer Wally Pfister expressed interest in shooting the film entirely in IMAX. During the film, set eight years after The Dark Knight, the arrival of new foe Bane forces Bruce to return to his old role as Batman, only to find himself overpowered and captured by Bane as Gotham is cut off from the rest of the world with a stolen Wayne Enterprises fusion generator prototype set to go off in a few months. With the aid of thief Selina Kyle, Bruce is able to return to Gotham and defeat Bane while redeeming his image as Batman. The film concludes with Bruce having 'retired' as Batman after faking his death to live with Selina Kyle, evidence suggesting that he has passed on the Batcave to Blake while Gotham rebuilds in memory of the Dark Knight's heroism. Upon release, The Dark Knight Rises received a positive critical response and was successful at the box office, going on to outgross its predecessor and become the 24th-highest-grossing film of all time grossing over $1.08 billion. It was named one of the best films of 2012 by numerous film critics, including the American Film Institute. It is considered one of the greatest superhero films of all time and one of the best films of the 2010s. On June 13, 2013, a source from Warner Bros. told The Wrap that they were discussing more Man of Steel films, as well as a Superman/Batman film, Wonder Woman, and Aquaman. Warner Bros. announced that Superman and Batman would unite in a new film, a follow-up to Man of Steel (2013), taking its inspiration from the comic The Dark Knight Returns and set for release in 2015. Goyer stated at the Superman 75th Anniversary Panel at Comic-Con, that Batman and Superman would face off, and titles under consideration were Superman vs Batman or Batman vs Superman. On August 22, 2013, The Hollywood Reporter announced the casting of Ben Affleck as Bruce Wayne/Batman. On January 17, 2014, it was announced that the film had been delayed from its original July 17, 2015, release date to May 6, 2016, in order to give the filmmakers "time to realize fully their vision, given the complex visual nature of the story". The film's release was moved again to March 25, 2016, "avoiding a high-profile showdown with Captain America: Civil War on May 6, 2016". At some point prior to the events of the film, Wayne Manor has decayed, and Bruce and Alfred relocated to a smaller glass house above the Batcave. During the film, Lex Luthor manipulates Batman into perceiving Superman as an enemy, and at the same time kidnaps Martha Kent and demands Superman to kill Batman in exchange of Martha's life. Batman fights and nearly kills Superman with kryptonite weapons, but when a weak Superman pleads to Batman that he's "letting him kill Martha", a confused Batman remembers the death of his own mother, who shares the name. This confuses Batman enough time so Lois Lane arrives and explains the situation. Seeing how hard he has fallen, Batman saves Martha Kent from Luthor's minions, and then fights alongside Superman and Wonder Woman to contain the Kryptonian deformity Luthor created to kill Superman. Taking Luthor's metahuman files, Bruce states that he intends to gather the metahumans to prepare for an implied future threat. Shortly after filming had finished for Man of Steel, Warner Bros hired Will Beall to script a new Justice League film in June 2012. With the release of Man of Steel in June 2013, Goyer was hired to write a new Justice League script, with the Beall draft being scrapped. In April 2014, it was announced that Zack Snyder would also be directing Goyer's Justice League script. Warner Bros. was reportedly courting Chris Terrio to rewrite Justice League the following July, after having been impressed with his rewrite of Batman v Superman. During post-production of the film, Zack Snyder left the film due to the death of his daughter. Joss Whedon took over the project and wrote and directed reshoots. As part of the ensemble cast, Bruce Wayne serves as something of a leader to the Justice League. Additionally, he spearheads efforts to revive Superman in preparation for the upcoming assault from Steppenwolf, and brings Lois Lane to help calm down the enraged reanimated Superman. The divisive reaction toward the final cut of Justice League, with Zack Snyder leaving directorial duties and the final cut of the film in the hands of Joss Whedon, has led to an argument comparing the situation to the one experienced by the film Superman II. Both Justice League and Superman II feature a director that was replaced, for different reasons, before the completion of a film, which led to a second director coming in and making substantial changes to the tone of each film. Although the reasoning behind each director's departure differs, Richard Donner was able to complete his cut of Superman II in 2005. In the belief that Snyder had shot enough material for a finished film, a campaign for a "Snyder Cut" was started to allow Snyder to receive a similar treatment to Donner. Arguments are made that Snyder's vision would be more cohesive to the previous films than the actual theatrical cut, which Snyder has refused to see. Warner Bros. initially remained silent regarding any intention of making a "Snyder Cut". In March 2019, Snyder confirmed his original cut does exist, and stated that it is up to Warner Bros. to release it. Despite this, in November, Variety reported that Warner Bros. was unlikely to release Snyder's version of Justice League in theaters or on HBO Max, calling it a "pipe dream". In December, however, Snyder posted a photo in his Vero account, which showed boxes with tapes labeled "Z.S. J.L Director's cut", and with the caption "Is it real? Does it exist? Of course it does." On May 20, 2020, Snyder officially announced that HBO Max will be releasing his cut of Justice League on their service in 2021. The cut would cost $70+ million to complete the special effects, musical score, editing, and additional shooting. While initially planned to be a four part miniseries, it was later clarified the cut would be released as a four hour long movie. Snyder stated this version will be non-canonical to DC Extended Universe continuity, but it would exist in a slightly alternate universe. Affleck, Miller, Fisher, Heard, and Manganiello returned to their respective roles for additional photography, in order to finish the project, with Jared Leto also reprising his role as The Joker from Suicide Squad. In June 2020, Michael Keaton entered talks to reprise his role from the Tim Burton Batman films in the DCEU film The Flash, released in 2023. According to The Hollywood Reporter, Warner Bros. hoped for Keaton to return for multiple DCEU films in a way "akin to the role played by Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, something of a mentor or guide or even string-puller." In August 2020, Keaton officially signed on, with Ben Affleck also announced to be reprising his version of the character for the film. Affleck stated that his scenes in the film were his favorite as the character. Along with Keaton and Affleck playing Batman in different timelines, George Clooney makes a cameo as Bruce Wayne in the closing scene. Adam West makes a posthumous appearance as Batman through the use of CGI and archive footage. In addition to major roles, Batman has made various cameo appearances in other DCEU films. In Suicide Squad (2016), Batman appears in brief flashbacks depicting the arrests of Floyd Lawton / Deadshot and Harley Quinn. He rescues Harley from a submerged car after pursuing her and the Joker, and apprehends Deadshot while he is shopping with his daughter. Batman's history with Killer Croc is also referenced. At the film's conclusion, Amanda Waller—who appears to know that Bruce Wayne is Batman—provides Bruce with files on various metahumans in exchange for his protection from future fallout from the Enchantress' recent attack. Bruce tells Waller to shut down Task Force X, as his "friends" will handle future problems. Although he does not appear, Bruce Wayne is mentioned in Wonder Woman (2017). After the events of Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, Bruce successfully retrieves the photo from Luthor's archives which he used to threaten Diana Prince, along with a watch that belonged to the father of Captain Steve Trevor. He transports them through an armored car to Diana, with a letter wishing to know her story someday. Diana recalls the events of the film as a flashback, after which she sends an e-mail to Bruce that reads "Thanks for bringing him back to me". Bill Dean voices a toy version of Batman in Shazam! (2019). Joker, directed by Todd Phillips, is set during the 1980s, where a failed stand-up comedian named Arthur Fleck turns to a life of crime and chaos in Gotham City and calls himself Joker. Bruce Wayne, a child portrayed by Dante Pereira-Olson, encounters Fleck when the latter attempts and fails to gain entry into Wayne Manor. Fleck later sees Bruce in a darkened alley with the remains of his parents, who had been fatally shot by an assailant who wears a clown mask. A sequel, Joker: Folie à Deux, is scheduled to be released on October 4, 2024. It will introduce Harley Quinn, played by Lady Gaga. In February 2017, Matt Reeves was hired to direct The Batman (2022), replacing Ben Affleck who wrote the original script until it was replaced by Reeves and Peter Craig. Reeves initially had plans to keep The Batman in the DCEU; however, due to creative differences, the film would focus on a younger Batman, ultimately serving as a reboot from the one seen in the DCEU. In May 2019, Robert Pattinson was cast as Bruce Wayne / Batman. In 2020, DC Films president Walter Hamada stated that there would be two Batmans existing simultaneously in a multiverse. Development of a second film, The Batman – Part II, had begun by April 2022. The film was originally scheduled to be released on October 3, 2025, but was delayed to October 2, 2026, due to the 2023 Writers Guild of America and SAG-AFTRA strikes. After filmmaker James Gunn and producer Peter Safran were appointed in October 2022 to serve as the co-chairmen and co-CEOs of the then-newly formed DC Studios to develop plans for a new DC shared universe slate, Gunn stated in December that Batman would be "a big part of the DC Universe (DCU)". A film featuring Bruce Wayne / Batman and Damian Wayne / Robin titled The Brave and the Bold was revealed to be in development at DC Studios in January 2023, as the third installment of the upcoming DCU film slate. It will exist separately from future projects in Matt Reeves' The Batman franchise. It is also based on Grant Morrison's run of Batman from 2006 to 2013. In June 2023, Andy Muschietti was confirmed as the director of the film ahead of the release of The Flash later that month, with his sister Barbara set to produce through their production company Double Dream alongside Gunn and Safran. The Flash writer Christina Hodson, who is a member of the DCU's writer's room, was being eyed to write the film but chose to work on Fast XI[broken anchor] (2025) instead. Theatrical 1993: Mask of the Phantasm, set in the continuity of Batman: The Animated Series with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2016: Batman: The Killing Joke, an adaptation of Batman: The Killing Joke with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2016: Batman: Return of the Caped Crusaders, based on the Batman television series with Adam West voicing Batman Direct-to-video 1998: Subzero, set in the continuity of Batman: The Animated Series with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2000: Return of the Joker, set in the continuity of Batman Beyond with Will Friedle voicing Batman and Kevin Conroy voicing Bruce Wayne. 2003: Mystery of the Batwoman, set in the continuity of The New Batman Adventures with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2005: The Batman vs. Dracula, set in the continuity of The Batman with Rino Romano voicing Batman 2010: Under the Red Hood, an adaptation of Batman: Under the Hood with Bruce Greenwood voicing Batman 2011: Year One, an adaptation of Batman: Year One with Benjamin McKenzie voicing Batman 2012: The Dark Knight Returns – Part 1, an adaptation of the first half of The Dark Knight Returns with Peter Weller voicing Batman 2013: The Dark Knight Returns – Part 2, an adaptation of the second half of The Dark Knight Returns with Peter Weller voicing Batman 2013: DC Super Heroes Unite, an adaptation of Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes with Troy Baker voicing Batman 2014: Son of Batman, a loose adaptation of Batman and Son with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2014: Assault on Arkham, set in the continuity of Batman: Arkham with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2015: Batman vs. Robin an animated film with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2015: Batman Unlimited: Animal Instincts, an animated film with Roger Craig Smith voicing Batman 2015: Batman Unlimited: Monster Mayhem, an animated film with Roger Craig Smith voicing Batman 2016: Batman Unlimited: Mechs vs. Mutants, an animated film with Roger Craig Smith voicing Batman 2016: Batman: Bad Blood, an animated film also featuring Batwoman and Batwing with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2017: Batman and Harley Quinn, an animated film with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2017: Batman vs. Two-Face, based on the Batman television series with Adam West voicing Batman for final time before his death 2018: Batman: Gotham by Gaslight, an animated film based on the one-shot graphic novel of the same name with Bruce Greenwood voicing Batman 2018: Batman Ninja, an animated film with Kōichi Yamadera and Roger Craig Smith voicing Batman in Japanese and English respectively. 2019: Batman: Hush, based on the 2002 comic book story arc of the same name with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman. 2021: Batman: Soul of the Dragon, an animated film with David Giuntoli voicing Batman 2021: Batman: The Long Halloween Part 1 and Part 2, a two part animated film based on Batman: The Long Halloween with Jensen Ackles voicing Batman. 2017: DC Super Heroes vs. Eagle Talon, with Takayuki Yamada voicing Batman 2018: Teen Titans Go! To the Movies with Jimmy Kimmel voicing Batman. 2022: DC League of Super-Pets, with Keanu Reeves voicing Batman. 2008: Justice League: The New Frontier, based on the comic of the same name with Jeremy Sisto voicing Batman 2009: Superman/Batman: Public Enemies, based on the comic of the same name with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2010: Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths, a loose adaptation of various DC comics with William Baldwin voicing Batman 2010: Superman/Batman: Apocalypse, based on Superman/Batman: The Supergirl from Krypton with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2010: DC Super Friends: The Joker's Playhouse, based on the Fisher-Price toyline with Daran Norris voicing Batman 2012: Justice League: Doom, based on JLA: Tower of Babel with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2013: Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox, based on Flashpoint with Kevin McKidd voicing Batman 2014: JLA Adventures: Trapped in Time, an original story with Diedrich Bader voicing Batman 2014: Justice League: War, based on Justice League: Origin with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2014: Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Batman Be-Leaguered animated television special, with Troy Baker reprising his role as Batman from the Lego video games. 2015: Justice League: Throne of Atlantis, based on Throne of Atlantis with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2015: Justice League: Gods and Monsters with Michael C. Hall voicing a Kirk Langstrom version of Batman 2015: Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Justice League vs. Bizarro League, with Troy Baker reprising his role 2016: Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Justice League – Cosmic Clash, with Troy Baker reprising his role 2017: Justice League Dark, with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2018: Scooby-Doo! & Batman: The Brave and the Bold, with Diedrich Bader voicing Batman 2018: Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: The Flash, with Troy Baker voicing Batman 2018: Lego DC Comics Super Heroes: Aquaman: Rage of Atlantis, with Troy Baker voicing Batman 2018: The Death of Superman and Reign of the Supermen, based on The Death of Superman with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2019: Batman vs. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, with Troy Baker voicing Batman 2020: Lego DC: Shazam!: Magic and Monsters, with Troy Baker voicing Batman 2020: Superman: Red Son, with Roger Craig Smith voicing Batman. 2020: Justice League Dark: Apokolips War, with Jason O'Mara voicing Batman 2021: Injustice, an animated film based on the 2013 video game Injustice: Gods Among Us, featuring a parallel universe in the DC Multiverse, with Anson Mount voicing Batman. 2014: A Lego-themed version of Batman appears in The Lego Movie, voiced by Will Arnett. 2017: The character receives his own spin-off film, The Lego Batman Movie, voiced again by Arnett. This film takes place in a universe where all of the previous live-action films, as well as some animated series, the preceding film, and the 1966 TV series (which the film mocks in multiple instances) have somehow happened. Despite this, the film works as an origin story for both Robin and Batgirl, and is established in Lego Dimensions to be set in the Lego DC universe, distinct from The Lego Movie universe. 2019: Arnett reprised his role as Lego Batman in The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part. 2008: Batman: Gotham Knight, a collection of original shorts with Kevin Conroy voicing Batman 2020: Batman: Death in the Family, an interactive short film based on the story arc from the comics that allows the viewer to choose different outcomes of the story; featuring Bruce Greenwood voicing Batman List indicator(s) This section includes characters who will appear or have appeared in multiple Batman or Batman-centered films that received a wide theatrical release. An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film, or that the character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.  C indicates a cameo role.  U indicates an uncredited appearance.  V indicates a voice-only role.  L indicates the actor or actress lent only their likeness for the film. Features different versions of the Bruce Wayne/Batman character: the DCEU version played by Ben Affleck, the 1989 series version played by Michael Keaton, the Batman & Robin version played by George Clooney, and the 1960s version in archival footage of Adam West Attributed to multiple sources: Batman (1989). Additionally, Charles Roskilly portrays Bruce Wayne as a child. Batman Returns Batman Forever. Additionally, Ramsey Ellis portrays Bruce Wayne as a child. Batman & Robin. Additionally, Eric Lloyd portrays Bruce Wayne as a child. Additionally, Gus Lewis portrays Bruce Wayne as a child in Batman Begins, and in archival footage used in The Dark Knight Rises. Hynden Walch voices Bruce as a child in Gotham Knight. Additionally, Brandon Spink portrays Bruce Wayne as a child in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. Version from Tim Burton / Joel Schumacher films continuity. Additionally, Oscar Novak portrays Bruce Wayne as a child. Additionally, Jon Simmons portrays a young Alfred Pennyworth in Batman & Robin. Additionally, Hugo E. Blick portrays a young Joker in Batman (1989). Batman Forever. Credited as "Shooter". Credited as "Unseen Arkham Prisoner". This portrayal of Catwoman does not appear with the name Selina Kyle. Additionally, Joseph Walker portrays a young Edward Nashton, who is this incarnation's Riddler. Credited as "Other Mugger". In Joker, an unnamed rioter murders Bruce Wayne's parents in a manner that heavily mirrors their deaths in the comics and various media. The actor who portrays the murderer is uncredited. This incarnation of Barbara Gordon uses the last name Wilson as opposed to Gordon. In The Dark Knight, the character is unnamed, only credited as "Gordon's Daughter," with the name "Barbara Gordon" only being used for James Gordon's wife. Michael Reid MacKay portrays Antonio Diego in Batman & Robin, a serial killer who is transformed into Bane. Additionally, President pro tempore of the United States Senate Patrick Leahy has a brief role as himself in Batman Forever and Batman & Robin, an unnamed Wayne Enterprise board member in The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Rises, and as Senator Purrington in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. With a total gross of over $6.83 billion at the global box office, the series is ninth highest-grossing film franchise of all time. Domestically, Batman films have grossed U.S. $3,158,097,126, making the franchise the fourth-highest-grossing film series in North America. Critical reception of the modern films has varied throughout its different eras. The Dark Knight, from Christopher Nolan's trilogy, is considered one of the best superhero movies ever, while Batman and Robin is considered one of the worst. The Dark Knight Rises is the highest-grossing Batman movie, grossing $1,081,041,287 worldwide, while Batman and Robin is the lowest-grossing film to feature Batman, at $238,207,122 worldwide. Of the 1980s and 1990s, Tim Burton's films received positive critical reviews for their return of the character to a more serious portrayal, though some felt that Batman Returns was too dark. Joel Schumacher's two films received mixed reviews, particularly Batman and Robin, which has the lowest aggregate scores out of any film in the series. Conversely, the films in Christopher Nolan's trilogy of the 2000s and 2010s have the highest scores on review aggregation websites of the live-action feature films with The Dark Knight receiving a 94% from Rotten Tomatoes and an 84 from Metacritic. Batman's newer iterations in the 2010s DCEU received mixed reviews from critics. The series' theatrically released animated movies have a large critical disparity, with Mask of the Phantasm and The Lego Batman Movie being well-received while Batman: The Killing Joke received mixed reviews. The films in the series have received numerous accolades, including having been nominated for a total of 29 Academy Awards, of which they won five; 36 British Academy Film Awards, of which they won four; and 58 Saturn Awards, of which they won 13. Starting with the 93rd Academy Awards (2021), the Best Sound Mixing and Best Sound Editing categories were consolidated into a single Best Sound category. Received one award out of two nominations in this category. Received two nominations in this category. Speculative fiction portal Film portal United States portal Batman franchise media Category:Fan films based on Batman Superman in film Catwoman (film) Goulart, Ron (2004). Comic Book Encyclopedia. New York City: Harper Entertainment. ISBN 978-0-06-053816-3. Couch, Aaron (June 14, 2015). "'Batman' Movie Series: List of Unmade Projects". The Hollywood Reporter. Subers, Ray (September 4, 2012). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Dark Knight Rises' Joins Billionaire Club". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 9, 2012. "The Dark Knight Trilogy (Batman Begins / The Dark Knight / The Dark Knight Rises) [Blu-ray]". Amazon.com. December 4, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2020. McNary, Dave (May 31, 2019). "Robert Pattinson Is Officially 'The Batman'". Variety. Retrieved May 31, 2019. Houghton, Rianne (May 21, 2021). "The Flash movie teases Michael Keaton and Ben Affleck returns in new set photo". www.digitalspy.com. Digital Spy. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana (August 3, 2022). "'Batgirl' Blindside: Why Warner Bros. Decided to Pull the Plug". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 10, 2022. "Movie Franchises - Box Office History". The Numbers. Retrieved January 28, 2020. Viglione, Joe (March 14, 2022). "Three Spidermen and a Bat – A Film Discussion | TMR Zoo". Retrieved March 14, 2022. Daniels, Les (1999). Batman: The Complete History. Chronicle Books. pp. 57–59. ISBN 0-8118-4232-0. Mayer, Geoff (February 7, 2017). Encyclopedia of American Film Serials. McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-2719-9. Reinhart, Mark (2013). The Batman Filmography, 2nd ed. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. p. 193. Reinhart, The Batman Filmography, p. 223. Ramey, Bill (November 8, 2005). "An Interview With Michael Uslan – Part 1". Batman-on-Film. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2008. Ramey, Bill (November 11, 2005). "An Interview With Michael Uslan – Part 2". Batman-on-Film. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2008. Griffin, Nancy; Masters, Kim (1997). "Hit Men". Hit & Run: How Jon Peters and Peter Guber Took Sony For A Ride In Hollywood. New York City: Simon & Schuster. pp. 114, 158–174. ISBN 0-684-80931-1. Jones, Alan (November 1989). "Batman in Production". Cinefantastique. pp. 75–88. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2008. Uslan, Michael; Melniker, Benjamin; Guber, Peter; Mankiewicz, Tom; Hamm, Sam (2005). Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight—The Road to Gotham City (DVD). Warner Home Video. Jones, Alan (November 1989). "Batman". Cinefantastique. pp. 55–67. Archived from the original on December 5, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2008. Stax (December 1, 2001). "The Stax Report Special Edition: Script Review of The Batman". IGN. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2008. White, Taylor L. (July 1989). "Batman". Cinefantastique. pp. 33–40. The 'Batman' that never was: When Bill Murray and Eddie Murphy almost played the Dynamic Duo Salisbury, Mark; Burton, Tim (2006). "Batman". Burton on Burton. London: Faber and Faber. pp. 70–83. ISBN 0-571-22926-3. Hanke, Ken (1999). "Going Batty in Britain". Tim Burton: An Unauthorized Biography of the Filmmaker. Renaissance Books. pp. 75–85. 1-58063-162-2. Englehat, Steve. "Batman". SteveEnglehart.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2007. Retrieved November 25, 2007. So I got to do the second treatment with just the characters that eventually hit the screen: Bruce Wayne, the Batman, Silver St. Cloud, Boss Thorne, and the Joker. Griffin, Nancy; Masters, Kim (1997). "Hit Men". Hit & Run: How Jon Peters and Peter Guber Took Sony For A Ride In Hollywood. Simon & Schuster. pp. 158–174. ISBN 0-684-80931-1. Rebello, Stephen (November 1989). "Sam Hamm – Screenwriter". Cinefantastique. pp. 34–41. Johnstone, Iain (August 1989). "Dark Knight in the City of Dreams". Empire. pp. 46–54. Retrieved May 14, 2008. Morgenstern, Joe (April 9, 1989). "Tim Burton, Batman and The Joker". The New York Times. Retrieved October 26, 2008. Salisbury, Burton, p.145 Boucher, Geoff (October 15, 2008). "Tim Burton talks about Johnny Depp, 'Alice in Wonderland' and 'The Dark Knight'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 4, 2012. Resner, Jeffrey (August 1992). "Three Go Mad in Gotham". Empire. pp. 39–46. Sloane, Judy (August 1995). "Daniel Waters on Writing". Film Review. pp. 67–69. Hughes, David (2003). "Batman". Comic Book Movies. New York City: Virgin Books. pp. 33–46. ISBN 0-7535-0767-6. Broeske, Pat H.; Thompson, Anne (August 9, 1991). "Big-Game Hunting". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Salisbury, Burton, p.102-114 "Batman Returns". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Richards, Olly (September 1992). "Trouble in Gotham". Empire. pp. 21–23. "Batman 3". Entertainment Weekly. October 1, 1993. Archived from the original on September 21, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2008. Gordinier, Jeff (July 15, 1994). "Next at Batman". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 21, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2008. Svetkey, Benjamin (July 12, 1996). "Holy Happy Set!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 7, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2008. "Batman Forever". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman Forever". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 8, 2022. Fleming, Michael (February 21, 1997). "Helmer's 3rd At Bat". Variety. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2008. Joel Schumacher, Peter MacGregor-Scott, Chris O'Donnell, Val Kilmer, Uma Thurman, John Glover (2005). Shadows of the Bat: The Cinematic Saga of the Dark Knight Part 6-Batman Unbound (DVD). Warner Home Video. Pener, Degen (September 13, 1996). "Holy Hearsay". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2008. Busch, Anita M. (January 10, 1997). "Schumacher on 'Popcorn'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2008. Mallory, Michael; Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 5, 1997). "Holy caped caper, IV". Variety. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2008. "Batman & Robin". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Karger, Dave (July 11, 1997). "Big Chill". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 21, 2008. Retrieved November 11, 2008. "FilmAffinity". FilmAffinity. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "Comix Worst to Best: Batman & Robin (1997)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2008. Fear, David. "Men in Tights". MSN Movies. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved November 14, 2008. Fleming, Michael (February 21, 1997). "Helmer's 3rd At Bat". Variety. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Greenberg, James (May 8, 2005). "Rescuing Batman". Los Angeles Times. p. E-10. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved May 11, 2019. "Before 'Batman Begins': Secret History of the Movies That Almost Got Made". The Hollywood Reporter. June 14, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2020. Linder, Brian (July 27, 2000). "Rumblings From Gotham". IGN. Retrieved June 11, 2018. Fleming, Michael (November 11, 1997). "Schumacher trims sails". Variety. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2008. Toro, Gabe (October 5, 2011). "Joel Schumacher Says He Wanted Nicolas Cage To Play Scarecrow In The Aborted 'Batman Triumphant'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2014. Couch, Aaron (February 9, 2017). "Coolio Was Courted to Play Scarecrow in Scrapped 'Batman & Robin' Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 1, 2018. Ramey, Bill (July 28, 2005). "Interview: Lee Shapiro". Batman-on-Film. Archived from the original on September 25, 2008. Retrieved October 18, 2008. "10 'Batman' Movies That Never Got Made". Movieweb. August 19, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2020. Anderson, Eric (September 13, 2012). "Chris O'Donnell On Why His 'Robin' Spin-Off Never Happened & Passing On Men In Black". Access Hollywood. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Kit, Borys; Counch, Aaron (December 22, 2021). "Michael Keaton Joining 'Batgirl'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2021. "Batman boosts OnStar online". Automotive News. June 19, 2000. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Ramey, Bill "Jett" (April 7, 2018). "Batman History - "OnStar Batman"". BATMAN ON FILM. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Raftery, Brian M.; Miller, Nancy (July 9, 2002). "Dynamic Duel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 6, 2008. Retrieved February 4, 2008. Linder, Brian (August 9, 2001). "More Batman, Superman Insanity at WB". IGN. Retrieved February 4, 2008. Hughes, David (March 2004). "The Dark Knight Strikes Out". Tales From Development Hell. London, England: Titan Books. pp. 192–211. ISBN 1-84023-691-4. Goldsman, Akiva (June 21, 2002). "Batman vs Superman 2nd Draft" (PDF). Daily Scripts. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved October 11, 2007. Smith, Adam (July 2005). "The Original American Psycho". Empire. pp. 74–80, 82, 84, 87. Fierman, Daniel; Miller, Nancy; Raftery, Brian M. (March 14, 2003). "Stallville?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved February 8, 2008. Linder, Brian (July 9, 2002). "Batman vs. Superman in '04". IGN. Retrieved February 4, 2008. Hughes, David (2003). Tales From Development @#!*%. Titan Books. pp. 205–8. ISBN 1-84023-691-4. Jacks, Brian (March 15, 2010). "EXCLUSIVE: Christian Bale Met For Superman Role In Wolfgang Petersen's 'Batman Vs. Superman'". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2011. Harris, Dana (September 21, 2000). "WB sends Pi guy into the Bat Cave". Variety. Archived from the original on January 17, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Jensen, Jeff (December 4, 1998). "Winging It". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 19, 2008. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Linder, Brian (October 16, 2000). "The Bat-Men Speak". IGN. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Topel, Fred (April 23, 2012). "Action Packed: Boaz Yakin on Safe and Batman Beyond". CraveOnline. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Linder, Brian (December 6, 2000). "Aronofsky Talks Batman: Year One...Again". IGN. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Thompson, Andrew O. (November 8, 2000). "Matthew Libatique". Variety. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 2, 2001). "WB: Judd purr-fect as Cat". Variety. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved October 17, 2008. Smith, Adam (July 2005). "The Original American Psycho". Empire. pp. 74–80, 82, 84, 87. Godfrey, Alex; Travis, Ben (April 17, 2020). "Darren Aronofsky's Batman Fell Apart Because He Wanted Joaquin Phoenix – And The Studio Didn't". Empire. Retrieved April 20, 2020. Tyler, Adrienne (May 11, 2020). "What Aronofsky's Batman: Year One Movie Looked Like (& Why It Didn't Happen)". Screenrant. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Pamela McClintock; Ben Fritz (February 22, 2007). "'Justice' prevails for Warner Bros". Variety. Retrieved April 12, 2007. Borys Kit (October 15, 2007). "The Vine: Young actors seek Justice". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 16, 2008. Michael Cieply (March 1, 2008). "A Film's Superheroes Face Threat of Strike". The New York Times. Retrieved March 15, 2008. Garry Maddox (February 25, 2008). "Unhappy feet may flee Sydney". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved February 25, 2008. Buchanan, Kyle (October 20, 2010). "The Social Network's Armie Hammer Talks Special Effects, Misogyny, and the Downside of Being Tall and Handsome". New York. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Jami Philbrick (November 20, 2010). "Exclusive: Teresa Palmer Still Wants to Play Talia Al Ghul in 'The Dark Knight Rises'". Movieweb.com. Retrieved September 6, 2014. Garry Maddox (March 19, 2008). "Mega movie refused rebate". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved March 19, 2008. Garrett, Diane (February 26, 2008). "Warner Bros. to serve 'Justice' in '09". Variety. Retrieved March 15, 2008. Fleming, Michael; McClintock, Pamela (February 27, 2008). "Film greenlights in limbo". Variety. Retrieved March 15, 2008. Seijas, Casey (March 9, 2009). "Justice League' Movie Still A Possibility, Says Director... Just Not Anytime Soon". MTV Splash Page. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Parrish, Robin (June 29, 2016). "The Best Movie Trilogies Of All Time". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Ritschel, Chelsea (September 20, 2018). "From 'Jurassic Park' to 'The Godfather': America's favourite movie trilogies, ranked". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2019. "10 greatest movie trilogies of all time". The Independent. May 15, 2021. Hiatt, Brian (October 1, 2003). "Christian Bale is the new Batman". EW.com. Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Pappademas, Alex (May 2012). "The Geek Shall Inherit the Earth". GQ. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Seijas, Casey (August 11, 2008). "Joss Whedon Talks About His 'Batman' Movie That Never Was". MTV Splash Page. Archived from the original on October 10, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Flemming, Michael (January 27, 2003). "Batman captures director Nolan". Variety. Retrieved September 24, 2014. Graser, Marc; Dunkley, Cathy (February 8, 2004). "The bat and the beautiful". Variety. Retrieved November 2, 2006. "Batman Begins goes to the source". The Kansas City Star. June 25, 2004. "35 East Wacker Drive". Emporis. 2007. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved May 14, 2007. Brain, Marshall (June 16, 2005). "How the Batmobile Works". HowStuffWorks. "Batman Begins Production Notes – The Batsuit & Gadgetry". Warner Bros. Archived from the original on August 18, 2014. Retrieved November 26, 2008. "Empire's 500 Greatest Movies of All Time". Empire. Retrieved August 23, 2012. Crook, Marshall; Sanders, Peter (January 24, 2008). "Advertising: Will Marketing Change After Star's Death?". The Wall Street Journal. pp. B1. Archived from the original on May 4, 2008. Retrieved June 4, 2008. "Ledger's Death Puts Last Films in a Bind". CNN. January 24, 2008. Archived from the original on July 26, 2008. Retrieved July 10, 2008. "The 50 Best Movies of the Decade (2000–2009)". Paste. November 3, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2011. "Film Critics Pick the Best Movies of the Decade". Metacritic. January 3, 2010. Archived from the original on April 28, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2012. "Review of the Decade – Year-By-Year: Empire's Films Of The Decade". Empire. Retrieved September 4, 2012. "Movie Records". the-numbers.com. Retrieved August 24, 2010. "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 30, 2010. Retrieved May 31, 2010. "The 21st Century's 100 greatest films". BBC. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2016. "The 100 best films of the 21st century". The Guardian. September 13, 2019. Archived from the original on September 13, 2019. Retrieved September 13, 2019. "The 100 Greatest Movies Of The 21st Century: 10 - 1". Empire. January 11, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2020. "The Dark Knight is ranked 97th". The Greatest Films. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "20 Reasons Why The Dark Knight Is Still The Best Superhero Movie". Screen Rant. March 10, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Moore, Shannon. "Why 'The Dark Knight' is the best superhero movie of all time". Massachusetts Daily Collegian. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "5 Reasons The Dark Knight Is The Greatest Superhero Film Ever Made (& 5 Reasons Its Logan)". Comic Book Resources. May 29, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "'The Dark Knight' was released 15 years ago. It's still one of the greatest movies ever". Deseret News. July 18, 2023. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Rose, Steve (July 24, 2008). "Is The Dark Knight really the best film ever made?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "Dark Knight, arguably the best movie ever". The Johns Hopkins News-Letter. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "SJSU News | Learn By Doing/ Excite Your Mind". sjsunews.com. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Boucher, Geoff (October 27, 2008). "Christopher Nolan on 'Dark Knight' and its box-office billion: 'It's mystifying to me'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 19, 2010. "Merrick" (pseudonym) (December 5, 2008). "Nolan Talks DARK KNIGHT Blu-Ray, a 100,000 Person Screening of the Film (Featuring Live Q & A w/ Nolan), TDK Sequel, and More!!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Jensen, Jeff (November 30, 2010). "Christopher Nolan on his 'last' Batman movie, an 'Inception' videogame, and that spinning top". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Bowles, Scott (December 7, 2008). "For now, Nolan and Batman will rest in 'Dark' glory". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 8, 2010. Finke, Nikki; Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 9, 2010). "It's A Bird! It's A Plane! It's Chris Nolan! He'll Mentor Superman 3.0 And Prep 3rd Batman". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Boucher, Geoff (March 10, 2010). "Christopher Nolan takes flight with Superman: 'We have a fantastic story' [UPDATED]". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 4, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010. Jensen, Jeff (January 19, 2011). "'The Dark Knight Rises' scoop: Anne Hathaway, Tom Hardy join cast". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 19, 2011. Sneider, Jeff (March 18, 2011). "Gordon-Levitt's 'Dark Knight' role revealed". Variety. Archived from the original on March 20, 2011. Retrieved March 18, 2011. Labrecque, Jeff (March 21, 2011). "Joseph Gordon Levitt joins 'Dark Knight Rises'... but not as Falcone". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 21, 2011. de Semlyen, Phil (November 19, 2010). "Exclusive: The Dark Knight Rises In May". Empire. Retrieved December 3, 2010. Boucher, Geoff (October 27, 2010). "Nolan: 'Dark Knight Rises' finds the future in IMAX, not 3-D". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 30, 2010. Retrieved October 28, 2010. Weintraub, Steve (December 22, 2010). "Exclusive: Exclusive: David Keighley (Head of Re-Mastering IMAX) Talks 'The Dark Knight', 'The Dark Knight Rises', 'Tron: Legacy', New Cameras, More". Collider. Archived from the original on February 27, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2011. Gilchrist, Todd (April 20, 2010). "Cinematographer Wally Pfister Talks About Shooting 'Batman 3' in 3-D". Moviefone. Retrieved February 15, 2011. "Batman teaser poster: Gotham city topples as 'The Dark Knight Rises'". Daily Bhaskar. Retrieved July 17, 2011. the top 10 films of 2012 Silva, Gabriela (July 5, 2020). "DC Comics: 5 Lowest Ranked Films & Shows (& 5 Highest Ranked), According To IMDb". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 29, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Franklin, Garth (April 4, 2021). "What Are The Most Acclaimed Comic Book Films?". Dark Horizons. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Burt, Kayti; Zutter, Natalie; Bojalad, Alec; Kaye, Don; Sokol, Tony; Crow, David (December 30, 2019). "100 Best Movies of the Decade". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on March 22, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Binns, Simon (December 29, 2019). "The Dark Knight Rises Voted Best Film Of The Decade". LADbible Group. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Film, Total (December 16, 2019). "The 100 best movies of the decade". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2022.. "Why 'Man of Steel' Holds the Key to Warner Bros.' Future Franchises". December 12, 2014.[permanent dead link] Sperling, Nicole (July 20, 2013). "Comic-Con 2013: 'Superman & Batman' movie will follow 'Man of Steel'". Los Angeles Times. "Superman & Batman Film Set for Comic-Con Reveal". The Hollywood Reporter. July 20, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2014. Anders, Charlie Jane (July 20, 2013). "They're doing a Superman/Batman movie... but that's not the big news". io9. Retrieved July 22, 2013. Collura, Scott (July 23, 2013). "Comic-Con: Man of Steel Sequel Likely Called Batman Vs. Superman". Retrieved July 23, 2013. "Ben Affleck is Batman for 'Man of Steel' Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. August 22, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2014. Schillaci, Sophie (August 22, 2013). "Ben Affleck Is Batman for 'Man of Steel' Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 23, 2013. "Warner Bros. Pictures Pushes Batman vs. Superman Back to 2016". ComingSoon.net. January 17, 2014. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Sneider, Jeff; Cunningham, Todd (August 6, 2014). "Warner Bros. Blinks in Marvel Showdown: 'Batman v Superman' Avoids 'Captain America 3'". TheWrap.com. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Sneider, Jeff (June 5, 2012). "Beall writing 'Justice League' for Warner Bros". Variety. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Finke, Nikki (June 10, 2013). "'Man Of Steel' Sequel Underway With Zack Snyder And David S. Goyer". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Stedman, Alex (April 27, 2014). "Zack Snyder to Direct 'Justice League' Movie". Variety. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 25, 2014). "'Batman V Superman' Scribe Chris Terrio For 'Justice League'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 8, 2014. Kit, Borys (May 22, 2017). "Zack Snyder Steps Down From 'Justice League' to Deal With Family Tragedy". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 3, 2020. "What to Know About the 'Justice League' Snyder Cut—and Why Some People Are Upset About Its Release". Time. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Justice League: The Snyder Cut Movement Explained". Screen Rant. July 8, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Zack Snyder Confirms A Snyder Cut Of Justice League Exists". Screen Rant. March 28, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2020. Lang, Brent; Kroll, Justin (November 26, 2019). "DC Films Plots Future With Superman, Green Lantern and R-Rated Movies (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Zack Snyder Confirms Justice League Director's Cut Is Real". ScreenCrush. December 4, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2020. Donnelly, Matt (May 20, 2020). "Zack Snyder Will Release the 'Snyder Cut' of 'Justice League' on HBO Max". Variety. Retrieved August 27, 2020. ""It Will Be an Entirely New Thing": Zack Snyder's $20M-Plus 'Justice League' Cut Plans Revealed". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "The Snyder Cut Will Be a "Radical Rethinking" of 'Justice League', Costing Considerably More Than $30 Million to Finish". /Film. May 26, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 22, 2020). "Zack Snyder's 'Justice League' Director's Cut Will Be Four Separate One-Hour Installments On HBO Max; Trailer Drops". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "'Justice League': Snyder Cut to Include Footage From a Week of Additional Shooting". TheWrap. September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. "Zack Snyder's Justice League Is 4-Hour Movie and Not a Miniseries Says Director". Movies. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "Zack Snyder's 'Justice League' Is Separate from the DC Cinematic Universe Continuity". Movieweb. July 20, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "'Justice League' Cast and Crew Will Return to Finish Zack Snyder's Cut". Movieweb. May 20, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Jared Leto to Play Joker in Zack Snyder's 'Justice League' Reshoots (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. October 21, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Kit, Borys (June 22, 2020). "Micheal Keaton in Talks to Return as Batman for 'Flash' Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Breznican, Anthony (August 20, 2020). "Ben Affleck Will Return as Batman in The Flash". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2020. Sharf, Zack (January 7, 2022). "Ben Affleck: 'I Finally Figured Out' the Best Way to Play Batman While Making 'The Flash'". Variety. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Exploring the Strange Portrayal of Batman in 'Suicide Squad'". Geeks. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Batman's Role In Wonder Woman Explained". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "New Batman Toy Voice Actor In 'Shazam!' Revealed". ComicBook.com. Retrieved March 11, 2019. Davis, Brandon (October 23, 2018). "'Joker': Dante Pereira-Olson Cast as Young Bruce Wayne". ComicBook.com. Retrieved October 23, 2018. Ashurst, Sam; Chapman, Matt (August 30, 2018). "Joaquin Phoenix's Joker film release date, plot, cast, trailer and everything you need to know". Digital Spy. Retrieved September 16, 2018. Rubin, Rebecca (April 26, 2022). "Robert Pattinson Returning for The Batman Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Parker, Ryan; McClintock, Pamela (April 26, 2022). "'The Batman' Sequel Set With Robert Pattinson and Director Matt Reeves". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Sharf, Zack (January 31, 2023). "The Batman Part II Sets 2025 Release Date as Part of Newly Branded 'DC Elseworlds' Projects". Variety. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 12, 2024). "The Batman 2 From Matt Reeves Heads To Fall 2026; Paul Thomas Anderson-Leonardo DiCaprio Movie Gets Summer 2025 Date". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 17, 2024. Sinha, Sujita (December 16, 2022). "James Gunn calls Batman a 'big part of the DCU'". Mashable. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2023. Kit, Borys (January 31, 2023). "DC Slate Unveiled: New Batman, Supergirl Movies, a Green Lantern TV Show, and More from James Gunn, Peter Safran". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2023. Donnelly, Matt (June 16, 2023). "New Batman Film 'Brave and the Bold' Lands 'The Flash' Director Andy Muschietti (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Couch, Borys Kit, Aaron; Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (June 16, 2023). "'The Flash' Director Andy Muschietti Tackling New Batman Movie 'The Brave and the Bold'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 18, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Kevin Conroy". TV Guide. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Kevin Conroy Reflects On The Killing Joke Backlash". CINEMABLEND. July 20, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Fitch, Adam (August 17, 2016). "Adam West returns in Batman: Return of the Caped Crusaders trailer". Heroes.direct. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker (2000), retrieved December 1, 2019 Batman vs. Dracula (2005), retrieved December 1, 2019 Weintraub, Steve 'Frosty' (April 27, 2010). "BATMAN: UNDER THE RED HOOD Trailer and Images". Collider. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Talking About Bringing Ben McKenzie to Gotham With Batman: Year One Director Andrea Romano". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "'Dark Knight' Animated Movie Sets Voice Cast (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. May 23, 2012. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Stuart, Paul (June 23, 2013). "LEGO BATMAN: THE MOVIE - DC SUPER HEROES UNITE Blu-Ray Review". Collider. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Radish, Christina (April 22, 2014). "Jason O'Mara Talks SON OF BATMAN, Exploring the Father-Son Dynamic, Being a Father and a Superhero, Taking on the Role of Batman & Possible Future Films". Collider. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "SDCC Interview: Kevin Conroy, star of Batman: Assault on Arkham". Flickering Myth. August 6, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Animated 'Batman vs. Robin' Movie Finds Its Voice Cast (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. January 14, 2015. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Batman & Green Arrow Take On Robot Animals In The First Clip From Batman Unlimited: Animal Instincts". 4 GEEKS LIKE YOU. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. "EXCLUSIVE TRAILER DEBUT: Joker Rules in "Batman Unlimited: Monster Mayhem"". Comic Book Resources. June 2, 2015. Joseph, Eric (August 1, 2016). "Roger Craig Smith Discusses Batman Unlimited: Mechs Vs. Mutants". We Got This Covered. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Dillon, Bryant (February 3, 2016). "Fanbase Press - 'Batman: Bad Blood' Premiere: Jason O'Mara on Batman, the Bat Family, and Borrowing the Batmobile!". fanbasepress.com. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Abdulbaki, Mae (July 28, 2017). "Kevin Conroy On His 'Complicated' Batman In 'Batman And Harley Quinn'". Heroic Hollywood. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Adam West and William Shatner Facing Off in Batman vs. Two-Face is the Stuff of Campy Superhero Dreams". io9. August 10, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Lovett, Jamie (July 8, 2017). "DC Animation's Next Movie Revealed". Comic Book. Retrieved July 8, 2017. Bonomolo, Cameron (October 5, 2017). "'Batman Ninja' Anime: First Details & Poster Revealed". ComicBook.com. Retrieved June 14, 2018. ワーナー ブラザース 公式チャンネル (March 15, 2018). 映画『ニンジャバットマン』 日本用トレーラー＜公開日追加ver＞【2018年6月15日劇場公開】. Warner Bros. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2018 – via YouTube. Ressler, Karen (February 13, 2018). "Batman Ninja Anime's English Trailer Reveals Dub Cast, Home Video Release". Anime News Network. Retrieved February 13, 2018. Katzman, Gregg (July 21, 2018). "Batman: Hush Will Receive an Animated Film Adaptation". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Ankers, Adele (August 13, 2020). "Batman Voice Cast Set for 1970s Set Animated Film Soul of the Dragon". IGN. Retrieved August 21, 2020. "'Batman: The Long Halloween, Part One' Sets Voice Cast (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. March 31, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Casey, Henry T.; April 2021, Luke Wilson 08. "The Batman movie release date, cast, trailer, Robert Pattinson interview and latest news". Tom's Guide.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) サイト名. dc-taka.com (in Japanese). Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Stauffer, Derek. "Jimmy Kimmel to Voice Batman in Teen Titans GO! Movie". Screen Rant. Retrieved November 13, 2019. Mahjouri, Shakiel (March 6, 2022). "Keanu Reeves Is Caped Crusade Batman In 'DC League Of Super-Pets' Trailer". ET Canada. Archived from the original on March 6, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Jeremy Sisto Is Batman in 'Justice League: The New Frontier'". Movieweb. February 18, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "The World's Finest - DC Universe - Superman / Batman: Public Enemies". dcanimated.com. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Liu, Ed (December 17, 2009). "William Baldwin on Voicing the Dark Knight for "Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths"". Anime Superhero News. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Under: "Superman", EdGross (September 17, 2010). "Kevin Conroy Interview: Superman/Batman Apocalypse". comicbookmovie.com. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "The Many Voices of Batman". Voice Over Talent Industry News. October 20, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Page, Splash. "'Justice League: Doom' Cast Includes Nathan Fillion, Kevin Conroy". MTV News. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "DC Super Heroes Batman Be-Leaguered". Behind The Voice Actors. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Lowry, Brian (July 24, 2015). "Blu-Ray Review: 'Justice League: Gods and Monsters'". Variety. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "EXCLUSIVE: Batman Gets Upstaged in DC's "LEGO Justice League vs. Bizarro League" Clip". Comic Book Resources. February 6, 2015. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "NYCC: LEGO Heroes Return in "Justice League: Cosmic Clash"". Comic Book Resources. October 11, 2015. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Batman Vs. TMNT's Troy Baker on Voicing Both Batman & The Joker". Comic Book Resources. May 29, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Couch, Aaron (July 21, 2021). "DC's 'Injustice' Sets Cast for Animated Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Rosen, Christopher (February 3, 2014). "'LEGO Movie' Star Will Arnett On 'Arrested Development' Criticism". HuffPost. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Will Arnett on the pressure of starring in 'The Lego Batman Movie' and the precious instrument that is his voice". Los Angeles Times. February 9, 2017. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Alexander, Bryan. "Lego Batman feuds with Superman, falls in love in 'Lego Movie 2': Will Arnett explains why". USA Today. Retrieved December 1, 2019. "Kevin Conroy on Voicing Batman Gotham Knight". SuperHeroHype. May 14, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2019. Weiss, Josh (July 30, 2020). "First trailer for 'Batman: Death in the Family' reveals DC's first interactive movie". SyFy Wire. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Sarkisian, Jacob (January 27, 2021). "Sen. Patrick Leahy, who's third in line to the presidency, has appeared in 5 'Batman' movies, including 'The Dark Knight Rises'". Insider. Retrieved March 27, 2021. "Box Office Mojo Movie Franchises Index Sorted by Total Gross". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 10, 2013. Solomon, Aubrey (1989). Twentieth Century Fox: A Corporate and Financial History (The Scarecrow Filmmakers Series). Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. p. 254. ISBN 978-0-8108-4244-1. "Big Rental Pictures of 1966". Variety. January 4, 1967. p. 8. "Batman". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman Returns". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman: Mask of the Phantasm". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman & Robin". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman Begins". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "The Dark Knight". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "The Dark Knight Rises". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman: The Killing Joke". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "The Lego Batman Movie". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Joker". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "The Batman". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Batman Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 23, 2021. "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2022. "Batman". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 31, 2023. "Batman: The Movie Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Batman". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "Batman (1989): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "Batman Returns". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Batman: Mask of the Phantasm". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 27, 2022. "Batman Forever (1995): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "Batman & Robin (1997): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "Batman Begins". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved November 11, 2023. "Batman Begins (2005): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "The Dark Knight". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 30, 2023. "The Dark Knight (2008): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 18, 2008. "The Dark Knight Rises". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 4, 2023. "The Dark Knight Rises (2012): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 20, 2012. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016): Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 18, 2008. "Batman: The Killing Joke". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "The Lego Batman Movie". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 10, 2021. "The Lego Batman Movie reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved February 5, 2017. "Justice League". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 30, 2022. "Justice League Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved December 8, 2017. "Joker". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Joker Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved April 18, 2020. "Zack Snyder's Justice League". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "Zack Snyder's Justice League Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved September 16, 2021. "The Batman". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "The Batman Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Batman franchise overview at Box Office Mojo