Year 883 (DCCCLXXXIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Spring – Viking raiders ravage Flanders, and sack the abbey at Saint-Quentin. King Carloman II blocks their passage at Laviers, which had been on the banks of the Somme. Meanwhile, Vikings enter the Rhine, but are turned back by Henry of Franconia (possibly a margrave of Saxony). They over-winter at Duisburg. King Charles the Fat travels to Nonantola (Northern Italy), where he meets Pope Marinus I. He receives complaints of Guy II of Spoleto, who is the official "protector" of Rome, and invades the Papal States. King Charles orders Guy to appear before a tribunal. Guy II of Spoleto begins a revolt, and assembles an army supported with Arab auxiliaries. King Charles the Fat sends Berengar of Friuli with an expeditionary force to deprive him of Spoleto. An epidemic ravages Berengar's army, and forces them to retire. Svatopluk I, ruler (knyaz) of Great Moravia, conquers Lower Pannonia (today's Southwestern Hungary and Northern Croatia), during the succession strife in the East Frankish Kingdom (approximate date). The first historic document (written by Regino of Prüm) mentions Duisburg. The Zanj Rebellion: Abbasid general Al-Muwaffaq brings in Egyptian forces, to help him in his two-year siege of the Zanj capital Mukhtara. He captures the city, and crushes the revolt that has devastated Chaldea (modern Iraq) since 869. September 11 – Yazaman al-Khadim, Abbasid governor of Tarsus, routs a Byzantine army under general Kesta Styppiotes, in a night attack. According to Arab chroniclers, 70,000 out of 100,000 Byzantine troops are killed. Burchard II, duke of Swabia (or 884) Ibn Masarra, Muslim ascetic and scholar (d. 931) Zhao Jiliang, chancellor of Later Shu (d. 946) Zhao Tingyin, Chinese general (d. 949) September 11 – Kesta Styppiotes, Byzantine general Ansegisus, archbishop of Sens (or 879) Anselm of Farfa, Frankish abbot (approximate date) Bertharius, Benedictine abbot and poet Bertulf, archbishop of Trier Dawud al-Zahiri, Muslim scholar (or 884) Eochocán mac Áedo, king of Ulaid (Ireland) Froila, Galician bishop Guy II, duke of Spoleto Han Jian, Chinese warlord Ignatius II, patriarch of Antioch Pi Rixiu, Chinese poet Wang Jingchong, Chinese governor (b. 847) Yang Fuguang, Chinese general (b. 842) Italian History - Timeline, p. 9. Fields, Philip M. (1987). The History of al-Ṭabarī, Vol. XXXVII: The ʻAbbāsid Recovery. Albany, New York: State University of New York Press. pp. 143–144. ISBN 0-88706-053-6.