Ankleshwar (sometimes written Ankaleshwar) is a city and a municipality in the Bharuch district in the state of Gujarat, India. The city is located 14 kilometres from Bharuch. Ankleshwar Industrial Association (AIA) is the largest organisation of the Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation, where over 2000 industries are registered.[citation needed] Ankleshwar is a hub of the chemical industry in India. One aggregation of plants, the Ankleshwar Industrial Estate, produces more than 5 percent of India's output of chemical products, including pharmaceuticals and dyes. Pollution is regulated by the Gujarat Pollution Control Board, which charges the AIA with self-enforcement of its constituent organisations. Ankleshwar is connected by Indian National Highway 8 (Mumbai to New Delhi) and by the Western Railway Division of Indian Railways. The railway division runs the broad gauge train services to Rajpipla. The 140-year-old (2021) Golden Bridge built in (1881) connects Ankleshwar to Bharuch across the Narmada on the station front while a new bridge connects the highway, the other bridge made by L&T on the highway is now ready to use. Ankleshwar railway station is centrally located at the intersection of NH8 & Station Road. Ankleshwar City Bus stand is located on Station Road (i.e. located in the City, the western section). Development project of Ankleshwar Airport & City Bus are in pipe line in the last stage. Anklesaria, a toponymic surname for Ankleshwar, is found among Parsis from India: Saniya Anklesaria, an Indian actress Shahnaz Aiyar (d. 2015), Indian writer, wife of Swaminathan Aiyar CA Jaydipsinh Chauhan ,Educator, He has achieved All India Rank in ICMAI exams and also earn 12 Degrees including Chartered Accountant, Gold medal in MCom from Spu, He had help more than 16000 people in COVID second wave and 12000 people in Bharuch flood in 2023, he also Vice President of western India CA students association, currently he is President of Bharuch Congress Sevadal. Sarkar, Runa (2017). Business, institutions, environment. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. pp. 85–86. ISBN 978-0-19-807544-8. Retrieved 5 February 2024.