The Syrian civil war (Arabic: ٱلْحَرْبُ ٱلْأَهْلِيَّةُ ٱلسُّورِيَّةُ, romanized: al-ḥarb al-ʾahlīyah al-sūrīyah) is an ongoing multi-sided conflict in Syria involving various state-sponsored and non-state actors. In March 2011, popular discontent with the rule of Bashar al-Assad triggered large-scale protests and pro-democracy rallies across Syria, as part of the wider Arab Spring protests in the region. After months of crackdown by the government's security apparatus, various armed rebel groups such as the Free Syrian Army began forming across the country, marking the beginning of the Syrian insurgency. By mid-2012, the crisis had escalated into a full-blown civil war. Receiving arms from NATO and GCC states, rebel forces initially made significant advances against the government forces, who were receiving arms from Iran and Russia. Rebels captured the regional capitals of Raqqa in 2013 and Idlib in 2015. Consequently, in September 2015, Russia launched a military intervention in support of the government, shifting the balance of the conflict. By late 2018, all rebel strongholds, except parts of Idlib region, had fallen to the government forces. In 2014, the Islamic State group seized control of large parts of Eastern Syria and Western Iraq, prompting the U.S.-led CJTF coalition to launch an aerial bombing campaign against it, while providing ground support to the Kurdish-majority Syrian Democratic Forces. Culminating in the Battle of Raqqa, the Islamic State was territorially defeated by late 2017. In August 2016, Turkey launched a multi-pronged invasion of northern Syria, in response to the creation of Rojava, while also fighting Islamic State and government forces in the process. Since the March 2020 Idlib ceasefire, the frontline fighting during the conflict has mostly subsided, and has been characterized by regular skirmishes. In March 2011, popular discontent with the Ba'athist government led to large-scale protests and pro-democracy rallies across Syria, as part of the wider Arab Spring protests in the region. Numerous protests were violently suppressed by security forces in deadly crackdowns ordered by Bashar al-Assad, resulting in tens of thousands of deaths and detentions. The Syrian revolution transformed into an insurgency with the formation of resistance militias across the country, deteriorating into a full-blown civil war by 2012. The war is fought by several factions. The Syrian Arab Armed Forces, alongside its domestic and foreign allies, represent the Syrian Arab Republic and Assad government. Opposed to it is the Syrian Interim Government, a big-tent alliance of pro-democratic, nationalist opposition groups (whose military forces consist of the Syrian National Army and allied Free Syrian militias). Another faction is the Syrian Salvation Government, whose armed forces are represented by a coalition of Sunni militias led by Tahrir al-Sham. Independent of them is the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria, whose military force is the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), a multi-ethnic, Arab-majority force led by the Kurdish YPG. Other competing factions include Jihadist organizations such as the Al-Qaeda-branch Hurras al-Din (successor of Al-Nusra Front) and the Islamic State (IS). A number of foreign countries, such as Iran, Russia, Turkey, and the United States, have been directly involved in the civil war, providing support to opposing factions in the conflict. Iran, Russia, and Hezbollah support the Syrian Arab Republic militarily, with Russia conducting airstrikes and ground operations in the country since September 2015. Since 2014, the U.S.-led international coalition has been conducting air and ground operations primarily against the Islamic State and occasionally against pro-Assad forces, and has been militarily and logistically supporting factions such as the Revolutionary Commando Army and the Autonomous Administration's Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF). Turkish forces currently occupy parts of northern Syria and, since 2016, have fought the SDF, IS, and the Assad government while actively supporting the Syrian National Army (SNA). Between 2011 and 2017, fighting from the Syrian civil war spilled over into Lebanon as opponents and supporters of the Syrian government traveled to Lebanon to fight and attack each other on Lebanese soil. While officially neutral, Israel has exchanged border fire and conducted repeated strikes against Hezbollah and Iranian forces, whose presence in western Syria it views as a threat. Violence in the war peaked during 2012–2017, but the situation remains a crisis. By 2020, the Syrian government controlled about two-thirds of the country and was consolidating power. Frontline fighting between the Assad government and opposition groups had mostly subsided by 2023, but there had been regular flareups in northwestern Syria and large-scale protests emerged in southern Syria and spread nationwide in response to extensive autocratic policies and the economic situation. The protests were noted as resembling the 2011 revolution that preceded the civil war. The war has resulted in an estimated 470,000–610,000 violent deaths, making it the second deadliest conflict of the 21st century, after the Second Congo War. International organizations have accused virtually all sides involved—the Assad government, IS, opposition groups, Iran, Russia, Turkey, and the U.S.-led coalition—of severe human rights violations and massacres. The conflict has caused a major refugee crisis, with millions of people fleeing to neighboring countries such as Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan; however, a sizable minority has also sought refuge in countries outside of the Middle East, with Germany alone accepting over half a million Syrians since 2011. Over the course of the war, a number of peace initiatives have been launched, including the March 2017 Geneva peace talks on Syria led by the United Nations, but fighting has continued. In October 2019, Kurdish leaders of Rojava, a region within Syria, announced they had reached a major deal with the government of Syria under Assad. This deal was enacted in the wake of the US withdrawal from Syria. The Kurdish leaders made this deal in order to obtain Syria's help in stopping hostile Turkish forces who were invading Syria and attacking Kurds. One major NGO stated: Twelve years into Syria's devastating civil war, the conflict appears to have settled into a frozen state. Although roughly 30% of the country is controlled by opposition forces, heavy fighting has largely ceased and there is a growing regional trend toward normalizing relations with the regime of Bashar al-Assad. Over the last decade, the conflict erupted into one of the most complicated in the world, with a dizzying array of international and regional powers, opposition groups, proxies, local militias and extremist groups all playing a role. The Syrian population has been brutalized, with nearly a half a million killed, 12 million fleeing their homes to find safety elsewhere, and widespread poverty and hunger. Meanwhile, efforts to broker a political settlement have gone nowhere, leaving the Assad regime firmly in power. As of 2023, the civil war had largely subsided, mainly achieving a stalemate. One source stated: The war whose brutality once dominated headlines has settled into an uncomfortable stalemate. Hopes for regime change have largely died out, peace talks have been fruitless, and some regional governments are reconsidering their opposition to engaging with Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad. The government has regained control of most of the country, and Assad's hold on power seems secure. In 2023, the main military conflict was not between the Syrian government and rebels, but rather between Turkish forces and factions within Syria. In late 2023, Turkish forces continued to attack Kurdish forces, in the region of Rojava, Starting on 5 October 2023, the Turkish Armed Forces launched a series of air and ground strikes targeting the Syrian Democratic Forces in Northeastern Syria. The airstrikes were launched in response to the 2023 Ankara bombing, which the Turkish government alleges was carried out by attackers originating from Northeastern Syria. The non-religious Ba'ath Syrian Regional Branch government came to power through a coup d'état in 1963. For several years, Syria went through additional coups and changes in leadership, until in March 1971, General Hafez al-Assad, an Alawite, declared himself President. It marked the beginning of the domination of personality cults centred around the Assad dynasty that pervaded all aspects of Syrian daily life and was accompanied by a systematic suppression of civil and political freedoms; becoming the central feature of state propaganda. Authority in Ba'athist Syria is monopolised by three power-centres: Alawite loyalist clans, Ba'ath party and the armed forces; glued together by unwavering allegiance towards the Assad dynasty. The Syrian Regional Branch remained the dominant political authority in what had been a one-party state until the first multi-party election to the People's Council of Syria was held in 2012. On 31 January 1973, Hafez al-Assad implemented a new constitution; leading to a national crisis. The 1973 Constitution entrusted Arab Socialist Baath party with the distinctive role as the "leader of the state and society"; empowering it to mobilise the civilians for party programmes, issue decrees to ascertain their loyalty and supervise all legal trade unions. Ba'athist ideology was imposed upon children as compulsory part of school curriculum and Syrian Armed Forces were tightly controlled to the Party. The constitution removed Islam from being recognised as the state religion and stripped existing provisions such as the president of Syria being required to be a Muslim. These measures caused widespread furore amongst the public; leading to fierce demonstrations in Hama, Homs and Aleppo organized by the Muslim Brotherhood and the ulama. Assad regime violently crushed the Islamic revolts that occurred during 1976–1982, waged by revolutionaries from the Syrian Muslim Brotherhood. The Ba'ath party carefully constructed Assad as the guiding father figure of the party and modern Syrian nation; advocating the continuation of Assad dynastic rule of Syria. As part of the publicity efforts to brand the nation and Assad dynasty as inseparable; slogans such as "Assad or we burn the country", "Assad or to hell with the country" and "Hafez Assad, forever" became an integral part of the state and party discourse during the 1980s. Eventually the party organisation itself became a rubberstamp and the power structures became deeply dependent on sectarian affiliation to the Assad family and the central role of armed forces needed to crack down on dissent in the society. Critics of the regime have pointed out that deployment of violence is at the crux of Ba'athist Syria and describe it as "a dictatorship with genocidal tendencies". Hafez ruled Syria for 3 decades with an iron first; using methods ranging from censorship to violent measures of state terror such as mass murders, forced deportations and brutal practices such as torture, which were unleashed collectively upon the civilian population. Upon Hafez al-Assad's death in 2000, his son Bashar al-Assad succeeded him as the President of Syria. Bashar's wife Asma, a Sunni Muslim born and educated in Britain, was initially hailed in the Western press a "rose in the desert". The couple once raised hopes amongst Syrian intellectuals and outside Western observers as wanting to implement economic and political reforms. However, Bashar failed to deliver on promised reforms; instead crushing the civil society groups, political reformists and democratic activists that emerged during the Damascus spring in the 2000s. Bashar Al-Assad claims that no 'moderate opposition' to his government exists, and that all opposition forces are Islamists focused on destroying his secular leadership; his view was that terrorist groups operating in Syria are 'linked to the agendas of foreign countries'. The total population in July 2018 was estimated at 19,454,263 people; ethnic groups – approximately Arab 50%, Alawite 15%, Kurd 10%, Levantine 10%, other 15% (includes Druze, Ismaili, Imami, Assyrian, Turkmen, Armenian); religions – Muslim 87% (official; includes Sunni 74% and Alawi, Ismaili, and Shia 13%), Christian 10% (mainly of Eastern Christian churches – may be smaller as a result of Christians fleeing the country), Druze 3% and Jewish (few remaining in Damascus and Aleppo). Socioeconomic inequality increased significantly after free market policies were initiated by Hafez al-Assad in his later years, and it accelerated after Bashar al-Assad came to power. With an emphasis on the service sector, these policies benefited a minority of the nation's population, mostly people who had connections with the government, and members of the Sunni merchant class of Damascus and Aleppo. In 2010, Syria's nominal GDP per capita was only $2,834, comparable to Sub-Saharan African countries such as Nigeria and far lower than its neighbors such as Lebanon, with an annual growth rate of 3.39%, below most other developing countries. The country also faced particularly high youth unemployment rates. At the start of the war, discontent against the government was strongest in Syria's poor areas, predominantly among conservative Sunnis. These included cities with high poverty rates, such as Daraa and Homs, and the poorer districts of large cities. This coincided with the most intense drought ever recorded in Syria, which lasted from 2006 to 2011 and resulted in widespread crop failure, an increase in food prices and a mass migration of farming families to urban centers. This migration strained infrastructure already burdened by the influx of some 1.5 million refugees from the Iraq War. The drought has been linked to anthropogenic global warming. Subsequent analysis, however, has challenged the narrative of the drought as a major contributor to the start of the war. Adequate water supply continues to be an issue in the ongoing civil war and it is frequently the target of military action. The human rights situation in Syria has long been the subject of harsh critique from global organizations. The rights of free expression, association and assembly were strictly controlled in Syria even before the uprising. The country was under emergency rule from 1963 until 2011 and public gatherings of more than five people were banned. Security forces had sweeping powers of arrest and detention. Despite hopes for democratic change with the 2000 Damascus Spring, Bashar al-Assad was widely reported as having failed to implement any improvements. In 2010, he imposed a controversial national ban on female Islamic dress codes (such as face veils) across universities, and expelled over a thousand female tutors and school teachers as part of the ban. A Human Rights Watch report issued just before the beginning of the 2011 uprising stated that Assad had failed to substantially improve the state of human rights since taking power. Several political scientists, military experts, and journalists have stated that the Syrian Civil War is primarily rooted in a feud between Russia and the United States and their allies in the region over natural gas pipelines passing through Syria on their way to European markets. The United States and its allies intended to build the Qatar–Turkey pipeline which would relieve Europe of its dependence on Russian natural gas, especially during winter months where many European homes rely on Russia to survive the winter. On the contrary, Russia and its allies intended to stop this planned pipeline and instead build the Iran–Iraq–Syria pipeline. Syrian president Bashar al-Assad declined Qatar's year 2000 proposal to build a $10 billion Qatar-Turkey pipeline through Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Syria and Turkey, allegedly prompting covert CIA operations to spark a Syrian civil war to pressure Bashar al-Assad to resign and allow a pro-American president to step in and sign off on the deal. leaked documents have shown that in 2009, the CIA began funding and supporting opposition groups in Syria to foment a civil war. Harvard Professor Mitchell A Orenstein and George Romer stated that this pipeline feud is the true motivation behind Russia entering the war in support of Bashar al-Assad, supporting his rejection of the Qatar-Turkey pipeline and hoping to pave the way for the Iran-Iraq-Syria pipeline which would bolster Russia's allies and stimulate Iran's economy. The US Military has set up bases near gas pipelines in Syria, purportedly to fight ISIS but perhaps also to defend their own natural gas assets, which have been allegedly targeted by Iranian militias. The Conoco gas fields have been a point of contention for United States since falling in the hands of ISIS, which were captured by American-backed Syrian Democratic Forces in 2017. Protests, civil uprising, and defections (March–July 2011) Initial armed insurgency (July 2011 – April 2012) Kofi Annan ceasefire attempt (April–May 2012) Next phase of the war starts: escalation (2012–2013) Rise of the Islamist groups (January–September 2014) US intervention (September 2014 – September 2015) Russian intervention (September 2015 – March 2016), including first partial ceasefire Aleppo recaptured; Russian/Iranian/Turkish-backed ceasefire (December 2016 – April 2017) Syrian-American conflict; de-escalation zones (April–June 2017) ISIL siege of Deir ez-Zor broken; CIA program halted; Russian forces permanent (July–December 2017) Army advance in Hama province and Ghouta; Turkish intervention in Afrin (January–March 2018) Douma chemical attack; U.S.-led missile strikes; southern Syria offensive (April–August 2018) Idlib demilitarization; Trump announces US withdrawal; Iraq strikes ISIL targets (September–December 2018) ISIL attacks continue; US states conditions of withdrawal; fifth inter-rebel conflict (January–May 2019) Demilitarization agreement falls apart; 2019 northwestern Syria offensive; northern Syria buffer zone established (May–October 2019) U.S. forces withdraw from buffer zone; Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria (October 2019) Northwestern offensive; Baylun airstrikes; Operation Spring Shield; Daraa clashes; Afrin bombing (late 2019; 2020) New economic crisis and stalemate conflict (June 2020–present) There are numerous factions, both foreign and domestic, involved in the Syrian civil war. These can be divided into four main groups. First, Ba'athist Syria led by Bashar al-Assad and backed by his Russian and Iranian allies. Second, the Syrian opposition consisting of two alternative governments: i) the Syrian Interim Government, a big-tent coalition of democratic, Syrian nationalist and Islamic political groups whose defense forces consist of the Syrian National Army and Free Syrian Army, and ii) the Syrian Salvation Government, a Sunni Islamist coalition led by Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham. Third, the Kurdish-dominated Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria and its military-wing Syrian Democratic Forces supported by the United States, France, and other coalition allies. Fourth, the Global Jihadist camp consisting of Al-Qaeda affiliate Guardians of Religion Organisation and its rival Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. The Syrian government, the opposition and the SDF have all received support—militarily, logistically and diplomatically—from foreign countries, leading the conflict to often be described as a proxy war. The major parties supporting the Syrian government are Iran, Russia and Lebanese militia Hezbollah. Syrian rebel groups received political, logistic and military support from the United States, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Britain, France, Israel, and the Netherlands. Under the aegis of operation Timber Sycamore and other clandestine activities, CIA operatives and U.S. special operations troops have trained and armed nearly 10,000 rebel fighters at a cost of $1 billion a year since 2012. Iraq had also been involved in supporting the Syrian government, but mostly against ISIL. Hezbollah, the Lebanese Shia militant group, was significantly involved in the Syrian Civil War. Starting from the 2011 Syrian revolution, Hezbollah provided active support to the Ba'athist government forces. By 2012, the group escalated its involvement, deploying troops across Syria. In 2013, Hezbollah publicly acknowledged its presence in Syria, intensifying its ground commitment. This involvement included an estimated 5,000 to 8,000 fighters at any given time, comprising Special Forces, standing forces from all units, part-time fighters, and new recruits with accelerated combat training. Hezbollah's presence, supported by Iranian weaponry and training, further complicated the conflict dynamics, drawing Israeli airstrikes against Hezbollah and Iranian targets in Syria. In June 2014, members of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) crossed the border from Syria into northern Iraq, and took control of large swaths of Iraqi territory as the Iraqi Army abandoned its positions. Fighting between rebels and government forces also spilled over into Lebanon on several occasions. There were repeated incidents of sectarian violence in the North Governorate of Lebanon between supporters and opponents of the Syrian government, as well as armed clashes between Sunnis and Alawites in Tripoli. Starting on 5 June 2014, ISIL seized swathes of territory in Iraq. As of 2014, the Syrian Arab Air Force used airstrikes targeted against ISIL in Raqqa and al-Hasakah in coordination with the Iraqi government. Sarin, mustard agent and chlorine gas have been used during the conflict. Numerous casualties led to an international reaction, especially the 2013 Ghouta chemical attack. A UN fact-finding mission was requested to investigate reported chemical weapons attacks. In four cases UN inspectors confirmed the use of sarin gas. In August 2016, a confidential report by the United Nations and the OPCW explicitly blamed the Syrian military of Bashar al-Assad for dropping chemical weapons (chlorine bombs) on the towns of Talmenes in April 2014 and Sarmin in March 2015 and ISIS for using sulfur mustard on the town of Marea in August 2015. The United States and the European Union have said the Syrian government has conducted several chemical attacks. Following the 2013 Ghouta attacks and international pressure, the destruction of Syria's chemical weapons began. In 2015 the UN mission disclosed previously undeclared traces of sarin compounds in a "military research site". After the April 2017 Khan Shaykhun chemical attack, the United States launched its first intentional attack against Syrian government forces. Investigation conducted by Tobias Schneider and Theresa Lutkefend of the GPPi research institute documented 336 confirmed attacks involving chemical weapons in Syria between 23 December 2012 and 18 January 2019. The study attributed 98% of the total chemical attacks to the Assad regime. Almost 90% of the attacks occurred after Ghouta chemical attack in August 2013. In April 2020, the UN Security Council briefing was held on the findings of a global chemical weapons watchdog, Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which found that the Syrian Air Force used sarin and chlorine for multiple attacks, in 2017. The close allies of Syria, Russia and European countries debated on the issue, where the OPCW findings were dismissed by Moscow while many Western European countries called for accountability for the government's war-crimes. The UN Deputy ambassador from Britain, Jonathan Allen stated that report by OPCW's Investigation Identification Team (IIT) claimed that the Syrian regime is responsible for using chemical weapons in the war on at least four occasions. The information was also noted in two UN-mandated investigations. In April 2021, Syria was suspended from OPCW through the public vote of member states, for not co-operating with the IIT and violating the Chemical Weapons Convention. Findings of another OPCW investigation report published in July 2021 concluded that the Syrian regime had engaged in confirmed chemical attacks at least 17 times, out of the 77 reported incidents of chemical weapons usage attributed to Assadist forces. Syria is not a party to the Convention on Cluster Munitions and does not recognize the ban on the use of cluster bombs. The Syrian Army is reported to have begun using cluster bombs in September 2012. Steve Goose, director of the Arms Division at Human Rights Watch said "Syria is expanding its relentless use of cluster munitions, a banned weapon, and civilians are paying the price with their lives and limbs", "The initial toll is only the beginning because cluster munitions often leave unexploded bomblets that kill and maim long afterward". Russian thermobaric weapons, also known as "fuel-air bombs", were used by the government side during the war. On 2 December 2015, The National Interest reported that Russia was deploying the TOS-1 Buratino multiple rocket launch system to Syria, which is "designed to launch massive thermobaric charges against infantry in confined spaces such as urban areas". One Buratino thermobaric rocket launcher "can obliterate a roughly 200 by 400 metres (660 by 1,310 feet) area with a single salvo". Since 2012, rebels have said that the Syrian Air Force (government forces) is using thermobaric weapons against residential areas occupied by the rebel fighters, such as during the Battle of Aleppo and also in Kafr Batna. A panel of United Nations human rights investigators reported that the Syrian government used thermobaric bombs against the strategic town of Qusayr in March 2013. In August 2013, the BBC reported on the use of napalm-like incendiary bombs on a school in northern Syria. Several types of anti-tank missiles are in use in Syria. Russia has sent 9M133 Kornet, third-generation anti-tank guided missiles to the Syrian government whose forces have used them extensively against armour and other ground targets to fight jihadists and rebels. U.S.-made BGM-71 TOW missiles are one of the primary weapons of rebel groups and have been primarily provided by the United States and Saudi Arabia. The U.S. has also supplied many Eastern European sourced 9K111 Fagot launchers and warheads to Syrian rebel groups under its Timber Sycamore program. In June 2017, Iran attacked ISIL targets in the Deir ez-Zor area in eastern Syria with Zolfaghar ballistic missiles fired from western Iran, in the first use of mid-range missiles by Iran in 30 years. According to Jane's Defence Weekly, the missiles travelled 650–700 kilometres. In 2022, a German court sentenced Anwar Raslan, 58, a high-ranking official of President Bashar al-Assad's regime to life imprisonment after he sought asylum in Germany and was arrested in 2019. He was charged with being complicit to the murder of at least 27 people coupled with the sexual assault and torture of at least another 4,000 people between 29 April 2011, and 7 September 2012. Raslan was a mid-level officer in Branch 251 and oversaw the torture of detainees. His trial was one of an unprecedented nature because Germany took on a trial of crimes committed in the Syrian war and the human rights lawyers took this on under the principle of "universal jurisdiction". Universal Jurisdiction is a concept in German law that allows for serious crimes to be tried in Germany even if they did not happen in the country. His co-defendant Eyad al-Gharib, 44, a low-level officer in Branch 251 was also sentenced to 4 years and 6 months in prison on 24 February 2021. Eyad's duties included the transport of detainees to location where they would be tortured for days on end. It was his knowledge of the fact that torture was happening there that landed him the sentence. The successive governments of Hafez and Bashar al-Assad have been closely associated with the country's minority Alawite religious group, an offshoot of Shia, whereas the majority of the population, and most of the opposition, is Sunni. A third of 250,000 Alawite men of military age have been killed fighting in the Syrian civil war. In May 2013, SOHR stated that out of 94,000 killed during the war, at least 41,000 were Alawites. According to The Daily Beast news website, many Syrian Christians stated in November 2013 that they had fled after they were targeted by the anti-government rebels. As militias and non-Syrian Shia—motivated by pro-Shia sentiment rather than loyalty to the Assad government—have taken over fighting the anti-government forces from the weakened Syrian Army, fighting has taken on a more sectarian nature. One opposition leader has said that the Shia militias often "try to occupy and control the religious symbols in the Sunni community to achieve not just a territorial victory but a sectarian one as well"—reportedly occupying mosques and replacing Sunni icons with pictures of Shia leaders. According to the Syrian Network for Human Rights, human rights abuses have been committed by the militias including "a series of sectarian massacres between March 2011 and January 2014 that left 962 civilians dead". The Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (AANES), also known as Rojava, is a de facto autonomous region in northeastern Syria. The region does not claim to pursue full independence but autonomy within a federal and democratic Syria. Rojava consists of self-governing sub-regions in the areas of Afrin, Jazira, Euphrates, Raqqa, Tabqa, Manbij and Deir Ez-Zor. The region gained its de facto autonomy in 2012 in the context of the ongoing Rojava conflict, in which its official military force, the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), has taken part. While entertaining some foreign relations, the region is not officially recognized as autonomous by the government of Syria or any state except for the Catalan Parliament. The AANES has widespread support for its universal democratic, sustainable, autonomous pluralist, equal, and feminist policies in dialogues with other parties and organizations. Northeastern Syria is polyethnic and home to sizeable ethnic Kurdish, Arab and Assyrian populations, with smaller communities of ethnic Turkmen, Armenians, Circassians, and Yazidis. The supporters of the region's administration state that it is an officially secular polity with direct democratic ambitions based on an anarchistic, feminist, and libertarian socialist ideology promoting decentralization, gender equality, environmental sustainability, social ecology and pluralistic tolerance for religious, cultural and political diversity, and that these values are mirrored in its constitution, society, and politics, stating it to be a model for a federalized Syria as a whole, rather than outright independence. The region's administration has also been accused by some partisan and non-partisan sources of authoritarianism, support of the Syrian government, Kurdification, and displacement. However, despite this the AANES has been the most democratic system in Syria, with direct open elections, universal equality, respecting human rights within the region, as well as defense of minority and religious rights within Syria. In March 2015, the Syrian Information Minister announced that his government considered recognizing Kurdish autonomy "within the law and constitution". While the region's administration was not invited to the Geneva III peace talks on Syria, or any of the earlier talks, Russia in particular called for the region's inclusion and did to some degree carry the region's positions into the talks, as documented in Russia's May 2016 draft for a new constitution for Syria. An analysis released in June 2017 described the region's "relationship with the government fraught but functional" and a "semi-cooperative dynamic". In late September 2017, Syria's Foreign Minister said that Damascus would consider granting Kurds more autonomy in the region once ISIL was defeated. On 13 October 2019, the SDF announced that it had reached an agreement with the Syrian Army which allowed the latter to enter the SDF-held cities of Manbij and Kobani in order to dissuade a Turkish attack on those cities as part of the cross-border offensive by Turkish and Turkish-backed Syrian rebels. The Syrian Army also deployed in the north of Syria together with the SDF along the Syrian-Turkish border and entered into several SDF-held cities such as Ayn Issa and Tell Tamer. Following the creation of the Second Northern Syria Buffer Zone the SDF stated that it was ready to work cooperatively with the Syrian Army if a political settlement between the Syrian government and the SDF was achieved. According to information gathered in December 2021, Iraqi authorities have returned 100 Iraqi fighters from the ISIL (ISIS) group who were being held by Kurdish forces in northeast Syria. As of 2022, the main military threat and conflict faced by Rojava's official defense force, the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), are firstly, an ongoing conflict with ISIS; and secondly, ongoing concerns of possible invasion of the northeast regions of Syria by Turkish forces, in order to strike Kurdish groups in general, and Rojava in particular. An official report by the Rojava government noted Turkey-backed militias as the main threat to the region of Rojava and its government. In May 2022 Turkish and opposition Syrian officials said that Turkey's Armed Forces and the Syrian National Army are planning a new operation against the SDF, composed mostly of the YPG/YPJ. The new operation is set to resume efforts to create 30-kilometer (18.6-mile) wide "safe zones" along Turkey's border with Syria, President Erdoğan said in a statement. The operation aims at the Tal Rifaat and Manbij regions west of the Euphrates and other areas further east. Meanwhile, Ankara is in talks with Moscow over the operation. President Erdoğan reiterated his determination for the operation on 8 August 2022. On 5 June 2022, the leader of the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), Mazloum Abdi, said that forces of the Kurdish government in the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (AANES) were willing to work with Syrian government forces to defend against Turkey, saying "Damascus should use its air defense systems against Turkish planes." Abdi said that Kurdish groups would be able to cooperate with the Syrian government, and still retain their autonomy. The joint discussions were a result of the negotiation processes that had begun in October 2019. In early 2023, reports indicated that the forces of Islamic State in Syria had mostly been defeated, with only a few cells remaining in various remote locations. As of 2023, Turkey was continuing its support for various militias within Syria, consisting mostly of the Syrian National Army, which periodically attempted some operations against Kurdish groups. One stated goal was to create "safe zones" along Turkey's border with Syria, according to a statement by Turkish President Erdoğan. The operations were generally aimed at the Tal Rifaat and Manbij regions west of the Euphrates and other areas further east. President Erdoğan openly stated his support for the operations, in talks with Moscow in mid-2022. As of 2015[update], 3.8 million have been made refugees. As of 2013[update], 1 in 3 of Syrian refugees (about 667,000 people) sought safety in Lebanon (normally 4.8 million population). Others have fled to Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq. Turkey has accepted 1,700,000 (2015) Syrian refugees, half of whom are spread around cities and a dozen camps placed under the direct authority of the Turkish Government. Satellite images confirmed that the first Syrian camps appeared in Turkey in July 2011, shortly after the towns of Deraa, Homs, and Hama were besieged. In September 2014, the UN stated that the number of Syrian refugees had exceeded 3 million. According to the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, Sunnis are leaving for Lebanon and undermining Hezbollah's status. The Syrian refugee crisis has caused the "Jordan is Palestine" threat to be diminished due to the onslaught of new refugees in Jordan. Greek Catholic Patriarch Gregorios III Laham says more than 450,000 Syrian Christians have been displaced by the conflict. As of September 2016[update], the European Union has reported that there are 13.5 million refugees in need of assistance in the country. Australia is being appealed to rescue more than 60 women and children stuck in Syria's Al-Hawl camp ahead of a potential Turkish invasion. A major statement from NGO ACT Alliance found that millions of Syrian refugees remain displaced in countries around Syria. This includes around 1.5 million refugees in Lebanon. Also the report found that refugees in camps in north-eastern Syria have tripled this year. Numerous refugees remain in local refugee camps. Conditions there are reported to be severe, especially with winter approaching. 4,000 people are housed at the Washokani Camp. No organizations are assisting them other than the Kurdish Red Cross. Numerous camp residents have called for assistance from international groups. Refugees in Northeast Syria report they have received no help from international aid organizations. On 30 December 2019, over 50 Syrian refugees, including 27 children, were welcomed in Ireland, where they started afresh in their new temporary homes at the Mosney Accommodation Centre in Co Meath. The migrant refugees were pre-interviewed by Irish officials under the Irish Refugee Protection Programme (IRPP). As of 2022 there are over 5.6 million refugees. Over 3.7 million of those (about 65%) are in Turkey. These figures have seen a lot of blame lain on refugees across the political spectrum in the country. They are being blamed for the worsening economic crisis. Measures have been put in place to "drive them out" including raised fees on utilities such water and services such as marriage licences. There has been an increase on attacks targeting Syrian refugees in the country. Another aspect of the post-war years will be how to repatriate the millions of refugees. The Syrian government has put forward a law commonly known as "law 10", which could strip refugees of property, such as damaged real estate. There are also fears among some refugees that if they return to claim this property they will face negative consequences, such as forced conscription or prison. The Syrian government has been criticized for using this law to reward those who have supported the government. However, the government said this statement was false and has expressed that it wants the return of refugees from Lebanon. In December 2018, it was also reported that the Syrian government has started to seize property under an anti-terrorism law, which is affecting government opponents negatively, with many losing their property. Some people's pensions have also been cancelled. Erdogan said that Turkey expects to resettle about 1 million refugees in the "buffer zone" that it controls. Erdogan claimed that Turkey had spent billions on approximately five million refugees now being housed in Turkey; and called for more funding from wealthier nations and from the EU. This plan raised concerns amongst Kurds about displacement of existing communities and groups in that area. The violence in Syria caused millions to flee their homes. As of March 2015, Al-Jazeera estimate 10.9 million Syrians, or almost half the population, have been displaced. Violence erupted due to the ongoing crisis in northwest Syria has forced 6,500 children to flee every day over the last week of January 2020. The recorded count of displaced children in the area has reached more than 300,000 since December 2019. As of 2022, there are 6.2 million internally displaced persons in Syria according to United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 2.5 million of those are children. 2017 alone saw the displacement of at least 1.8 million people, many of them being displaced for the second and third time. Hundreds of boys are being held hostage by ISIS. As of 25 January 2022, The New York Times stated that the fight over a prison in northeastern Syria has brought attention to the plight of thousands of foreign children who were brought to Syria by their parents to join the Islamic State caliphate and have been detained for three years in camps and prisons in the region, abandoned by their home countries. An estimated 40,000 foreigners, including children, travelled to Syria to fight for the caliphate or work for it. Thousands of them had brought their small children with them. There were also other children born there. When ISIS lost control of the last piece of territory in Syria, Baghuz, three years ago, surviving women and young children were detained in camps, while suspected militants and boys, some as young as 10, were imprisoned. Furthermore, when the boys in the camps reach the age of adolescence, they are usually transferred to Hasaka's Sinaa prison, where they are packed into overcrowded cells with no access to sunlight. According to prison guards in the area, there is insufficient food and medical attention. When the boys reach the age of 18, they are sent to the regular prison population, where wounded ISIS members are placed three to a bed. On 2 January 2013, the United Nations stated that 60,000 had been killed since the civil war began, with UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay saying "The number of casualties is much higher than we expected, and is truly shocking". Four months later, the UN's updated figure for the death toll had reached 80,000. On 13 June 2013, the UN released an updated figure of people killed since fighting began, the figure being exactly 92,901, for up to the end of April 2013. Navi Pillay, UN high commissioner for human rights, stated that: "This is most likely a minimum casualty figure". The real toll was guessed to be over 100,000. Some areas of the country have been affected disproportionately by the war; by some estimates, as many as a third of all deaths have occurred in the city of Homs. One problem has been determining the number of "armed combatants" who have died, due to some sources counting rebel fighters who were not government defectors as civilians. At least half of those confirmed killed have been estimated to be combatants from both sides, including 52,290 government fighters and 29,080 rebels, with an additional 50,000 unconfirmed combatant deaths. In addition, UNICEF reported that over 500 children had been killed by early February 2012, and another 400 children have been reportedly arrested and tortured in Syrian prisons; both of these reports have been contested by the Syrian government. Additionally, over 600 detainees and political prisoners are known to have died under torture. In mid-October 2012, the opposition activist group SOHR reported the number of children killed in the conflict had risen to 2,300, and in March 2013, opposition sources stated that over 5,000 children had been killed.[better source needed] In January 2014, a report was released detailing the systematic killing of more than 11,000 detainees of the Syrian government. On 20 August 2014, a new U.N. study concluded that at least 191,369 people have died in the Syrian conflict. The UN thereafter stopped collecting statistics, but a study by the Syrian Centre for Policy Research released in February 2016 estimated the death toll to be 470,000, with 1.9m wounded (reaching a total of 11.5% of the entire population either wounded or killed). A report by the pro-opposition SNHR in 2018 mentioned 82.000 victims that had been forcibly disappeared by the Syrian government, added to 14.000 confirmed deaths due to torture. According to various war monitors, Syrian Armed Forces and pro-Assad forces has been responsible for over 90% of the total civilian casualties in the civil war. On 15 April 2017, a convoy of buses carrying evacuees from the besieged Shia towns of al-Fu'ah and Kafriya, which were surrounded by the Army of Conquest, was attacked by a suicide bomber west of Aleppo, killing more than 126 people, including at least 80 children. On 1 January 2020, at least eight civilians, including four children, were killed in a rocket attack on a school in Idlib by Syrian government forces, the Syrian Human Rights Observatory (SOHR) said. In January 2020, UNICEF warned that children were bearing the brunt of escalating violence in northwestern Syria. More than 500 children were wounded or killed during the first three quarters of 2019, and over 65 children fell victim to the war in December alone. Over 380,000 people were killed since the war in Syria started nine years ago, war monitor Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said on 4 January 2020. The death toll comprises civilians, government soldiers, militia members and foreign troops. In an airstrike by Russian forces loyal to the Syrian government, at least five civilians were killed, out of which four belonged to the same family. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights claimed that the death toll included three children following the attack in the Idlib region on 18 January 2020. On 30 January 2020, Russian air strikes on a hospital and a bakery killed over 10 civilians in Syria's Idlib region. Moscow immediately rejected the allegation. On 23 June 2020, Israeli raids killed seven fighters, including two Syrian in a central province. State media cited a military official as saying the attack targeted posts in rural areas of Hama province. Just four days after the start of 2022, two children were killed and five others injured in northwest Syria. In 2021 alone, over 70% of violent attacks against children have been recorded in the region. On 14 January 2022, one person was killed by a car bomb and several others were wounded in the city of Azaz in northwest Syria, three people were wounded at a marketplace in a suspected suicide bombing in the town of al Bab and another suicide bomb went off in the city of Afrin at a roundabout. United Nations and human rights organizations have asserted that human rights violations have been committed by both the government and the rebel forces, with the "vast majority of the abuses having been committed by the Syrian government". Numerous human rights abuses, political repression, war crimes and crimes against humanity perpetrated by the Assad government throughout the course of the conflict has led to international condemnation and widespread calls to convict Bashar al-Assad in the International Criminal Court (ICC). The unprecedented scale of the atrocities launched by government forces since the outbreak of the Syrian revolution has led to international outrage, and Syria's membership was suspended from various international organizations. According to three international lawyers, Syrian government officials could face war crimes charges in the light of a huge cache of evidence smuggled out of the country showing the "systematic killing" of about 11,000 detainees. Most of the victims were young men and many corpses were emaciated, bloodstained and bore signs of torture. Some had no eyes; others showed signs of strangulation or electrocution. Experts said this evidence was more detailed and on a far larger scale than anything else that had emerged from the then 34-month crisis. Atrocities committed by the Assad regime has been described as the "greatest war crimes of the 21st century", with chilling revelations of torture, rapes, massacres, extermination being leaked through the 2014 Caesar Report, which contained photographic evidences gathered by a dissident army photographer who worked in Ba'athist military prisons. According to international lawyer Stephen Rapp: We've got better evidence-- against Assad and his clique-- than we had against Milosevic in Yugoslavia, or we had in any of the war crimes tribunals in which I've involved in, some extent, even better than we had against the Nazis at Nuremberg, because the Nazis didn't actually take individual pictures of each of their victims with identifying information on them. The UN reported in 2014 that "siege warfare is employed in a context of egregious human rights and international humanitarian law violations. The warring parties do not fear being held accountable for their acts". Armed forces of both sides of the conflict blocked access of humanitarian convoys, confiscated food, cut off water supplies and targeted farmers working their fields. The report pointed to four places besieged by the government forces: Muadamiyah, Daraya, Yarmouk camp and Old City of Homs, as well as two areas under siege of rebel groups: Aleppo and Hama. In Yarmouk Camp 20,000 residents faced death by starvation due to blockade by the Syrian government forces and fighting between the army and Jabhat al-Nusra, which prevents food distribution by UNRWA. In July 2015, the UN removed Yarmouk from its list of besieged areas in Syria, despite not having been able deliver aid there for four months, and declined to say why it had done so. After intense fighting in April/May 2018, Syrian government forces finally took the camp, its population now reduced to 100–200. ISIS forces have also been criticized by the UN of using public executions and killing of captives, amputations, and lashings in a campaign to instill fear. "Forces of the Islamic State of Iraq and al-Sham have committed torture, murder, acts tantamount to enforced disappearance and forced displacement as part of attacks on the civilian population in Aleppo and Raqqa governorates, amounting to crimes against humanity", said the report from 27 August 2014. ISIS also persecuted gay and bisexual men. Enforced disappearances and arbitrary detentions have also been a feature since the Syrian uprising began. An Amnesty International report, published in November 2015, stated the Syrian government has forcibly disappeared more than 65,000 people since the beginning of the Syrian civil war. According to a report in May 2016 by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, at least 60,000 people have been killed since March 2011 through torture or from poor humanitarian conditions in Syrian government prisons. In February 2017, Amnesty International published a report which stated the Syrian government murdered an estimated 13,000 persons, mostly civilians, at the Saydnaya military prison. They stated the killings began in 2011 and were still ongoing. Amnesty International described this as a "policy of deliberate extermination" and also stated that "These practices, which amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity, are authorised at the highest levels of the Syrian government". Three months later, the United States State Department stated a crematorium had been identified near the prison. According to the U.S., it was being used to burn thousands of bodies of those killed by the government's forces and to cover up evidence of atrocities and war crimes. Amnesty International expressed surprise at the reports about the crematorium, as the photographs used by the US are from 2013 and they did not see them as conclusive, and fugitive government officials have stated that the government buries those its executes in cemeteries on military grounds in Damascus. The Syrian government said the reports were not true. By July 2012, the human rights group Women Under Siege had documented over 100 cases of rape and sexual assault during the conflict, with many of these crimes reported to have been perpetrated by the Shabiha and other pro-government militias. Victims included men, women, and children, with about 80% of the known victims being women and girls.[better source needed] On 11 September 2019, the UN investigators said that air strikes conducted by the US-led coalition in Syria have killed or wounded several civilians, denoting that necessary precautions were not taken leading to potential war crimes. In late 2019, as the violence intensified in north-west Syria, thousands of women and children were reportedly kept under "inhumane conditions" in a remote camp, said UN-appointed investigators. In October 2019, Amnesty International stated that it had gathered evidence of war crimes and other violations committed by Turkish and Turkey-backed Syrian forces who are said to "have displayed a shameful disregard for civilian life, carrying out serious violations and war crimes, including summary killings and unlawful attacks that have killed and injured civilians". According to a 2020 report by U.N.-backed investigators into the Syrian civil war, young girls aged nine and above have been raped and inveigled into sexual slavery, while boys have been put through torture and forcefully trained to execute killings in public. Children have been attacked by sharpshooters and lured to be bargaining chips for ransoms. On 6 April 2020, the United Nations published its investigation into the attacks on humanitarian sites in Syria. The council in its reports said, it had examined 6 sites of attacks and concluded that the airstrikes had been carried out by the "Government of Syria and/or its allies." However, the report was criticized for being partial towards Russia and not naming it, despite proper evidence. "The refusal to explicitly name Russia as a responsible party working alongside the Syrian government … is deeply disappointing", the HRW quoted. On 27 April 2020, the Syrian Network for Human Rights reported continuation of multiple crimes in the month of March and April in Syria. The rights organization billed that Syrian regime decimated 44 civilians, including six children, during the unprecedented times of COVID-19. It also said, Syrian forces held captive 156 people, while committing a minimum of four attacks on vital civilian facilities. The report further recommended that the UN impose sanctions on the Bashar al-Assad regime, if it continues to commit human rights violation. On 8 May 2020, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet, raised serious concern that rebel groups, including ISIL terrorist fighters, may be using the COVID-19 pandemic as "an opportunity to re-group and inflict violence in the country". On 21 July 2020, the Syrian government forces carried out an attack and killed two civilians with four Grad rockets in western al-Bab sub-district. On 14 January 2022, in the rebel-held city of Azaz in northwest Syria, a car bomb went off killing one and wounding several bystanders. According to a rescue worker, an improvised explosive device had been housed inside a car and then the car was planted near a local transport office in the city which is close to the Turkish border. In the town of al Bab, a suicide bomb went off wounding three and in the city of Afrin, another suicide bomb went off at a roundabout. All these three bombings happened in a span of hours and minutes from each other. According to Aljazeera, a rocket attack on a northern Syrian town controlled by Turkey-backed opposition fighters killed six civilians and injured more than a dozen others on 21 January 2022. According to the British-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, it was unclear who fired the artillery shells, but the attack came from a region populated by Kurdish fighters and Syrian government forces. After an attack on a Syrian jail on 23 January 2022, over 120 individuals were killed in an ongoing conflict between Kurdish-led troops and ISIL (ISIS) fighters. According to the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, "at least 77 IS members and 39 Kurdish fighters, including internal security forces, prison guards and counter-terrorism forces were killed" in the attack. On 17 December 2023, eight civilians, including a pregnant woman, were killed during bombardments by the Syrian Arab Army on the town of Darat Izza. War monitor SOHR reported that pro-Assad forces deliberately perpetrated a massacre by "directly targeting residential areas, using artillery shells and rocket launchers". As the conflict has expanded across Syria, many cities have been engulfed in a wave of crime as fighting caused the disintegration of much of the civilian state, and many police stations stopped functioning. Rates of theft increased, with criminals looting houses and stores. Rates of kidnappings increased as well. Rebel fighters were seen stealing cars and, in one instance, destroying a restaurant in Aleppo where Syrian soldiers had been seen eating. Local National Defense Forces commanders often engaged "in war profiteering through protection rackets, looting, and organized crime". NDF members were also implicated in "waves of murders, robberies, thefts, kidnappings, and extortions throughout government-held parts of Syria since the formation of the organization in 2013", as reported by the Institute for the Study of War. Criminal networks have been used by both the government and the opposition during the conflict. Facing international sanctions, the Syrian government relied on criminal organizations to smuggle goods and money in and out of the country. The economic downturn caused by the conflict and sanctions also led to lower wages for Shabiha members. In response, some Shabiha members began stealing civilian properties and engaging in kidnappings. Rebel forces sometimes rely on criminal networks to obtain weapons and supplies. Black market weapon prices in Syria's neighboring countries have significantly increased since the start of the conflict. To generate funds to purchase arms, some rebel groups have turned towards extortion, theft, and kidnapping. Syria has become the chief location for manufacturing of Captagon, an illegal amphetamine. Drugs manufactured in Syria have found their way across the Gulf, Jordan and Europe but have at times been intercepted. In January 2022, a Jordanian army officer was shot and killed and three army personnel injured after a shoot out erupted between drug smugglers and the army. The Jordanian army has said that it shot down a drone in 2021 that was being used to smuggle a substantial amount of drugs across the Jordanian border. The World Health Organization has reported that 35% of the country's hospitals are out of service. Fighting makes it impossible to undertake the normal vaccination programs. The displaced refugees may also pose a disease risk to countries to which they have fled. 400,000 civilians were isolated by the Siege of Eastern Ghouta from April 2013 to April 2018, resulting in acutely malnourished children according to the United Nations Special Advisor, Jan Egeland, who urged the parties for medical evacuations. 55,000 civilians are also isolated in the Rukban refugee camp between Syria and Jordan, where humanitarian relief access is difficult due to the harsh desert conditions. Humanitarian aid reaches the camp only sporadically, sometimes taking three months between shipments. Formerly rare infectious diseases have spread in rebel-held areas brought on by poor sanitation and deteriorating living conditions. The diseases have primarily affected children. These include measles, typhoid, hepatitis, dysentery, tuberculosis, diphtheria, whooping cough and the disfiguring skin disease leishmaniasis. Of particular concern is the contagious and crippling Poliomyelitis. As of late 2013 doctors and international public health agencies have reported more than 90 cases. Critics of the government complain that, even before the uprising, it contributed to the spread of disease by purposefully restricting access to vaccination, sanitation and access to hygienic water in "areas considered politically unsympathetic". In June 2020, the United Nations reported that after more than nine years of war, Syria was falling into an even deeper crisis and economic deterioration as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of 26 June, a total of 248 people were infected by COVID-19, out of which nine people died. Restrictions on the importation of medical supplies, limited access to essential equipment, reduced outside support and ongoing attacks on medical facilities left Syria's health infrastructure in peril, and unable to meet the needs of its population. Syrian communities were additionally facing unprecedented levels of hunger crisis. In September 2022, the UN representative in Syria reported that several regions in the country were witnessing a cholera outbreak. UN Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator Imran Riza called for an urgent response to contain the outbreak, saying that it posed "a serious threat to people in Syria". The outbreak was linked to the use of contaminated water for growing crops and the reliance of people on unsafe water sources. The conflict holds the record for the largest sum ever requested by UN agencies for a single humanitarian emergency, $6.5 billion worth of requests of December 2013. The international humanitarian response to the conflict in Syria is coordinated by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) in accordance with General Assembly Resolution 46/182. The primary framework for this coordination is the Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan (SHARP) which appealed for US$1.41 billion to meet the humanitarian needs of Syrians affected by the conflict. Official United Nations data on the humanitarian situation and response is available at an official website managed by UNOCHA Syria (Amman). UNICEF is also working alongside these organizations to provide vaccinations and care packages to those in need. Financial information on the response to the SHARP and assistance to refugees and for cross-border operations can be found on UNOCHA's Financial Tracking Service. As of 19 September 2015, the top ten donors to Syria were United States, European Commission, United Kingdom, Kuwait, Germany, Saudi Arabia, Canada, Japan, UAE, and Norway. The difficulty of delivering humanitarian aid to people is indicated by the statistics for January 2015: of the estimated 212,000 people during that month who were besieged by government or opposition forces, 304 were reached with food. USAID and other government agencies in US delivered nearly $385 million of aid items to Syria in 2012 and 2013. The United States has provided food aid, medical supplies, emergency and basic health care, shelter materials, clean water, hygiene education and supplies, and other relief supplies. Islamic Relief has stocked 30 hospitals and sent hundreds of thousands of medical and food parcels. Other countries in the region have also contributed various levels of aid. Iran has been exporting between 500 and 800 tonnes of flour daily to Syria. Israel supplied aid through Operation Good Neighbor, providing medical treatment to 750 Syrians in a field hospital located in Golan Heights where rebels say that 250 of their fighters were treated. Israel established two medical centers inside Syria. Israel also delivered heating fuel, diesel fuel, seven electric generators, water pipes, educational materials, flour for bakeries, baby food, diapers, shoes and clothing. Syrian refugees in Lebanon make up one quarter of Lebanon's population, mostly consisting of women and children. In addition, Russia has said it created six humanitarian aid centers within Syria to support 3000 refugees in 2016. On 9 April 2020, the UN dispatched 51 truckloads of humanitarian aid to Idlib. The organization said that the aid would be distributed among civilians stranded in the north-western part of the country. On 30 April 2020, Human Rights Watch condemned the Syrian authorities for their longstanding restriction on the entry of aid supplies. It also demanded the World Health Organization to keep pushing the UN to allow medical aid and other essentials to reach Syria via the Iraq border crossing, to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the war-torn nation. The aid supplies, if allowed, will allow the Syrian population to protect themselves from contracting the COVID-19 virus. As of December 2019, a diplomatic dispute is occurring at the UN over re-authorization of cross-border aid for refugees. China and Russia oppose the draft resolution that seeks to re-authorize crossing points in Turkey, Iraq, and Jordan; China and Russia, as allies of Assad, seek to close the two crossing points in Iraq and Jordan, and to leave only the two crossing points in Turkey active. The current authorization expired on 10 January 2020. All of the ten individuals representing the non-permanent members of the Security Council stood in the corridor outside of the chamber speaking to the press to state that all four crossing points are crucial and must be renewed. United Nations official Mark Lowcock is asking the UN to re-authorize cross-border aid to enable aid to continue to reach refugees in Syria. He says there is no other way to deliver the aid that is needed. He noted that four million refugees out of the over eleven million refugees who need assistance are being reached through four specific international crossing points. Lowcock serves as the United Nations Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator and the Head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Russia, aided by China's support, has vetoed the resolution to retain all four border crossings. An alternate resolution also did not pass. The US strongly criticized the vetoes and opposition by Russia and China. China explained the reason for veto is the concern of "unilateral coercive measures" by certain states causing humanitarian suffering on the Syrian people. It views lifting all unilateral sanctions respecting Syrian sovereignty and for humanitarian reasons is a must. As of March 2015[update], the war has affected 290 heritage sites, severely damaged 104, and completely destroyed 24.[needs update] Five of the six UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Syria have been damaged. Destruction of antiquities has been caused by shelling, army entrenchment, and looting at various tells, museums, and monuments. A group called Syrian Archaeological Heritage Under Threat is monitoring and recording the destruction in an attempt to create a list of heritage sites damaged during the war and to gain global support for the protection and preservation of Syrian archaeology and architecture. UNESCO listed all six Syria's World Heritage Sites as endangered but direct assessment of damage is not possible. It is known that the Old City of Aleppo was heavily damaged during battles being fought within the district, while Palmyra and Krak des Chevaliers suffered minor damage. Illegal digging is said to be a grave danger, and hundreds of Syrian antiquities, including some from Palmyra, appeared in Lebanon. Three archeological museums are known to have been looted; in Raqqa some artifacts seem to have been destroyed by foreign Islamists due to religious objections. In 2014 and 2015, following the rise of the Islamic State, several sites in Syria were destroyed by the group as part of a deliberate destruction of cultural heritage sites. In Palmyra, the group destroyed many ancient statues, the Temples of Baalshamin and Bel, many tombs including the Tower of Elahbel, and part of the Monumental Arch. The 13th-century Palmyra Castle was extensively damaged by retreating militants during the Palmyra offensive in March 2016. IS also destroyed ancient statues in Raqqa, and a number of churches, including the Armenian Genocide Memorial Church in Deir ez-Zor. In January 2018 Turkish airstrikes seriously damaged an ancient Neo-Hittite temple in Syria's Kurdish-held Afrin region. It was built by the Arameans in the first millennium BC. According to a September 2019 report published by the Syrian Network for Human Rights, more than 120 Christian churches have been destroyed or damaged in Syria since 2011. The war has inspired its own particular artwork, done by Syrians. A late summer 2013 exhibition in London at the P21 Gallery showed some of this work, which had to be smuggled out of Syria. The Syrian civil war is one of the most heavily documented wars in history, despite the extreme dangers that journalists face while in Syria. On 19 August 2014, American journalist James Foley was executed by ISIL, who said it was in retaliation for the United States operations in Iraq. Foley was kidnapped in Syria in November 2012 by Shabiha militia. ISIL also threatened to execute Steven Sotloff, who was kidnapped at the Syrian-Turkish border in August 2013. There were reports ISIS captured a Japanese national, two Italian nationals, and a Danish national as well. Sotloff was later executed in September 2014. At least 70 journalists have been killed covering the Syrian war, and more than 80 kidnapped, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists. On 22 August 2014, the al-Nusra Front released a video of captured Lebanese soldiers and demanded Hezbollah withdraw from Syria under threat of their execution. During the early period of the civil war, The Arab League, European Union, the United Nations, and many Western governments quickly condemned the Syrian government's violent response to the protests, and expressed support for the protesters' right to exercise free speech. Initially, many Middle Eastern governments expressed support for Assad, but as the death toll mounted, they switched to a more balanced approach by criticizing violence from both government and protesters. Both the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation suspended Syria's membership. Russia and China vetoed Western-drafted United Nations Security Council resolutions in 2011 and 2012, which would have threatened the Syrian government with targeted sanctions if it continued military actions against protestors. The US Congress has enacted punitive sanctions on the Syrian government for its actions during the Civil War. These sanctions would penalize any entities lending support to the Syrian government, and any companies operating in Syria. US President Donald Trump tried to protect the Turkish President Erdogan from the effects of such sanctions. Some activists welcomed this legislation. Some critics contend that these punitive sanctions are likely to backfire or have unintended consequences; they argue that ordinary Syrian people will have fewer economic resources due to these sanctions (and will thus need to rely more the Syrian government and its economic allies and projects), while the sanctions' impact on ruling political elites will be limited. Mohammad al-Abdallah, executive director of Syria Justice and Accountability Center (SJAC), said that the sanctions will likely hurt ordinary Syrian people, saying, "it is an almost unsolvable unfeasible equation. If they are imposed, they will indirectly harm the Syrian people, and if they are lifted, they will indirectly revive the Syrian regime;" he attributed the sanctions to "political considerations, as the United States does not have weapons and tools in the Syrian file, and sanctions are its only means." Peter Ford, the former UK Ambassador to Syria, said "...going forward, we're seeing more economic warfare. It seems that the US, having failed to change the regime in Syria by military force or by proxies, is tightening the economic screws and the main reason why the US is keeping hold of the production facilities in eastern Syria. So, the economic situation is becoming more and more serious and dire in Syria and it's a major reason why refugees are not going back."[citation needed] In June, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced new economic sanctions on Syria targeting foreign business relations with the Syrian government. Under the Caesar Act, the latest sanctions were to be imposed on 39 individuals and entities, including Asma al-Assad, wife of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. On 17 June 2020, James F. Jeffrey, Special Representative for Syria Engagement, signalled that the UAE could be hit with sanctions under the Caesar Act if it pushed ahead with normalisation efforts with the Syrian regime. During the course of the war, there have been several international peace initiatives, undertaken by the Arab League, the United Nations, and other actors. The Syrian government has refused efforts to negotiate with what it describes as armed terrorist groups. On 1 February 2016, the UN announced the formal start of the UN-mediated Geneva Syria peace talks that had been agreed on by the International Syria Support Group (ISSG) in Vienna. On 3 February 2016, the UN Syria peace mediator suspended the talks. On 14 March 2016, Geneva peace talks resumed. The Syrian government stated that discussion of Bashar-al-Assad's presidency "is a red line", however Syria's President Bashar al-Assad said he hoped peace talks in Geneva would lead to concrete results, and stressed the need for a political process in Syria. A new round of talks between the Syrian government and some groups of Syrian rebels concluded on 24 January 2017 in Astana, Kazakhstan, with Russia, Iran and Turkey supporting the ceasefire agreement brokered in late December 2016. The Astana Process talks was billed by a Russian official as a complement to, rather than replacement, of the United Nations-led Geneva Process talks. On 4 May 2017, at the fourth round of the Astana talks, representatives of Russia, Iran, and Turkey signed a memorandum whereby four "de-escalation zones" in Syria would be established, effective of 6 May 2017. On 18 September 2019, Russia stated the United States and Syrian rebels were obstructing the evacuation process of a refugee camp in southern Syria. On 28 September 2019, Syria's top diplomat demanded the foreign forces, including that of US and Turkey, to immediately leave the country, saying that the Syrian government holds the right to protect its territory in all possible ways if they remain. President RT Erdogan said Turkey was left with no choice other than going its own way on the Syria 'safe zone' after a deadline to co-jointly establish a "safe zone" with the US in northern Syria expired in September. The U.S. indicated it would withdraw its forces from northern Syria after Turkey warned of incursion in the region that could instigate fighting with American-backed Kurds. In October 2019, in response to the Turkish offensive, Russia arranged for negotiations between the Syrian government in Damascus and the Kurdish-led forces. Russia also negotiated a renewal of a cease-fire between Kurds and Turkey that was about to expire. Russia and Turkey agreed via the Sochi Agreement of 2019 to set up a Second Northern Syria Buffer Zone. Syrian President Assad expressed full support for the deal, as various terms of the agreement also applied to the Syrian government. The SDF stated that they considered themselves as "Syrian and a part of Syria", adding that they would agree to work with the Syrian Government. The SDF officially announced their support for the deal on 27 October. The agreement reportedly included the following terms: A buffer zone would be established in Northern Syria. The zone would be around 30 kilometres (19 mi) deep, stretching from Euphrates River to Tall Abyad and from Ras al-Ayn to the Iraq-Syria border, but excluding the town of Qamishli, the Kurds' de facto capital. The buffer zone would be controlled jointly by the Syrian Army and Russian Military Police. All YPG forces, which constitute the majority of the SDF, must withdraw from the buffer zone entirely, along with their weapons, within 150 hours from the announcement of the deal. Their withdrawal would be overseen by Russian Military Police and the Syrian Border Guards, which would then enter the zone. In late 2019, a new Syrian Constitutional Committee began operating in order to discuss a new settlement and to draft a new constitution for Syria. This committee comprises about 150 members. It includes representatives of the Syrian government, opposition groups, and countries serving as guarantors of the process, such as Russia. However, this committee has faced strong opposition from the Assad government. 50 of the committee members represent the government, and 50 members represent the opposition. Until the Assad government agrees to participate, it is unclear whether the third round of talks will proceed on a firm schedule. In December 2019, the EU held an international conference which condemned any suppression of the Kurds, and called for the self-declared Autonomous Administration in Rojava to be preserved and to be reflected in any new Syrian Constitution. The Kurds are concerned that the independence of their declared Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (AANES) in Rojava might be severely curtailed. Rojava officials condemned the fact that they were excluded from the peace talks and stated that "having a couple of Kurds" in the committee did not mean that the Syrian Kurds were properly represented in it. The co-chair of the Syrian Democratic Council accused Turkey of vetoing the representation of Syrian Kurds within the committee. The Kurdish administration also organized demonstrations in front of the UN office in Qamishli to protest their exclusion from the committee. On 13 April 2023, Syrian Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad arrived in Jeddah to meet Saudi foreign minister, Prince Faisal bin Farhan. After frayed relations during the Syrian civil war, both nations now seek "a political solution to the Syrian crisis that preserves the unity, security and stability of Syria", according to the Saudi foreign ministry. The high level talks are "facilitating the return of Syrian refugees to their homeland, and securing humanitarian access to the affected areas in Syria". Al-Assad previously visited the UAE, Oman as well as Saudi Arabia. The discussion also included the possible resumption of consular services between the two countries. This is the first visit to Saudi Arabia by a Syrian foreign minister since the onset of the civil war in 2011. The same week all foreign ministers of the Arab League would meet again to discuss the return of Syria to the regional organisation. United Nations authorities have estimated that the war in Syria has caused destruction reaching to about $400 billion. SNHR reported in 2017 that the war has rendered around 39% of Syrian mosques unserviceable for worship. More than 13,500 mosques were destroyed in Syria between 2011 and 2017. Around 1,400 were dismantled by 2013, while 13,000 mosques got demolished between 2013 and 2017. According to a Syrian war monitor, over 120 churches have been damaged or demolished by during the course of Syrian war since 2011; and 60% of these attacks were perpetrated by pro-Assad forces. While the war is still ongoing, Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad said that Syria would be able to rebuild the war-torn country on its own. As of July 2018[update], the reconstruction is estimated to cost a minimum of US$400 billion. Assad said he would be able to loan this money from friendly countries, Syrian diaspora and the state treasury. Iran has expressed interest in helping rebuild Syria. One year later this seemed to be materializing, Iran and the Syrian government signed a deal where Iran would help rebuild the Syrian energy grid, which has taken damage to 50% of the grid. International donors have been suggested as one financier of the reconstruction. As of November 2018[update], reports emerged that rebuilding efforts had already started. It was reported that the biggest issue facing the rebuilding process is the lack of building material and a need to make sure the resources that do exist are managed efficiently. The rebuilding effort have so far remained at a limited capacity and has often been focused on certain areas of a city, thus ignoring other areas inhabited by disadvantaged people. Various efforts are proceeding to rebuild infrastructure in Syria. Russia says it will spend $500 million to modernize Syria's port of Tartus. Russia also said it will build a railway to link Syria with the Persian Gulf. Russia will also contribute to recovery efforts by the UN. Syria awarded oil exploration contracts to two Russian firms. Syria announced it is in serious dialogue with China to join China's "Belt and Road Initiative" designed to foster investment in infrastructure in over one-hundred developing nations worldwide. On Wednesday 12 January 2022, China and Syria signed a memorandum of understanding in Damascus. The memorandum was signed by Fadi al-Khalil, the Head of Planning and International Cooperation Commission for the Syrian Side and Feng Biao, the Chinese ambassador in Damascus for the Chinese side. The memorandum sees Syria join the initiative whose aim is to help expand cooperation with China and other partner countries in areas such as trade, technology, capital, human movement and cultural exchange. Among other things, it aims to define the future of this cooperation with partner states. Asia portal Current events portal Middle East portal Modern history portal Belligerents in the Syrian civil war 2010s in Syria political history Cities and towns during the Syrian civil war Eastern Syria insurgency Inter-rebel conflict during the Syrian civil war Rojava conflict Timeline of the Syrian civil war Spillover of the Syrian civil war Syria chemical weapons program Syrian–Turkish border clashes during the Syrian civil war Terrorism in Syria Syrian civil war in popular culture Casualty recording Human rights violations during the Syrian civil war Control of cities during the Syrian civil war List of Syrian defectors List of aviation shootdowns and accidents during the Syrian civil war List of terrorist incidents in Syria Northwestern Syria offensive (April–June 2015) ("Battle of Victory") Battle of Yarmouk Camp (2015) Syrian civil war ceasefires Syrian Democratic Council Syrian diaspora Syrian peace process White Helmets (Syrian civil war) 2023 American–Middle East conflict Iraqi insurgency (2011–2013) Islamist uprising in Syria from 1976 until 1982 List of wars involving Syria War in Iraq (2013–2017) Formed in January 2017 as a merger between Jaysh al-Ahrar (a faction of Ahrar al-Sham), Ansar al-Din Front, Jaysh al-Sunna, Jabhat Fatah al-Sham (successor of Al-Nusra Front) and Liwa al-Haqq. Sources: Kassam, Kamal; Becker, Maria (16 May 2023). "Syrians of today, Germans of tomorrow: the effect of initial placement on the political interest of Syrian refugees in Germany". Frontiers in Political Science. 5: 3. doi:10.3389/fpos.2023.1100446. "Syria: The story of the conflict". BBC News. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Syrian Troops Open Fire on Protestors in Several Cities". The New York Times. 25 March 2011. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. "Mid-East unrest: Syrian protests in Damascus and Aleppo". BBC News. 15 March 2011. Archived from the original on 21 July 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2013. The name "Rojava" ("The West") was initially used by the region's PYD-led government, before its usage was dropped in 2016. Since then, the name is still used by some locals and international observers. Sources: Sources: Starting from the Syrian-Turkish border and going south into Syria. Syrian Civil War Enters 10th Year Syria: Grim 10-year anniversary of ‘unimaginable violence and indignities’ Syria's Civil War Started A Decade Ago. Here's Where It Stand 10 years since start of Syrian civil war 11 Years of War in Syria: Situation Assessment 11 years into Syria's civil war, this is what everyday life looks like Twelve years on from the beginning of Syria’s war Syrians mark 12 years of civil war with no end in sight Why has the Syrian war lasted 12 years? "Map of military control across Syria at the end of 2022 and the beginning of 2023". Jusoor. 2 January 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023. "Syria". GCR2P. 1 December 2022. Archived from the original on 28 January 2023. "Syrian Revolution 13 years on | Nearly 618,000 persons killed since the onset of the revolution in March 2011". Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "UN: UN Human Rights Office estimates more than 306,000 civilians were killed over 10 years in Syria conflict". United Nations. 28 June 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2023. "Civilian Deaths in the Syrian Arab Republic: Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights". United Nations. 28 June 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Over the past ten years, civilians have borne the brunt of the conflict, with an estimated 306,887 direct civilian deaths occurring. "Syria emergency". United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Kassam, Kamal; Becker, Maria (16 May 2023). "Syrians of today, Germans of tomorrow: the effect of initial placement on the political interest of Syrian refugees in Germany". Frontiers in Political Science. 5: 3. doi:10.3389/fpos.2023.1100446. "Syria: The story of the conflict". BBC News. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "U.S.-Russian ceasefire deal holding in southwest Syria". Reuters. 9 July 2017. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Death toll in alleged Israeli strikes near Damascus up to 23 fighters — monitor Archived 7 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Times of Israel "2021 will be a defining year for Syria". Middle East Institute. "Crisis in Syria: Economic crisis compounds a decade of war". International Rescue Committee (IRC). 31 January 2022. Chulov, Martin (26 May 2021). "'Mob boss' Assad's dynasty tightens grip over husk of Syria". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Twelve years on from the beginning of Syria's war By Al Jazeera Staff ,15 Mar 2023. Security Council: 12 years of war, leaves 70 per cent of Syrians needing aid, 25 January 2023, UN official website. Suleiman, Ali Haj (23 August 2023). "Anti-government protests in Syria continue for sixth day". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023. "Anti-government protests shake Syrian provinces amid anger over economy". The Guardian. 26 August 2023. Archived from the original on 26 August 2023. Abdulrahim, Raja (31 August 2023). "Rare Protests in Syria Summon Echoes of Arab Spring". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. "Syria Protests Spurred by Economic Misery Stir Memories of the 2011 Anti-Government Uprising". Asharq al-Awsat. 29 August 2023. Archived from the original on 29 August 2023. Ray, Michael. "8 Deadliest Wars of the 21st Century". Britannica. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. "Russia accused of war crimes in Syria at UN security council session". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. "Damning evidence of war crimes by Turkish forces and allies in Syria". Amnesty International. 18 October 2019. Archived from the original on 2 December 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2020. Dewan, Angela; McGann, Hillary (5 June 2018). "US-led strikes on Raqqa may amount to war crimes, Amnesty says". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. Barnard, Anne; Hubbard, Ben; Fisher, Ian (15 April 2017). "As Atrocities Mount in Syria, Justice Seems Out of Reach". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2017. Karasapan, Omer (27 January 2022). "Syrian refugees in Jordan: A decade and counting". Brookings Institution. Todd, Zoe (19 November 2019). "By the Numbers: Syrian Refugees Around the World". Frontline. Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2023. Lundgren, Magnus (2016). "Mediation in Syria: Initiatives, strategies, and obstacles, 2011–2016". Contemporary Security Policy. 37 (2): 283–298. doi:10.1080/13523260.2016.1192377. S2CID 156447200. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Syria’s Kurds forge ‘costly deal’ with al-Assad as US pulls out: Damascus has much to gain from deal with Kurds, but its ability to halt Turkey’s push depends on Russia, say analysts. By Arwa Ibrahim, Published On 15 Oct 2019 on website of Al-Jazeera. : Kurdish forces backed by US strike deal with Syria’s Assad, in major shift in 8-year war, By Helen Regan and Eliza Mackintosh, CNN, Mon October 14, 2019. Turkey-Syria offensive: Kurds reach deal with Damascus to stave off assault. Agreement to hand over border towns comes after more than 700 Isis affiliates escape camp. Bethan McKernan in Akçakale Mon 14 Oct 2019 website of The Guardian. Syria’s Stalemate Has Only Benefitted Assad and His Backers. On the conflict’s 12th anniversary, everyday Syrians face a dire humanitarian situation, while Assad’s grip on power holds steady. Tuesday, March 14, 2023 / BY: Mona Yacoubian The civil uprising against the longtime rule of the Assads deteriorated into protracted civil war. Here’s a look at the elements that have deepened Syria’s tragedy. By Zachary Laub, February 14, 2023. Turkey is trying to bomb Rojava out of existence, By Sarah Glynn, 9 October 2023. "Turkey says bombers came from Syria, eyes cross-border targets". Reuters. 4 October 2023. Retrieved 5 October 2023. Wilson, Scott (25 April 2011). "Syria escalates attacks against demonstrators". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Shamaileh, Ammar (2017). "2: Trust, Terror and the Arab Spring: Egypt, Libya and Syria". Trust and Terror: Social Capital and the Use of Terrorism as a Tool of Resistance. New York, NY, USA: Routledge. p. 16. ISBN 978-1-138-20173-6. Saber Allam; Salah Ashraf (2019). "Introduction". Assad's Survival: The Symbol Of Resisting The Arab Spring. Alexandria, Egypt: Lamar. p. 9. ISBN 978-977-85412-3-6. Ma’oz, Moshe (2022). "15: The Assad dynasty". In Larres, Klaus (ed.). Dictators and Autocrats: Securing Power across Global Politics. New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 249–263. doi:10.4324/9781003100508. ISBN 978-0-367-60786-9. S2CID 239130832. "Assad says Syria 'able' to get out of crisis". Al Jazeera. 25 May 2012. Archived from the original on 7 June 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Profile: Syria's ruling Baath Party". BBC. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Björklund Kmak; Heta Magdalena (2022). "4: The world as an exiling political structure". Refugees and Knowledge Production: Europe's Past and Present. Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. pp. 73–74. doi:10.4324/9781003092421. ISBN 978-0-367-55206-0. S2CID 246668129. Ma’oz, Moshe (2022). "15: The Assad dynasty". In Larres, Klaus (ed.). Dictators and Autocrats: Securing Power across Global Politics. New York, NY: Routledge. pp. 249–250. doi:10.4324/9781003100508. ISBN 978-0-367-60786-9. S2CID 239130832. Golovnina, Maria (19 March 2012). "Asma al Assad, a "desert rose" crushed by Syria's strife". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 September 2013. Retrieved 8 August 2013. Stack, Liam; J. David Goodman (1 April 2011). "Syrian Protesters Clash With Security Forces". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2013. "President Bashar al-Assad interview with Croatian newspaper Vecernji List". leakofnations.com. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "Syria". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 11 July 2016. "The World Factbook: Syria". CIA Library. Archived from the original on 9 January 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2018. "Rebels in Syria's largest city of Aleppo mostly poor, pious and from rural backgrounds". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 December 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Syria GDP per Capita [2002 – 2020] [Data & Charts]". www.ceicdata.com. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 18 August 2020. "Youth Exclusion in Syria: Social, Economic, and Institutional Dimensions". Journalist's Resource. 11 August 2011. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Retrieved 11 August 2012. Kelley, C. P., Mohtadi, S., Cane, M. A., Seager, R., & Kushnir, Y. (2015). Syria had also received in the same period around 1.5 million refugees from Iraq. By 2011, Syria was facing steep rises in the prices of commodities and a clear deterioration in the national standard of living. Fountain, Henry (2 March 2015). "Researchers Link Syrian Conflict to a Drought Made Worse by Climate Change". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 April 2017. Retrieved 1 May 2017. Kelley, Colin P.; Mohtadi, Shahrzad; Cane, Mark A.; Seager, Richard; Kushnir, Yochanan (17 March 2015). "Climate change in the Fertile Crescent and implications of the recent Syrian drought". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 112 (11): 3241–3246. Bibcode:2015PNAS..112.3241K. doi:10.1073/pnas.1421533112. PMC 4371967. PMID 25733898. "Syria: Climate Change, Drought and Social Unrest". The Center for Climate & Security. 29 February 2012. Archived from the original on 14 April 2017. Retrieved 1 May 2017. Gleick, Peter H. (1 July 2014). "Water, Drought, Climate Change, and Conflict in Syria". Weather, Climate, and Society. 6 (3): 331–340. doi:10.1175/wcas-d-13-00059.1. S2CID 153715885. Selby, Jan; Dahi, Omar S.; Fröhlich, Christiane; Hulme, Mike (1 September 2017). "Climate change and the Syrian civil war revisited". Political Geography. 60: 232–244. doi:10.1016/j.polgeo.2017.05.007. ISSN 0962-6298. S2CID 59482093. Eklund, Lina; Theisen, Ole Magnus; Baumann, Matthias; Forø Tollefsen, Andreas; Kuemmerle, Tobias; Østergaard Nielsen, Jonas (6 April 2022). "Societal drought vulnerability and the Syrian climate-conflict nexus are better explained by agriculture than meteorology". Communications Earth & Environment. 3 (1): 85. Bibcode:2022ComEE...3...85E. doi:10.1038/s43247-022-00405-w. hdl:11250/3053767. ISSN 2662-4435. S2CID 247975293. Ide, Tobias (1 December 2018). "Climate War in the Middle East? Drought, the Syrian Civil War and the State of Climate-Conflict Research". Current Climate Change Reports. 4 (4): 347–354. Bibcode:2018CCCR....4..347I. doi:10.1007/s40641-018-0115-0. ISSN 2198-6061. S2CID 159017324. "Aleppo water supply cut as Syria fighting rages". BBC News. 8 September 2012. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 1 May 2017. "World Report 2010 Human Rights Watch World Report 2010" Archived 18 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine, p. 555. Human Rights Watch World Report 2005 Events of 2004, Human Rights Watch 2005. ISBN 1-56432-331-5. "Syria's Assad vows to lift emergency law by next week". Reuters. 16 April 2011. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. Retrieved 1 January 2014. "Syria". Amnesty International. 2009. Archived from the original on 28 February 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2012. Mcgregor-Wood, Simon (20 July 2010). "Islamic Face Covering Veil Banned From Syrian Universties(sic)". ABC News. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Black, Ian (16 July 2010). "Syrian human rights record unchanged under Assad, report says". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2016. "Is the fight over a gas pipeline fuelling the world's bloodiest conflict?". News.com.au. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Porter, Gareth (21 September 2016). "The War Against the Assad Regime Is Not a "Pipeline War"". Truthout. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Kennedy, Robert F. (22 February 2016). "Why the Arabs Don't Want Us in Syria". POLITICO Magazine. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Endre Szénási. "Syria: Another Dirty Pipeline War" (PDF). Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Syria: Another Pipeline War". EcoWatch. 25 February 2016. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Whitlock, Craig (21 May 2023). "U.S. secretly backed Syrian opposition groups, cables released by WikiLeaks show". Washington Post. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Orenstein, Mitchell A.; Romer, George (14 October 2015). "Putin's Gas Attack". Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Iran-Backed Groups Blow Up Gas Pipeline in Syria, Monitor Says". Voice of America. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "U.S.-backed forces capture big gas field in Syria's Deir al-Zor: senior commander". Reuters. 23 September 2017. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Ashawi, Khalil (13 August 2018). "Syrian rebels build an army with Turkish help, face challenges". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Sengupta, Kim (12 May 2015). "Turkey and Saudi Arabia alarm the West by backing Islamist extremists the Americans had bombed in Syria". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Trump to Arm Syrian Kurds, Even as Turkey Strongly Objects". The New York Times. 9 May 2017. Archived from the original on 10 May 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "ISIS reportedly massacres dozens in Syrian village". CBS News. Associated Press. 31 March 2015. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "Battle for Aleppo: How Syria Became the New Global War". Der Spiegel. 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017. Syria has become a proxy war between the US and Russia O'Connor, Tom (31 March 2017). "Iran's military leader tells U.S. to get out of Persian Gulf". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017. The Gulf Arab faction, especially Saudi Arabia, has been engaged in a proxy war of regional influence with Iran "Iran Spends Billions to Prop Up Assad". Bloomberg. 9 June 2015. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2019. Louisa Loveluck, and Roland Oliphant, "Russia transporting militia groups fighting Islamic State to frontlines in Syria" Archived 23 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Telegraph 17 Nov 2015 "Syrian rebels: US sends more arms against Iran threat". al-Jazeera. 31 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "Donald Trump ends covert CIA aid to Syrian rebels in 'win' for Russia". The Independent. 20 July 2017. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2019. Weiss, Michael (22 May 2012). "Syrian rebels say Turkey is arming and training them". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2012. "Saudi Arabia just replenished Syrian rebels with one of the most effective weapons against the Assad regime". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2015. Khalaf, Roula & Abigail Fielding Smith (16 May 2013). "Qatar bankrolls Syrian revolt with cash and arms". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2013.(subscription required) Memmott, Mark (13 November 2013). "As Talks Continue, CIA Gets Some Weapons To Syrian Rebels". NPR. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Israeli lawmaker accuses Israel of aiding Syrian rebel group formerly known as Nusra Front". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 5 July 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021. "IDF chief finally acknowledges that Israel supplied weapons to Syrian rebels". The Times of Israel. 14 January 2019. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. "Dutch govt under fire for Syria opposition support". MSN. 11 September 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. "U.S. has secretly provided arms training to Syria rebels since 2012". Los Angeles Times. 21 June 2013. Archived from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2015. "Secret CIA effort in Syria faces large funding cut". The Washington Post. 12 June 2015. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2015. "Iraq bombs ISIS 'operations room' in Syria". Al Arabiya English. 16 August 2018. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. Kais, Roi (8 June 2013). "Hezbollah is a 'cancer,' say Arab media". Ynetnews. Retrieved 21 December 2023. "US punishes Hezbollah". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 21 December 2023. "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2023. Cave, Damien (24 August 2012). "Syrian War Plays Out Along a Street in Lebanon". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2017. "Syria pounds ISIS bases in coordination with Iraq". The Daily Star Newspaper – Lebanon. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. "Facts About Sarin". Centers for Disease Control. Archived from the original on 14 April 2003. Retrieved 7 October 2015. Syria Used Chlorine in Bombs Against Civilians, Report Says Archived 22 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, Rick Gladstone, 24 August 2016. Retrieved 25 August 2016. Loveluck, Louisa (9 May 2015). "UN inspectors find undeclared sarin-linked chemicals at Syrian military site". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2015. Lutkefend Schneider; Theresa Tobias (February 2019). "Nowhere to Hide: The Logic of Chemical Weapons Use in Syria" (PDF). pp. 1–47. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2022 – via GPPi. Lombardo, Clare (17 February 2019). "More Than 300 Chemical Attacks Launched During Syrian Civil War, Study Says". NPR. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. "Russia Clashes With Europeans Over Report on Syria Chemical Weapons Attacks". TIME. Archived from the original on 16 April 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. "Security Council briefing on Syria's use of Chemical Weapons". GOV.UK. 15 April 2020. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 15 April 2020. Corder, Mike (21 April 2021). "States suspend Syria's OPCW rights over chemical attacks". AP News. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. "Conference of the States Parties adopts Decision to suspend certain rights and privileges of the Syrian Arab Republic under the CWC". OPCW. 22 April 2021. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. "Decision addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic" (PDF). 22 April 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2022 – via OPCW. "OPCW Confirms Chemical Weapons Use in Syria". Arms Control Association. July 2021. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. "Syria has likely used chemical weapons 17 times: International chemical weapons watchdog". The Hindu. 4 June 2021. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. "Syria: Mounting Casualties from Cluster Munitions". Human Rights Watch. 16 March 2013. Archived from the original on 5 December 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2016. "Russia's Lethal Thermobaric Rocket Launchers: A Game Changer in Syria?". The National Interest. 2 December 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2015. Majumdar, Dave (2 December 2015). "Russia's Lethal Thermobaric Rocket Launchers: A Game Changer in Syria?". The National Interest. Archived from the original on 15 October 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2016. Syria rebels say Assad using 'mass-killing weapons' in Aleppo – Israel News, Ynetnews Archived 12 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Ynetnews.com (20 June 1995). Cumming-Bruce, Nick (4 June 2013). "U.N. Panel Reports Increasing Brutality by Both Sides in Syria". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2017. "Syria crisis: Incendiary bomb victims 'like the walking dead'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. "Russia Delivers Kornet Anti-Tank Guided Missiles To Syria". 20 August 2015. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "Saudi Arabia just replenished Syrian rebels with one of the most effective weapons against the Assad regime – Business Insider". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Jeremy Binnie; Neil Gibson (8 April 2016). "US arms shipment to Syrian rebels detailed". Jane's Defence Weekly. IHS. Archived from the original on 5 December 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2016. "Iran says it hit targets in Syria with Zolfaghar ballistic missiles – Jane's 360". janes.com. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "Iran's Revolutionary Guard strikes Syria for Tehran attacks". CNBC. 18 June 2017. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Cohen, Gili (18 June 2017). "Iran Fires at Militants in Syria in First Use of Mid-range Missiles in 30 Years". Haaretz. Reuters, Associated Press. Archived from the original on 18 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Syrian intelligence officer is convicted of crimes against humanity, gets life in prison in landmark German trial". The Washington Post. 14 January 2022. "How an Alleged Syrian Intelligence Officer was Put on Trial in Germany". 14 January 2022. Behari, Elad (23 December 2011). "Syria: Sunnis Threatening to Massacre Minority Alawites". Arutz Sheva. Archived from the original on 10 January 2012. Retrieved 11 March 2011. Sherlock, Ruth (7 April 2015). "In Syria's war, Alawites pay heavy price for loyalty to Bashar al-Assad". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Karouny, Mariam (14 May 2013). "Syria Death Toll Likely As High As 120,000, Group Says". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 6 October 2013. Dettmet, Jamie (19 November 2013). "Syria's Christians Flee Kidnappings, Rape, Executions". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 19 November 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2013. Nelson, Lara (18 November 2015). "The Shia jihad and the death of Syria's army". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016. Without the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) and Lebanese Hezbollah the army could not stand up. [For example, in "the largest and most important military force for Assad in southern Syria" – Division 9,] Seventy percent of the troops ... are Iranian troops or Lebanese Hezbollah, the rest are shabiha. Only two to three percent are regular Syrian soldiers. Lister (2015), p. 154. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFLister2015 (help) Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), p. 89. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) "'Rojava' no longer exists, 'Northern Syria' adopted instead". Kurdistan24. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 19 December 2019. Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. 11, 95. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) Zabad (2017), pp. 219, 228. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFZabad2017 (help) "ANALYSIS: 'This is a new Syria, not a new Kurdistan'". Middle East Eye. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 25 May 2016. Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. 97–98. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) "Delegation from the Democratic administration of Self-participate of self-participate in the first and second conference of the Shaba region". Cantonafrin.com. 4 February 2016. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. "Turkey's Syria offensive explained in four maps". BBC News. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Syria Kurds adopt constitution for autonomous federal region". TheNewArab. 31 December 2016. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 5 October 2018. "Umar: Catalonian recognition of AANES is the beginning". Hawar News Agency. 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. van Wilgenburg, Wladimir (21 October 2021). "Catalan parliament recognizes administration in northeast Syria". Kurdistan24. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Shahvisi, Arianne (2018). "Beyond Orientalism: Exploring the Distinctive Feminism of democratic confederalism in Rojava". Geopolitics. 26 (4): 1–25. doi:10.1080/14650045.2018.1554564. S2CID 149972015. "German MP Jelpke: Rojava needs help against Corona pandemic". ANF News. Şimşek, Bahar; Jongerden, Joost (29 October 2018). "Gender Revolution in Rojava: The Voices beyond Tabloid Geopolitics". Geopolitics. 26 (4): 1023–1045. doi:10.1080/14650045.2018.1531283. hdl:1887/87090. Burç, Rosa (22 May 2020). "Non-territorial autonomy and gender equality: The case of the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria - Rojava" (PDF). Philosophy and Society. 31 (3): 277–448. doi:10.2298/FID2003319B. S2CID 226412887. Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. xviii, 112. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) Zabad (2017), pp. 219, 228–229. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFZabad2017 (help) Schmidinger, Thomas (2019). The Battle for the Mountain of the Kurds. Translated by Schiffmann, Thomas. Oakland, CA: PM Press, Kairos. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-62963-651-1. Afrin was the home to the largest Ezidi minority in Syria. Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. xviii, 66, 200. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) "Syria Kurds challenging traditions, promote civil marriage". ARA News. 20 February 2016. Archived from the original on 22 February 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2016. Zabad (2017), p. 219. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFZabad2017 (help) Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. 156–163. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) "PYD leader: SDF operation for Raqqa countryside in progress, Syria can only be secular". ARA News. 28 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016. Ross, Carne (30 September 2015). "The Kurds' Democratic Experiment". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 May 2016. In der Maur, Renée; Staal, Jonas (2015). "Introduction". Stateless Democracy (PDF). Utrecht: BAK. p. 19. ISBN 978-90-77288-22-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2016. Retrieved 19 April 2016. Jongerden, Joost (6 December 2012). "Rethinking Politics and Democracy in the Middle East" (PDF). Ekurd.net. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 9 October 2016. Allsopp & van Wilgenburg (2019), pp. 94, 130–131, 184. sfnp error: no target: CITEREFAllsoppvan_Wilgenburg2019 (help) "SDF Agrees to Sochi Deal for Northern Syria". The Syrian Observer. 28 October 2019. Archived from the original on 5 November 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019. [1][dead link] Küçük, Bülent; Özselçuk, Ceren (1 January 2016). "The Rojava Experience: Possibilities and Challenges of Building a Democratic Life". South Atlantic Quarterly. 115 (1): 184–196. doi:10.1215/00382876-3425013 – via read.dukeupress.edu. [2][dead link] Gerber, Damian; Brincat, Shannon (2018). "When Öcalan met Bookchin: The Kurdish Freedom Movement and the Political Theory of Democratic Confederalism". Geopolitics. 26 (4): 1–25. doi:10.1080/14650045.2018.1508016. S2CID 150297675. "NATION-BUILDING IN ROJAVA: PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY AMIDST THE SYRIAN CIVL WAR" (PDF). Imemo.ru. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "RUPTURES AND RIPPLE EFFECTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND BEYOND" (PDF). Repository.bilkent.edu.tr. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "KRG: Elections in Jazira are Not Acceptable". Basnews. 14 March 2015. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Syrian Kurds point finger at Western-backed opposition". Reuters. 23 May 2016. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 24 May 2016. "Russia finishes draft for new Syria constitution". Now.MMedia/Al-Akhbar. 24 May 2016. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. "Syria rejects Russian proposal for Kurdish federation". Al-Monitor. 24 October 2016. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 23 December 2019. Heller, Sam (30 June 2017). "The Signal in Syria's Noise". warontherocks.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 19 December 2019. "Syria to consider granting Kurds greater autonomy". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "Report: Syrian army to enter SDF-held Kobani, Manbij". Reuters. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Syrian army to deploy along Turkish border in deal with Kurdish-led forces". Reuters. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Syrian army moves to confront Turkish forces as US withdraws". Times of Israel. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Syrian Kurds accuse Turkey of violations, Russia says peace plan on track". Reuters. 24 October 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Iraq repatriates 100 ISIL fighters from Syria's Kurdish forces". Aljazeera.com. 8 December 2021. Is This the End of Rojava?The Kurdish region of northeast Syria was autonomous for seven years, but had to ask the Syrian government for protection after an invasion by Turkey. By Mireille Court and Chris Den Hond, FEBRUARY 18, 2020, The Nation website. We stand in solidarity with Rojava, an example to the world.Leaders from social movements, communities and First Nations from around the world, including LaDonna Brave Bull Allard, Eve Ensler and Stuart Basden on the Turkish invasion in north-east Syria. Fri 1 Nov 2019 guardian.com Statement regarding Syrian Democratic Forces security operation in al-Hol camp, 18 Sept. 2022 U.S. Army Central Command Communication Integration official statement. The Syrian National Army: The Turkish Proxy Militias of Northern Syria Archived 21 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine, 21 July 2022, Rojava official website. "Turkey planned Syria military operation after Russia withdrawal, sources reveal". Middle East Monitor. 5 June 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2022. "Syria: US-backed SDF 'open' to working with Syrian troops to fight off Turkey invasion". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 8 June 2022. "Russian, regime forces boosted after Turkey signals Syria operation". Daily Sabah. 7 June 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2022. "President Erdoğan reiterates determination for Syria operation". Hürriyet Daily News. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2022. US-Backed Kurdish-Led Forces Say Ready to Coordinate With Syrian Army Against Turkey, Reuters, via VOA website, By Maya Gebeily, June 5, 2022. Syria 'should use air defences' against Turkish invasion, The National, June 6, 2022. These Kurdish-Led Forces Cannot Count On Syrian Air Defenses To Protect Them Against The Turkish Air Force, Paul Iddon, Jun 20, 2022. Kurdish, Syrian, Iranian forces coordinate ahead of Turkish operation:Kurdish units and Iranian-affiliated factions in Syria have formed a joint operations room under Russian supervision to counter a possible Turkish military operation in northern Syria., by Mohammed Hardan, June 17, 2022. al-monitor.com US-backed Syrian Kurds to turn to Damascus if Turkey attacks. The U.S.-backed and Kurdish-led forces in northern Syria say they will turn to the government in Damascus for support should Turkey go ahead with its threat to launch a new incursion into the war-torn country. By BASSEM MROUE Associated Press, June 7, 2022. Syria’s Kurds strike deal with Assad after being abandoned by US, Kurdish fighters agree to hand over border towns to Damascus in deal brokered by Russia], Richard Hall, Sunday 13 October 2019, the UK Independent. Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat, UN official website, February 2023. CENTCOM – YEAR IN REVIEW 2022: THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS, USCENTCOM, official website of US Army Central Command, Dec. 29, 2022. Ex-Islamic State fighters still pose a risk in Turkey, finds report, By Joshua Askew, March 1, 2023. Operation Claw-Sword Exposes Blind Spots in the US’ NE Syria Strategy by Caroline Rose, Aram Shabanian, Calvin Wilder, March 7, 2023, website of new Lines Institute. Al Rifai, Diana; Haddad, Mohammed (17 March 2015). "What's left of Syria?". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. Retrieved 21 March 2015. "Syrian Refugees in Lebanon Archived 22 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine", The New York Times, 5 September 2013 "Syrian refugee camps in Turkish territory tracked by satellite". Astrium-geo.com. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Syrian refugees top 3 million, half of all Syrians displaced: U.N." Reuters. 29 August 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. "Syrian Civil War Causes One-Third of Country's Christians to Flee Their Homes Archived 12 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine". The Algemeiner Journal. 18 October 2013. "Syrian Refugees". Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "Fears for dozens of Australian children in refugee camps in Syria". Daily Telegraph. 8 October 2019. Archived from the original on 8 October 2019. Retrieved 8 October 2019. "ACT Alliance Call for Action: Jordan, Syria and Lebanon (18 December 2019) REPORTfrom ACT AlliancePublished on 18 Dec 2019". 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Winter threatens the IDPs in the Washokani Camp Archived 11 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine.For the displaced people in northern and eastern Syria, winter is a torture: many set up for those seeking shelter have already collapsed due to rain and wind. Almost all international aid organisations are watching the misery. ANF HESEKÊ Tuesday, 10 Dec 2019. Residents in northeast Syria brace for winter as oil smugglers thrive Archived 19 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, by Dan Wilkofsky 18 December 2019. Over 3500 refugees accommodated in the Washokani camp Archived 11 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. The Washokani camp, set up by the autonomous administration of North-East Syria near Hesekê, now hosts 3566 people who have fled the Turkish occupation troops in Serêkaniyê. ANF HESEKÊ Saturday, 7 Dec 2019. No help for people displaced by the Turkish invasion Archived 11 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. More than 2,500 people now live in the northern Syrian camp Washokani who had to flee due to the Turkish occupation war. No help has arrived from international organisations yet. ANF HESEKE Sunday, 1 Dec 2019. Ignorance of aid organisations exacerbates the situation of IDPs Archived 11 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Hundreds of thousands have fled home due to the attacks of the AKP government and its gangs on Northern Syria. The living conditions of the refugees are being exacerbated by the ignorance of international aid organisations. ANF HESEKE Wednesday, 13 Nov 2019. Bray, Allison. "Fifty Syrian refugees promised the warmest of Irish welcomes". Herald.ie. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. "Situation Syria Regional Refugee Response". data2.unhcr.org. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Farooq, Umar. "How killing of Syrian refugee marks an alarming trend in Turkey". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Chulov, Martin (26 April 2018). "10m Syrians at risk of forfeiting homes under new property law". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Syria wants its citizens in Lebanon to return, help rebuild". Fox News. 4 June 2018. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018. Nehme, Dahlia (12 December 2018). "Syrian state seizes opponents' property, rights activists say". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018 – via www.reuters.com. Erdogan says world cares more about Syria's oil than its children Archived 11 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine Tuesday, 17 December 2019. Erdogan urges resettling of 1 million refugees in northern Syria Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Turkish president says formula needed to allow refugees to return on a voluntary basis but in 'short period of time'. Migrant arrivals in Europe from Turkey nearly double in 2019 Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. According to a confidential EU report, 70,000 migrants have crossed from Turkey to the EU this year. The numbers raise questions about whether an EU-Turkey refugee deal is unravelling. Turkish President Erdoğan calls for resettlement of 1M refugees in northern Syria Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine BY MARTY JOHNSON – 12/17/19. Lack of refugee aid forced Turkey into Syria operation: Erdogan Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, 17 Dec 2019. Erdoğan: Return of Syrian refugees as crucial as fight against terrorism Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Daily Sabah with AFP, Istanbul, 17 December 2019. Erdogan renews call for 'safe zone' support as Syrians return Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Ayla Jean Yackley 17 December 2019. Turkey says EU should increase funding of Syrian refugees beyond $6.6bn pledged Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine.EU funds support 3.5 million Syrian refugees in Turkey, as Syria's civil war has killed hundreds of thousands and pushed millions from their homes. Migrant wave calls EU-Turkey deal into question – report Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. 17 Dec 2019 The number of migrants crossing from Turkey into Europe doubled in 2019 to 70,000, raising questions about whether the 2016 EU-Turkey migrant deal is still effective, Deutsche Welle reported, citing a confidential EU report. Turkish official says EU should boost funding of Syrian refugees Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine 15 December 2019. "Children bearing the brunt of latest escalation in Syrian civil war". Local News 8. CNN. 2 February 2020. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2020. "Internally Displaced People". UNHCR Syria. Retrieved 18 January 2022. Arraf, Jane (25 January 2022). "ISIS is holding hundreds of boys hostage. Who are they?". The New York Times. "Syrian Martyrs شهداء سورية". Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. "U.N.'s Syria death toll jumps dramatically to 60,000-plus". CNN. 3 January 2013. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 29 January 2013. "Syria death toll at least 93,000, says UN". BBC News. 13 June 2013. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "More than 2,000 killed in Syria since Ramadan began". Times of Oman. 25 July 2013. Archived from the original on 4 September 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2013. McDonnell, Patrick J. (13 June 2013). "U.N. says Syria death toll has likely surpassed 100,000". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2013. Retrieved 13 August 2013. "Syria crisis: Solidarity amid suffering in Homs". BBC. 29 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 29 January 2013. Enders, David (6 November 2012). "Deaths in Syria down from peak; army casualties outpacing rebels'". Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 14 November 2012. "The international community let the Syrian people down; millions of people killed, wounded and displaced over 4 years". The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 15 March 2015. "400 children killed in Syria unrest". Arab News. Geneva. 8 February 2012. Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 28 January 2013. Peralta, Eyder (3 February 2012). "Rights Group Says Syrian Security Forces Detained, Tortured Children: The Two-Way". NPR. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Fahim, Kareem (5 January 2012). "Hundreds Tortured in Syria, Human Rights Group Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Fighting Continues in Syria". Arutz Sheva. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 25 October 2012. "Statistics for the number of martyrs". Violations Documentation Center in Syria. 3 June 2013. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013. Retrieved 26 August 2014. Black, Ian (21 January 2014). "Syrian regime document trove shows evidence of 'industrial scale' killing of detainees". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. Laura Smith-Spark (22 August 2014). "More than 191,000 dead in Syria conflict, U.N. finds". CNN. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015. Retrieved 1 April 2015. Black, Ian (11 February 2016). "Report on Syria conflict finds 11.5% of population killed or injured". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 February 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "By Acknowledging the Death of 836 Forcibly-Disappeared Syrians at its hands, the Syrian Regime Convicts itself, yet the Security Council Does Nothing" (PDF). sn4hr.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. Approximately 82,000 Forcibly Disappeared and 14,000 Died due to Torture at the hands of the Syrian Regime "Assad, Iran, Russia committed 91% of civilian killings in Syria". Middle East Monitor. 20 June 2022. Archived from the original on 4 January 2023. "Civilian Death Toll". SNHR. September 2022. Archived from the original on 5 March 2022. "91 percent of civilian deaths caused by Syrian regime and Russian forces: rights group". The New Arab. 19 June 2022. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. "2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Syria". U.S Department of State. Archived from the original on 2 July 2022. "In Syria's Civilian Death Toll, The Islamic State Group, Or ISIS, Is A Far Smaller Threat Than Bashar Assad". SOHR. 11 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. "Assad's War on the Syrian People Continues". SOHR. 11 March 2021. Archived from the original on 13 March 2021. Roth, Kenneth (9 January 2017). "Barack Obama's Shaky Legacy on Human Rights". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. "The Regional War in Syria: Summary of Caabu event with Christopher Phillips". Council for Arab-British Understanding. Dearden, Lizzie (12 January 2016). "Madaya: The two other Syrian villages where 20,000 people have been starving under rebel siege". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "Syria war: Huge bomb kills dozens of evacuees in Syria". BBC News. 15 April 2017. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "'A new horror': 80 children among those slaughtered in suicide attack on refugee convoy". ABC News. 17 April 2017. Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "Four Syrian children killed in New Year's Day attack on school". www.aljazeera.com. 1 January 2020. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2020. "Children in Syria bearing brunt of intensifying violence, UNICEF". InfoMigrants. 2 January 2020. Archived from the original on 2 January 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2020. Naquin, Leora (4 January 2020). "The death toll in Syria has exceeded 380,000 in almost nine years: Monitor". Technoea News. Archived from the original on 5 January 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2020. "Russia strike kill five civilians in northwest Syria". Business Recorder. 18 January 2020. Archived from the original on 13 May 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2020. "At Least 10 Civilians Reported Killed In Syria Air Strikes; Russia Denies Involvement". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 30 January 2020. Archived from the original on 30 January 2020. Retrieved 30 January 2020. "Seven killed in Israeli strikes on Syria – monitor". The Washingtonpost. Archived from the original on 25 June 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "Two children killed and five injured in Syria as the new year starts". www.unicef.org. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "Suspected suicide bombers strike in northwest Syria near Turkish border". Reuters. 13 January 2022. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "UN must refer Syria war crimes to ICC: Amnesty". GlobalPost. Archived from the original on 16 August 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2014. Robertson QC, Geoffrey (2013). "11: Justice in Demand". Crimes Against Humanity: The Struggle for Global Justice (4th ed.). New York, NY, USA: The New Press. pp. 560–562, 573, 595–607. ISBN 978-1-59558-860-9. Syria Freedom Support Act; Holocaust Insurance Accountability Act of 2011. Washington DC, USA: Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives. 2012. pp. 221–229. Vohra, Anchal (16 October 2020). "Assad's Horrible War Crimes Are Finally Coming to Light Under Oath". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 2 November 2020. "German court finds Assad regime official guilty of crimes against humanity". Daily Sabah. 13 January 2022. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Martina Nosakhare, Whitney (15 March 2022). "Some Hope in the Struggle for Justice in Syria: European Courts Offer Survivors a Path Toward Accountability". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 5 April 2022. Debusmann, Bernd (17 May 2023). "How Syria's Bashar al-Assad got away with murder". WION. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Pelley, Scott (11 July 2021). "The evidence of Syrian President Bashar Assad and his regime's legacy of war crimes". CBS News. Archived from the original on 14 May 2023. Sir Desmond de Silva QC, former chief prosecutor of the special court for Sierra Leone, Sir Geoffrey Nice QC, the former lead prosecutor of former Yugoslavian president Slobodan Milošević, and Professor David Crane, who indicted President Charles Taylor of Liberia at the Sierra Leone court "foreignaffairs.house.gov". Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. "EXCLUSIVE: Gruesome Syria photos may prove torture by Assad regime". CNN. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Report of the independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic". 12 February 2014. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2014. "UN decries use of sieges, starvation in Syrian military strategy | The New Age Online". The New Age. South Africa. 5 March 2014. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2014. "Yarmouk update: Nusra's apparent return complicates UNRWA's hopes for food program". 3 March 2014. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 6 March 2014. Dyke, Joe (24 July 2015). "Yarmouk camp no longer besieged, UN rules". IRIN. Archived from the original on 27 July 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2015. Syrian cleric condemns 'flagrant looting' after regime captured Yarmouk Archived 26 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Al-Araby 24 May 2018 "Syria and Isis committing war crimes, says UN". The Guardian. 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 28 August 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Under ISIS: Where Being Gay Is Punished by Death". ABC News. 13 June 2016. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "syrias disappeared". BBC News. 11 November 2014. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 11 November 2014. Loveluck, Louisa (5 November 2015). "Amnesty accuses Syrian regime of 'disappearing' tens of thousands". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2016. Monitor: 60,000 dead in Syria government jails Archived 22 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Al Jazeera "Syria: 13,000 secretly hanged in Saydnaya military prison – shocking new report". Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017. "US accuses Syria of killing thousands of prisoners and burning the dead bodies in large crematorium outside Damascus". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 19 December 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2017. Harris, Gardiner (15 May 2017). "Syria Prison Crematory Is Hiding Mass Executions, U.S. Says". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 May 2017. Retrieved 15 May 2017. Harris, Gardiner; Barnard, Anne (15 May 2017). "Syrian Crematory Is Hiding Mass Killings of Prisoners, U.S. Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "The ultimate assault: Charting Syria's use of rape to terrorize its people". Women Under Siege. 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2012. Nebehay, Stephanie (11 September 2019). "UN investigators point to Syria war crimes". Newcastle Herald. Archived from the original on 19 October 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Women, children in Syria continue to be kept in inhumane conditions: UN report". Devdiscourse. Archived from the original on 19 October 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. JAMEY KEATEN (16 January 2020). "UN report lays out agonies faced by Syrian children amid war". WKRC. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 16 January 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2020. "UN inquiry stops short of directly blaming Russia over Idlib attacks". The Guardian. 7 April 2020. Retrieved 7 April 2020. "Assad regime violence continues despite coronavirus". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 3 May 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Syria violence 'a ticking time-bomb that must not be ignored': UN human rights chief". UN News. 8 May 2020. Archived from the original on 16 July 2020. Retrieved 8 May 2020. "Syria: Assad regime attack kills 2 civilians in al-Bab". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 21 July 2020. "Shelling on Syria's Afrin kills six civilians; dozens wounded". Aljazeera.com. 21 January 2022. "Syria prison attack kills more than 100, clashes ongoing". Aljazeera.com. 23 January 2022. "Eight civilians killed by Syria army in rebel bastion". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Cave, Damein (9 August 2012). "Crime Wave Engulfs Syria as Its Cities Reel From War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 August 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2012. Kozak, Christopher (26 May 2015). "The Regime's Military Capabilities: Part 1". ISW. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2015. Local NDF commanders often engage in war profiteering through protection rackets, looting, and organized crime. NDF members have been implicated in waves of murders, robberies, thefts, kidnappings, and extortions throughout regime-held parts of Syria since the formation of the organization in 2013. Asher, Berman. "Criminalization of the Syrian Conflict". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 27 October 2012. "Jordan army officer killed in shooting along border with Syria -army statement". Reuters. 16 January 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "WHO warns of Syria disease threat". BBC. 4 June 2013. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. United Nations. (9 November 2017). "Syrian conflict has now lasted longer than World War II – UN humanitarian envoy". UN News Centre website Archived 11 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 10 December 2017. "Rukban camp in Syria receives first aid in three months". Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Sparrow, Annie (20 February 2014). "Syria's Polio Epidemic: The Suppressed Truth". New York Review. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2014. Even before the uprising, in areas considered politically unsympathetic like Deir Ezzor, the government stopped maintaining sanitation and safe-water services, and began withholding routine immunizations for preventable childhood diseases. Once the war began, the government started ruthless attacks on civilians in opposition-held areas, forcing millions to seek refuge in filthy, crowded, and cold conditions. "Syrians 'face unprecedented hunger amid impending COVID crisis'". UN News. 26 June 2020. Archived from the original on 28 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Cholera outbreak in Syria poses serious threat, U.N. says". Reuters. 13 September 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "UN launches biggest humanitarian appeal, fearing deepening of Syrian crisis". ReliefWeb. 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 28 July 2015. United Nations General Assembly Resolution 182 session 46 Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian emergency assistance of the United Nations on 19 December 1991 United Nations, Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan (SHARP) Archived 16 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 18 September 2013. "Syrian Arab Republic". United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 18 September 2013. "Syrian Arab Republic – Civil Unrest 2013". Financial Tracking Service. UNOCHA. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2015. "Syria crisis 'worsening' amid humanitarian funding shortfall, warns top UN relief official". UN News Centre. 26 March 2015. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 28 July 2015. "USAID/SYRIA". Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. "SYRIAN HUMANITARIAN RELIEF". Archived from the original on 24 April 2013. Retrieved 29 April 2013. "Iran sending tonnes of flour daily to Syria: report". Agence France-Presse. 3 March 2013. Archived from the original on 6 March 2013. "Revealed: how Syrian rebels seek medical help from an unlikely source in Israel". 12 January 2014. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Retrieved 17 January 2014. "Humanitarian aid convoy departs to help Syrian refugees". 27 April 2013. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 29 April 2013. "Scores of families leave besieged Aleppo under Russia-Damascus plan". Reuters. 30 July 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2016. "UN sends humanitarian aid to Idlib, NW Syria". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 9 April 2020. "Syria: Aid Restrictions Hinder Covid-19 Response". Human Rights Watch. 28 April 2020. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 28 April 2020. "WHO Should Stand By Appeal for Cross-Border Aid to Syria". Human Rights Watch. 30 April 2020. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2020. "Clash at UN Security Council over cross-border aid for Syria". 19 December 2019. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "Syria, January 2020 Monthly Forecast : Security Council Report". www.securitycouncilreport.org. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "UN: Ability to Get Lifesaving Aid to 4 Million Syrians at Risk". 19 December 2019. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. Nichols, Michelle (23 December 2019). "Russia, backed by China, casts 14th U.N. veto on Syria to block cross-border aid – Reuters". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "UN defeats rival resolutions to keep Syria cross-border aid". Associated Press. 23 December 2019. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. US slams China, Russia veto on humanitarian aid to Syria Archived 23 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Daily Sabah with AFP, Istanbul, 22 December 2019. Russia, China block extension of cross-border humanitarian aid for millions of Syrians Archived 24 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, alaraby.co.uk "Letter dated 8 July 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council". undocs.org. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 19 May 2021. Cunliffe, Emma. "Damage to the Soul: Syria's cultural heritage in conflict" Archived 10 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Durham University and the Global Heritage Fund. 1 May 2012. Fisk, Robert. "Syria's ancient treasures pulverised" Archived 10 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. 5 August 2012. Barnard, Anne (16 April 2014). "Syrian War Takes Heavy Toll at a Crossroad of Cultures". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 18 April 2014. "Palmyra's Temple of Bel destroyed, says UN". BBC News. 1 September 2015. Archived from the original on 3 September 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2015. Said, H.; Raslan, Rasha; Sabbagh, Hazem (26 March 2016). "Palmyra Castle partially damaged due to ISIS acts, plans to restore it to its former glory". Syrian Arab News Agency. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. "Threats to Cultural Heritage in Iraq and Syria". US Department of State. 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 21 January 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2015. Hayrumyan, Naira (24 September 2014). "Middle East Terror: Memory of Armenian Genocide victims targeted by ISIS militants". ArmeniaNow. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2015. "Turkish strikes 'damage ancient temple'". BBC News. 29 January 2018. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Report: Over 120 Syrian churches damaged by war since 2011". 10 September 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Batty, David (22 June 2013). "Syrian art smuggled from the midst of civil war to show in London". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2016. "Syria's war may be the most documented ever. And yet, we know so little". PRI. 19 December 2016. Archived from the original on 4 March 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. "Five years in Syria: History's most documented war". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. Nickisch, Curt (3 May 2013). "N.H. Family: Missing Journalist James Foley In Syrian Prison". WBUR. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. Mosendz, Polly. "ISIL Beheads American Photojournalist James Foley". The Wire. Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. Chulov, Martin (20 August 2014). "Islamic State militants seize four more foreign hostages in Syria". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. "James Foley's killers pose many threats to local, international journalists". Committee to Protect Journalists. 20 August 2014. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2014. "Captured soldiers: They will kill us, if Hezbollah remains in Syria". The Daily Star Newspaper – Lebanon. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. "UN chief slams Syria's crackdown on protests". Al Jazeera. 18 March 2011. Archived from the original on 30 January 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2012. "Minister Cannon Condemns Ongoing Violence in Yemen, Bahrain and Syria". Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development Canada. 21 March 2011. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015. "China and Russia veto UN resolution condemning Syria". BBC. 5 October 2011. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Mansour, Aiman (26 December 2019). "Could Congress' latest Syria sanctions bill backfire?". Al-Monitor. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "U.S. Adds Bevy of Sanctions in Defense Authorization Law". Kharon. Archived from the original on 30 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. O'Connor, Tom (17 December 2019). "Syria prepares for a major offensive as the U.S. votes for new sanctions on Assad, Russia and Iran". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 30 December 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2020. "What's the 'Caesar Act' in Trump's $738bn defence policy bill?". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2020. "Trump administration lays out case against Senate bill that would levy Turkey sanctions". Axios. 23 December 2019. Archived from the original on 24 December 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2020. "US Congress approves bill to impose sweeping sanctions against Syrian government". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 17 January 2020. Alrifai, Oula A. (29 December 2019). "Assad is growing stronger under Trump's nonexistent Syria policy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 30 December 2019. Retrieved 31 December 2019. McDowall, Angus (4 September 2018). "Long reach of U.S. sanctions hits Syria reconstruction". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2020. "Caesar Act: economic chokehold to adjust political behavior". Enab Baladi. 25 December 2019. Archived from the original on 26 December 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2020. "Syria war: New US sanctions target Assad government's foreign backers". BBC News. 17 June 2020. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020. "Special Representative for Syria Engagement James Jeffrey On Syria Caesar Act Designations". United States Department of States. Archived from the original on 2 January 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020. Lundgren, Magnus (2016). "Mediation in Syria: initiatives, strategies, and obstacles, 2011–2016". Contemporary Security Policy. 37 (2): 273–288. doi:10.1080/13523260.2016.1192377. S2CID 156447200. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Syria's Assad says he will not negotiate with armed groups". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 April 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Assad's priority to defeat 'terrorism' before elections: Russian lawmaker". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 February 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "U.N. announces start of Syria peace talks as government troops advance". Reuters. 1 February 2016. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016. "Envoy suspended Syria talks over Russian escalation: U.N. official". Reuters. 3 February 2016. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 4 February 2016. "Syria's Assad says hopes Geneva talks lead to concrete results: Kremlin". Reuters. 14 March 2016. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Syria talks to tackle Bashar al-Assad's presidency". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 15 March 2016. "Russian negotiator positive after 'birth' of Astana Syria". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. РФ, Турция и Иран подписали меморандум о создании в Сирии зон деэскалации Archived 23 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine Interfax, 4 May 2017. "Russia, Turkey and Iran continue cooperation on de-escalation zones in Syria". TASS. 23 June 2017. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2017. "Russia accuses US, Syria rebels of blocking refugee evacuation". Jordan Times. 18 September 2019. Archived from the original on 19 September 2019. Retrieved 19 September 2019. Batrawy, Aya (29 September 2019). "Syria demands US, Turkish forces withdraw". Newcastle Herald. Archived from the original on 29 September 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "Turkey to strengthen efforts for Syria safe zone, says Security Council". Ahval. October 2019. Archived from the original on 1 October 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2019. "US Avoids War With Turkey as Trump Pulls Troops Out of Syria". Mish Talk. 7 October 2019. Archived from the original on 7 October 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. Russia calls Turkey's invasion of north Syria 'unacceptable.' Archived 22 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine Strongest words yet from Assad-supporting Moscow heaps pressure on Ankara. Tue, 15 Oct 2019, Henry Foy, Laura Pitel, Chloe Cornish "THE NEW MIDDLE EAST: U.S. MILITARY, RUSSIA'S DIPLOMACY AND CHINA'S MONEY, BY TOM O'CONNOR ON 10/22/19". Newsweek. 22 October 2019. Archived from the original on 27 November 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Russia deploys troops to Turkey-Syria border". 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Turkey and Russia agree on deal over buffer zone in northern Syria Archived 14 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Erdoğan hails agreement with Putin in which Kurdish fighters will be moved from border area. guardian.com. "Kurdish Reaction To Turkey-Russia Deal To Patrol Northern Syria". NPR.org. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. "Syrian Kurds say pulling out from entire length of Turkey border". Kurd Net – Ekurd.net Daily News. 28 October 2019. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019. Turkey and Russia redraw the map in northeast Syria Archived 23 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. With Operation Peace Spring, Turkey has gained control of part of northeast Syria, creating a buffer zone against Kurdish-led forces where it will be able to settle one million Syrian refugees. The Sochi agreement with Russia confirms Turkey's influence over the border zone, and may allow Assad's government to regain control of land held until now by the Kurds. Nov. 2019. Fahim, Kareem; DeYoung. "Russia and Turkey reach deal to push Kurdish forces out of zone in northern Syria". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Fraser, Suzan; Isachenkov, Vladimir. "Russia, Turkey seal power in northeast Syria with new accord". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 October 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. O'Connor, Tom O'Connor (23 October 2019). "Russia shows off new Syria map, sends troops to border after its deal with Turkey". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 25 November 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Soylu, Ragıp (22 October 2019). "LATEST — Here is the complete text of Turkish, Russian agreement on Northern Syria, that pushed YPG 30km from Turkish, Syria borderpic.twitter.com/jwiOurbfa3". @ragipsoylu. Archived from the original on 27 November 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2019. The Sochi Agreement And Its Implications Archived 10 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine OCTOBER 25, 2019. "Turkey v Syria's Kurds: The short, medium and long story". BBC News. 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2020. Contains an explanatory map of the buffer zone. Russia-backed Syria constitution talks begin in Geneva Archived 26 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Patrick Wintour, Wed 30 Oct 2019. Regime continues to violate Sochi deal amid diplomatic efforts for political solution in Syria Archived 10 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Daily Sabah, Instanbul, 10 December 2019. EU condemns Turkey again while sticking to its position on the Kurdish administration in north-east Syria Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Tuesday, 17 December 2019. "Syrian Kurds criticise UN envoy over new committee". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Turkey vetoed inclusion of Syrian Kurds in constitutional committee – official". Ahval. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Syria's Kurds protest exclusion from constitutional committee". France 24. 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 30 October 2019. "Syrian FM makes first visit to Saudi Arabia since 2011", AlJazeera. 13 April 2023. Accessed 13 April 2023. "Saudi Arabia and Syria discuss political solutions to latter’s crises" Arab News. 13 April 2023. Accessed 13 April 2023. "Sanctions On Damascus And Tehran Have Led To Serious Fuel Shortages In Syria". 14 April 2019. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 14 April 2019. Celik, Ersin (1 September 2017). "Over 13,500 mosques destroyed in Syria". Yeni Safak. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. "Report: Over 120 churches damaged war in Syria since 2011". www.citynews1130.com. Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. "Syrians will reconstruct country after war themselves, Assad says". Tass. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Iran Criticizes its 'Meager' Share in Rebuilding of Syria". Asharq Al Awsat. 9 September 2023. "Iran strikes initial deal to rebuild Syrian power grid". Reuters. 2 November 2019. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Sayigh, Yezid. "Reconstructing Syria: The need to break the mould". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018. ""Upon land soaked with the blood": on the architects planning the reconstruction of Syria – CityMetric". www.citymetric.com. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2018. Russia to modernize Syria port, build railway across Syria to Persian Gulf Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Major commercial projects could potentially make it easier for Tehran to increase its influence in Israel's northeastern neighbor. "UPDATE 1-Russia to invest $500 mln in Syrian port, build grain hub -Interfax – Reuters". Reuters. 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "5 Russian-Syrian Projects Announced This Week – The Moscow Times". 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "Syria hands oil exploration contracts to two Russian firms – Oil & Gas 360". 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. Ensor, Josie (17 December 2019). "Syria in 'serious dialogue' with China about joining Belt and Road initiative, says Assad". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 15 January 2020. "Syria Reaches Out To Join China's Belt & Road Initiative, December 17, 2019Posted bySilk Road Briefing". 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Syria, China sign MoU in framework of Silk Road Economic Belt Initiative". 12 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. Cordesman, Anthony "'Failed State Wars' in Syria and Iraq (III): Stability and Conflict in Syria" (Archived 9 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine). Center for Strategic and International Studies. 2 March 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. Hinnebusch, Raymond (2012). "Syria: From 'Authoritarian Upgrading' to Revolution?". International Affairs. 88 (1): 95–113. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2346.2012.01059.x. Landis, Joshua (2012). "The Syrian Uprising of 2011: Why the Asad Regime Is Likely to Survive to 2013". Middle East Policy. 19 (1): 72–84. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4967.2012.00524.x. Malek, Alia (2017). The Home That Was Our Country: A Memoir of Syria. PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-56858-532-1. Pearlman, Wendy (2017). We Crossed a Bridge and It Trembled: Voices from Syria. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-265445-8. Sorenson, David S. (2016). Syria in Ruins: The Dynamics of the Syrian Civil War. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3837-8. van Dam, Nikolaos (2017). Destroying a Nation: The Civil War in Syria. I. B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-78672-248-5. Syrian civil war at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Data from Wikidata Wars and conflicts in Syria at Curlie Ecowatch - Syria: Another Pipeline War