Akershus (Norwegian pronunciation: [ɑkəʂˈhʉːs] ) is a county in Norway, with Oslo as its administrative centre. Akershus has been a region in Eastern Norway with Oslo as its main city since the Middle Ages, and is named after the Akershus Fortress in Oslo and ultimately after the medieval farm Aker in Oslo. From the Middle Ages to 1919, Akershus was a main fief and main county that included most of Eastern Norway, and from the 17th century until 2020 and again from 2024, Akershus also has a more narrow meaning as a smaller central county in the Greater Oslo Region. Akershus is Norway's largest county by population with over 716,000 inhabitants. Originally Akershus was one of four main fiefs in Norway and included almost all of Eastern Norway. The original Akershus became a main county (Stiftamt or Stift) in 1662 and was sometimes also known as Christiania Stift. It included several subcounties (Amt or Underamt); in 1682 its most central areas, consisting of modern Oslo and Akershus, became the subcounty of Akershus within the larger main county of the same name. In 1842, the capital city of Christiania, which at the time consisted of a tiny part of modern Oslo, became a separate subcounty within Akershus main county. The main county of Akershus was disestablished in 1919, and the subcounty continued as Akershus county (fylke). During its history Akershus (sub) county ceded territory to Oslo several times; Akershus' most central and important municipality, Aker, was transferred to Oslo in 1948. Thus, while modern Akershus' capital is Oslo, Oslo is not located within the modern county itself. In 2020, the county of Akershus was merged into Viken along with the counties of Østfold and Buskerud, but Akershus was reestablished as a county from 2024 with slightly enlarged borders. Modern Akershus borders Oslo, Hedmark, Oppland, Buskerud, Oslo, and Østfold; it also has a short border with Sweden (Värmland). As a geographical term the meaning of Akershus has changed over time. Akershus originally primarily referred to Akershus main county, which included most of Eastern Norway, with the exception of Upper Telemark and Båhuslen (now mainly part of Sweden). The modern Akershus county is a direct continuation of the subcounty of Akershus, created in 1682, and included all of modern Oslo and Akershus. In 1842 the capital city of Christiania, which at the time consisted of a tiny part of modern Oslo, became a separate subcounty within Akershus main county. Akershus main county ceased to exist in 1919, after which Akershus in everyday usage became synonymous with the modern county that excluded Christiania. Akershus' most central and important municipality, Aker, was transferred to and merged with Oslo in 1948. After 1948, the remaining Akershus county is conventionally divided into Asker and Bærum to the west of Oslo, Follo and Romerike. Embracing numerous suburbs and urban areas of Oslo, notably Bærum and historically Aker, Akershus is one of the most densely populated areas in the country. The main national railway lines into Oslo run through Akershus with many junctions and stations such as Asker, Sandvika, Ski, and Lillestrøm. Akershus includes some of the lake Mjøsa and some of the river Glomma. The county also includes the historical place Eidsvoll, 48 km north of Oslo, in which the national assembly ratified the Norwegian constitution in 1814.[citation needed] South of Eidsvoll is the international airport, Oslo Airport at Gardermoen. Oslo's previous international airport, Fornebu, is also located in Akershus. The estate of the crown prince is located in Asker (the royal palace is in Oslo). Brennhaugen Busåsen Elgheia Fallhaugen Geitryggen Hagatjennhaugen Klofjell Korpehaugen Liskampen Marifjell Middagskollen Nordklofjellet Nordliskampen Oppskott Ramstadslottet Svartungbråteberget The county has two major hospitals, Akershus University Hospital and Sykehuset Asker og Bærum. The main road from continental Europe, E6, enters Akershus in the south, and runs through eastern Oslo, further to Gardermoen, and into Hedmark County on the eastern shores of lake Mjøsa. E18 enters Akershus in the south-east, merges for a short stretch with E6 at Vinterbro in Ås, before running under central Oslo. E18 then turns south-west through Bærum and Asker before entering Buskerud County north of Drammen. E16 runs from the intersection with E18 in Sandvika into Buskerud County west of Sollihøgda. All main railways out of Oslo run through Akershus: Southwest: the Drammen Line Southeast: the Østfold Line as two separate railways North: the Gjøvik Line Northeast: the Trunk Line, Gardermoen Line, and Dovre Line East: the Kongsvinger Line Akershus became a fief in the 16th century, and then also included the current counties of Hedmark, Oppland, Buskerud, and Oslo, as well as the municipalities of Askim, Eidsberg, and Trøgstad in the county of Østfold. In 1662, Akershus became an Amt, and in 1685, Buskerud was separated from Akershus and became an Amt of its own. In 1768, Hedmark and Oppland were also separated from Akershus to become Oplandenes Amt (and Askim, Eidsberg, and Trøgstad were transferred to Østfold). In 1842, the city of Christiania (Oslo) was made a separate Amt, as well. In 1919, the term Amt was changed to Fylke. In 1948, Aker, the greatest and the most populous municipality of Akershus, was transferred to the county of Oslo. The county is named after Akershus Fortress. The fortress was built in 1299, and the meaning of the name is "the (fortified) house of (the district) Aker". The name is somewhat misleading now, since the fortress is now outside Akershus (it is in Oslo County since 1842). In fact, the administration of Akershus sits outside the county, as well, in the centre of Oslo. The coat-of-arms is from modern times (1987). It shows a gable from Akershus Fortress. Akershus has a total of 21 municipalities: Bærum Asker Lillestrøm Nordre Follo Ullensaker Nesodden Frogn Vestby Ås Enebakk Lørenskog Rælingen Aurskog-Høland Nes Gjerdrum Nittedal Lunner Jevnaker Nannestad Eidsvoll Hurdal Asker og Bærum (Norwegian) Follo Fornebu Gjelleråsen Greater Oslo Region Haslum Heggedal Hosle Jar, Norway Kolbotn Nedre Romerike Øvre Romerike Romerike Skui Slependen Snarøya Drøbak Jessheim Lillestrøm Sandvika Ski Asker Aurskog Bjørke Blaker Bærum Drøbak Eidsvoll Enebakk Feiring Fenstad Fet Frogn Frogner Garder Gjerdrum Hakadal Hemnes Heni Holter Hovin Hurdal Hvitsten Høland Høvik Kroer Kråkstad Langset Lillestrøm Løken, see Høland Lørenskog Maria kirke Nannestad Nes Nesodden Nittedal Nordby Oppegård Rælingen Setskog (Sitskogen) Skedsmo Ski Stensgård Søndre Høland Sørum Såner Udenes Ullensaker Vestby Vestre Bærum Østre Bærum Ås Algarheim Alværn Ask Askkroken Aulifeltet Aursmoen Bekkeberga Bekkestua Berger Billingstad Bjerkås Bjørkelangen Bjørnemyr Blaker Blakstad Blommenholm Blylaget Blystadlia Bodung Bomannsvik Borgen, Asker Borgen, Ullensaker Brevik Bråtesletta Brudalen Brårud Burås Bærums Verk Bærumsmarka Bøn Dal Dalsroa Danskerud Dikemark Drengsrud Drøbak Dønski Eidsvoll Verk Eiksmarka Eltonåsen Enebakkneset Fagerstrand Feiring Fenstad Finnbråten Finstadbru Finstadjordet Fjellfoten Fjellhamar Fjellsrud Fjellstad Fjellstrand Fjerdingby Flaskebekk Flateby Fosser Frogner Gan Garder Gardermoen Grav Greverud Grinitajet Grønlundfjellet Grønvoll Gullhella Gullverket Haga Hakadal Hammerstad Hauerseter Hanaborg Heer Hellerud Hellvik, Akershus Hemnes Hogsetfeltet Hurdal Hurdal Verk Hvam Hvitsten Hølen Høvik Håkavik Ingeborgrud Jessheim Jong Kampå Kirkebygda Kirkerud Kjeller Kjenn Kjul Kjøvangen Kjøya Kløfta Kolbotn Konglungen Kringler Kråkstad Kurland Langhus Langset Leirsund Lierfoss Lindeberg Lommedalen Lundermoen Lysaker Løkeberg Løken Løkenfeltet Lørenfallet Løstad Løvenstad Maura Minnesund Mogreina Momoen Nerdrum Nesbru Neskollen Nesoddtangen Nesset Nesøya Nordbyhagen Nordkisa Oksval Onsrud Oppegård Oppåkermoen Pepperstad skog Rasta Rotnes Rud Rustadbruk Rustadmoen Rykkinn Rælingen Røykås Råholt Rånåsfoss Sand Sem Sessvollmoen Seterstøa Setskog Siggerud Sjøstrand Skaugum Skedsmokorset Skiphelle Skjetten Skotbu Skrukkelia Skulerud Skytta Skårer Slattum Slattumhagen Smestad Sofiemyr Solberg Solemskogen Son Store Brevik Strømmen Styrigrenda Sundbyhagen Svarterud Svartskog Svestad Sværsvann Sørumsand Såner Tanum Teigebyen Togrenda Torget, Hurdal Torget, Nesodden Trandum Trollåsen Tårnåsen Ursvik Vardeåsen Vestby Vettre Vevelstad Vinterbro Visperud Voll Vollen Vormsund Vøyenenga Ytre Enebakk Østerås Åkrene Åneby Årnes Ås Åsgreina Åsgrenda Sundet Aker Aurskog Blaker Drøbak Feiring Hvitsten Høland Hølen Kråkstad Lillestrøm Nordre Høland Setskog Son Søndre Høland People from Akershus Kristoffer Ajer (1998–), football player (Celtic FC), national team Harriet Backer (1845–1932), artist, painter educated in Oslo, Berlin, Munich and Paris Jo Benkow (1924–2013), WWII pilot and politician, president of Stortinget 1985-1993 John Carew (1979–), former football player (Lørenskog, Vålerenga, Valencia, Lyon, Aston Villa), with 24 goals for Norway. Bjørn Dæhlie (1967), cross-country skier and most-winning skier globally, with eight gold medals from Winter Olympics Kai Eide, diplomat, writer and politician; special UN envoy to Kosovo in 2005, head of UN mission to Afghanistan from 2008 to 2010 Euronymous (1968–1993), musician and co-founder of black metal band Mayhem Åslaug Haga (1959–), politician, member of parliament and government, president of Global Crop Diversity Trust from 2013 to 2020 Morten Harket (1959–), musician and singer, vocal of pop group A-ha Trygve Haavelmo (1911–1999), economist and Nobel Prize laureate Anniken Huitfeldt, politician, chair of Stortinget Committee on Foreign Relations and Defence Carl Otto Løvenskiold (1839–1916), politician, and briefly prime minister in Stockholm in 1884 Rolf Presthus (1936–1988), politician, former chairman of Conservative Party and minister of Finance Jan Tore Sanner (1966–), politician, minister of Finance in Norway since 2020 Reiulf Steen (1933–2014), politician, chairman of the Norwegian Labour Party from 1965 to 1975 Johan Herman Wessel (1742–1785), poet and early satiric author Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional GDP per Capita, OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. Berulfsen, Bjarne (1969). Norsk Uttaleordbok (in Norwegian). Oslo: H. Aschehoug & Co (W Nygaard). p. 20. "Projected population - Statistics Norway". Archived from the original on 2013-10-23. Retrieved 2018-10-06. Statistics Norway - Church of Norway. Statistics Norway - Members of religious and life stance communities outside the Church of Norway, by religion/life stance. County. 2006-2010 Archived 2011-11-02 at the Wayback Machine "Immigrants and Norwegian-born to immigrant parents, by immigration category, country background and percentages of the population". ssb.no. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015. Retrieved 26 June 2017. Akershus county website Media related to Akershus at Wikimedia Commons Akershus travel guide from Wikivoyage 60°00′N 11°00′E﻿ / ﻿60.000°N 11.000°E﻿ / 60.000; 11.000