Riviera (pronounced [riˈvjɛːra]) is an Italian word which means "coastline", ultimately derived from Latin rīpa, through Ligurian rivêa. It came to be applied as a proper name to the coast of Liguria, in the form Riviera ligure, then shortened in English. The areas currently known in English as "the Riviera'' are: the Italian Riviera (Riviera ligure), the adjacent northwestern coast of Italy the French Riviera (Côte d'Azur), the southeastern coast of France the Spanish Riviera (Costa del Sol) in Andalusia the Portuguese Riviera (Riviera Portuguesa or Coasta do sol), along Estoril in the west of Lisbon. Riviera may also refer to: Red Sea Riviera, the eastern shore of Egypt Riviera Maya, the Caribbean coast of the Yucatán Peninsula Mexican Riviera, the southwestern coast of Mexico, including Acapulco Riviera Nayarit, another part of Pacific coast of Mexico California Riviera, Santa Barbara, California Florida Riviera, Fort Lauderdale, Florida Florida Riviera, Sunny Isles Beach, Florida Irish Riviera, Scituate, Massachusetts Bengali Riviera, coastal region in Cox's Bazar and St. Martin's Island in Bangladesh Chinese Riviera, coastal region in Zhuhai, China Philippine Riviera, often used to refer to northern coasts of Nasugbu, near Manila, including Punta Fuego and Hamilo Coast. Thai Riviera, stretching from Phetchaburi to Chumphon Turkish Riviera, also known as the Turquoise Coast English Riviera, Torbay Thames Riviera, an area of London, United Kingdom that includes Tagg's Island French Riviera, also known as the Côte d'Azur Italian Riviera, also known as the Riviera Ligure Portuguese Riviera, also known as the Costa do Estoril Swiss Riviera, on Lake Geneva, also known as Riviera vaudoise Bulgarian Black Sea Coast, also known as the Bulgarian Riviera, formerly part of the Red Riviera. Caucasian Riviera, of Russia and Georgia Jurmala near Riga in Latvia, once known as the Baltic Riviera Albanian Riviera Athens Riviera, the Saronic Gulf coastline of Athens Budva Riviera, in Montenegro Makarska Riviera, in Croatia Slovene Riviera Austrian Riviera, former term used for the coastline of the defunct Austrian Empire "riviera". Chambers Concise Dictionary. New Delhi: Allied Chambers. 2004. p. 1045. ISBN 9788186062364. Kolb, Martina (2013). Nietzsche, Freud, Benn, and the Azure Spell of Liguria. Toronto, Ontario: University of Toronto Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-1-4426-4329-1. Niccoli, Alessandro (1970). "Riviera". Enciclopedia Dantesca (in Italian). "Visit California". Visit California. "Visit Santa Barbara". Visit Santa Barbara. "Resolution No. 2006-930". 2006. Prieto-Valdes, Tessa (January 7, 2017). "Hamilo Coast: Premier gateway to 'Philippine Riviera'". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved July 5, 2023. "A cruise along the Thai riviera". Bangkok Post. Retrieved 2023-08-30. "English Riviera". English Riviera. "Red Riviera". National Geographic. Retrieved 14 March 2023. This article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names). If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.