This is a list of cities in Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan is a country in the South Caucasus region, situated at the crossroads of Southwest Asia and Southeastern Europe. As of 2013, Azerbaijan has 78 cities, including 10 cities of republican subordination, 67 district-level cities, and 1 special legal status city. These are followed by 260 urban-type settlements and 4,252 villages. There are 78 urban settlements in Azerbaijan with the official status of a city (Azerbaijani: şəhər): Aghdam Agdash Aghjabadi Agstafa Agsu Astara Aghdara Babek Baku – the capital and largest city of Azerbaijan Balakən Barda Beylagan Bilasuvar Dashkasan Shabran Fuzuli Gadabay Ganja Goranboy Goychay Goygol Hajigabul Imishli Ismayilli Jabrayil Julfa Kalbajar Khachmaz Khankendi Khojavend Khirdalan Kurdamir Lankaran Lerik Masally Mingachevir Nakhchivan Naftalan Neftchala Oghuz Ordubad Qabala Qakh Qazakh Quba Qubadli Qusar Saatlı (city) Sabirabad Shahbuz Shaki Shamakhi Shamkir Sharur Shirvan Siyazan Shusha Sumgait Tartar Tovuz Ujar Yardimli Yevlakh Zaqatala Zardab Zangilan List of ten cities, including the capital Baku, with the largest urban population in 2018. Azerbaijan portal Geography portal Lists portal Administrative divisions of Azerbaijan List of geographic names of Iranian origin List of cities by country List of cities in Asia List of cities in Europe List of startups of Azerbaijan While often politically aligned with Europe, Azerbaijan is generally considered to be at least mostly in Southwest or Western Asia geographically with its northern part bisected by the standard Asia-Europe divide, the Greater Caucasus. The United Nations classification of world regions places Azerbaijan in Western Asia; the CIA World Factbook places it mostly in Southwest Asia [1] and Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary places it in both; NationalGeographic.com, and Encyclopædia Britannica also place Georgia in Asia. Conversely, some sources place Azerbaijan in Europe such as Worldatlas.com. AZƏRBAYCAN RESPUBLİKASININ INZIBATI ƏRAZI BÖLGÜSÜ MƏLUMAT TOPLUSU [Collection of information on the administrative-territorial divisions of the Republic of Azerbaijan] (in Azerbaijani). Baku: National Assembly of Azerbaijan. 2013. Marushiakova, E.; Popov, V. (2016). Gypsies in Central Asia and the Caucasus. Springer International Publishing. p. 68. ISBN 978-3-319-41057-9. Retrieved January 27, 2017. Dumper, M.; Stanley, B.E. (2007). Cities of the Middle East and North Africa: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 63. ISBN 978-1-57607-919-5. Retrieved January 27, 2017. Demographic Indicators of Azerbaijan, State Statistics Committee (Azerbaijan) Population of Azerbaijan, State Statistics Committee (Azerbaijan)