The Federal Service for the Oversight of Consumer Protection and Welfare (Russian: Федеральная служба по надзору в сфере защиты прав потребителей и благополучия человека; also Rospotrebnadzor; Russian: Роспотребнадзор) is the federal service responsible for the supervision of consumer rights protection and human wellbeing in Russia. This service was founded in 2004, and was included in the structure of the Ministry of Health Care of Russia until 2012. In May 2012 Rospotrebnadzor was removed from the supervision of the Ministry of Health and now reports directly to the Russian Government. It functions on the authority of the Act of Federal Service on the base of the Administrative Regulation. The organization's history goes back to the Decree of the Council of People's Commissars of the RSFSR "On the Sanitary Authorities of the Republic" dated 15 September 1922.[citation needed] As of 2004, 2,218 separate sanitary-epidemiological stations (centers) were open in Russia.[citation needed] It initially reported to the Ministry of Health. By 2004, the Rospotrebnadzor was under the direct oversight of the Government of Russia.[citation needed] From 2004 until October 2013, it was headed by Gennady Onishchenko. The current head of the Rospotrebnadzor is Anna Popova.[citation needed] The service currently employs approximately 110,000 professionals in its various bodies and organizations.[citation needed] The Rospotrebnadzor is responsible for performing the following functions:[citation needed] sanitary control and issuing permissive documents; licensing of certain kinds of activities; certification of different objects of evaluating of conformity to Russian legislation. sanitary certification of production according to the requirements of the Customs Union; state registration of production of the RF (excepting medicaments); state registration of production of the Customs Union on the territory of Russia (with the exception of pharmaceuticals). "Federal Service for the Oversight of Consumer Protection and Welfare of the Russian Federation - The Russian Government". government.ru. Retrieved 2024-03-26. GOST standards The International Portal about Procedure of Product Certification in Russia The Official Department of the Rostest Certification Center in St. Petersburg The Official Department of the Rostest Certification Center in Stockholm The International Portal about Russian Documentation required for Importing goods into Russia The International Portal about Procedure of Russian Certification Current information about the products whose subject under the Expert Conclusion Archived 2007-09-30 at the Wayback Machine Official website