The Berom (sometimes also spelt as Birom; exonyms: Tyap: A̱kuut) is one of the largest autochthonous ethnic group in Plateau State, central Nigeria. Covering about four local government areas, which include Jos North, Jos South, Barkin Ladi (Gwol) and Riyom. Berom people are also found in some southern Kaduna State local government areas like Fadan Karshe with Berom settlers tracing their origins to Za'ang (Zawan) a Berom district on the Jos Plateau. They emigrated during the British Colonial Government of Nigeria. A large number of this tribe, if not all, are Christians (about 99% of the populace of the Berom people are estimated to be practising Christianity). Statistics also have it that a large number of the population of Plateau State is made up of Berom people. The Berom speak the Berom language, which belongs to the Plateau branch of Benue–Congo, a subfamily of the large Niger–Congo language family. It is not related to the Hausa language (which belongs to the Afro-Asiatic family) or other Afroasiatic languages of Plateau State, which are Chadic languages. The Berom people have a rich cultural heritage. They celebrate the Nzem Berom festival annually in March or April. Other festivals include Nzem Tou Chun (worongchun) and Wusal Berom. Its one of the major aborigine groups in Nigeria (Plateau State) that believes in the Judeo-Christian-Islamic God (Dagwi). Some Berom festivals include: Mandyɛng, in March/April - harvest festival Tyǐ, in August - red ochre collection festival Badù, in March/April - harvest festival Nshok, in March/April - harvest festival Worong cun, in April/May - planting festival, celebrated after good rains Búná/Vwana, in August - fonio harvest festival Mado, in October/November - hunting festival celebrated for prosperity. Che people also take part. Behwol, in February/March - hunting festival celebrated for prosperity. Che, Boze, Anaguta, inand Izere peoples also take part. Nzem Berom, in March/April - one-week Berom festival celebrating Berom cultural identity that was first celebrated in 1981 Wusal Berom, in November - Christian festival that was first celebrated in 1992 Festivals in Berom culture are primarily related to agriculture and hunting, which have been the main events revolving around Berom livelihood and cosmology. Agriculture-related festivals are typically cycled around different villages. The influx of Christianity and western Education paved way for many socio-cultural changes in Berom culture. In order to avoid the danger of losing the socio-cultural practice of the ancestor, and the overall precolonial activities such as the Mandyeng, Nshok, Worom Chun, Vwana, ceremonies were brought into a single umbrella festival called Nzem Berom. Nzem Berom is held within the first week of April, to coincide with the period when Mandyeng, Nshok and Badu Festival was held. The Nzem is a period when different cultural displays are exhibited from different parts of Berom land, especially in music, dance, arts and culture. Mandyeng is a major festival celebrated in Berom land to usher in the rainy season. The festivals normally take place in March/ April. In the past the Berom regard Mandyeng/Nshok (they are very similar) the most vital festivals which ensured a good farming and hunting period and harvest. Not all the Berom communities celebrate Mandyeng and Nshok. Those that perform 'Mandyeng' claim their roots from Riyom, they include; Vwang, Kuru, Zawan, Gyel, Rim, Bachit, Bangai, Lwa, Sop, Jol, Wereng Kwi, Gwo, Kakuruk, Kuzeng, Kurak, Kuchin, Rahos and Tahoss. Nshok: Nshok slightly varies from Mandiyeng due to the fact that it also associates hunting with the rainy season farming. It is also held once a year around the months of April and May, to usher in the new season just as the Mandyeng.[citation needed] In the pre-colonial era the Berom regarded hunting as both an occupation and a sport. Although economically it was not as important as farming, hunting was regarded as a show of skill and bravery. So much so, that most Berom names are derived from game animals, most importantly duiker[citation needed], due to their perceived beauty. Names such as Gyang, Pam, Dung, Davou, Chuwang, Badung etc. for boys are most common, while girls answer to Kaneng, Lyop, Chundung, Nvou, Kangyang. These are names for different species of duiker.[citation needed] Others, such as Bot (frog) Tok (fish), Tsok (toad) etc. are names for other animals that are non-domesticated, but not game. These names clearly typify how important game was in pre-colonial Berom society. Nshok was not the only hunting festival in Berom land. Festivals such as Mado and Behwol existed but are not as important as Nshok. Some of the musical instruments among the Berom include: Yom Nshi: a two-string banjo made with calabash and skin as resonators Yom: a straw string instrument Kwag or Gwashak: a scraper made from dry cactus played with a stick slid across the sawed body of the dry cactus to produce a scraping sound Kundung: a xylophone made of cattle horns and cobwebs (image). Berom musical instruments listed in Blench (2021): Idiophones Xylophone (kundung or yom bi tok) Vessel rattle Ankle rattles, made from Borassus aethiopum leaves Scraper, guiro (gwák or gwàshák) made from Euphorbia kamerunica (yěp) Membranophones Barrel-drum (biŋ) Gourd-drum, bing shi Conical drum (rwey biŋ or bing gwom) reserved for royalty Hourglass drum (kalangu) Chordophones Raft-zither (yom kwo) Arched harp (yom waya) Trough-lute (yom shi) Aerophones Flutes Ju, single-note whistle ensemble Ju shelo, fingerhole notch-flute Unknown flute Horns and trumpets Transverse horn, bwo nyama End-blown horn End-blown trumpet Berom dance equipment listed in Blench (2021): Shang, fibre buttock ornament Gadus or gawat, fly-whisk Bong, dance hat dance skirts The ancient Beroms primary food staple was chun (fonio) which even to this day remains a primary part of Berom diet. Tuk chun is served with any soup of choice; katai chun (rich soup of mostly wild vegetables) and bwirik chun (gruel). Maize grits are sometimes used as a substitute for chun in katai. As time went, the Beroms adopted pwana and ngai (millet) for gruel. Berom ancestral lands are all located on high ground on the Jos plateau; beautiful scenery and undulating terrains. One prominent plant found in all Berom localities is ryep or cactus The Berom have a paramount ruler called the Gbong Gwom Jos. The traditional stool was created in 1935 by the British colonial administration of Northern Nigeria. Northern Nigeria was composed of completely different linguistic and cultural features between the ethnicities on the Plateau and the other groups. This ignorance of ethnic differences had initially encouraged the formation of vassal Hausa heads to oversee the created Jos Native Authority, which proved tumultuous with the Berom due to conflicting views and interests. Through a circular; No. 24p/1916[JOS PROF NAK 473/1916], dated 15 August 1917, the Resident at Bauchi Province was instructed to send potentials from various native authorities including district and village heads to be elevated as chieftains by the Governor General. In response to the circular, the Resident wrote back to the secretary Northern Province Kaduna via a memo No. 24/1916 [JOSPROF NAK 473/1916] dated 27 October 1917, recommended a paramount ruler to superintend the native areas.[citation needed] In the pre-colonial period, the Berom were divided into autonomous political groups based on regions, but the colonial authority merged them under the Gbong Gwom in 1952 to help coordinate the activities of the natives. The first chief Dachung Gyang of Riyom assumed leadership from 1935 to 1941. Under Dachung Gyang, the traditional institution was designated as the Berom Tribal Council composing of local chiefs within the Jos Native Authority. Its authority then only included mainly the Berom and excluded the chiefs of Buji, Naraguta, Jos and Bukuru. However, the government, in a Gazette of 7 February 1918, modified the list to include the Buji, Naraguta, Jos and Bukuru .[citation needed] The emergence of Da Rwang Pam (1947 to his death on 14 July 1969) saw the elevation of the head of the Tribal Council to the stool of the Gbong Gwom Jos. Since 1969, the stool has been held by the following: Da. Dr. Fom Bot, 19 August 1969 to his death on 1 December 2002 Da Victor Dung Pam, 17 April 2004 to 7 March 2009 Da Jacob Gyang Buba, 1 April 2009 to the present The former governors of Plateau State Michael Botmang and Jonah David Jang, are of Berom origin. The Berom people are Christians in soul and tradition as several aspects of Berom life and culture has been absorbed by Christian norms and ethics most demonstrably through their tremendous hospitality. Over 95% of Beroms are members of either COCIN or Roman Catholic and 2 of the institutions listed below i.e BLTB and BOM are Christian institutions. There are also a record number of Berom Christian songs that trend on the Plateau. Berom Educational and Cultural Organisation (BECO) Berom Youth Movement (BYM) motto: Gasi ha yi bwei Berom Language and Translation Board (BLTB) Berom Outreach Ministries (BOM) Lt Col James Yakubu Pam MFR b. 23rd Nov 1933 d.15th January 1966. Adjutant General of Nigerian Army. Killed in the abortive coup of Jan 15th 1966.Survived by Elizabeth Pam MFR (wife, deceased May 2011) and 6 children Kaneng Daze (entrepreneur), Jummai Sankey (Justice of the Supreme Court of Nigeria), Yusufu Pam (Frmr Attorney General Plateau State), Ishaku Pam FRCP (Consultant Physician and Clinical Director, Prof. Ishaya Pam (Frmr CMD Jos University Teaching Hospital) and Ibrahim Pam (World Bank) https://www.gamji.com/nowa/NEWS1103.htm John Dungs†, soldier, industrialist, statesman and former Military Administrator of Delta State. CEO of H. F. Schroeder West Africa Limited and founder CEO of Langfield Group Limited. A Prince of Riyom (scion of Da. Dung Jok, Gwom Rwei Riyom) Toma Tok Bot, first pastor of the Berom Church Sambo Daju†, physicist, educationist and public servant. Former Commissioner of Education; Lands and Survey Benue-Plateau State D. B. Zang†, tin magnate, industrialist and elder statesman Sambo Bashi Gyel†, entrepreneur, politician and elder statesman Michael Botmang†, politician and first Berom Deputy Governor and Governor of Plateau State Lamba Gwom†(Cmdr.), Federal Minister of Transport and Federal Minister of Internal Affairs in the Cabinet of Ibrahim Babangida Peter Gyang Sha†(Brig. Gen.), soldier and former General Officer Commanding 3rd armoured division of the Nigerian Army, Jos Jonah Jang, soldier and statesman, former Governor of Plateau State Dung Chong†,(Maj. Gen) soldier and former director of intelligence Nigerian Army Philip Davou Dung Catholic Bishop of Shendam Diocese, appointment 5 November 2016 P. D. Pwajok†, elder statesman and entrepreneur. Founder of P. D. Pwajok and sons enterprises Dachollom Datiri (Rev), clergyman and former President Church of Christ in Nations (COCIN) Davou Zang, Senator of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the 4th National Assembly. Sen Luka Gwom†, elder and renowned historian John Wash Pam† Senator of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and former Deputy Senate President in the 2nd National Assembly James Vwi (MHR), politician and Honourable Member of the House of Representatives of Nigeria in the Third Nigerian Republic (5 December 1992 – 17 November 1993) representing Barkin Ladi constituency; member House committee on petroleum and mineral resources. Former national president Berom Youth Movement (BYM). During the 2006/2007 democratic to democratic transition, he broke ranks with the incumbent PDP and aligned with his kinsman John Dungs Kachollom Daju, Permanent Secretary Federal Ministry of Labour and Employment Barnabas Dusu†, Berom Language and Translation Board luminary that pioneered the translation of the Holy Bible to Berom language known as Bwok Basa Dagwi. The earlier version (New Testament) is known as Takada wuna sira pas Yakubu Pam (Rev), pastor; Executive Secretary Nigerian Christian Pilgrim Commission and formerly chairman Plateau chapter of the Christian Association of Nigeria and later CAN chairman North-Central geopolitical zone. Reverend Pam is also a member of the presidential council on CAN. Chris Bature, pastor and General Overseer Berom Outreach Ministries Yohanna Kwa†, engineer and inventor. Former Chief Executive Nigerian Mining Corporation Gyang Dalyop Dantong†, Senator of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the 6th National Assembly and 7th National Assembly representing Plateau North senatorial constituency Gyang Pwajok†, Senator of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the 7th National Assembly representing Plateau North senatorial constituency Daniel Sunday Dung, Member of the House of Representatives of Nigeria in the 4th National Assembly, Fourth Nigerian Republic representing Jos South/Jos East constituency Gabriel Bwan Fom† Member of the House of Representatives of Nigeria in the 5th National Assembly representing Jos South/Jos East constituency Istifanus Gyang, Senator of the Federal Republic of Nigeria in the 9th National Assembly for Plateau North senatorial constituency and formerly MHR representing Barkin Ladi/Riyom constituency in the 8th National Assembly Edward Pwajok, attorney (Senior Advocate of Nigeria) and Member of the House of Representatives of Nigeria in the 8th National Assembly representing Jos South/Jos East constituency Dachung Musa Bagos, Member of the House of Representatives of Nigeria in the 9th National Assembly representing Jos South/Jos East constituency Stephen Dalyop Pam, Honourable Justice of the Federal High Court of Nigeria Assistant Inspector General of Police Ezekiel Zang Sati Pam Dakwak†, former Head of Civil Service, Plateau State and elder statesman Davou S. B. Gyel, entrepreneur and Honourable Member of the House of Representatives during the Third Nigerian Republic representing Jos South constituency Victor Kwon†, attorney and former People's Democratic Party national legal adviser Gyang Dudu, customs officer and BECO President Yakubu Gyang Dakwak, attorney and former Chief Justice, Plateau State High Court of Justice Police Commissioner, Fom Pam Joseph Matthew Pwajok, Director and former Managing Director Nigerian Airspace Management Agency (NAMA) Rufus Bature, politician and former Member of the Plateau State House of Assembly, Secretary to the State Government in Simon Lalong's administration and later state chairman of the All Progressives Congress (APC) Ezekiel Dalyop, public servant and former Head of Civil Service, Plateau State Sambo Choji, footballer Chris Giwa, football personality, philanthropist and owner of Giwa F.C. Daps Dalyop Gwom, gospel artist Jeremiah Gyang singer and record producer Kenneth Gyang, filmographer Kevin Chuwang, Big Brother Africa Season 4 winner Ayuba Pam Dangwong, Veteran journalist with the nation newspaper and a former special adviser media and publicity to Governor Jang. Prominent for his stories and reports during the crisis and defendant of Berom nation his son Dr Alex Pam known for charitable works in his community "Berom". Ethnologue. Retrieved 7 February 2019. Idrees, Aliyu Alhaji; Ochefu, Yakubu A. (2002). Studies in the History of Central Nigeria Area. CSS Limited. p. 663. ISBN 9789782951588. "Nzem Berom Cultural Festival | MTN Events". Blench, Roger. 2021. Talking eggs and were-frogs: Berom religion past and present. Cambridge: Kay Williamson Educational Foundation. "Nzem Berom Cultural festival on the Plateau". 16 December 2018. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom socio-cultural festivals and ceremonies: from the pre-colonial times to date. BH Publication. p. 18. ISBN 9789783318335. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom socio-cultural festivals and ceremonies: from the pre-colonial times to date. BH Publication. p. 64. ISBN 9789783318335. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom socio-cultural festivals and ceremonies: from the pre-colonial times to date. BH Publication. pp. vii. ISBN 9789783318335. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom Socio-cultural Festivals and Ceremonies: From the Pre-colonial Times to Date. ISBN 9789783318335. Blench, Roger. 2021. The musical instruments of the Berom of Central Nigeria. Cambridge: Kay Williamson Educational Foundation. Nigeria: An Exhibition of Nigerian Royal Regalia, and Selection of Photographs, Arts and Crafts. Federal Ministry of Information & National Orientation Nigeria. 2004. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom socio-cultural festivals and ceremonies: from the pre-colonial times to date. BH Publication. p. 121. ISBN 9789783318335. Dudley, B. J. (5 November 2013). Parties and Politics in Northern Nigeria. Routledge. p. 92. ISBN 9781136961823. Ochonu, Moses E. (14 February 2014). Colonialism by Proxy: Hausa Imperial Agents and Middle Belt Consciousness in Nigeria. Indiana University Press. p. 181. ISBN 9780253011657. Nigeria: An Exhibition of Nigerian Royal Regalia, and Selection of Photographs, Arts and Crafts. Federal Ministry of Information & National Orientation Nigeria. 2004. Nyam, Samuel Dung; Jacobs, Charles C. (2004). An Evaluation of the Gbong Gwom Institution from 1935-2004. BH Publication. p. 13. Molemodile, Vicky Mnguember Sylvester (2000). Nigerianness: A general perspective. Vougasen. p. 15. ISBN 9789783489387. Best, Shedrack Gaya (2007). Conflict and peace building in Plateau State, Nigeria. Spectrum Books Limited. p. 27. ISBN 9789780298036. Molemodile, Vicky Mnguember Sylvester (2000). Nigerianness: A general perspective. Vougasen. p. 15. ISBN 9789783489387. Nyam, Samuel Dung (2005). Berom socio-cultural festivals and ceremonies: from the pre-colonial times to date. BH Publication. p. 122. ISBN 9789783318335. Nigeria), League for Human Rights (Jos (2004). Recrudescent civil disturbances and human rights: the Jos and state-wide crises. League for Human Rights. p. 66. Tell. Tell Communications Limited. 2009. p. 18. Bergstresser, Heinrich (2017). A Decade of Nigeria: Politics, Economy and Society 2004-2016. BRILL. p. 132. ISBN 9789004347410. ".: H.F Schroeder (W.A.) Limited". Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. "Tok Bot, Toma - Dictionary of African Christian Biography" https://dacb.org/stories/nigeria/tokbot-toma/ "DAJU, Dr. Sambo". 8 February 2017. "Da D.B. Zang - (1927-2008)". 4 March 2021. "Former Director Of Military Intelligence, Major General Dung Chong Laid To Rest In Jos – Independent Newspaper Nigeria" https://independent.ng/former-director-of-military-intelligence-major-general-dung-chong-laid-to-rest-in-jos/ "Shendam (Diocese) [Catholic-Hierarchy]". Anyanwu, Chris Ngozi (1993). "The Law Makers, 1992-1996: Federal Republic of Nigeria". "Facebook" https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=pfbid035BwfCS5M6dnwjvaUZmmbjNb3WcQK8RNcotwFDzViLJsboQMpXg7ECAxf575gf3cLl&id=104674229565296 "Buhari swears in four permanent secretaries, presides over FEC" https://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/more-news/526255-buhari-swears-in-four-permanent-secretaries-presides-over-fec.html?tztc=1 "Executive Secretary Profile" https://ncpc.gov.ng/executive-secretary-profile "Commission promotes four CPs to AIG | The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News — News — The Guardian Nigeria News – Nigeria and World News" https://guardian.ng/news/commission-promotes-four-cps-to-aig/ "Plateau gets substantive Chief Judge, Yakubu Dakwak - Daily Post Nigeria" https://dailypost.ng/2018/04/03/plateau-gets-substantive-chief-judge-yakubu-dakwak/?amp=1 "PSC Appoints AIG Egbetokun DIG, Promotes Mba, Umar, Akinyosola, 21 CPs to Rank of AIG - THISDAYLIVE" https://www.thisdaylive.com/index.php/2023/03/29/psc-appoints-aig-egbetokun-dig-promotes-mba-umar-akinyosola-21-cps-to-rank-of-aig?amp=1 "Fmr Plateau SSG Rufus Bature emerges APC Chairman - Nigeria News" https://www.tvcnews.tv/2021/10/fmr-plateau-ssg-rufus-bature-emerges-apc-chairman/ Nyam, S. D. (ed.). 2004. The Berom Digest. Jos: Berom Historical Publications Roger Blench, Berom Images