West Yorkshire is a metropolitan and ceremonial county in the Yorkshire and the Humber region of England. It borders North Yorkshire to the north and east, South Yorkshire and Derbyshire to the south, Greater Manchester to the south-west, and Lancashire to the west. The city of Leeds is the largest settlement. The county has an area of 2,029 km2 (783 sq mi) and a population of 2.3 million, making it the fourth-largest ceremonial county by population. Large parts of West Yorkshire are urban; many settlements are part of the West Yorkshire built-up area, which has a population of 1.78 million. The largest settlements are the cities of Leeds (516,298) and Bradford (366,187), Huddersfield (162,949), and the city of Wakefield (109,766). The west of the county is more rural. The county is governed by five metropolitan boroughs: City of Bradford, Calderdale, Kirklees, City of Leeds and City of Wakefield, which collaborate through West Yorkshire Combined Authority. The western part of West Yorkshire is in the South Pennines, and contains a small part of the Peak District National Park. It is characterised by steep valleys and is the source of the River Calder, which flows past Wakefield before meeting the Aire, which flows through Leeds, near Castleford. The landscape becomes flatter in the east, and the county boundary is on the edge of the Vale of York. Remnants of strong coal, wool and iron ore industries remain in the county, having attracted people over the centuries, and this can be seen in the buildings and architecture. Several railways and the M1, M621, M606, A1(M) and M62 motorways traverse the county. West Yorkshire County Council was abolished in 1986 and its five districts effectively became unitary authorities. The metropolitan county, covering an area of 2,029 square kilometres (783 sq mi), continues to exist in law and as a geographic frame of reference. Since 1 April 2014, West Yorkshire has been a combined authority area, with the local authorities pooling some functions over transport and regeneration as the West Yorkshire Combined Authority. The first Mayor of West Yorkshire, Tracy Brabin, was elected on 6 May 2021, following a devolution deal announced by the government in the March 2020 budget. The conurbation of Bradford, Dewsbury, Halifax, Huddersfield, Leeds and Wakefield makes up the West Yorkshire Built-up Area, which is the fourth-largest in the United Kingdom and the largest within the historic county boundaries of Yorkshire. In Parliament, 13 out of 22 of West Yorkshire's MPs are Labour and 9 are Conservative. At local level, the councils are generally divided, apart from the Wakefield district, which has long been one of the safest Labour councils in the country. Some services are provided across the county by West Yorkshire Joint Services and the West Yorkshire Police and West Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service are also county-wide. The county borders, going anticlockwise from the west: Lancashire, Greater Manchester, Derbyshire, South Yorkshire and North Yorkshire. The terrain of the county mostly consists of the Pennines and its foothills which dominate the west of the county and gradually descend into the Vale of York and Humberhead Levels in the east. Geologically, it lies almost entirely on rocks of carboniferous age which form the inner Southern Pennine fringes in the west and the Yorkshire coalfield further eastwards. In the extreme east of the metropolitan county there are younger deposits of Magnesian Limestone. Areas in the west such as Bradford and Calderdale are dominated by the scenery of the eastern slopes of the South Pennines, dropping from upland in the west down to the east, and dissected by many steep-sided valleys while a small part of the northern Peak District extends into the south west of Kirklees. Large-scale industry, housing, public and commercial buildings of differing heights, transport routes and open countryside conjoin. The dense network of roads, canals and railways and urban development, confined by valleys creates dramatic interplay of views between settlements and the surrounding hillsides, as shaped the first urban-rural juxtapositions of David Hockney. Where most rural the land crops up in the such rhymes and folklore as On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at, date unknown, the early 19th century novels and poems of the Brontë family often in and around Haworth and long-running light comedy-drama Last of the Summer Wine in the 20th century. The carboniferous rocks of the Yorkshire coalfield further east have produced a rolling landscape with hills, escarpments and broad valleys in the outer fringes of the Pennines. In this landscape there is widespread evidence of both current and former industrial activity. There are numerous derelict or converted mine buildings and recently landscaped former spoil heaps.[citation needed] The scenery is a mixture of built up areas, industrial land with some dereliction, and farmed open country. Ribbon developments along transport routes including canal, road and rail are prominent features of the area although some remnants of the pre industrial landscape and semi-natural vegetation still survive. However, many areas are affected by urban fringe pressures creating fragmented and downgraded landscapes and ever present are urban influences from major cities, smaller industrial towns and former mining villages.[citation needed] In the Magnesian Limestone belt to the east of the Leeds and Wakefield areas is an elevated ridge with smoothly rolling scenery, dissected by dry valleys. Here, there is a large number of country houses and estates with parkland, estate woodlands, plantations and game coverts.[citation needed] The rivers Aire and Calder drain the area, flowing from west to east. Wakefield's Parish Church was raised to cathedral status in 1888 and after the elevation of Wakefield to diocese, Wakefield Council immediately sought city status and this was granted in July 1888. However the industrial revolution, which changed West and South Yorkshire significantly, led to the growth of Leeds and Bradford, which became the area's two largest cities (Leeds being the largest in Yorkshire). Leeds was granted city status in 1893 and Bradford in 1897. The name of Leeds Town Hall reflects the fact that at its opening in 1858 Leeds was not yet a city, while Bradford renamed its Town Hall as City Hall in 1965. Queensbury and Shelf Urban District was split between Bradford and Calderdale in 1974: Queensbury civil parish became part of Bradford; Shelf civil parish became part of Calderdale. West Yorkshire was formed as a metropolitan county in 1974, by the Local Government Act 1972, and corresponds roughly to the core of the historic West Riding of Yorkshire and the county boroughs of Bradford, Dewsbury, Halifax, Huddersfield, Leeds, and Wakefield. West Yorkshire Metropolitan County Council inherited the use of West Riding County Hall at Wakefield, opened in 1898, from the West Riding County Council in 1974. Since 1987 it has been the headquarters of Wakefield City Council. The county initially had a two-tier structure of local government with a strategic-level county council and five districts providing most services. In 1986, throughout England the metropolitan county councils were abolished. The functions of the county council were devolved to the boroughs; joint-boards covering fire, police and public transport; and to other special joint arrangements. Organisations such as the West Yorkshire Police (governed by the West Yorkshire Police and Crime Commissioner) continue to operate on this basis. Although the county council was abolished, West Yorkshire continues to form a metropolitan and ceremonial county with a Lord Lieutenant of West Yorkshire and a High Sheriff. West Yorkshire contains green belt interspersed throughout the county, surrounding the West Yorkshire Urban Area. It was first drawn up in the 1950s. All the county's districts contain large portions of green belt. A small section of West Yorkshire forms scattered settlements into Rochdale in Greater Manchester with the villages of Walsden and Rishworth in Calderdale which are only 8 and 11 miles apart from the main town centre. West Yorkshire also has close ties with Lancashire in terms of history, local identity and infrastructure including with the War of the Roses and Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway. Up until the 19th century, the town of Todmorden was in Lancashire but was moved into Yorkshire. In the 1974 boundary review. The towns of Earby and Barnoldswick were moved into the Pendle district of Lancashire. The towns of Halifax, Hebden Bridge, Keighley and the city of Bradford border the boroughs of Pendle, Burnley and Rossendale. The civil parish of Saddleworth in Oldham was the only part of West Riding of Yorkshire to be moved into the county of Greater Manchester. The villages in the parish border the towns of Huddersfield and Holmfirth. There is a strong identity debate with Saddleworth residents who still maintain close connections with Yorkshire. Including the Saddleworth White Rose Society. West Yorkshire is ethnically diverse, hosting large populations of multiple ethnic minority groups. Most notably, the city of Bradford is well known for its large concentration of British Pakistanis, the highest by percentage in the country. Leeds and Kirklees also have large British Pakistani populations. Kirklees also hosts a large population of British Indians. West Yorkshire is home to a large Eastern European population, particularly British Poles. Ethnic minorities totalled to over 21% of West Yorkshire's population in 2011. Distribution of ethnic groups in West Yorkshire according to the 2021 census. White (2021) White-British White-Irish White-Other Asian (2021) Asian-Indian Asian-Pakistani Asian-Bangladeshi Asian-Chinese Black (2021) Black-African Black-Caribbean Other-Arab Other-Other ethnic group Distribution of religions in West Yorkshire according to the 2011 census. Christianity Islam Judaism Hinduism Sikhism Buddhism Other religion No religion Leeds has since attracted investment from financial institutions, to become a recognised financial centre, with many banks, building societies and insurance companies having offices in the city. Wakefield has also attracted many service-based industries, in particular call centres. Two of the big four supermarkets are from West Yorkshire. Morrisons is based in Bradford, while Asda is based in Leeds. West Yorkshire grew up around several industries. Wakefield, Castleford, Pontefract and South and East Leeds were traditional coal mining areas. Wool Bradford, Halifax and Huddersfield grew through the development of woollen mills. Leeds' traditional industry was the manufacturing of cloth while heavier engineering industries facilitated growth in South Leeds. The Heavy Woollen District covered towns such as Dewsbury, Batley, Morley, Ossett, Cleckheaton and Heckmondwike. The woollen and cloth industries declined throughout the twentieth century. Rhubarb The Rhubarb Triangle is wholly in West Yorkshire and still produces the vegetable in considerable quantities. Twelve farmers who farm within the Rhubarb Triangle applied to have the name "Yorkshire forced rhubarb" added to the list of foods and drinks that have their names legally protected by the European Commission's Protected Food Name scheme. The application was successful and the farmers in the Rhubarb Triangle were awarded Protected Designation of Origin status (PDO) in February 2010. Food protected status accesses European funding to promote the product and legal backing against other products made outside the area using the name. Other protected names include Stilton cheese, Champagne and Parma Ham. Coal The last pit in West Yorkshire to close was Hay Royds Colliery at Denby Dale in 2012 after a flood. Several films and television series have been filmed in West Yorkshire's historic areas, particularly around the town of Halifax. For example, portions of the BBC television series Happy Valley were filmed in Huddersfield; in addition to exteriors, some of the studio filming was done at North Light Film Studios at Brookes Mill, Huddersfield. As well, interiors for the BBC's Jamaica Inn, for the BBC's Remember Me and for ITV series Black Work, were also filmed at the studios. More recently, many of the exteriors of the BBC series Jericho were filmed at the nearby Rockingstone Quarry and some interior work was done at North Light Film Studios. Urban tourism varies. National interest features include sporting stadia, museums, theatre and galleries. Royal Armouries is in Leeds, as is the Leeds Playhouse (formerly the West Yorkshire Playhouse), Opera North and The Grand Theatre. The First Direct Arena in Leeds seats around 15,000 people. Sheffield Arena is also popular, as is the Bradford Alhambra, St Georges Hall and the Media and Science Museum in Bradford. Leeds is the most popular shopping destination in West Yorkshire, probably Yorkshire and rivals Manchester having claim to Briggate, the Headrow, Trinity Leeds, Victoria Gate, the Victoria and Northern Quarters, the biggest indoor market in Europe and the White Rose Centre, as well as many 'first outside of London' labels such as Harvey Nichols and Victoria's Secret. Leeds is also a popular nightlife destination domestically, which is not surprising given its accessibility and central location. All cities are well connected via rail and road, Leeds railway station is an important hub seeing 29.7 million passengers 2015–16, making it the fourth busiest station in the UK after London stations, Birmingham New Street and Glasgow Central. It is the busiest in Northern England. Signposted walks follow rivers and the escarpment of the Pennines, which is scaled in meandering stages and tunnels by the recreational Leeds-Liverpool Canal and Rochdale Canal, navigable by barge, canoe or kayak. Other tourism features include abbeys, castles, countryside walks, landscapes, picturesque villages, architecture, stately homes, tea rooms, real ale breweries, farmer's markets, restaurants and hiking in villages including Hebden Bridge, Ilkley with its scenic riversides, cherry blossoms and suspension bridge and equally in Wharfedale, Otley. West Yorkshire lies in arguably the most strategic part of Yorkshire: the M62, M1 and the A1(M) pass through the county, as well as the internal urban motorways in Leeds and Bradford. West Yorkshire has two mainline railway stations, Leeds and Wakefield Westgate. Leeds railway station is the only Network Rail principal station in Yorkshire and North East England, and one of only three in the North of England along with Manchester Piccadilly and Liverpool Lime Street. Other important railway stations in West Yorkshire include Bradford Interchange, Bradford Forster Square, Huddersfield, Halifax, Dewsbury, Keighley and Shipley. West Yorkshire also has Yorkshire's largest airport, Leeds Bradford Airport. Unlike South Yorkshire, West Yorkshire has no light transit system; the Leeds Supertram was proposed but was later cancelled after the withdrawal of government funding. Public transport is run under the authority of West Yorkshire Metro. In October 2021, £830 million of funding was announced for the West Yorkshire Combined Authority to develop mass transit for the region. Additionally, the West Yorkshire Combined Authority won its bids for the Zero Emission Bus Regional Areas (ZEBRA) scheme and Bus Service Improvement Plan (BSIP) scheme, the successful ZEBRA funding will see the introduction of between 179 and 245 zero-emission electric buses with the necessary infrastructure whilst the BSIP plan will give the West Yorkshire Combined Authority £70 million out of a desired £168 million to implement the improvements outlined in the authority's BSIP. Major football clubs in West Yorkshire include Leeds United, Huddersfield Town, and Bradford City. Rugby league is also big in West Yorkshire. The teams who are, or have been, in the Super League are Bradford Bulls, Castleford Tigers, Halifax Panthers, Huddersfield Giants, Leeds Rhinos, and Wakefield Trinity. Other rugby league clubs in West Yorkshire include Batley Bulldogs, Dewsbury Rams, Featherstone Rovers, Hunslet Hawks and Keighley Cougars. Any combination of these teams playing against each other would be called a West Yorkshire derby even if the rivalry is not as great as other rivalries between teams in the area. The main rugby union club in the county is Yorkshire Carnegie. Elland Road is the largest stadium in the area, hosting Leeds United. The Headingley Stadium, a stadium complex also in Leeds, consists of a cricket and a rugby ground. The cricket ground is home of the Yorkshire County Cricket Club and the rugby ground is home to Leeds Rhinos. In Huddersfield, the John Smith's Stadium is home to Huddersfield Town and Huddersfield Giants. In Bradford, Valley Parade is the home of Bradford City, whereas the Odsal Stadium is the home of the Bradford Bulls. Other stadiums include Wheldon Road (Castleford), The Shay (Halifax), Belle Vue (Wakefield), Mount Pleasant (Batley), Crown Flatt (Dewsbury), Post Office Road (Featherstone), John Charles Centre for Sport (Hunslet) and Cougar Park (Keighley). There are two racecourses in West Yorkshire: Pontefract and Wetherby. West Yorkshire also used to host regular speedway meetings, having the Halifax Dukes and the Bradford Dukes teams. Odsal Stadium used to host BriSCA stock cars. Leeds has a hill climb event at Harewood speed Hillclimb. Bretton Hall Cartwright Hall Cliffe Hall, also known as Cliffe Castle, Keighley East Riddlesden Hall Esholt Hall, Esholt Firsby Hall Harewood House Kershaw House Keighley & Worth Valley Railway Kirklees Hall/Priory Kirkstall Abbey Roman Lagentium (Castleford) Ledston Hall, Ledston Linthwaite Hall, Linthwaite Linton Hall Lister Park, Bradford Lotherton Hall Middleton Railway, the world's oldest steam railway Nostell Priory Oakwell Hall Oulton Hall, Oulton Piece Hall, Halifax Pontefract Castle Pontefract Priory, Pontefract Queen's Park, Castleford Roundhay Park Leeds Saltaire, a UNESCO World Heritage Site Sandal Castle Scarcroft Watermill, Scarcroft Shelley Hall, Shelley Shibden Hall Shipley Glen Tramway Tong Hall, Tong Wetherby Castle, Wetherby Abbey House Museum, Leeds Armley Mills Industrial Museum, Leeds Bagshaw Museum, Batley Bankfield Museum, Halifax Bradford Industrial Museum, Eccleshill/Fagley, Bradford Brontë Parsonage Museum, Haworth Colne Valley Museum, Golcar, Huddersfield Eureka, Halifax Leeds City Museum, Leeds National Coal Mining Museum for England Overton, Wakefield National Media Museum, Bradford Pennine Farm Museum, Ripponden, Halifax Pontefract Museum Royal Armouries Museum, Leeds Thackray Museum, Leeds The Hepworth Wakefield Thwaite Mills, Leeds Tolson Museum, Dalton, Huddersfield Wakefield Museum, Wakefield West Yorkshire Folk Museum, Shibden Hall, Halifax Yorkshire Sculpture Park, West Bretton, Wakefield Emley Moor, site of the tallest self-supporting structure in the UK (a TV mast) Harewood Estate – Leeds Country Way public footpath runs through the estate, landscaped gardens and home to Red Kites amongst many other birds Ilkley Moor, part of Rombalds Moor New Swillington Ings Nature Reserve Otley Chevin – extensive wooded parkland on high ground with extensive views North over Wharfedale and South as far as the Peak District RSPB Fairburn Ings and St Aidan's – wetland centres for birds Seckar Woods LNR, a Local Nature Reserve Walton Hall, West Yorkshire, home of naturalist Charles Waterton and the world's first nature reserve Scammonden Reservoir, Deanhead Reservoir – both in the moors near Ripponden River Aire, River Calder, River Hebble, River Spen, River Worth Aire and Calder Navigation Calder and Hebble Navigation Huddersfield Broad Canal Huddersfield Narrow Canal, Standedge Tunnel Leeds and Liverpool Canal Rochdale Canal List of Lord Lieutenants of West Yorkshire List of High Sheriffs of West Yorkshire The Kingdom of Elmet West Yorkshire Urban Area West Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service West Yorkshire Regiment (The Prince of Wales's Own) List of ceremonial counties in England by gross value added Listed buildings in West Yorkshire "No. 62943". The London Gazette. 13 March 2020. p. 5161. "West Yorkshire Demographics | Age, Ethnicity, Religion, Wellbeing". Varbes. Retrieved 10 February 2023. "Gazetteer of the old and new geographies of the United Kingdom" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. p. 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 December 2003. Retrieved 14 December 2006. "Metropolitan Counties and Districts". Beginners' Guide to UK Geography. Office for National Statistics. 17 September 2004. Archived from the original on 6 June 2002. Retrieved 11 January 2007. "Yorkshire and Humber Counties". The Boundary Commission for England. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 14 February 2007. "Devolution deal worth £1.8bn agreed". BBC News. 11 March 2020. Retrieved 17 May 2020. Beecham, Richard (13 May 2020). "West Yorkshire mayor plans still on track for next May despite lockdown". Yorkshire Evening Post. Retrieved 17 May 2020. "Yorkshire Southern Pennine Fringe". www.countryside.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 8 September 2008. Retrieved 6 October 2008. "Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and Yorkshire Coalfield". www.countryside.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 21 August 2008. Retrieved 6 October 2008. "Southern Magnesian Limestone". www.countryside.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 8 September 2008. Retrieved 6 October 2008. Beckett 2005, pp. 39, 40 "History of City Hall". City of Bradford Metropolitan District Council. Archived from the original on 6 October 2008. Retrieved 17 January 2009. "County Hall". Wakefield City Council. 20 November 2004. Archived from the original on 11 November 2006. Redcliffe-Maud and Wood, B., English Local Government Reformed, (1974) Kingdom, J., Local Government and Politics in Britain, (1991) "Wars of the roses: How the rivalry between Yorkshire and Lancashire still exists today". The Yorkshire Post. Retrieved 9 June 2021. Hayes, Dean (1 October 2000). The Wars of the Roses: A History of Lancashire vs. Yorkshire Cricket Matches. ASIN 1903158117. Himelfield, Dave; Macpherson, Jon (2 November 2020). "The Yorkshire town that wishes it was in Lancashire". LancsLive. Retrieved 9 June 2021. Himelfield, Dave (30 January 2021). "More towns which aren't sure if they're in Lancashire or Yorkshire". YorkshireLive. Retrieved 9 June 2021. Shaw, Megan (6 December 2020). "The fight to keep these historic villages in Yorkshire nearing a sad end". YorkshireLive. Retrieved 9 June 2021. "1991 census: local base statistics". NOMIS. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. "KS006 - Ethnic group - Nomis - Official Census and Labour Market Statistics". www.nomisweb.co.uk. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "2011 Census: Ethnic Group, local authorities in England and Wales, ONS". "TS021 - Ethnic group - Nomis - Official Census and Labour Market Statistics". www.nomisweb.co.uk. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "2011 Census: Ethnic Group, local authorities in England and Wales, ONS". Shell, Hanna Rose (2020). Shoddy: From Devil's Dust to the Renaissance of Rags. Chicago: University of Chicago. p. 159. ISBN 9780226377759. Application to register: Yorkshire Forced Rhubarb (PDF), DEFRA, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 August 2013, retrieved 25 February 2010 "The Drift remembers Yorkshire's industrial past". University of Bolton. 27 January 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Productions at North Light Film Studios". North Light Film Studios. Retrieved 10 February 2017. "Film & TV". Examiner. Huddersfield. Archived from the original on 15 May 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2017. Ballinger, Lauren (5 December 2014). "North Light Film Studios – Remember Me filming locations". Examiner. Huddersfield. Retrieved 10 February 2017. Rees, Caroline (3 November 2013). "Sally Wainwright: not the same old". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 January 2014. Bremner, Jade (11 December 2013). "Last Tango in Halifax actress Sarah Lancashire begins shooting new crime drama in Yorkshire". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2014. "Creative England provides filming location and crew support to new BBC drama Happy Valley when filming in Yorkshire". Creative England. 29 April 2014. Archived from the original on 30 May 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2014. Gildea, Samantha (1 February 2016). "Jericho filming locations". Examiner. Huddersfield. Retrieved 10 February 2017. "£830m Government boost set to kickstart mass transit scheme - including line through West Leeds". West Leeds Dispatch. 22 October 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "West Yorkshire Mayor welcomes £830 million funding to progress work on transforming the region's transport system". West Yorkshire Combined Authority. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "'Tough decisions' needed after funding for bus improvement plan falls £98m short". Bradford Telegraph and Argus. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Mayor cautiously welcomes £900 million funding to improve transport across West Yorkshire". West Yorkshire Combined Authority. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Over 240 electric buses could soon be rolled out through £81m scheme". Bradford Telegraph and Argus. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Capital Spending and Project Approvals" (PDF). 23 June 2022. p. 6. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Beckett, J. V. (2005), City status in the British Isles,1830–2002, Ashgate Publishing, ISBN 0-7546-5067-7 Wikimedia Commons has media related to West Yorkshire. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for West Yorkshire. West Yorkshire Joint Services Images of West Yorkshire Archived 31 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine at the English Heritage Archive West Yorkshire at Curlie Portals:  United Kingdom  England  Yorkshire