This is a list of the kings and queens of Aragon. The Kingdom of Aragon was created sometime between 950 and 1035 when the County of Aragon, which had been acquired by the Kingdom of Navarre in the tenth century, was separated from Navarre in accordance with the will of King Sancho III (1004–35). In 1164, the marriage of the Aragonese princess Petronila (Kingdom of Aragon) and the Catalan count Ramon Berenguer IV (County of Barcelona) created a dynastic union from which what modern historians call the Crown of Aragon was born. In the thirteenth century the kingdoms of Valencia, Majorca and Sicily were added to the Crown, and in the fourteenth the Kingdom of Sardinia and Corsica. The Crown of Aragon continued to exist until 1713 when its separate constitutional systems (Catalan Constitutions, Aragon Fueros, and Furs of Valencia) were swept away in the Nueva Planta decrees at the end of the War of the Spanish Succession. With the death of Sancho III of Pamplona, Aragon was inherited by his son Ramiro as an autonomous state. Nominally co-monarch of her son Charles I, Joanna I was confined for alleged insanity during her whole reign. During the Catalan Civil War, there were three who claimed his throne, though this never included the Kingdom of Valencia. Aragon itself stayed loyal to Philip IV during the Reapers' War while Catalonia switched allegiance to Louis XIII and Louis XIV the Sun-King (see List of Counts of Barcelona). Portugal seceded in 1640. Charles II died without heirs. During the war (officially in 1707) Philip V of Spain, the first of the Bourbon dynasty in Spain, disbanded the Crown of Aragon. After this time, there are no more Aragonese monarchs. Nevertheless, Spanish monarchs up to Isabella II, while styling themselves king/queen of Spain on coins, still used some of the traditional nomenclature of the defunct Crown of Aragon in their official documents: King/Queen of Castile, Leon, Aragon, both Sicilies, Jerusalem, Navarra, Granada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia, Majorca, Sevilla, Sardinia, Cordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, the Algarve, Algeciras, Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the Eastern & Western Indias, the Islands & Mainland of the Ocean sea; Archduke of Austria; Duke of Burgundy, Brabant, Milan; Count of Habsburg, Flanders, Tyrol, Barcelona; Lord of Biscay, Molina. List of Asturian monarchs List of Castilian monarchs List of Galician monarchs List of Leonese monarchs List of Navarrese monarchs List of Majorcan monarchs List of Valencian monarchs List of Spanish monarchs Counts of Barcelona Kings of Spain family tree "Alfonso II el Casto, hijo de Petronila y Ramón Berenguer IV, nació en Huesca en 1157;". Cfr. Josefina Mateu Ibars, María Dolores Mateu Ibars, Colectánea paleográfica de la Corona de Aragon: Siglo IX–XVIII, Universitat Barcelona, 1980, p. 546. ISBN 978-84-7528-694-5. Antonio Ubieto Arteta, Creación y desarrollo de la Corona de Aragón, Zaragoza, Anubar (Historia de Aragón), 1987, págs. 187–188. ISBN 84-7013-227-X. Media related to Kings of Aragon at Wikimedia Commons