Anthony John Abbott AC (/ˈæbət/; born 4 November 1957) is an Australian former politician who served as the 28th prime minister of Australia from 2013 to 2015. He held office as the leader of the Liberal Party of Australia. Abbott was born in London, England, to an Australian mother and a British father, and moved to Sydney at the age of two. He studied economics and law at the University of Sydney, and then attended The Queen's College, Oxford, as a Rhodes Scholar, studying Philosophy, Politics and Economics. After graduating from Oxford, Abbott briefly trained as a Roman Catholic seminarian, and later worked as a journalist, manager, and political adviser. In 1992, he was appointed director of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy, a position he held until his election to parliament as a member of parliament (MP) for the division of Warringah at the 1994 Warringah by-election, before the election of the Howard government in 1996. Following the 1998 election, Abbott was appointed Minister for Employment Services in the second Howard ministry. He was promoted to cabinet in 2001 as Minister for Employment, Workplace Relations and Small Business. In 2003, Abbott became Minister for Health and Ageing, retaining this position until the defeat of the Howard government at the 2007 election. Initially serving in the shadow cabinets of Brendan Nelson and then Malcolm Turnbull, Abbott resigned from the front bench in November 2009, in protest against Turnbull's support for the Rudd government's proposed Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS). Forcing a leadership ballot on the subject, Abbott narrowly defeated Turnbull to become the party's leader and leader of the opposition. Abbott led the Liberal-National Coalition to the 2010 federal election, which resulted in a hung parliament, and an eventual victory for the Australian Labor Party (ALP). Abbott remained leader, and led the Coalition to a landslide victory at the 2013 election. After assuming office, the Abbott government implemented Operation Sovereign Borders in an effort to halt illegal maritime arrivals. It abolished several reforms enacted by the preceding government, including the Minerals Resource Rent Tax and Australia's carbon pricing scheme. His government aimed to rein in a federal budget deficit that reached A$48.5 billion by June 2014, and established the National Commission of Audit to advise on restoring the federal budget to surplus. Abbott instituted the Royal Commission into Trade Union Governance and Corruption; founded the Medical Research Future Fund; and produced white papers on developing Northern Australia and the Agricultural Competitiveness. In international affairs, Abbott concluded free trade agreements with China, Japan and South Korea. He challenged the Russian president Vladimir Putin over Russia's actions in Ukraine and over the shooting down of Malaysian Flight MH17 in Ukraine. He committed Australian forces to the battle against ISIS during the Syrian conflict, and agreed to resettle an additional 12,000 refugees from the region. He launched the New Colombo Plan to encourage educational exchange with the Indo-Pacific region. Domestically, Abbott campaigned for recognition of Indigenous Australians in the Australian Constitution, and promised a plebiscite on the issue of same-sex marriage. Abbott's "budget repair" measures proved unpopular, with his government's austere 2014 budget being widely criticised. Due to Abbott's poor opinion polling and personal unpopularity, he was defeated by rival Malcolm Turnbull in a September 2015 leadership spill, and replaced as prime minister. He remained in the Parliament as a backbencher, until he lost his seat of Warringah to independent candidate Zali Steggall at the 2019 federal election. In September 2020, he was named an adviser to the British government's Board of Trade. Abbott continues to contribute to international public debate as a writer, public speaker and advocate for conservative causes. He is often ranked in the lower tier of Australian prime ministers. Abbott was born on 4 November 1957 at the General Lying-In Hospital in Lambeth, London, England. He is the oldest of four children born to Fay (née Peters; b. 1933) and Richard Henry "Dick" Abbott (1924–2017). He has three younger sisters, including Christine Forster, who has also been involved in politics. His mother was born in Sydney, while his father was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, England. At age 16, Dick Abbott moved to Australia with his parents. Two years later, in 1942, he was called up to the Royal Australian Air Force. Dick Abbott and his mother returned to the UK in 1954 where he met and married Fay Peters, a dietitian. On 7 September 1960, Abbott, his parents, and younger sister Jane, left the UK for Australia on the Assisted Passage Migration Scheme ship SS Oronsay. Settling in Sydney, the family first lived in the suburb of Bronte and later moved to Chatswood. Dick Abbott established what was to become one of the largest orthodontics practices in Australia, retiring in 2002. Abbott attended primary school at St Aloysius' College at Milson's Point, before completing his secondary school education at St Ignatius' College, Riverview, both Jesuit schools. During his time at St Ignatius' College, one was his teachers was John Kennedy, who would later go on to serve as the member for Hawthorn. He graduated with a Bachelor of Economics (BEc) in 1979 and a Bachelor of Laws (LLB) in 1981 from the University of Sydney. He resided at St John's College and was president of the Student Representative Council. Influenced by his chaplain at St Ignatius', Father Emmet Costello, he then attended The Queen's College, Oxford, as a Rhodes Scholar, where in June 1983 he graduated as a Bachelor of Arts in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE) and on 21 October 1989 proceeded by seniority to Master of Arts. During his university days, Abbott gained media attention for political opposition to the then dominant left-wing student leadership. Once he was violently beaten at a university conference. According to the Sun-Herald newspaper, it was "an ugly and often violent time", and Abbott's tactics in student politics were like "an aggressive terrier". Abbott organised rallies in support of Governor-General John Kerr after he dismissed the Whitlam government in November 1975, as well as a pro-Falklands War demonstration during his time at Oxford. At St. Ignatius College, Abbott had been taught and influenced by the Jesuits. At university, he encountered B. A. Santamaria, a Catholic layman who led a movement against Communism within the Australian labour movement in the 1950s, culminating in the 1955 Labor Party split and the formation of the Democratic Labor Party. Santamaria has been described as Abbott's "political hero". He wrote the foreword to a novelisation of Santamaria's life written by Alan Reid, and in 2015 launched a biography of Santamaria written by Gerard Henderson. In 1977, Abbott faced charges of common and indecent assault after allegedly groping trainee teacher Helen Wilson while she was making a speech at the College of Advanced Education in Kuring-gai, Sydney. Abbott pleaded not guilty, and the charges were ultimately dropped. Abbott was a student boxer, earning two Blues for boxing while at Oxford. When Abbott was a student, on one occasion he rescued a child who had been pulled out into the sea by the current. On another occasion, while drinking at a pub, he helped rescue children from the burning house next door. On both of these occasions, he left the scene after the rescues and did not wait to be thanked. Following his time in Britain, Abbott returned to Australia and told his family of his intention to join the priesthood. In 1984 at the age of 26, he entered St Patrick's Seminary, Manly. Abbott did not complete his studies at the seminary, leaving the institution in 1987. Interviewed before the 2013 election, Abbott said of his time as a trainee priest: "The Jesuits had helped to instil in me this thought that our calling in life was to be, to use the phrase: 'a man for others'. And I thought then that the best way in which I could be a 'man for others' was to become a priest. I discovered pretty soon that I was a bit of a square peg in a round hole … eventually working out that, I'm afraid, I just didn't have what it took to be an effective priest." Abbott worked in journalism, briefly ran a concrete plant, and began to get involved in national politics. Throughout his time as a student and seminarian, he was writing articles for newspapers and magazines—first for Honi Soit (the University of Sydney student newspaper) and later The Catholic Weekly and national publications such as The Bulletin. He eventually became a journalist and wrote for The Australian. At birth, Abbott was a British citizen by birth in the UK and by descent from his British-born father. He did not hold Australian citizenship from birth, as at the time Australian citizenship by descent could only be acquired from the father. Abbott became a naturalised Australian citizen on 26 June 1981, apparently so as to become eligible for a Rhodes scholarship. On 12 October 1993, he renounced his British citizenship to be eligible to run for parliament under section 44 of the constitution. Abbott began his public life when he was employed as a journalist for The Bulletin, an influential news magazine, and later for The Australian newspaper. While deciding his future career path, Abbott developed friendships with senior figures in the New South Wales Labor Party, and was encouraged by Bob Carr, as well as Johno Johnson, to join the Labor Party and run for office. Abbott felt uncomfortable with the role of unions within the party, however, and wrote in his biography that he felt Labor "just wasn't the party for me." For a time he worked as a plant manager for Pioneer Concrete before becoming press secretary to Liberal Leader John Hewson from 1990 to 1993, helping to develop the Fightback! policy. Prime Minister John Howard wrote in his autobiography that Abbott considered working on his staff before accepting the position with The Bulletin, and it was on Howard's recommendation that Hewson engaged Abbott. According to Howard, he and Abbott established a good rapport, but Hewson and Abbott fell out shortly before the 1993 election, and Abbott ended up in search of work following the re-election of the Keating government. He was approached to head Australians for Constitutional Monarchy (ACM), the main group organising support for the maintenance of the Monarchy in Australia amidst the Keating government's campaign for a change to a republic. Abbott renounced his British citizenship in 1993. Between 1993 and 1994, Abbott was Executive Director of ACM. According to biographer Michael Duffy, Abbott's involvement with ACM "strengthened his relationship with John Howard, who in 1994 suggested he seek pre-selection for a by-election in the seat of Warringah". Howard provided a glowing reference and Abbott won pre-selection for the safe Liberal seat. Despite his conservative leanings, Abbott acknowledged he voted for Labor in the 1988 NSW state election as he thought that "Barrie Unsworth was the best deal Premier that New South Wales had ever had". Nevertheless, Abbott then clarified that he has never voted for Labor in a federal election. Abbott won Liberal preselection for the federal Division of Warringah by-election in March 1994 following the resignation of Michael MacKellar. He easily held the safe Liberal seat in the Liberals' traditional Northern Beaches heartland, suffering a swing of only 1 percentage point in the primary vote. He easily won the seat in his own right at the 1996 general election. Before 2019, he only dropped below 59 percent of the two-party vote once, in 2001; that year independent Peter Macdonald, the former member for the state seat of Manly, held Abbott to only 55 percent. Abbott was the parliamentary secretary to the Minister for Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs (1996–1998), Minister for Employment Services (1998–2001), Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations and Small Business (2001), Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations (2001–03) and Minister for Health and Ageing from 2003 to November 2007. From early 2002 to October 2007, he was also the Leader of the House in the House of Representatives. In 1998, Abbott established a trust fund called "Australians for Honest Politics Trust" to help bankroll civil court cases against the One Nation Party and its leader Pauline Hanson. Prime Minister John Howard denied any knowledge of existence of such a fund. Abbott was also accused of offering funds to One Nation dissident Terry Sharples to support his court battle against the party. However, Howard defended the honesty of Abbott in this matter. Abbott conceded that the political threat One Nation posed to the Howard government was "a very big factor" in his decision to pursue the legal attack, but he also claimed to be acting "in Australia's national interest". Howard also defended Abbott's actions saying "It's the job of the Liberal Party to politically attack other parties – there's nothing wrong with that." As a Parliamentary Secretary, Abbott oversaw the establishment of the Green Corps program which involved young people in environmental restoration work. As Minister for Employment Services, he oversaw the implementation of the Job Network and was responsible for the government's Work for the Dole scheme. He also commissioned the Cole Royal Commission into "thuggery and rorts" in the construction industry and created the Office of the Australian Building and Construction Commissioner in response and to lift productivity. The Liberal Party allowed members a free choice in the 1999 republic referendum. Abbott was one of the leading voices within the party campaigning for the successful "No" vote, pitting him against future parliamentary colleague and leading republican Malcolm Turnbull. When Abbott was promoted to the Cabinet in 1998, Prime Minister Howard described him as an effective performer with an endearing style, whereas the Opposition described him as a "bomb thrower." Howard appointed Abbott to replace Kay Patterson as Minister for Health in 2003, during a period of contentious Medicare reform and a crisis in Medical indemnity Insurance, in which the price of insurance was forcing doctors out of practice. The Australian Medical Association was threatening to pull out all Australian doctors. Abbott worked with the states to address the crisis and keep the system running. Health care initiatives instigated by Abbott include the Nurse Family Partnership, a long term scheme aimed at improving conditions for indigenous youth by improving mother-child relationships. The scheme was successful in reducing child abuse and improving school retention rates. In 2005, Abbott was holidaying with his family in Bali when the Bali bombings occurred. Abbott visited the victims of the bombings in hospital, and in his capacity as Health Minister organised for Australians who required lifesaving emergency surgery and hospitalisation to be flown to Singapore. In 2006, Abbott controversially opposed access to the abortion drug RU486, and the Parliament voted to strip Health Ministers of the power to regulate this area of policy. During this time, Abbott likened the act of having an abortion to committing a murder, saying "we have a bizarre double standard, a bizarre double standard in this country where someone who kills a pregnant woman's baby is guilty of murder but a woman who aborts an unborn baby is simply exercising choice". Abbott introduced the Medicare Safety Net to cap the annual out-of-pocket costs of Medicare cardholders to a maximum amount. In 2007, he attracted criticism over long delays in funding for cancer diagnostic equipment (PET scanners). According to Sydney Morning Herald's political editor, Peter Hartcher, before the defeat of the Howard government at the 2007 election, Abbott had opposed the government's centrepiece WorkChoices industrial relations deregulation reform in Cabinet, on the basis that the legislation exceeded the government's mandate, was harsh on workers, and was politically dangerous to the government. John Howard wrote in his 2010 autobiography that Abbott was "never a zealot about pursuing industrial relations changes" and expressed "concern about making too many changes" during Cabinet's discussion of WorkChoices. Abbott campaigned as Minister for Health at the 2007 election. On 31 October, he apologised for saying "just because a person is sick doesn't mean that he is necessarily pure of heart in all things", after Bernie Banton, an asbestos campaigner and terminal mesothelioma sufferer, complained that Abbott was unavailable to collect a petition. In The Australian Doctor's 2015 poll, Tony Abbott was ranked as the third "worst health minister in 35 years", as voted on by doctors. Peter Dutton was ranked the overall worst. The Coalition lost government in 2007 and Abbott was re-elected to the seat of Warringah with a 1.8% swing toward the Labor Party. Following Peter Costello's rejection of the leadership of the Parliamentary Liberal Party, Abbott nominated for the position of party leader, along with Malcolm Turnbull and Brendan Nelson. After canvassing the support of his colleagues, Abbott decided to withdraw his nomination. He seemingly did not have the numbers, noting that he was "obviously very closely identified with the outgoing prime minister." He said he would not rule out contesting the leadership at some time in the future. Of the three candidates, Abbott was the only one who had previous experience in Opposition. Nelson was elected Liberal leader in December 2007 and Abbott was assigned the Shadow Portfolio of Families, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs. As indigenous affairs spokesman, Abbott said that it had been a mistake for the Howard government not to offer a national apology to the Stolen Generations; spent time teaching at remote Aboriginal communities; and argued for the Rudd government to continue the Northern Territory National Emergency Response which restricted alcohol and introduced conditional welfare in certain Aboriginal communities. During this period in Opposition, Abbott wrote Battlelines, a biography and reflection on the Howard government, and potential future policy direction for the Liberal Party. In the book, Abbott said that in certain aspects the Australian Federation was "dysfunctional" and in need of repair. He recommended the establishment of local hospital and school boards to manage health and education, and discussed family law reform, multiculturalism, climate change, and international relations. The book received a favourable review from former Labor Party speech writer Bob Ellis and The Australian described it as "read almost universally as Abbott's intellectual application for the party's leadership after the Turnbull experiment". The number of unauthorised immigrant arrivals in boats to Australia increased during 2008. Abbott claimed that this was an effect of the Rudd government's easing of border protection laws and accused Kevin Rudd of ineptitude and hypocrisy on the issue of unauthorised immigrants upon boats arriving, particularly during the Oceanic Viking affair of October 2009, saying, "John Howard found a problem and created a solution. Kevin Rudd found a solution and has now created a problem". During November 2009, Abbott resigned from shadow ministerial responsibilities due to the Liberal Party's position on the Rudd government's Emissions trading Scheme (ETS), leading to the resignation of other shadow ministers. On 1 December 2009, Abbott was elected to the position of Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia over Turnbull and Shadow Treasurer Joe Hockey. Abbott proposed blocking the government's ETS in the Senate whereas Turnbull sought to amend the bill which the majority of the Liberal Party did not support. Abbott named his Shadow Cabinet on 8 December 2009. Abbott described Prime Minister Rudd's Emission Trading plan as a 'Great big tax on everything' and opposed it. The Coalition and minor parties voted against the government's ETS legislation in the Senate and the legislation was rejected. Abbott announced a new Coalition policy on carbon emission reduction in February, which committed the Coalition to a 5 per cent reduction in emissions by 2020. Abbott proposed the creation of an 'emissions reduction fund' to provide 'direct' incentives to industry and farmers to reduce carbon emissions. In April, Rudd announced that plans for the introduction his ETS would be delayed until 2013. When appointed to the Liberal leadership, Abbott's Catholicism and moral beliefs became subjects of repeated media questioning. Various commentators suggested that his traditionalist views would polarise female voters. He told press gallery journalist Laurie Oakes that he did not do doorstop interviews in front of church but regularly faced pointed questions about his faith which were not being put to Prime Minister Rudd, who conducted weekly church door press conferences following his attendances at Anglican services. Abbott reportedly missed the 2009 vote on the Rudd government $42 billion stimulus package because he fell asleep in his parliamentary office after a night of drinking. When asked by a journalist whether he had been drunk, Abbott said "that is an impertinent question" and that he "wasn't keeping count" but thought it was "maybe two" bottles of wine. In a 60 Minutes interview aired on 7 March 2010, Abbott was asked: "Homosexuality? How do you feel about that?". He replied: "I'd probably feel a bit threatened … it's a fact of life and I try to treat people as people and not put them in pigeonholes." In later interviews Abbott apologised for the remark. In 2013, Abbott stated on 3AW that if his sister Christine Forster were to have a marriage ceremony with her partner Virginia he would attend. In March 2010, Abbott, announced a new policy initiative to provide for six months paid parental leave, funded by an increase in corporate tax by 1.7 percentage points on all taxable company income above $5 million. Business groups and the government opposed the plan, however it won support from the Australian Greens. While Opposition Spokesman for Indigenous Affairs, Abbott spent time in remote Cape York Aboriginal communities as a teacher, organised through prominent indigenous activist Noel Pearson. Abbott repeatedly spoke of his admiration for Pearson, and in March 2010, introduced the Wild Rivers (Environmental Management) Bill to Parliament in support of Pearson's campaign to overturn the Queensland government's Wild Rivers legislation. Abbott and Pearson believed that the Queensland law would 'block the economic development' of indigenous land, and interfere with Aboriginal land rights. Abbott completed an Ironman Triathlon event in March 2010 at Port Macquarie, New South Wales. In April he set out on a 9-day charity bike ride between Melbourne and Sydney, the annual Pollie Pedal, generating political debate about whether he should have committed so much time to physical fitness. Abbott described the events as an opportunity to "stop at lots of little towns along the way where people probably never see or don't very often see a federal member of Parliament." In his first Budget reply speech as Opposition Leader, Abbott sought to portray the Rudd government's third budget as a "tax and spend" budget and promised to fight the election on the new mining "super-profits" tax proposed by Rudd. On 24 June 2010, Julia Gillard replaced Kevin Rudd as Australian Labor Party leader and Prime Minister. The replacement of a first-term Prime Minister was unusual in Australian political history and the Rudd-Gillard rivalry remained a vexed issue for the Gillard government into the 2010 election and its subsequent term. On 17 July, Gillard called the 2010 federal election for 21 August. Polls in the first week gave a view that Labor would be re-elected with an increased majority, with Newspoll and an Essential poll showing a lead of 10 points (55–45) two party preferred. The two leaders met for one official debate during the campaign. Studio audience surveys by Channel 9 and Seven Network suggested a win to Gillard. Unable to agree on further debates, the leaders went on to appear separately on stage for questioning at community fora in Sydney and Brisbane. In Sydney on 11 August, Abbott's opening statement focused on his main election messages around government debt, taxation and asylum seekers. An exit poll of the Rooty Hill RSL audience accorded Abbott victory. Gillard won the audience poll at Broncos Leagues Club meeting in Brisbane on 18 August. Abbott appeared for public questioning on the ABC's Q&A program on 16 August. Labor and the Coalition each won 72 seats in the 150-seat House of Representatives, four short of the requirement for majority government, resulting in the first hung parliament since the 1940 election. Abbott and Gillard commenced a 17-day period of negotiation with crossbenchers over who would form government. On the crossbench, four independent members, one member of the National Party of Western Australia and one member of the Australian Greens held the balance of power. Following the negotiations, Gillard formed a minority government with the support of an Australian Greens MP and three independent MPs on the basis of confidence and supply. Another independent and the WA National gave their confidence and supply support to the Coalition, resulting in Labor holding a 76–74 tally of votes on the floor of the Parliament. The Coalition finished with 49.88 percent of the two party preferred vote, obtaining a national swing of around 2.6%. During negotiations, the Independents requested that both major parties' policies be costed by the apolitical Australian Treasury. The Coalition initially resisted the idea, citing concerns over Treasury leaks, however they eventually allowed the analysis. Treasury endorsed Labor's budget costings but projected that Coalition policies would add between $860 million and $4.5 billion to the bottom line over the next four years, rather than the $11.5 billion projected by the Coalition. The close result was lauded by former Prime Minister John Howard, who wrote in 2010 that Abbott had shifted the dynamic of Australian politics after coming to the leadership in 2009 and "deserves hero status among Liberals". Following the 2010 election, Abbott and his deputy, Julie Bishop, were re-elected unopposed as leaders of the Liberal Party. Abbott announced his shadow ministry on 14 September, with few changes to senior positions, but with the return of former leadership rival Malcolm Turnbull, whom he selected as Communications spokesman. Abbott announced that he wanted Turnbull to prosecute the Opposition's case against the Gillard government's proposed expenditure on a National Broadband Network. Following the 2010–2011 Queensland floods, Abbott opposed plans by the Gillard government to impose a "flood levy" on taxpayers to fund reconstruction efforts. Abbott said that funding should be found within the existing budget. Abbott announced a proposal for a taskforce to examine further construction of dams in Australia to deal with flood impact and food security. In February 2011, Abbott criticised the Gillard government's handling of health reform and proposal for a 50–50 public hospitals funding arrangement with the states and territories, describing the revised Labor Party proposal as "the biggest surrender since Singapore". Although Abbott had previously stated that he considered a carbon tax the best way to set a price on carbon, he opposed Prime Minister Gillard's February 2011 announcement of a proposal for the introduction of a "carbon tax", and called on her to take the issue to an election. Abbott said that Gillard had lied to the electorate over the issue because Gillard and her Treasurer Wayne Swan had ruled out the introduction of a carbon tax in the lead up to the 2010 election. In April 2011, Abbott proposed consultation with Indigenous people over a bipartisan Federal Government intervention in Northern Territory towns including Alice Springs, Katherine and Tennant Creek, which would cover such areas as police numbers and school attendance in an effort to address what he described as a "failed state" situation. April saw Abbott announce a $430 million policy plan to improve the employment prospects of people with serious mental health problems. Following the first Gillard government budget in May 2011, Abbott used his budget-reply speech to reiterate his critiques of government policy and call for an early election over the issue of a carbon tax. Rhetorically echoing Liberal party founder, Robert Menzies, Abbott addressed remarks to the "forgotten families". In June 2011, Abbott for the first time led Gillard in a Newspoll as preferred Prime Minister. In September 2011, he announced a plan to develop an agricultural food bowl in the north of Australia by developing dams for irrigation and hydroelectricity. Coalition task force leader Andrew Robb claimed that Australia currently produced enough food for 60 million people, but that the Coalition plan could double this to 120 million people by 2040. The head of the Northern Australia Land and Water Taskforce expressed concerns about the economic and environmental viability of this plan as well as its effects on the indigenous Australian communities in northern Australia. Reflecting on indigenous issues on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of the Aboriginal Tent Embassy on Australia Day 2012, Abbott said that there had been many positive developments in indigenous affairs in recent decades including Rudd's apology and moves to include indigenous Australians in the Australian Constitution. Later that day, Abbott became the target of protesters from the "Embassy" after one of Gillard's advisers contacted a union official who advised Tent Embassy protesters of Abbott's whereabouts and misrepresented Abbott's views on Aboriginal affairs to them, saying he intended to "pull down" the embassy. A major security scare resulted, which was broadcast around the world, resulting in Gillard and Abbott being rushed to a government car amid a throng of security due to fears for their safety. In an address to the National Press Club on 31 January 2012, Abbott outlined some of his plans for government if elected. These included an intent to live one week of every year in an indigenous Australian community, and to prune government expenditure and cut taxes. Abbott also announced "aspirational" targets for a disability insurance scheme and a subsidised dentistry program once the budget had been restored to "strong surplus". Abbott responded to the February 2012 Labor leadership crisis by criticising the cross bench independents for keeping Labor in power and renewed his calls for a general election to select the next Prime Minister of Australia. In criticising the Gillard government on foreign policy, Abbott said that "foreign policy should have a Jakarta rather than a Geneva focus". Following his attendance at the 10th anniversary commemoration of the Bali bombing in Bali, Abbott travelled to Jakarta with his Shadow Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Immigration for a meeting with Indonesian President Yudhoyono and Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa. Abbott promised a "no-surprises principle" for dealings with Indonesia. The presidential reception was an unusual occurrence for an opposition leader. In November 2012, Abbott launched his fourth book, A Strong Australia, a compilation of nine of his "landmark speeches" from 2012, including his budget reply and National Press Club addresses. On 9 October 2012, Prime Minister Julia Gillard accused Tony Abbott of misogyny and hypocrisy in a speech to Parliament that gained international notice. At the federal election on 7 September 2013, Abbott led the Liberal-National coalition to victory over the incumbent Labor government, led by Kevin Rudd. Abbott and his ministry were sworn in on 18 September 2013. He was the subject of criticism for his decision to only include one woman, Deputy Liberal leader Julie Bishop, in his cabinet. On the first day of the new Parliament, Abbott introduced legislation into Parliament to repeal the Carbon Tax, and commenced Operation Sovereign Borders, the Coalition's policy to stop the maritime arrival of asylum seekers, which received strong public support. Abbott announced a Royal Commission into trade union governance and corruption on 11 February 2014. This was followed by amendments to the Fair Work Act, and a "Repeal Day", where more than 10,000 "red tape" regulations were repealed. As Prime Minister, Abbott oversaw free trade agreements signed with Japan, South Korea and China. The Carbon Tax Repeal Bill passed both houses of Parliament on 17 July 2014 and the Mining Tax Repeal Bill passed both houses of Parliament on 2 September 2014 after negotiations with the Palmer United Party. The 2014 Australian federal budget, the Abbott government's first budget, delivered by Treasurer Joe Hockey, was criticised by the Opposition as "cruel" and "unfair" and a large number of budget saving measures were blocked by the crossbench in the Senate. Hockey and Abbott were both criticised for their inability to "sell" the necessity of the budget cuts to the cross bench or the public. Hockey was further criticised for several "out of touch" and "insensitive" comments in subsequent months, however, the prime minister continuously publicly backed the treasurer, refusing to replace him with a better performing minister. On 25 March 2014, Abbott announced that he had advised the Queen to reinstate the knight and dame system of honours to the Order of Australia. Outgoing Governor-General Quentin Bryce and her successor, Peter Cosgrove, became the first recipients of the reinstated honours. On Australia Day 2015, Abbott announced that Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, the Queen's husband and a resident of the United Kingdom, would be appointed a Knight of the Order of Australia. This decision was widely criticised, including by members of the government, and fuelled speculation that the prime minister's leadership could be challenged. On 2 November 2015, new prime minister Malcolm Turnbull announced that knights and dames had been removed from the Order of Australia, as "not appropriate in our modern honours system", although existing titles would not be affected. On 6 February 2015, Liberal backbencher Luke Simpkins announced that he would move a motion, at a meeting of the party room, for a spill of the federal Liberal Party's leadership positions. Simpkins stated that such a motion would give Liberal members of parliament and senators the opportunity to either endorse the Prime Minister or "seek a new direction." The meeting was held on 9 February 2015 and the spill motion was defeated by 61 votes to 39. Both Malcolm Turnbull and deputy leader Julie Bishop were speculated to be considering a leadership run if the spill motion had succeeded. Prime Minister Abbott described the leadership motion as a "near death experience" and declared that "good government starts today", promising to consult his colleagues more, to shy away from his so-called "captain's calls" and to reduce the role of his chief of staff Peta Credlin. Following the Île-de-France attacks, the Kuwait mosque bombing and the mass shooting in Sousse, Tunisia, Abbott announced that "Isis is at war with Australia." Australia had already begun anti-terrorism measures against the group in 2014. However, by September, the Royal Australian Air Force was readying a wing of F/A-18E/F Super Hornets, along with an E-7A Wedgetail and KC-30, for operations in Eastern Syria, making strikes against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. The Australian commitment, known as Operation Okra involved 400 personnel, came at the formal request of PresidentBarack Obama. Australian forces integrated with British Armed Forces, United States Armed Forces and other coalition members within Operation Inherent Resolve. It is understood that Australia's air operations were complemented by operations of the 4 Squadron of the Australian Special Air Service Regiment. In July 2015, Bronwyn Bishop, who had been successfully nominated by Abbott in November 2013 for the position of Speaker of the House, came under intense media scrutiny after details of her use of taxpayer-funded political entitlements were made public, including chartering a helicopter flight between Melbourne and Geelong to attend a Liberal party fundraiser. Abbott was criticised over his handling of the entitlements scandal as he allowed the controversy to drag on for weeks because of his refusal to sack the Speaker, a close friend and political mentor. Despite Abbott's support, Bishop resigned as Speaker on 2 August 2015. During Abbott's prime ministership, Australian law continued to define marriage as a union of a man and a woman, while recognising same-sex couples as de facto couples in areas such as taxation law, social security law, immigration and superannuation, and Abbott did not support changing the law. During Abbott's time as Opposition Leader and Prime Minister, the position of the Labor Party and opinion polls shifted towards favouring same-sex marriage. Abbott determined that a national plebiscite, rather than a Parliamentary vote should settle the issue. As an Opposition front bencher in 2008, Abbott wrote: "The love and commitment between two people of the same sex can be as strong as that between husband and wife... There is more moral quality in a relationship between two people devoted to each other for decades than in many a short-lived marriage. Still, however deeply affectionate or long lasting it may be, the relationship between two people of the same sex cannot be a marriage because a marriage, by definition, is between a man and a woman... Let's celebrate all strong relationships, whether they are between a man and a woman or between people of the same sex but let's be careful about describing every lasting sexual bond as a 'marriage'." The First Rudd government and Gillard government held similar views (although the short-lived second Rudd government reversed Labor's position on the issue). Abbott reaffirmed that he did not support changing the law to recognise same-sex marriage, and did not alter Coalition policy on the issue – however he permitted Coalition members to advocate for change if they felt strongly on the issue, and indicated that if a bill were to come before the new parliament, the Coalition party room would discuss its stance on the issue. Opinion polls suggested growing support for change. On 11 August 2015, after renewed debate about same-sex marriage in Australia, Abbott called a Coalition Party room vote and Coalition MPs voted against allowing a free vote on the issue 66 to 33. Some MPs said they were willing to cross the floor on the issue and Abbott was criticised by some pro-gay marriage Liberal MPs, including Christopher Pyne, for holding the vote in the Coalition party room, rather than the Liberal party room (as the inclusion of National Party votes decreased chances of a pro-change outcome). To settle the issue, Abbott proposed a plebiscite following the next election. Although he remained personally opposed to change, he said Parliament should respect the outcome of the national vote on the issue. A national plebiscite regarding same-sex marriage would eventually be held in 2017, under the subsequent Turnbull government. On 14 September 2015, Malcolm Turnbull, the Minister for Communications, resigned and stated his intention to challenge the Liberal Party leadership in a leadership spill. A party-room meeting held that evening saw Abbott defeated by Turnbull on a 54–44 vote. According to The Economist, Abbott was ousted due to poor opinion polling, lacklustre economic management, and involvement in several political gaffes and scandals. In comments just after the result was announced, Turnbull praised Abbott for his "formidable achievements" as prime minister. By the time he was removed from premiership, Abbott was one of the most unpopular world leaders, and he has been regarded by critics and political experts as one of Australia's worst prime ministers. After Malcolm Turnbull successfully challenged Abbott for the Liberal Party leadership in 2015, Abbott returned to the government backbench and pledged to remain in Parliament. In a final media conference as Prime Minister, Abbott told reporters: "Leadership changes are never easy for our country. My pledge today is to make this change as easy as I can. There will be no wrecking, no undermining, and no sniping. I've never leaked or backgrounded against anyone. And I certainly won't start now [...] I am proud of what the Abbott government has achieved. We stayed focused despite the white-anting [...] The nature of politics has changed in the past decade. A febrile media culture has developed that rewards treachery. If there's one piece of advice I can give to the media, it's this: refuse to print self-serving claims that the person making them won't put his or her name to. Refuse to connive at dishonour by acting as the assassin's knife." Turnbull government Malcolm Turnbull gave the former Prime Minister no portfolio in the new government. As a backbencher, he continued to defend the record of the Abbott government, and speak out on a range of issues. Following the November 2015 Paris attacks, he backed Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi call for a "revolution in Islam" in a speech in Singapore, and told Sky News, "All of those things that Islam has never had — a Reformation, an Enlightenment, a well-developed concept of the separation of church and state — that needs to happen." He defended the Abbott government's 2014 Budget measures and called on future Prime Ministers to follow his commitment to spending a week a year in indigenous communities. Abbott declared he would have won the 2016 Election. In a December 2015 editorial, The Sydney Morning Herald accused Abbott of contradicting his undertaking that there would be "no undermining of Malcolm Turnbull". On 24 January 2016, Abbott confirmed that he would stand for Liberal preselection for the Division of Warringah in the federal election. He was re-elected with a small swing against him, matching the statewide swing against the Government. Following his re-election, he voiced various concerns about the direction of the Turnbull government. In February 2017, he told a book launch that the Turnbull government was perceived by many conservatives as "Labor lite", and risked a "drift to defeat" at the upcoming election if it failed to improve its performance. Turnbull's ousting of Abbott had divided the Liberal Party rank and file and tensions continued in the parliamentary Party. Abbott said Turnbull supporters had plotted against him. In the lead up to the 2017 postal survey on same sex marriage, Abbott campaigned for the retention of the status quo. During the campaign, Abbott was headbutted in Hobart by protester Astro Labe, who was sentenced to six months imprisonment. Following the "yes" vote in the plebiscite, Abbott said he accepted the result, and that the matter was settled. In October 2015, The Australian reported that a "poll of 1631 voters shows 62 per cent of Australians believe the Liberal Party did the right thing" in ousting Abbott. Abbott was returned as the Member for Warringah at the subsequent election, but the Coalition's majority in the House of Representatives was reduced from 29 seats to one seat. In April 2018, the now-elected Turnbull government reached the 30-consecutive-Newspoll-losses benchmark Turnbull had used to unseat Abbott. Turnbull resigned after losing the support of the Party in room during the Liberal leadership spills of 2018. Abbott supported Peter Dutton in the leadership vote. Following the election of Scott Morrison as party leader, Abbott said the Coalition now had a better chance of re-election in the upcoming poll, telling the Centre for Independent Studies: "I am confident, given the ministerial appointments that he's made, that there will be better policy, there will be a united party, and there will be a sharper difference with our opponents." Morrison government Following Turnbull's resignation, Abbott was appointed as Prime Minister Scott Morrison's Special Envoy on Indigenous Affairs, with a brief to focus on indigenous school attendance and performance. Abbott presented his first report to Parliament as Special Envoy in December 2018. He recommended increasing substantially the salary supplements and the retention bonuses for teachers in very remote areas; waiving HECS debt of longer term teachers in very remote schools; incentives for communities to adopt debit card arrangements; an extension of the Remote School Attendance Strategy, with more local school buy-in and engagement; extension of the Good to Great Schools program that has reintroduced phonics and disciplined learning for further evaluation and emulation; and that the government should match the Australian Indigenous Education Foundation's private and philanthropic funding on an ongoing basis. On 18 May 2019, during the federal election, Abbott lost his seat of Warringah to independent candidate and former Olympic skier Zali Steggall, marking the first time the seat had been lost by the Liberals and their predecessors since its creation in 1922. Steggal ran as a pro-climate action candidate and her campaign won extensive media coverage and the backing of the left wing GetUp! lobby group. Abbott went into the election holding Warringah on a two party preferred margin of 61 percent. However, he lost over 12 percent of his primary vote from 2016, and finished over 4,100 votes behind Steggall on the first preference count and over 13,000 after preferences were distributed - losing by 57.2% to 42.8% . Abbott had won the seat at nine elections and served 25 years as the Member for Warringah. Abbott has been on the board of the Ramsay Centre for Western Civilisation since 2016. In 2019 he was appointed to the board of the Australian War Memorial. On 4 September 2020, Abbott was appointed as an adviser to the UK's Board of Trade with the stated aim of providing "a range of views to help in its advisory function, promoting free and fair trade and advising on UK trade policy to the International Trade Secretary". The role involves advising on the negotiation of international trade deals for the UK, but it was reported that Abbott would not be involved in advising the government on the country's Brexit process. He will be joined on the board by other senior political figures, including Patricia Hewitt, a former UK Secretary of State for Health, Daniel Hannan, a former Member of the European Parliament, and Linda Yueh, a writer and broadcaster. News of the appointment prompted UK Opposition politicians to question his suitability for the job because of comments previously made by Abbott about climate change, women and same-sex marriage. Boris Johnson, the UK's Prime Minister, said that he could not agree with the views of everyone in his government, but that Abbott had been elected as Prime Minister by that "great, liberal democratic nation of Australia" which he said "speaks for itself". After the death of Senator Jim Molan, former Victorian Liberal president Michael Kroger in an interview with Sky News Australia suggested the idea of Abbott taking Molan's Senate seat. Opposition Leader Peter Dutton told ABC News that there was ''no question Tony Abbott would be an asset" but also stated that "there will be many other candidates who are very credible as well". Abbott has not confirmed whether he is interested in returning to public life. In February 2023, Abbott joined the board of UK think-tank Global Warming Policy Foundation which is known for its climate change scepticism. As of July 2023, he holds the role of a Senior Advisor at New Direction, a think tank affiliated with the European Conservatives and Reformists Party in the European Parliament. In November 2023, Abbott was appointed to a board seat at Fox Corporation. His nomination came the day after Rupert Murdoch announced his retirement. Abbott is a member of the National Right faction of the Liberal Party. The term "Abbottism" has been coined by several media outlets to refer to his political ideology. Abbottism has been compared to several other eponymous political ideologies, namely Hansonism (the views of Pauline Hanson) and Trumpism (the views of Donald Trump). Abbott has an active interest in indigenous affairs. As Opposition Leader, Abbott promised to prioritise indigenous affairs. As Prime Minister, Abbott reformed the administration of the portfolio, moving it into the Department of Prime Minister. As Health Minister, Abbott established the Nurse Family Partnership to improve conditions for indigenous youth. As Opposition Leader, he worked with Cape York Aboriginal activist Noel Pearson, volunteered as a teacher in remote Aboriginal Communities and gave a commitment to continue to live one week a year in such communities if elected Prime Minister. In contrast to his mentor John Howard, Abbott praised Rudd's National Apology to the Stolen Generation. While the Coalition and Labor were engaged in negotiations with crossbenchers to obtain minority government in 2010, Noel Pearson lobbied Rob Oakeshott to back Abbott. Rising to support the passage of the Gillard government's historic Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples Recognition Bill through the House of Representatives in 2013, Abbott said: Australia is a blessed country. Our climate, our land, our people, our institutions rightly make us the envy of the earth, except for one thing—we have never fully made peace with the First Australians. This is the stain on our soul that Prime Minister Keating so movingly evoked at Redfern 21 years ago. We have to acknowledge that pre-1788 this land was as Aboriginal then as it is Australian now. Until we have acknowledged that we will be an incomplete nation and a torn people … So our challenge is to do now in these times what should have been done 200 or 100 years ago to acknowledge Aboriginal people in our country's foundation document. In short, we need to atone for the omissions and for the hardness of heart of our forebears to enable us all to embrace the future as a united people. In November 2012, Abbott flew to Alice Springs to back Aboriginal Country Liberal Party (CLP) MLA Alison Anderson to run in the federal seat of Lingiari and to become the first Indigenous woman to enter Parliament. Anderson eventually did not run as the CLP candidate for Lingiari in the 2013 federal election. In August 2015, he rejected the request of Aboriginal leaders Patrick Dodson and Noel Pearson for the federal government to fund a series of Indigenous-only conventions on the wording for the referendum, citing concerns it could be potentially divisive. Abbott opposed the Indigenous Voice to Parliament in the 2023 referendum, arguing it would divide Australians. Abbott served on the advisory board of Advance Australia, a conservative lobby group supporting the No campaign against the Voice. Abbott supports the Australian monarchy. Before entering parliament, he worked as the Executive Director of Australians for Constitutional Monarchy from 1993 to 1994. In March 2014, Abbott advised the Queen to reintroduce the grade of Knight/Dame to the Order of Australia, without discussing it in the Cabinet and despite stating in December 2013 that he did not plan to do so. The Fraser government initially introduced the grade of Knight/Dame of the Order of Australia in 1976; the Hawke government discontinued it in 1986. Before becoming Opposition Leader, Abbott initially supported proposals by Liberal leaders Howard and Turnbull to introduce floating prices to reduce carbon emissions, but also expressed some doubts as to the science and economics underlying such initiatives. In 2009, Abbott announced his opposition to Turnbull's support for the Rudd government's Emissions Trading Scheme proposal, and successfully challenged Turnbull for the Liberal leadership, chiefly over this issue. As Opposition Leader, Abbott declared that he accepted that climate change was real and that humans were having an impact on it, but rejected carbon pricing as a means to address the issue, proposing instead to match the Labor government's 5% emissions reduction target through implementation of a plan involving financial incentives for emissions reductions by industry, and support for carbon storage in soils and expanded forests. On the eve of the 2013 election, Abbott told the ABC: [J]ust to make it clear... I think that climate change is real, humanity makes a contribution. It's important to take strong and effective action against it, and that is what our direct action policy does. … The important thing is to take strong and effective action to tackle climate change, action that doesn't damage our economy. And that is why the incentive-based system that we've got, the direct action policies, which are quite similar to those that president Obama has put into practice, is – that's the smart way to deal with this, a big tax is a dumb way to deal with it. — Abbott on ABC TV Insiders prior to 2013 election. Before becoming Opposition Leader in November 2009, Abbott questioned the science of climate change and an ETS. In November 2009, Abbott outlined his objections to the Rudd government's carbon pricing plan on the ABC's Lateline program. Upon becoming Leader of the Opposition, Abbott put the question of support for the Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme (CPRS) to a secret ballot and the Liberal Party voted to reject the policy – overturning an undertaking by Turnbull to support an amended version of the government's scheme. Under Abbott, the Coalition joined the Greens and voted against the CPRS in the Senate, and the bill was defeated twice, providing a double dissolution trigger. The Rudd government eventually deferred its CPRS legislation until 2013. With Abbott as Opposition Leader, the Liberal party opposed a carbon emissions tax and an Emissions Trading Scheme. Abbott predicted in March 2012 that the Gillard government's carbon tax would be the world's "biggest". A January 2013 OECD report on taxation of energy use measured Australia's effective tax rate on carbon at 1 July 2012 as among the lower rates in the OECD. In July 2011, Abbott criticised the proposed powers of the government's carbon tax regulator. In October 2017, Abbott spoke in London at the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a climate-skeptic lobby group, where he described climate change as "probably doing good; or at least, more good than harm." He argued that higher concentrations of carbon dioxide act as "plant food" and "are actually greening the planet and helping to lift agricultural yields." On 15 December 2019, he claimed that the world was "in the grip of a climate cult". Abbott opposed the legislation of same-sex marriage in Australia. Abbott is an opponent of embryonic stem cell research and euthanasia. He supports the right for women to have an abortion. As Health Minister, he tried, but failed, to block the introduction of the abortion pill RU-486. As Health Minister, Abbott advocated for reducing the number of abortions performed each year as a national priority, and referred to abortion as the "easy way out". Abbott opposed allowing the introduction of embryonic stem cell research or therapeutic cloning in a conscience vote. In his 2009 book Battlelines, Abbott proposed that consideration should be given to a return to an optional at-fault divorce agreement between couples who would like it, similar to the Matrimonial Causes Act, which would require spouses to prove offences like adultery, habitual drunkenness, cruelty, desertion, or a five-year separation before a divorce would be granted. Abbott said that this would be a way of "providing additional recognition to what might be thought of as traditional marriage". Early on in his Prime Ministership, the Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly passed the Marriage Equality (Same Sex) Act 2013, a bill to allow same-sex couples to legally marry. Abbott announced that the federal government would challenge this decision in the High Court. The case was heard on 3 December. Nine days later, on 12 December, the High Court gave judgement that the Same Sex Act would be dismantled as it clashed with the Federal Marriage Act 1961. When the Marriage Amendment (Definition and Religious Freedoms) Act 2017, which posed the question of whether same-sex couples should be able to marry, was presented to members of parliament, Abbott abstained from voting. Ultimately, same-sex marriage would be passed into law in December 2017. Abbott supported Peter Dutton's call to give "special treatment" to white South African farmers seeking asylum. Abbott was opposed to a majority Fibre-to-the-Home (FttH) National Broadband Network (NBN). In 2010, as Leader of the Opposition, Abbott stated that he would "ferociously" hold the Labor government to account over what he believed to be "a white elephant on a massive scale" and would "demolish" the NBN. In 2010, Abbott argued that an LTE network could meet Australia's future broadband needs, with "a tower on every street corner". In 2011, he called for the NBN to be scrapped entirely with funding diverted to assist with recovery efforts following the Queensland floods, stating "The National Broadband Network is a luxury that Australia cannot now afford. The one thing you don't do is redo your bathroom when your roof has just been blown off." With Malcolm Turnbull as Shadow Minister for Communications and Broadband, the Liberal/National Coalition proposed an alternative - The Multi-Technology Mix (MTM), which heavily utilised Fibre to the Node (FttN) technology - in the lead up to the 2013 Australian federal election. Abbott said that if elected, all Australians would have access to a minimum broadband speed of 25Mbit/s by the end of their first term of government. They promised download speeds between 25 and 100 Mbit/s by the end of 2016 and 50 to 100 Mbit/s by 2019, with the rollout completed by the end of 2019. Abbott called the AUKUS defense pact between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia, which is directed at countering Chinese power in the Indo-Pacific region, "the biggest decision that any Australian government has made in decades" as "it indicates that we are going to stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States and the United Kingdom in meeting the great strategic challenge of our time, which obviously, is China". Abbott said that Australia would be safer as a result, and cited China's increasing naval firepower as a justification for the deal. Abbott strongly supports the de jure recognition of Taiwan as an independent nation. In 2021, Abbott attended a regional forum hosted in Taipei and met with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen. During a speech, he stated that he wants to help Taiwan end its isolation from global affairs and reaffirmed Australia's solidarity with the country amid increasing tensions with China. In the speech, he also referred to China as a "bully" and Chinese President Xi Jinping as "the new red emperor". Chinese officials highly criticised Abbott's visit and speech, although Prime Minister Scott Morrison and his government defended his visit. In March 2020, an Australian computer security researcher obtained Abbott's passport number and personal phone number after Abbott posted a photo of his aeroplane boarding pass on Instagram. The researcher found a security flaw in the online check-in portal of the airline carrier Qantas, that divulged sensitive information given details printed on the pass. Abbott has admitted to having smoked cannabis once. In September 2021, during the second COVID-19 lockdown in Sydney, Abbott was fined $500 for not wearing a mask in breach of COVID-19 health orders. When Abbott was 22, his girlfriend at the time became pregnant and claimed he was the biological father. The couple did not marry and put the child up for adoption. For 27 years, Abbott believed that he was the father of the child. In 2004, the man sought out Abbott, and it was publicly revealed he was an ABC sound recordist who worked in Parliament House, Canberra, and was involved in making television programs in which Abbott appeared. The story was reported around the world, but DNA testing later revealed that Abbott was not the man's father. Following his departure from the seminary, Abbott met and married Margaret "Margie" Aitken, a New Zealander working in Sydney. The couple have three daughters (Louise, Bridget and Frances), and became grandparents in 2021. Abbott is a Roman Catholic. Before the 2013 Election, Abbott spoke of his religious outlook: The Jesuits helped to instill in me this thought that our calling in life was to be … 'a man for others' … I am a pretty traditional Catholic... I'm not an evangelical, a charismatic Christian, I'm not. I try to attend Mass, but I don't get there every Sunday any more... Faith has certainly helped to shape my life, but it doesn't in any way determine my politics". — Tony Abbott on ABC TV's Kitchen Cabinet; September 2013. As a former Catholic seminarian, Abbott's religiosity has come to national attention and journalists have often sought his views on the role of religion in politics. According to John Warhurst of the Australian National University, academics have at times placed an "exaggerated concentration on the religious affiliation and personal religious background of just one of [the Howard government's] senior ministers, Tony Abbott." Journalist Michelle Grattan wrote in 2010 that while Abbott has always "worn his Catholicism on his sleeve", he is "clearly frustrated by the obsession with [it] and what might hang off that". Abbott has said that a politician should not rely on religion to justify a political point of view: We are all influenced by a value system that we hold, but in the end, every decision that a politician makes is, or at least should, in our society be based on the normal sorts of considerations. It's got to be publicly justifiable; not only justifiable in accordance with a private view; a private belief. — Abbott on ABC TV Four Corners, March 2010. Various political positions supported by Abbott have been criticised by church representatives, including aspects of Coalition industrial relations, asylum seeker, and Aboriginal affairs policies. After criticisms of Liberal Party policy by clergy, Abbott has said, "The priesthood gives someone the power to consecrate bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ. It doesn't give someone the power to convert poor logic into good logic." Abbott is an active volunteer member for the Davidson, NSW Rural Fire Service. He is also an active volunteer member of the Queenscliff Surf Life Saving Club. Abbott participates in the Pollie Pedal, an annual 1,000 km charity bike ride. In April 2007, he launched the tenth annual Pollie Pedal, to raise money for breast cancer research. In 2008, Abbott spent three weeks teaching in a remote Aboriginal settlement in Coen on Cape York, organised through Indigenous leader Noel Pearson. He taught remedial reading to Aboriginal children and worked with an income management group helping families manage their welfare payments. In 2009, he spent 10 days in Aurukun on Cape York working with the truancy team, visiting children who had not been attending school. Abbott's stated goal for these visits was to familiarise himself with Indigenous issues. Abbott has published four books. In 2009, he launched Battlelines; a personal biography, reflections on the Howard government and discussion of potential policy directions for the Liberal Party of Australia. Previously he had published two books in defence of the existing constitutional monarchy system, The Minimal Monarchy and How to Win the Constitutional War. In 2012, he released a compilation of key speeches from that year, entitled A Strong Australia. Abbott, Tony (1995). The Minimal Monarchy: and why it still makes sense for Australia. Kent Town South Australia: Wakefield Press. ISBN 1-86254-358-5. Abbott, Tony (1997). How to Win the Constitutional War: and give both sides what they want. Kent Town South Australia: Wakefield Press. ISBN 1-86254-433-6. Abbott, Tony (2009). Battlelines. Carlton Victoria Australia: Melbourne University Press. ISBN 978-0-522-85606-4. Abbott, Tony (2012). A Strong Australia. Liberal Party of Australia. ISBN 978-0-646-59033-2. 8 June 2020 Companion of the Order of Australia (AC), For eminent service to the people and Parliament of Australia, particularly as Prime Minister, and through significant contributions to trade, border control, and to the Indigenous community. 4 November 2018 National Medal (Australia), for 15 years service as a volunteer Firefighter. 1 January 2001 Centenary Medal, for service as Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations.  New South Wales: 8 March 2015 Rural Fire Service Long Service Medal, for ten years of long service  Japan: 29 April 2022 Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun Abbott government 2014 Australian federal budget 2015 Australian federal budget "We're for Sydney". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 22 August 2018. Jones, Gemma (30 March 2013). "Tony Abbott's daughters Bridget and Frances speak about claims their 'daggy Dad' is a misogynist and more". News.com.au. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Abbott". The Free Dictionary. n.d. Retrieved 14 March 2021. "Hon Tony Abbott MP". Senators and Members of the Parliament of Australia. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "Abbott quits as new leadership revolt escalates". The Age. Melbourne. 26 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Curtis, Lyndal (7 September 2010). "Labor forms government". ABC Radio. Retrieved 11 September 2013. "Promise check: We will stop the boats". ABC News: Fact Checker. Australia. 27 July 2014. Promise check: Abolish the carbon tax, ABC Fact checker Promise Check: Abolish the Mining Tax; ABC Fact Checker Foley, Brett; Sedgman, Phoebe (23 November 2014). "Australia Raises A$5.7 Billion as Abbott Sells Medibank IPO". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. "Australia confirms air strikes in Syria, announces additional 12,000 refugee places". ABC News. Australia. 9 September 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2015. "Australians think Federal Budget 2014 is the worst in a very, very long time, according to this graphic". news.com.au. 19 May 2014. Archived from the original on 17 July 2014. Retrieved 6 July 2014. "Australian PM Tony Abbott Ousted by Malcolm Turnbull". BBC. 14 September 2015. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "Abbott v Turnbull: Tony bows out as 'revolving door' swings shut". The Australian. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Australian Electoral Commission summary of Warringah". Australian Electoral Commission. 18 May 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Davies, Anne (18 May 2019). "Australian election: Tony Abbott loses his Warringah seat to Zali Steggall". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 May 2019. "Board of Trade". Strangio, Paul (4 August 2021). "Who were Australia's best prime ministers? We asked the experts". Monash University. Retrieved 8 August 2021. "Dailytelegraph.com.au – Subscribe to The Daily Telegraph for exclusive stories". The Daily Telegraph. Australia. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Last piece of the puzzle", The Sydney Morning Herald, 1 September 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Mitchell, Susan; Abbott, Tony. A Man's Man. p. 8. Marr, David (8 September 2012). "Early elections". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 1 April 2014. "British migrants – Selection documents for free or assisted passage (Commonwealth nominees)". National Archives of Australia. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2011. NAA citation "NAA: A1877, 07/09/1960 ORONSAY ABBOTT R H" item barcode 7328488. North Coast Voices, 7 December 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2013 "Who are they: Gillard and Abbott". Australian Financial Review. 19 July 2010. Retrieved 22 June 2014. "The facts of Tony Abbott's life". Australia: ABC News. AAP. 1 December 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Meet the retired school principal who seized blue-ribbon Liberal seat Hawthorn". Williams, Edwina (24 October 2018). "Hawthorn – Labor: John Kennedy". The Junction. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Abbott, Tony (1 December 2009). "Tony Abbott reveals his Liberal beliefs and how his public and private lives shaped him". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Kenny, Mark (25 November 2014). "Tony Abbott's Oxford Transcript Released". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 November 2014. Nowra, Louis. "Tony Abbott: The Whirling Dervish". The Monthly. Davies, Brian. "Front rower's Rhodes to front bench". The Catholic Weekly. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012. Rae, Marion; Daley, Gemma. "Abbott Against Gillard Prompts Aussie Rhodes Scholar to Punch PM's Weight". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 11 December 2014. "The missing element of self-doubt". The Sydney Morning Herald. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Fellow students recall a champion of the right". The Sydney Morning Herald. 18 July 2004. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Crabb, Annabel (9 September 2013). "Abbott's own balance-of-power nightmare". The Drum. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Stephen Holt (6 July 2015). "Tony Abbott's career echoes that of his political hero, B. A. Santamaria". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 25 August 2018. Marr 2012, p. 24. "I faced assault charge, admits Abbott". The Age. 18 July 2004. Retrieved 23 December 2008. "P is for Politicians". University of Oxford. Archived from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 16 September 2013. "Abbott – not the greatest, but a fighter". The Age. Melbourne. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 26 August 2011. Kenny, Mark (3 July 2013). "Kev defies Tony to hit a raw nerd". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Hudson, Phillip (3 July 2013). "Prime Minister Kevin Rudd ready to rumble against Opposition Leader Tony Abbott". Herald Sun. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "The missing element of self-doubt". The Sydney Morning Herald. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Kitchen Cabinet: Tony Abbott profile". ABC Television. 4 September 2013. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2015. As a "Citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies"; that was changed by UK legislation in 1983, presumably to "British Citizen". "Citizenship Register – 45th Parliament". Parliament of Australia. Archived from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Carr to go after the one that got away". The Sydney Morning Herald. 12 March 2012. Howard, John (2010). Lazarus Rising. p. 200. Abbott, Tony [@TonyAbbottMHR] (14 July 2017). "FYI rumour mongers: I renounced my UK citizenship in 1993 and here's the proof" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "The missing element of self-doubt". The Sydney Morning Herald. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 7 March 2012. Howard, John (2010). Lazarus Rising. p. 201. Attard, Monica (12 June 2005). "Tony Abbott: Sunday Profile". Australia: ABC News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2005. Retrieved 28 November 2007. Howard, John (2010). Lazarus Rising. p. 202. Cassidy, Barrie (25 November 2001). "Abbott set to continue Reith's workplace reforms". Insiders. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 10 December 2007. Retrieved 11 November 2007. "Howard knew of slush fund to target Hanson". The Sydney Morning Herald. 27 August 2003. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2020 – via News Online. "Abbot denies lying over anti-Hanson fund". News Online. Lateline (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). 27 August 2003. Archived from the original on 23 May 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2016. "Honest Tony's too up front, says PM". The Sydney Morning Herald. 28 August 2003. Retrieved 8 July 2016. Seccombe, Mike; Murphy, Damien (28 August 2003). "Watchdog rethinks Liberal links to Abbott's slush fund". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 8 July 2016. Ian Macdonald, Senator (2 March 1998). "Adjournment – Green Corps". Parliamentary Debates (Hansard). Commonwealth of Australia: Senate. p. 116. The Hon. Tony Abbott my colleague, and I have responsibility within the government for overseeing the "Green" «Corps", and it was Mr Abbott, ATCV and I who, last weekend, hosted the national Green Corps conference. "The 7.30 Report". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 6 January 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Govt faces first scrutiny of Job Network". 7.30 Report. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 7 August 2000. Archived from the original (transcript and streaming video) on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "AM Archive – Tony Abbott on Job Network policy" (transcript). Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "PM – Labor may leave Ryan to Liberals after Moore departs". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 20 December 2000. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "AM Archive – Blast from Abbott" (transcript). Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 25 March 2002. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Building and Construction Industry Improvement Bill 2003 (Bills Digest, no. 129, 2003–04)". Aph.gov.au. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Hartcher, Peter (19 June 2010). "Abbott Closes in on Rudd". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 8 August 2010. "PM – Republic rivals battle for grassroots". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 26 October 1999. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Doctor groups hail promotion of 'head kicker'". The Age. Melbourne. 30 September 2003. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Cabinet make-over counteracts complacency: Howard". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 September 2003. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Hartcher, Peter. "Will the real Tony please stand up?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "Bali Bombing Victim: 'Tony Abbott Saved my Life'". The Age. Melbourne. 31 August 2013. Archived from the original on 14 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2013. "The facts of Tony's life". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 1 December 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "MPs to vote on RU486 control" (transcript). AM. Australia. 2006. Peacock, Matt (9 July 2007). "'Scientific fraud' hampered spread of cancer technique". 7.30 Report. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 11 November 2007. Caldwell, Alison (11 July 2007). "Govt rethinks PET scan funding decision". ABC News. Retrieved 11 November 2007. Matt Peacock (26 September 2007). "Cancer detection technology waits for Govt approval". 7.30 Report. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 11 November 2007. Peacock, Matt (27 September 2007). "Doctors angry as PET scan delay wears on". ABC News. Retrieved 11 November 2007. Howard, John (2010). Lazarus Rising. pp. 574, 652. Marris, Sid (31 October 2007). "Abbott insults asbestos sufferer". The Australian. Australian Associated Press. Archived from the original on 3 November 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007. Medhora, Shalailah (12 January 2015). "Peter Dutton ranked as worst health minister in 35 years in poll of doctors". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 12 November 2019. "Australian Electoral Commission summary of Warringah, Federal Election 2007". Australian Electoral Commission. 19 December 2007. Retrieved 19 December 2007. "Tony Abbott pulls out of Liberal leadership race". News.com.au. 28 November 2007. Archived from the original on 30 November 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007. "Tony Abbott quits race to be Lib leader". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australian Associated Press. 28 November 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007. "Brendan Nelson Assigns Shadow Ministry". Courier-Mail. 6 December 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2007. Retrieved 28 November 2007. "We should have said sorry: Abbott". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 3 April 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott's complex Aboriginal odyssey". Eureka Street. Archived from the original on 18 February 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Tony Abbott joins Insiders". Insiders. ABC News. 24 May 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Battlelines – Paperback Book". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 5 December 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010.Also Amazon Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Big Ideas". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 5 June 2010.[permanent dead link] Annabel Crabb (4 December 2009). "Abbott sweet talks Lama and the Left". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Milne, Glenn (26 October 2009). "A new battleline for Liberal ideas". The Australian. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Kelly, Joe (29 March 2010). "Rudd Government marks 100th asylum seeker boat". The Australian. Retrieved 8 August 2010. "Indonesian solution 'a shambles'". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 28 October 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2010. Grattan, Michelle; Murphy, Katharine; Schubert, Misha (27 November 2009). "Liberal Leadership Challenge: Malcolm Turnbull". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Davis, Mark (9 December 2009). "Abbott wins by standing for something". The Age. Retrieved 9 December 2009. "Tony Abbott goes back to the future in new front bench". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 December 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Gillham, Alexis (27 April 2010). "Kevin Rudd delays plans for emissions trading scheme until 2013". Herald Sun. Retrieved 5 June 2010. McCabe, Helen (February 2010). "Abbott's women". Australian Women's Weekly. pp. 18–28. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 17 February 2010. "Laurie Oakes". Today. ninemsn.com.au. 6 December 2009. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Adam Brereton (29 December 2015). "An Australian politician walks into a bar … and things don't always go well". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Australian PM: Tony Abbott was once too drunk for Parliament". Associated Press. 25 August 2017. Australia's prime minister confirmed Friday that his predecessor and intra-party rival Tony Abbott had once been too drunk to vote in Parliament, an incident that's been a poorly kept secret in political circles for eight years. "The Contender". 60 Minutes. ninemsn.com.au. 5 March 2010. Archived from the original on 13 April 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott still 'threatened' by homosexuality". ABC News. 9 March 2010. "Tony Abbott on Q and A". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 5 April 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Debra Killalea (26 February 2015). "SBS journalist and Mardi Gras host Patrick Abboud reveals rare insight into the life of Tony Abbott's lesbian sister". News.com.au. Archived from the original on 10 March 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2015. "Christine Forster: Tony Abbott's Openly Gay Sister". The Feed. Special Broadcasting Service. 26 February 2015. Archived from the original on 10 March 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2015. "Abbott supports sister but against gay marriage". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 April 2012. "Prime Minister Tony Abbott says he will attend sister's wedding, but not support the marriage". News.com.au. 23 October 2013. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 8 March 2015. "Abbott pledges parental leave scheme". SBS World News. Australia. Archived from the original on 16 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Karvelas, Patricia (31 March 2010). "Coalition leads way on land rights, says Pearson". The Australian. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Ironman Abbott crosses the finish line". ABC News. 2010. Retrieved 28 March 2010. "Tony Abbott won't change fitness regimen". The Courier-Mail. 2010. Retrieved 28 March 2010. "Abbott sets off on Pollie Pedal". ABC News. 7 April 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott delivers budget reply". Lateline. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 13 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Gillham, Alexis (14 May 2010). "Tony Abbott vows to abolish mining tax in Budget reply, as Kevin Rudd attacks economic credentials". Herald Sun. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Tony Abbott's budget reply". ABC News. 13 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Coorey, Phillip; Lester, Tim (24 June 2010). "Gillard becomes Australia's first female prime minister as tearful Rudd stands aside". The Sydney Morning Herald. Koranyi, Balazs (17 July 2010). "Australian PM Gillard calls 21 August election". Reuters. Archer, Lincoln (25 July 2010). "Leaders debate verdict: Tony Abbott vs Julia Gillard – so who won?". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 28 July 2010. Collerton, Sarah (12 August 2010). "Abbott named people's choice at Rooty Hill". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 15 October 2010. "Undecided Voters Question Abbott And Gillard in Brisbane". Brisbane Times. 19 August 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2010. "Tony Abbott joins Q and A". Q & A. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 16 August 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2010. Colebatch, Tim (28 August 2010). "72 all – Brisbane to Coalition and Corangamite to ALP". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 30 August 2010. "Voters leave Australia hanging". ABC News. 21 August 2010. "Australia count begins after tight election race". BBC News. 21 August 2010. "Australia heads for hung parliament". BBC News. 21 August 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. Peatling, Stephanie; Aston, Heath (18 July 2010). "It's good to be Greens, as balance of power tipped". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 19 August 2010. Maher, Sid (18 July 2010). "Greens set to grab balance of power". The Australian. Retrieved 19 August 2010. Davis, Mark (7 September 2010). "Labor over the line: Windsor and Oakeshott hand power to Gillard". The Age. Melbourne. "Two Party Preferred by State". Virtual Tally Room. Australian Electoral Commission. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010. Retrieved 23 October 2010. Green, Antony (20 September 2010). "Antony Green's Election Blog: How Australia Voted". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Collerton, Sarah (2 September 2010). "Treasury finds 'black hole' in Coalition costings". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 15 October 2010. Rodgers, Emma. "Where it's at: Independents' seven key demands". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Mark, David (3 September 2010). "Independents stand firm in face of fear campaign". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Howard, John (2010). Lazarus Rising. p. 652. "Liberal leaders re-elected unopposed". Australian Associated Press. 9 September 2010. Archived from the original on 19 January 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2011. "Tony Abbott promotes Malcolm Turnbull in new shadow ministry". Herald Sun. 14 September 2010. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Hewett, Jennifer (15 September 2010). "Recalled Malcolm Turnbull to bludgeon Labor over National Broadband Network". The Australian. Retrieved 26 April 2011. "Sky News Australia". Skynews.com.au. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Maher, Sid; Owens, Jared (7 January 2011). "Tony Abbott's dam solution for flooded rivers". The Australian. Retrieved 26 April 2011. "Abbott slams PM's hospital proposal". SBS World News. Australia. 12 February 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Hawker, Bruce (15 October 2010). "Abbott needs to understand balance". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Farr, Malcolm (25 February 2011). "Tony Abbott tells Julia Gillard to 'make an honest womanof herself' on carbon tax". Perth Now. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2011. "Abbott calls for new intervention in Alice Springs". AM. Australia. 21 March 2011. Retrieved 26 April 2011. "Abbott tries to take high ground on mental health". ABC News. 21 April 2011. Retrieved 26 April 2011. Abbott, Tony (12 May 2011). "Full text of Tony Abbott's budget reply speech". The Australian. "Tony Abbott defends Budget response, as Julia Gillard rules out poll". Herald Sun. 13 May 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Newspoll shows Abbott is preferred PM". Courier Mail. 28 June 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2012. Maher, Sid (17 September 2011). "Tony Abbott's plan for northern foodbowl". The Australian. Retrieved 18 September 2011. Hind, Rick (20 September 2011). "Taskforce chief slams northern food bowl proposal". ABC News. Retrieved 20 September 2011. "Footage gives fresh view of Australia Day protest". 7.30. 14 February 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Abbott outlines vision for Australia". ABC News. 31 January 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Opposition leader Tony Abbott says an election is the best way out of Labor leadership debacle". The Courier-Mail. 23 February 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2012. "Abbott to meet Indonesia leader in Jakarta". News.com.au. 12 October 2012. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "President Yudhoyono meets Australian opposition leader". Antara News. 4 November 1957. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Alford, Peter (15 October 2012). "Tony Abbott to promise Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono: no surprises on asylum policy". The Australian. Retrieved 16 September 2013. Ireland, Judith (15 February 2012). "Abbott launches collection of speeches". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 26 June 2013. King, Michelle (17 September 2019). "Julia Gillard, Australia's First Female Prime Minister On Leadership, Education And The Misogyny Speech". Forbes. Retrieved 1 November 2019. Harmon, Steph (7 February 2020). "Julia Gillard's misogyny speech voted 'most unforgettable' moment in Australian TV history". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 February 2020. Murphy, Katharine (7 September 2013). "Australian elections 2013: Coalition wins - as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 September 2013. "Abbott sworn in as Australia's PM". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 29 October 2013. Bonyhady, Nick (5 July 2021). "Julie Bishop 'tried to keep a straight face' defending Abbott's male-dominated cabinet". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 8 July 2021. Remeikis, Amy (5 March 2019). "Julie Bishop: when Tony Abbott was minister for women I knew we had 'some way to go'". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Australians want boat arrivals treated more harshly: poll". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 January 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2014. "Prime Minister Tony Abbott announces royal commission to 'shine spotlight' on alleged union corruption". ABC News. 11 February 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "Former Labor minister Martin Ferguson backs Tony Abbott's planned changes to Fair Work Act". The Sydney Morning Herald. 28 February 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "'Red tape' repeal: Move to scrap charities watchdog, introduce changes to financial advice rules". ABC News. 20 March 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "South Korea-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement". DFAT. Australia. Archived from the original on 4 January 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Japan-Australia Economic Partnership Agreement". DFAT. Australia. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Free trade agreement: Dairy farmers set to be big winners in deal between Australia and China". ABC News. 17 October 2014. Retrieved 17 October 2014. "Carbon tax is gone: Repeal bills pass the Senate". The Sydney Morning Herald. 17 July 2014. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Mining tax repeal: Joe Hockey says $6.5 billion hit to budget bottom line is 'damn good deal' for Australians". ABC News. 2 September 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Tony Abbott buys time after 'near death experience',vows to change". The Sydney Morning Herald. 9 February 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Prince Philip gets controversial Australian knighthood". ABC News. 23 March 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Malcolm Turnbull scraps Tony Abbott's Knights and Dames". The Sydney Morning Herald. 2 November 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Knights and dames removed from Order of Australia by Malcolm Turnbull". The Guardian. 2 November 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Prime Minister to fight leadership spill motion by WA Liberal MP". The West Australian. 6 February 2015. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Tony Abbott keeps leadership of Liberal Party but some supporters fear he is doomed". ABC News. 9 February 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Liberal leadership spill: as it happened". ABC News. 9 February 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. "Isis coming for us, says Tony Abbott after attacks – video". the Guardian. 28 June 2015. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 11 December 2023. ADBR (9 September 2015). "RAAF readies for operations over Syria within a week". ADBR. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Williams, Clive (25 November 2016). "After Mosul, time for a shift in Australia's strategic focus in Middle East". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Choppergate: The prime minister feels heat after his hand-picked speaker quits". The Economist. 8 August 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Same-sex marriage – Parliament of Australia". Aph.gov.au. 12 October 2010. Retrieved 22 August 2018. Ireland, Judith (11 August 2015). "Tony Abbott flags plebiscite on same-sex marriage in bid to defuse anger". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 13 August 2015. "Not for Adam and Steve". ABC News. 9 May 2008. "PM Kevin Rudd says no to gay marriage". Archived from the original on 25 March 2010. "Marriage only for a man and a woman: Julia Gillard". Retrieved 4 September 2020. Taylor, Lenore (11 August 2013). "Kevin Rudd pledges same-sex marriage bill in first 100 days if re-elected". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 August 2013. Hurst, Daniel (13 December 2013). "Tony Abbott under pressure for conscience vote on gay marriage". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 January 2015. Cox, Lisa (15 July 2014). "Poll shows growing support for same-sex marriage". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 July 2014. Hurst, Daniel (11 August 2015). "Same-sex marriage: disappointment and anger as Coalition party room rejects free vote Some MPs". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 August 2015. "Liberal MP Warren Entsch to lead way with cross-party bill on same-sex marriage". news.com.au. 12 August 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015.[permanent dead link] "Tony Abbott will back result of plebiscite on same-sex marriage". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 29 January 2016. "About: Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey". Australian Bureau of Statistics. 12 September 2017. Murphy, Katharine; Chan, Gabrielle (14 September 2015). "Liberal leadership spill: Malcolm Turnbull ousts Tony Abbott as Australian PM – as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 September 2015. "Turnbull's turn". The Economist. 17 September 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Australian PM Tony Abbott ousted by Malcolm Turnbull". BBC News. 14 September 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2015. Melleuish, Gregory (7 January 2016). "Why was Tony Abbott so unpopular?". The Conversation. Retrieved 9 January 2016. McCoy, Terrence (22 May 2014). "How Australia's winking Tony Abbott became one of the world's most unpopular prime ministers". The Washington Post. Strangio, Paul (4 August 2021). "Who were Australia's best prime ministers? We asked the experts". Monash University. Retrieved 8 August 2021. Keane, Bernard (4 September 2020). "For the Brits, here's the world according to Tony Abbott". Crikey. Retrieved 10 September 2020. Young, Sally (4 August 2015). "Is Tony Abbott's regime the worst federal government ever?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Glenday, James (16 September 2015). "Tony Abbott intends to remain in Parliament after losing Liberal leadership to Malcolm Turnbull". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 16 September 2015. "Tony Abbott promises 'no wrecking, no undermining' in final speech as prime minister". ABC News. 16 September 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. Tony Abbott calls for 'religious revolution' inside Islam, defends controversial 2014 budget measures as 'justifiable and right'; abc.net.au; 9 December 2015 "Tony Abbott: I would have won the next election". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 December 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Abbott's sniping from the backbench is hardly noble". The Sydney Morning Herald. 9 December 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Renomination for Warringah". The Hon Tony Abbott MP. Retrieved 11 February 2016. Warringah, NSW Archived 5 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine, 2016 Federal Election, Australian Electoral Commission. Retrieved 17 July 2016. "Who is right in the Abbott-Turnbull policy wars?". Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Government defends renewable energy target after Tony Abbott's renewed criticism". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 29 January 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Tony Abbott ally Eric Abetz critical of Malcolm Turnbull over industrial relations". 21 October 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Tony Abbott defends his criticisms of Turnbull government; 9News, Feb 24, 2017 NSW Liberals groan as Malcolm Turnbull tells gathering party is not ruled by factions, new PM praises Tony Abbott; Australian Broadcasting Corporation; 10 October 2015 Jeff Kennett attacks Malcolm Turnbull for 'self-interest' and lack of courage; The Sydney Morning Herald; 9 March 2016 Kevin Andrews says remarks about challenging Turnbull for leadership 'hypothetical'; Australian Broadcasting Corporation; 5 April 2016 Tony Abbott lashes out at Christopher Pyne over leaked leadership, same-sex marria; www.abc.net.au; 26/6/17 Andrew Bolt: Christopher Pyne drops Malcolm Turnbull's plan for Liberals on same-sex marriage; http://www.heraldsun.com.au; 26/7/17 Tony Abbott on why same sex marriage would fundamentally change society; smh.com.au, Sept 13, 2017 "SSM: Tony Abbott 'headbutted' by man wearing 'Vote Yes' badge in Hobart". ABC News. 22 September 2017. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "Abbott headbutted in Hobart". Sky News. 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "Tony Abbott head-butt: Attacker pleads guilty in court". BBC News. 18 January 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Hobart DJ Astro Labe jailed for headbutting former PM Tony Abbott". Examiner.com.au. 9 April 2018. Retrieved 10 April 2018. "Tasmanian DJ Astro Labe admits he head-butted former prime minister Tony Abbott". TheGuardian.com. 18 January 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2018. Australian Associated Press (12 October 2015). "Poll shows voters back dumping Abbott". The Australian. Retrieved 11 November 2016. Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull hits 30 straight Newspoll losses; www.theaustralian.com.au; 18 April 2018 Dutton was a reluctant challenger: Abbott; 9News.com.au, aug 27, 2018 "PM offers Tony Abbott special envoy for indigenous affairs role". www.9news.com.au. Retrieved 26 September 2018. Australian Associated Press (29 August 2018). "Tony Abbott accepts job as special envoy on Indigenous affairs". the Guardian. https://www.sbs.com.au/nitv/nitv-news/article/2018/12/06/tony-abbott-calls-parent-fines-boost-indigenous-school-attendance; www.sbs.com.au; 6 Dec 2018 INDIGENOUS UPLIFT BEGINS IN CLASS: HERE'S HOW CANBERRA CAN HELP; first published in The Australian; 8 December 2018 Green, Antony. "Warringah (Key Seat)". Australia votes. ABC News. Retrieved 19 May 2019. "Tony Abbott AC". Fox Corporation. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "Abbott appointed to UK trade adviser role". BBC News. 4 September 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Liberal senator Jim Molan dies aged 72 after 'sudden' decline in health". the Guardian. 16 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Calls from Liberal stalwart for Tony Abbott to return to parliament via senate". The West Australian. 18 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Liberals jostle for Molan's Senate seat with call for Tony Abbott to fill spot". the Guardian. 19 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. Graham Readfearn (7 February 2023). "Former Australian PM Tony Abbott joins board of UK climate sceptic thinktank". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "About". New Direction. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Former prime minister Tony Abbott nominated for Fox Corporation board of directors". ABC News. 23 September 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "Tony Abbott's Warringah motion for more conservative control in NSW Liberals fails to pass - ABC News". "Last Rites of 'Abbottism:' Australian Bureaucrats' Internal Security Confusion". "Abbottism: Our region's new foreign policy tenet". "Strong social movements are the future of political change, not just parties | Australia news | the Guardian". "Wyatt Roy wants to bring Silicon Valley's 'Aussie mafia' home". 21 September 2015. "Malcolm Turnbull sticks with the 'programme' ... Or does he?". "Abbott rejects 'economic Hansonism' tag". Lewis, Peter (30 May 2017). "What if Australia already had its 'Trump moment' – and it was Tony Abbott?". The Guardian. "Tony Abbott promises a new engagement with Indigenous Australians". ABC News. 15 March 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "Indigenous Affairs a Single Portfolio under Abbott". Australia: SBS World News. 16 September 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2014. Martin, Peter; Pearlman, Jonathan (26 August 2013). "Fact checker: Coalition leader Tony Abbott's bush jaunts make him almost a local". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 29 August 2013. "Promise check: Spend a week every year in an Indigenous community". ABC News (Australia). 6 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. Murphy, Katharine. "Abbott Supports Indigenous Australians in Constitution". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 26 June 2013. Patricia Karvelas (7 September 2010). "Greens alliance threatens Aboriginal wellbeing: Noel Pearson". The Australian. "Act of Recognition Passes in House of Representatives". AustralianPolitics.com. 13 February 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "Abbott wants 'authentic' outback Aborigines in Coalition with Wyatt". The Australian. 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Helen Davidson; Shalailah Medhora (3 August 2015). "Tony Abbott rejects proposal to hold Indigenous conventions on recognition". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 August 2015. Visentin, Lisa (1 May 2023). "Abbott attacks Voice as Indigenous leader pushes for compromise". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Tony Abbott says the Voice "reinforces the separatism which is at the heart of Indigenous disadvantage"". www.abc.net.au. 6 July 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. Jackson, Liz (15 March 2010). "The Authentic Mr Abbott". Four Corners. ABC TV. Transcript. "Tony Abbott on Q and A". Australia: ABC News. 5 April 2010. Retrieved 8 September 2013. "Biography: Tony Abbott MHR". Tonyabbott.com.au. Archived from the original on 20 July 2008. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Owens, Jared (26 March 2014). "Tony Abbott living in the past by restoring knights and dames, say critics". The Australian. Knott, Matthew (25 March 2014). "Tony Abbott reintroduces knight and dame honours for Australians". The Sydney Morning Herald. "Abbott backs Turnbull despite climate science doubts". ABC News (Australia). 4 October 2009. Retrieved 11 October 2009. Sharp, Ari (7 December 2009). "Turnbull blasts Abbott's 'bullshit' climate change stance". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 9 December 2009. Mclennan, David (2 February 2010). "Abbott announces emissions plan – Local News – News – General". The Canberra Times. Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Tony Abbott joins Insiders" (streaming video). Insiders. ABC TV. 1 September 2013. "Rudd puts ETS on backburner". Australia: ABC News. 27 April 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "The Liberal Party of Australia". Yahoo!7. 30 June 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2010. Abbott, Tony (23 March 2012). "The Carbon Tax: 100 days to go". Official Web Site (Press release). Tony Abbott. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Figure 1" (PDF). Taxing Energy Use – A Graphical Analysis. OECD. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Interview with John Laws, Radio 2SM and Super Radio Network". Tony Abbott Official Website. Tony Abbott. 7 July 2011. Archived from the original on 12 August 2013. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Kelly, Joe (29 July 2011). "Tony Abbott says 'draconian' carbon cop force will chase 'invisible' substance". The Australian. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Gordon, Michael (16 July 2011). "He says, she says in a faux election campaign". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 24 May 2013. Mathiesen, Karl (9 October 2017). "Tony Abbott says climate change is 'probably doing good'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 February 2019. "Tony Abbott: Global warming may be good climate science is 'crap'". news.com.au. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Andrew Probyn (10 October 2017). "The real Tony Abbott emerges in incendiary climate change speech". ABC News. Retrieved 4 February 2019. Readfearn, Graham (3 January 2020). "Tony Abbott, former Australian PM, tells Israeli radio the world is 'in the grip of a climate cult'". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 January 2020. "Plain speaking and brute experience". The Sydney Morning Herald. 4 February 2009. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "The Contender". 60 Minutes. ninemsn.com.au. 5 March 2010. Archived from the original on 13 April 2010. Retrieved 15 October 2010. Abbott, Tony (6 February 2006). "Parliament Best Forum for RU486 Decision". Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2010. van Onselen, Peter (9 January 2010). "Abbott's crusade to woo women voters". The Australian. Retrieved 25 September 2010. Berkovic, Nicola (10 August 2010). "Abbott denies he will change abortion law". The Australian. Retrieved 10 February 2011. Australian Associated Press (17 February 2004). "Abortion rate a tragedy, says Abbott". The Age. Retrieved 23 September 2011. Evans, Chris (29 August 2005). "Abbott opposes call to relax cloning laws". The Sydney Morning Herald. Melbourne. Australian Associated Press. Retrieved 28 November 2007. "Abbott's divorce proposal 'ludicrous'". Australia: ABC News. 14 July 2009. Gordon, Josh (12 July 2009). "Battlelines are drawn with a nod to family tradition". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "ACT legalises same-sex marriage". news.com. 22 October 2013. Archived from the original on 12 July 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2014. "Commonwealth to launch High Court challenge over ACT same-sex marriage laws". Australia: ABC News. 23 October 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2014. "High Court throws out ACT's same-sex marriage laws". Australia: ABC News. 13 December 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2014. Bourke, Latika; Ireland, Judith (8 December 2017). "Same-sex marriage: Tony Abbott, Barnaby Joyce, Scott Morrison and the other MPs who didn't vote 'yes' or 'no'". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 25 August 2018. Yaxley, Louise (15 November 2017). "Australia has said Yes, so how will your MP vote on a same-sex marriage bill in Parliament?". ABC News (Australia). Retrieved 18 November 2017. Yaxley, Louise (8 December 2017). "Same-sex marriage signed into law by Governor-General, first weddings to happen from January 9". ABC News (Australia). Retrieved 12 December 2017. Karp, Paul (19 March 2018). "Tony Abbott backs Peter Dutton's call for visas for white South African farmers". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Tony Abbott backs call to give white South African farmers refuge". 9news.com.au. 19 March 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018. Rodgers, Emma (14 September 2010). "Abbott orders Turnbull to demolish NBN". ABC News. Retrieved 12 February 2017. AAP, (14 September 2010), Turnbull back to 'demolish' NBN, Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 29 July 2010 "Coalition broadband: a wireless tower in every street". Crikey. 16 August 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Scrap NBN to pay for floods: Abbott". The Sydney Morning Herald. 18 January 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Scarr, Lanai (11 October 2013). "Tony Abbott promises cheaper and faster alternative to NBN". news.com.au. Retrieved 10 December 2019. Dalzell, Stephanie (16 September 2021). "China condemns AUKUS pact as Tony Abbott calls China a 'common danger' and Kevin Rudd urges caution". ABC News. Archived from the original on 16 September 2021. Hurst, Daniel (15 October 2021). "Mr Abbott goes to Taiwan: An unofficial message of Australian solidarity?". The Guardian. "Tony Abbott, in Taipei, says it's time to end Taiwan's isolation". 7 October 2021. "Tony Abbott takes aim at China in strongly worded speech in Taiwan". 8 October 2021. "'Prepare to fight': Why Tony Abbott has infuriated China more than ever". 13 October 2021. "Tony Abbott's 'unnecessary' Taiwan visit causes ructions inside Morrison government". ABC News. 7 October 2021. Sanchez, Kait (15 October 2020). "Go read this hilarious story from the person who found Tony Abbott's passport number". The Verge. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Tony Abbott hacked after posting boarding pass on Instagram". BBC News. 17 September 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Tony Abbott hacked after posting photo of boarding pass to social media". 7NEWS.com.au. 17 September 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Former Australian PM Tony Abbott's passport details and phone number obtained by hacker". The Guardian. 16 September 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Turnbull's pot admission makes a whiff of history". Hunter, Fergus. "'I am not going to waste police time': Tony Abbott fined for not wearing a mask". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 29 January 2024. Murray, Lucy. "Tony Abbott says it's un-Australian to dob as he cops $500 fine for not wearing mask". SBS News. Special Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 29 January 2024. "Tony Abbott fined by NSW Police". Nine News. Nine Network. Retrieved 29 January 2024. Murphy, Damien (22 March 2005). "Abbott's love child turns into shaggy dog story". The Sydney Morning Herald. p. 1. Retrieved 4 December 2009. "Abbott reunited with long-lost son". ABC News. 21 March 2005. Retrieved 28 November 2007. "DNA test shows Abbott not father of 'son'". ABC News. 21 March 2005. Retrieved 28 November 2007. Pearlman, Jonathan (4 September 2013). "Australia begrudgingly willing to accept Mad Monk Tony Abbott". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Tony Abbott-Liberal for Warringah – About Tony". Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2006. "Oh baby, there's a new boy in the Abbott family". 12 July 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Perry, Michael (16 August 2010). "Australia's conservative leader Tony Abbott". Reuters. Retrieved 10 February 2011. Ham, Paul (6 December 2009). "Australia's 'Mad Monk' deals blow to eco-campaign". The Times. UK. Retrieved 10 February 2011. Warhurst, John (March 2007). "Religion and politics in the Howard decade". Australian Journal of Political Science. 42 (1): 19–32. doi:10.1080/10361140601158526. hdl:1885/37648. S2CID 153995715. Grattan, Michelle (10 April 2010). "Pragmatic pugilist". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott attacks church over WorkChoices criticism". Australia: ABC News. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott winning voters on asylum seekers". The Sydney Morning Herald. 6 April 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Abbott fights flames in bushfires". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australian Associated Press. 27 January 2006. Retrieved 28 November 2007. Tony Abbott – Prime Minister Archived 20 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Liberal Party of Australia. Retrieved 16 October 2014 Cazzulino, Michelle (16 April 2007). "Charity ride and a blushing bride". The Daily Telegraph. Australia. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Smiles, Sarah (2 August 2008). "Abbott teaches what he preaches". The Age. Melbourne. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Fact checker: Coalition leader Tony Abbott's bush jaunts make him almost a local". The Sydney Morning Herald. 26 August 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Queen's Birthday Honours 2020 (PDF), Governor General, retrieved 7 June 2020 It's an Honour: Award Extract Tony Abbott, AustralianGovernment, retrieved 8 June 2020 It's an Honour: Centenary Medal, AustralianGovernment, archived from the original on 2 October 2019, retrieved 12 April 2014 "Prime Minister Tony Abbott rewarded for a decade of RFS service with a medal", The Daily Telegraph, retrieved 8 March 2015 "令和4年春の外国人叙勲 受章者名簿" (PDF). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Retrieved 29 April 2022. Aly, Waleed (July 2013). "Inside Tony Abbott's Mind". The Monthly. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2013. Marr, David (2012). "Political Animal: The Making of Tony Abbott". Quarterly Essay (47). ISBN 978-1-86395-577-5. B. Masters, Adam; Uhr, John (2017). Leadership Performance and Rhetoric. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 9783319587745. Laurenz, Mathei (2020). "Tony Abbott: the expert the UK has been waiting for?". LSE Brexit. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tony Abbott. Wikiquote has quotations related to Tony Abbott. Official website Parliamentary profile Search or browse Hansard for Tony Abbott at OpenAustralia.org Appearances on C-SPAN