Machala (Spanish pronunciation: [maˈtʃala]) is a city in south-west Ecuador. It is the capital of the El Oro Province, and is located near the Gulf of Guayaquil on fertile lowlands. Machala has a population of 288,072 (2022 census); it is the sixth-biggest city in the country, and the second-most important port. It has been referred to as the Banana Capital of the World. Machala is a commercial center for the surrounding agriculture industries. There is a large trade in bananas, coffee and cocoa. The banana industry is especially oriented for exportation, and plays a huge role in the city's economy. Bananas are shipped out from nearby Puerto Bolívar mainly to North America. Machala's geographical position near Guayaquil also makes it an important transportation center. Many travelers heading south to Peru or north to Guayaquil funnel through the city. It is not known as a tourist destination among Ecuadorians or international tourists, though its proximity to the Pacific Ocean positions it close to beaches. Machala has a growing economy that was marked in 2007 by the inauguration of its first mall, with a movie theater, on the outskirts of the city. The center of Machala is dominated by a large Catholic church and a central plaza. The plaza was built in the early 2000s to include a large fountain. There are many hotels situated in the center of the city. Las Brisas, located nearly a mile from the central plaza, is another popular place in Machala; it is a wealthier neighborhood which used to serve as a popular hangout for local teenagers. But the remodeling of La Zona Rosa, as well as the decreased safety of the area, have led to its becoming less popular. Machala has one university, the Universidad Técnica de Machala. There are many private schools in Machala and one public high school – Colegio 9 de Octubre. The city serves as a stopping-off point on the way to nearby Puerto Bolívar and the Jambelí Islands, which can only be reached by ferry. Machala features a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen BSh). Like most of the coastal region of Ecuador, there is a short wet season from January to April due to the retreat of the Humboldt Current. The weather in both wet and dry seasons is very warm to hot and cloudy due to persistent fog from the cold current. Santa Rosa International Airport (IATA: ETR, ICAO: SERO) serves as the city's principal airport. It hosts commercial flights to Quito with the Ecuadorian airline TAME. Gabriel Achilier (born 1985), footballer Jordy Caicedo (born 1997), footballer Gilberto Chamba, serial killer Fausto Tutu Guzman (born 1944), great Basketball player and Pajero Professional Nicolás Asencio (born 1975), footballer Juan Carlos Espinoza Mercado (born 1987), footballer Ángel Fernández (born 1971), footballer Luis Miguel Garcés (born 1982), footballer Hólger Matamoros (born 1985), footballer Carlos Muñoz (1964–1993), footballer Ismael Pérez Pazmiño (1876–1944), journalist and politician Ángel Pután (born 1986), footballer Tania Tinoco (born 1963), journalist and television producer Citypopulation.de Population and area of Machala "Fallece esposa de Gabriel Achilier" [Gabriel Achilier's Wife Dies]. La Hora (in Spanish). January 23, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017. "Ismael Pérez Pazmiño". diccionariobiograficoecuador.com (in Spanish). Retrieved September 12, 2017. Pezo, Claudia (August 31, 2003). "Tania Tinoco: Mi familia es lo primero" [Tania Tinoco: My Family Comes First]. El Universo (in Spanish). Retrieved September 12, 2017. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Machala. Official website (in Spanish) Orenses - El Oro - Machala - Ecuador / Comunidad Virtual de la Provincia de El Oro News about Machala in Spanish Chat Orenses - El Oro - Machala - Ecuador Chat Orenses - El Oro - Machala - Ecuador Investor info for Ecuador and Machala Universidad Technica de Machala Sitio informativo de la Capital Bananera del Mundo Ecuador, Travel in Machala 3°16′S 79°58′W﻿ / ﻿3.267°S 79.967°W﻿ / -3.267; -79.967