The Nitra Region (Slovak: Nitriansky kraj, pronounced [ˈɲitrɪɐnski ˈkraj]; Hungarian: Nyitrai kerület) is one of the administrative regions of Slovakia. It was first established in 1923 and from 1996 exists in its present borders. It consists of seven districts (okres) and 354 municipalities, from which 16 have a town status. The economy of the region focuses more on agriculture, than in other Slovak regions. Nitra is its seat, largest city, and cultural and economic center. This region with a long history is situated in the southwest of Slovakia, mostly in the eastern part of the Danubian Lowland. It is divided into two sub-units: the Danubian Flat in the south-west, with eastern part of the Žitný ostrov island, and the Danubian Hills in the north, centre and east. Mountain ranges reaching into the region are: Považský Inovec in the north-west, where the region's highest point, Veľký Inovec, is located, Tribeč in the north from Nitra, Pohronský Inovec in the north-east and Štiavnické vrchy in the east. Major rivers are the Danube in the south, Váh in the south-west, Nitra in the western-central part, Hron in the east and Ipeľ in the south-east. As for administrative divisions, the region borders Trenčín Region in the north, Banská Bystrica Region in the east, Hungarian Pest in the south-east, Komárom-Esztergom in the south, and Győr-Moson-Sopron county in the south-west and Trnava Region in the west. The population density in the region is 106/km2 (270/sq mi) (2020-06-30/-07-01), which is very similar to the country's average (110 per km2). The largest towns are Nitra, Komárno, Nové Zámky and Levice. According to the 2001 census, there were 713,422 inhabitants in the region, with a majority of Slovaks (68.3%), but there is a numerous Hungarian minority (27.6%) in the southern districts, forming a majority in the Komárno District (72%) and there are small minorities of Czechs and Roma (<1%). The city of Nitra is also the centre of whole region. The region - which is the warmest in Slovakia - reaches a high production of wheat, rye and vegetables. Significant industries are: the food industry, with breweries in Topoľčany, Nitra and Hurbanovo, are machinery (fridges in Zlaté Moravce, shipyards in Komárno) and energy (Mochovce Nuclear Power Plant). Current governor of Banská Bystrica region is Milan Belica (Smer-SD). He won with 34,1 %. In election 2017 was elected also regional parliament : In governor's elections won Milan Belica (Smer–SD) over many another candidates. In governor's elections won Milan Belica (Smer–SD) over centre-right candidate Tomáš Galbavý (SDKÚ–DS), who was supported by SaS, OKS, NOVA, Most–Híd, SMK-MKP. In governor's elections won Milan Belica (Smer–SD), who was supported by SDKÚ–DS and KDH. In governor's elections won Milan Belica, who was supported by ASV, KSS, ĽB, ĽS–HZDS, PSNS, ZSNS. His rival in second round of elections was Ján Greššo (DS, SDKÚ). In governor's elections won Milan Belica, who was supported by HZDS, SOP, SDĽ and Centre party. His rival in second round of elections was Miklós Fehér (SMK-MKP). The Nitra Region consists of 7 districts. There are 354 municipalities, of which 16 are towns. Nitra with Nitra Castle and Saint Emmeram's Cathedral, Nitra Synagogue, Dražovce church, etc. Medieval churches in Kostoľany pod Tribečom and Nitrianska Blatnica Chateau and European bison sanctuary in Topoľčianky (Topoľčianska zubria zvernica) Šaľa - town with a castle The water mill and bridge in Kolárovo Komárno with its fortification system, fortress, Elisabeth bridge, etc. Iža - Roman military camp Celemantia - UNESCO World Heritage Site Štúrovo - Bridge of Mária Valéria Levice with Levice Castle, Saint Michael's Church, Levice Town Hall etc. Arboretum in Tesárske Mlyňany Dunajské luhy Protected Landscape Area Ponitrie Protected Landscape Area Topoľčany Castle Nitra Saint Emmeram's Cathedral at Nitra Castle, Nitra Pribinas Square with statue of Pribina, Nitra Nitra Nitra synagogue, Nitra Dražovce church, Nitra Nitrianska Blatnica church Kostoľany pod Tribečom church Topoľčianky chateau European bison in Topoľčianska zubria zvernica Šaľa castle Water mill in Kolárovo Komárno Komárno Komárno fortress, Komárno Komárno fortification system, Komárno Roman military camp Celemantia, Iža (UNESCO World Heritage Site) Bridge of Mária Valéria, Štúrovo Rotunda in Bíňa Levice Castle, Levice Levice Town Hall, Levice Church of Saint Michael, Levice Arboretum Tesárske Mlyňany Dunajské luhy Protected Landscape Area Ponitrie Protected Landscape Area Nyitra County of the Kingdom of Hungary Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional GDP per Capita, OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. "SLOVAKIA: Regions and Major Cities". Citypopulation. Retrieved 22 January 2021. "Statistic of Slovak places by Dušan Kreheľ – Export". Retrieved 2021-07-05. POPULATION AND HOUSING CENSUS 2001 - Tab. 3a SaS, Together, Chance, ODS, DS, KDH, OKS, ZĽ, TKN The highest number of votes in preferential voting. Smer–SD, SNS, Most–Híd SaS, OKS, OĽaNO, NOVA, KDH, Šanca, ZZ–DÚ Candidated as coalition with KDH, SDKÚ–DS, ĽS–HZDS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, Smer–SD, ĽS–HZDS. Candidated as coalition with Smer–SD, SDKÚ–DS, ĽS–HZDS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, Smer–SD, SDKÚ–DS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, SDKÚ, ĽS–HZDS, SNS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, Smer–SD, SDKÚ, SNS. Candidated as coalition with Smer–SD, SDKÚ, ĽS–HZDS, SNS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, Smer–SD, ĽS–HZDS, SNS. Candidated as coalition with KDH, SDKÚ, ĽS–HZDS. HZDS, SOP, SDĽ, Smer–SD, Centre party Kopa, Ľudovít; et al. (2006). The Encyclopaedia of Slovakia and the Slovaks. Bratislava, Slovakia: Encyclopaedic Institute of the Slovak Academy of Sciences. ISBN 80-224-0925-1. Nitriansky samosprávny kraj Official website