Year 818 (DCCCXVIII) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. Vikings known as Rus' (Norsemen) plunder the north coast of Anatolia (modern Turkey), marking the first recorded raid of Rus' people on territory in the Byzantine Empire. April 17 – King Bernard of Italy, illegitimate son of Pepin of Italy, is tried and condemned to death by Emperor Louis I. The Kingdom of Italy is reabsorbed into the Frankish Empire. The Slavs known as Timočani on the Timok River break their alliance with the Bulgars. Duke Ljudevit of the Slavs in Lower Pannonia sends emissaries to Louis I, to assert his independence from the Franks. Al-Andalus: A grave rebellion breaks out in the suburbs of Cordoba, against the Emirate of Córdoba. Andalucian Arab refugees arrive in Fez (modern Morocco). The Anglo-Saxons, led by King Coenwulf of Mercia, raid Dyfed in Wales (approximate date). Beginning of the Lemro period: The Sambawa and Pyinsa Kingdoms are founded in present-day Myanmar. Theodulf, bishop of Orléans, is deposed and imprisoned, after becoming involved in a conspiracy with Bernard of Italy. Abu Dawud, Muslim hadith compiler (or 817) Al-Fath ibn Khaqan, Muslim governor (or 817) Ariwara no Yukihira, Japanese governor (d. 893) Pepin, count of Vermandois (approximate date) Sahl al-Tustari, Persian scholar (approximate date) April 17 – Bernard of Italy, king of the Lombards (b. 797) October 3 – Ermengarde, queen of the Franks Al-Fadl ibn Sahl, Persian vizier Ali al-Ridha, 8th Shia Imam (b. 766) Cernach mac Congalaig, king of Brega (Ireland) Clement, Irish scholar and saint Felix, bishop of Urgell (Spain) García I Jiménez, duke of Gascony Hildebold, archbishop of Cologne Michael the Confessor, bishop of Synnada Morman, chieftain and king of Brittany Muiredach mac Brain, king of Leinster (Ireland) Theophanes the Confessor, Byzantine monk (or 817) Quan Deyu, chancellor of the Tang dynasty (b. 759) Yuan Zi, general of the Tang dynasty (b. 739) Dr. Kathryn Tsai. A Timeline of Eastern Church History. Divine Ascent Press, Point Reyes Station, CA, 2004, p. 153. Fine, John V. A. Jr. (1991) [1983]. The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. p. 107. ISBN 0-472-08149-7. Picard, Christophe (2000). Le Portugal musulman (VIIIe-XIIIe siècle. L'Occident d'al-Andalus sous domination islamique. Paris: Maisonneuve & Larose. p. 40. ISBN 2-7068-1398-9. Whitney, James Pounder; Gwatkin, Henry Melvill (1922). The Cambridge Medieval History: Maps III. Germany and the Western Empire. 3. Plantagenet Publishing. p. 23.