Tangerines (Georgian: მანდარინები Mandarinebi, Estonian: Mandariinid) is a 2013 Estonian-Georgian film written, produced, and directed by Zaza Urushadze. Set during the 1992–1993 War in Abkhazia, the film is a morality tale addressing issues of conflict, reconciliation, and pacifism. It was filmed in Guria, Georgia. Tangerines was nominated for the Best Foreign Language Film awards at the 87th Academy Awards and the 72nd Golden Globe Awards, losing the former to the Polish film Ida (2013) and the latter to the Russian film Leviathan (2014). In a rural village of ethnic Estonians in Abkhazia, a Russian-backed separatist region in the newly independent Georgia, Ivo (Lembit Ulfsak) and his friend Margus (Elmo Nüganen) are the only two of their once large community who have not fled for Estonia after the outbreak of the war. Margus has delayed leaving until he can harvest his lucrative tangerine crop. Ivo, a carpenter, is attempting to make enough wooden crates to hold all the unpicked tangerines, but doesn't reveal his reasons for staying. Two Chechen mercenaries fighting alongside the Abkhaz separatists show up and demand food from Ivo before leaving peacefully. However, they get into a firefight with Georgian Army soldiers in front of Margus' house, leaving only one alive from each side. Ahmed (Giorgi Nakashidze), the surviving Chechen, and Nika (Mikheil Meskhi), a Georgian volunteer, are both gravely wounded, and Ivo brings them into his home to nurse them back to health. Ivo gets a promise from both to not carry out any retaliation under his roof, even if they both promise to kill one another once they get the strength. When the two rivals continue to heal over a period of days in the same tiny dwelling, there is a significant degree of tension between them. The two slowly start to see each other's honor and humanity. The two transform their hostility and animosity into respect and camaraderie under the moral supervision of the senior and wise Ivo. When Abkhaz soldiers come to the house, Ivo convinces Ahmed to tell them that Nika is also a fellow Chechen, but whose head wound has left him unable to speak. After a local military patrol fails to show to harvest the tangerines as planned, Margus is desperate. The Abkhaz soldiers, having set up camp nearby, promise to help harvest the tangerines in two days. That night, however, shelling hits the village, destroying Margus' property. Ahmed offers Margus a large wad of cash that he has made from being a mercenary, but Margus refuses money "made like that". Russian troops allied to the Abkhaz and Chechens later drive up to Ivo's house, finding Ahmed and Margus outside, and falsely accuse Ahmed of being Georgian. They are about to execute him when Nika shoots them from the house with a rifle. In the firefight, Margus is killed by Russian gunfire. Ahmed and Nika partner to fight the Russians, but Nika is shot dead by a wounded Russian before Ahmed finishes off Nika's killer. Ivo and Ahmed bury Margus and Nika. Ivo reveals that Nika's body lies next to that of his own son, who was killed when the war broke out in August 1992. Ivo tells Ahmed that if he had died instead of Nika, Ivo would have buried Ahmed next to his son as well. Ahmed tells Ivo that he misses his own family, and begins his drive home to a Chechnya that will be plunged into a similar bloody war less than two years later. He listens to a cassette tape of Georgian music that belonged to Nika. The closing credits of Tangerines features a famous Georgian song, ქაღალდის გემი (მე გადმოვცურავ ზღვას), performed by Irakli Charkviani. Originally from Charkviani's 1993 album "Svan Songs", the composition is roughly contemporaneous with the events described in the film and touches on the theme of longing and reuniting after a period of separation. Lembit Ulfsak as Ivo, an elderly Estonian farmer living in Abkhazia. He is a hawk-faced older fellow, who never hesitates; he instantly helps others, regardless of their "side" in this misery. Giorgi Nakashidze as Ahmed, a wounded Chechen soldier, slightly wounded but eager to "kill that scumbag in the next room!" Ivo eventually gets him to promise not to kill Nika unless he steps outside the house. Elmo Nüganen as Margus, a friend of Ivo, another Estonian farmer, with a tangerine orchard. He wants to make this sale so he can join his family in Estonia. Mikheil (Misha) Meskhi as Nika, a wounded Georgian soldier and an ethnic Christian with shrapnel in his head. His hatred for Ahmed is every bit as venomous. The film received an 88% rating from review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes based on 66 reviews, with an average rating of 7.40/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Tangerines' impassioned message and the strong work of a solid cast more than make up for the movie's flawed narrative and uneven structure." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 73 out of 100 based on 18 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". According to the film critic Anthony D'Alessandro, Nüganen drew a parallel to the 2014 Ukraine-Russia Conflict. List of submissions to the 87th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film List of Estonian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film "Samuel Goldwyn Films acquires "Tangerines" rights in the US". Estonian World. 16 February 2015. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "Mandariinid (2015)". The Numbers. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "Review: Estonians as Conflict Mediators in 'Tangerines'" news.err.ee, 11 November 2013 "Warsaw 2013 Review: Tangerines, An Engrossing Morality Tale That's Also A Lot Of Fun" Archived 19 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine "Croatia, Serbia, Finland and Estonia have announced their nominations for the category". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 2 September 2014. "Oscar Nominations 2015: See The Full List". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 15 January 2015. "72ND Annual Golden Globe® Awards Nominees Announced". Retrieved 11 December 2014. Me Gadmovtsurav Zgvas - ქაღალდის გემი (მე გადმოვცურავ ზღვას), Retrieved: 29 June 2023 "Tangerines (2015)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Tangerines Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 16 October 2018. Anthony D'Alessandro. "'Tangerines', Estonia's Oscar Submission, Draws Parallel To Ukraine-Russia Conflict". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 18 November 2014. The film, in its illumination of the Abkhazian battle, reminded the packed house last night of another conflict in its hemisphere between Russia and Ukraine. "Oscars 2015: Nominations list". BBC News. Retrieved 15 January 2015. "Tangerines Named As The Best European Film". Caucasus Business Week. Retrieved 4 February 2016. Bari International Film Festival 2014 "32nd Fajr International Film Festival 2014" "Tangerines". Golden Globe Awards. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "2014 JFF Winners Announced". Jerusalem Film Festival. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "Current Nominees | Categories". International Press Academy. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "Selgusid PÖFFi võitjad". ERR (in Estonian). 30 November 2013. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "War on Screen 2014" "29th Warsaw International Film Festival". Warsaw Film Festival. 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2016. Tangerines Allfilm Tangerines at IMDb Tangerines at AllMovie Tangerines at Rotten Tomatoes Tangerines at Box Office Mojo Estonian-Georgian film Mandariinid (Tangerines) wins prizes in Germany 'Tangerines': Film Review The Hollywood Reporter, 11/24/2014