Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat Beg (Persian: میرزا محمد حیدر دولت بیگ c. 1499/1500 – 1551) was a Chagatai Turco-Mongol military general, governor of Kashmir, and a historian. He was a Mughal Dughlat prince who wrote in both Chaghatai and Persian languages. Haidar and Babur were cousins on their mother's side, through the line of Genghis Khan. Unlike Babur, Haidar considered himself more of an ethnic Mongol of Moghulistan. Mirza Haidar Dughlat Beg in the Tarikh-i Rashidi constantly alludes to a distinct tribe or community of Moghuls in Mughalistan, however reduced in numbers, who had preserved Mongol customs, and from the incindental references to Mongolian phrases and terms, likely retained elements of the original Mongolian language, despite the growth of Islam and the growing use of the Turki language, the latter which Haider naturally spoke. According to the Tarikh-i Rashidi, Haider Dughlat considered his "Moghul Ulus" to be a separate people from the settled Turks of Transoxiania, from the fifteenth century and the first half of the sixteenth century. According to Vasily Bartold, there are “some indications that the language of the Moghuls was Mongolian until the 16th century". For the sedentary Mongols in Transoxiana, the nomadic Mongols to their east in Xinjiang and Kashgar represented a bastion of true Mongol culture, hence the name "Moghulistan". However, he did not stay long in Kashmir, leaving after making a treaty with the local sultan and striking coins in the name of Said Khan. He had also attacked Tibet through Ladakh but failed to conquer Lhasa. He returned in 1540, fighting for the Mughal Emperor Humayun. Arriving in Kashmir, Haidar installed as sultan the head of the Sayyid faction, Nazuk. In 1546, after Humayun recovered Kabul, Haidar removed Nazuk Shah and struck coins in the name of the Mughal emperor. His mother was Khub Nigar Khanim, third daughter of Yunus Khan by Isan Daulat Begum, and a younger sister of Kutluk Nigar Khanim, mother of Babur. Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat Beg governed Kashmir from 1540 to 1551, when he was killed in battle. René Grousset, The Empire of the Steppes: A History of Central Asia (1970 translation), p. 497. N. Ellas. textsThe Tarikh-i-rashidi; a history of the Moghuls of central Asia; an English version. p. 2. N. Ellas. The Tarikh-i-rashidi; a history of the Moghuls of central Asia; an English version. p. 82. Murad Butt. The Tarikh-i-rashidi. Karakoram Books. Бартольд В. В. (1968). Сочинения. Том V. Работы по истории и филологии тюркских и монгольских народов. Москва: Наука. pp. 169–170. Timothy May (2016). The Mongol Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO. p. 49. ISBN 9781610693400. Bell, Charles (1992). Tibet Past and Present. omer Banarsidass Publ. p. 33. ISBN 81-208-1048-1. Shahzad Bashir, Messianic Hopes and Mystical Visions: The Nurbakhshiya Between Medieval And Modern Islam (2003), p. 236. Stan Goron and J.P. Goenka: The Coins of the Indian Sultanates, New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 2001, pp. 463–464. List of Rulers: South Asia | Thematic Essay | Timeline of Art History | The Metropolitan Museum of Art Mansura Haidar (translator) (2002), Mirza Haidar Dughlat as Depicted in Persian Sources Karim, Abdul (2012). "Tarikh-i-Rashidi". In Islam, Sirajul; Jamal, Ahmed A. (eds.). Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.). Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. Selections from the Tarikh-i-Rashidi The Tarikh i Rashidi Download Full Book PDF by Murad Butt TARIKH-I-RASHIDI The Tarikh-i-rashidi: A History of the Moghuls of Central Asia; an English Version (1895) The Tarikh-i-rashidi