The International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI) is an intergovernmental organization whose members are supreme audit institutions. Nearly every supreme audit institution in the world is a member of INTOSAI. Depending on the type of system used in their home country, the members of INTOSAI may be variously titled the Chief Financial Controller, the Office of the Comptroller General, the Office of the Auditor General, the Court of Accounts, or the Board of Audit. INTOSAI holds a triennial conference entitled the International Congress of Supreme Audit Institutions (INCOSAI). It publishes the quarterly International Journal of Government Auditing and publishes guidelines and international standards on auditing. INTOSAI was founded in 1953 in Havana, Cuba. Thirty-four audit organizations formed the group originally and as of 2010 the current membership includes 193 institutions (188 national institutions, the European Court of Auditors and 4 associated members). The members of INTOSAI are the primary external auditors of the United Nations. The UN's General Assembly appoints the UN Board of Auditors (3 members appointed for 6 years) among the INTOSAI member representatives. The International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI) are a benchmark for auditing public entities (External Audit Standards for public entities). The "INTOSAI Auditing Standards" had been approved by the INCOSAI in 1998 and updated in 2001. In its strategic plan 2005–2010, the INTOSAI decided to "provide an up-to-date framework of professional standards", so the INTOSAI Professional Standards Committee decided to merge the existing and new INTOSAI standards and guidelines into a framework. The framework comprises all documents endorsed by INCOSAI with the purpose of guiding the professional standards used by SAIs The list of ISSAIs is in the table below: Auditing Standards (ISSAI-numbers of 3 digits) stipulate general principles and postulates for carrying out the audit work; Implementation Guidelines (ISSAI-numbers of 4 digits) give more detailed guidance, practical assistance to SAIs in implementing the Standards in their individual constituents. Financial audit focuses on determining whether an entity’s financial information is presented in accordance with the applicable financial reporting and regulatory framework. This is accomplished by obtaining sufficient and appropriate audit evidence to enable the auditor to express an opinion as to whether the financial information is free from material misstatement due to fraud or error. Performance audit focuses on whether interventions, programmes and institutions are performing in accordance with the principles of economy, efficiency and effectiveness and whether there is room for improvement. Performance is examined against suitable criteria, and the causes of deviations from those criteria or other problems are analysed. The aim is to answer key audit questions and to provide recommendations for improvement. Compliance audit focuses on whether a particular subject matter is in compliance with authorities identified as criteria. Compliance auditing is performed by assessing whether activities, financial transactions and information are, in all material respects, in compliance with the authorities which govern the audited entity. These authorities may include rules, laws and regulations, budgetary resolutions, policy, established codes, agreed terms or the general principles governing sound public sector financial management and the conduct of public officials. Examples of its major publications are: Guidelines for Internal Control Standards for the Public Sector (1992 - The current text is the 2004 revision by the INTOSAI Internal Control Standards Committee, approved by the XVIIIth INCOSAI of October 2004. It has been subsequently integrated in the INTOSAI standards/guidances as "INTOSAI GOV 9100"). It relies upon the COSO's integrated framework for internal control (as stated in the preface), and uses the COSO's definition of Internal Control and IIA's definition of Internal Audit. Guidelines on Best Practice for the Audit of Privatizations, (1998) Guidance for Planning an Audit of Internal Controls for Public Debt, (2002) In addition to the INTOSAI members (the Supreme Audit Institutions), the following intergovernmental organizations have adopted INTOSAI AS: Council of Europe European Communities The European Court of Auditors performs its audits in accordance with the IFAC and INTOSAI Auditing Standards and Codes of ethics, in so far as these are applicable in the European Community context. European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts Audit by two appointed Supreme Audit Institutions. European Space Agency Audit by an Audit Board composed of Supreme Audit Institutions auditors. EUMETSAT Audit by an appointed Supreme Audit Institution. International Criminal Police Organization North Atlantic Treaty Organization Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Audit by a Supreme Audit Institution. The United Nations The United Nations' Board of Auditors (the external audit of the UN) has adopted the ISAs (International Standards on Auditing). The Board is composed of three Supreme Audit Institutions chairmen, familiar with and usually using the INTOSAI Auditing Standards. The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) is among the five associated members of the INTOSAI. The INTOSAI is a strong advocate for the establishment of Independent Internal audit in public entities. ISSAI 1610 – Using the Work of Internal Auditors INTOSAI Guidance for Good governance: INTOSAI GOVs 9100–9230 The guidance "INTOSAI GOV 9100" states: (page 46) "The Supreme Audit Institution also has a vested interest in ensuring that strong internal audit units exist where needed. Those audit units constitute an important element of internal control by providing a continuous means for improving an organisation's operations. In some countries, however, the internal audit units may lack independence, be weak, or be non-existent. In those cases, the SAI should, whenever possible, offer assistance and guidance to establish and develop those capacities and to ensure the independence of the internal auditor's activities." "The creation of an internal audit unit as part of the internal control system is a strong signal by management that internal control is important. ... For an internal audit function to be effective, it is essential that the internal audit staff be independent from management, work in an unbiased, correct and honest way and that they report directly to the highest level of authority within the organisation. ... "For professional guidance, internal auditors should use the Professional Practices Framework (PPF) of the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) (...) Additionally, internal auditors should follow the INTOSAI Code of Ethics". AFROSAI: African Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions ARABOSAI: Arab Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions ASOSAI: Asian Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions CAROSAI: Caribbean Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions EUROSAI: European Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. For more information please see website. OLACEFS: Organization of Latin American and Caribbean Supreme Audit Institutions. For more information please see website PASAI: Pacific Association of Supreme Audit Institutions The following supreme audit institution are members of INTOSAI:  Albania: State Supreme Audit (Albania)  Algeria: Cour des Comptes  Andorra: Tribunal de Comptes  Angola: Tribunal de Contas de Angola  Argentina: Auditoría General de la Nación  Armenia: Chamber of Audit  Australia: Australian National Audit Office  Austria: Rechnungshof  Azerbaijan: Chamber of Accounts  Bahamas: Office of the Auditor General  Bahrain: National Audit Office  Bangladesh: Comptroller and Auditor General  Barbados: Auditor General's Office  Belarus: State Control Committee  Belgium: Court of Audit of Belgium  Belize: The Office of the Auditor General  Benin: Chambre des Comptes de la Cour Suprême  Bhutan: Royal Audit Authority  Bolivia: Contraloría General del Estado  Botswana: Office of the Auditor General  Brazil: Tribunal de Contas da União  Bulgaria: Chamber of Audit  Cape Verde: Tribunal de Contas  Cambodia: National Audit Authority of Cambodia  Canada: Auditor General of Canada  Central African Republic: Inspection Général d’État  Chile: Comptroller General of Chile  China: National Audit Office  Colombia: Contraloria General de la República  Comoros: Cour Suprême – Section des Comptes des Comores  Costa Rica: Contraloria General de la República  Ivory Coast: Cour des Comptes de Côte d'Ivoire  Croatia: Drzavni Ured za Reviziju  Cuba: Contraloría General de la República de Cuba  Cyprus: Audit Office of the Republic  Czech Republic: Supreme Audit Office  Denmark: Rigsrevisionen  Djibouti: Cour des Comptes  Dominica: Audit Department  Dominican Republic: Cámara de Cuentas de la República Dominicana  Egypt: Central Auditing Organization  Eritrea: Office of the Auditor General  Fiji: Office of the Auditor General  Finland: National Audit Office of Finland  France: Court of Audit  Gabon: Cour des Comptes  Gambia: National Audit Office  Ghana: Ghana Audit Service  Germany: Bundesrechnungshof  Georgia: State Audit Office of Georgia  Greece: Court of Audit  Grenada: Audit Department  Guatemala: Contraloría General de Cuentas  Guinea: Cour des Comptes  Guinea-Bissau: Tribunal de Contas  Guyana: The Audit Office of Guyana  Haiti: Cour Supérieure CCA  Honduras: Tribunal Superior de Cuentas  Hungary: Allami Számvevöszék  Iceland: Rikisendurskodun  India: Comptroller and Auditor General of India  Indonesia: Audit Board of Indonesia  Iran: Supreme Audit Court  Iraq: Federal Board of Supreme Audit  Ireland: Comptroller and Auditor General  Israel: State Comptroller's Office  Italy: Court of Audit  Jamaica: Audit Department  Japan: Board of Audit  Jordan: Audit Bureau of Jordan  Kazakhstan: Accounts Committee  Kenya: Kenya National Audit Office  Kiribati: Kiribati National Audit Office  Kosovo: National Audit Office of Kosovo  Kuwait: State Audit Bureau  Kyrgyzstan: The Accounts Chamber of the Kyrgyz Republic  Laos: State Audit Organization  Latvia: Latvijas Republikas Valsts kontrole  Lebanon: Cour des Comptes  Lesotho: Office of the Auditor General  Liberia: General Auditing Commission  Libya: Libyan Audit Bureau  Liechtenstein: Finanzkontrolle des Fürstentums Liechtenstein  Lithuania: Valstybės kontrolė  Luxembourg: Cour des Comptes  Madagascar: Cour des Comptes  Malawi: National Audit Office  Malaysia: National Audit Department  Maldives: Auditor General's Office  Mali: Contrôle Général des Services Publics  Malta: National Audit Office  Marshall Islands: Office of the Auditor General  Mauritania: Cour des Comptes de la République Islamique de Mauritanie  Mauritius: National Audit Office  Mexico: Superior Auditor of the Federation  Federated States of Micronesia: Office of the Public Auditor  Moldova: Curtea de Conturi  Monaco: Commission Supérieure des Comptes  Mongolia: Mongolian National Audit Office  Montenegro: State Audit Institution of Montenegro  Morocco: Cour des Comptes  Mozambique: Tribunal Administrativo  Myanmar: Office of the Auditor General  Namibia: Office of the Auditor-General  Nauru: Department of Audit  Nepal: Office of the Auditor General  Netherlands: Court of Audit  New Zealand: Office of the Auditor-General  Nicaragua: Consejo Superior de la Contraloría General  Niger: Cour des comptes  Nigeria: Office of the Auditor General for the Federation  North Macedonia: Drzaven zavod za revizija  Norway: Office of the Auditor General of Norway  Oman: State Audit Institution  Pakistan: Auditor General of Pakistan  Palau: Office of the Public Auditor  Palestine: State Audit and Administrative Control Bureau  Panama: Contraloría General de la República de Panamá  Papua New Guinea: Auditor General's Office  Paraguay: Contraloría General de la República  Peru: Contraloria General de la República  Philippines: Commission on Audit of the Philippines  Poland: Supreme Audit Office  Portugal: Court of Auditors  Qatar: State Audit Bureau  Republic of the Congo: Cour des Comptes et de Discipline Budgétaire  Romania: Court of Audit  Russia: Accounts Chamber of Russia  Rwanda: Office of the Auditor General  Saint Kitts and Nevis: The Audit Office  Saint Lucia: Office of the Director of Audit  Samoa: Samoa Audit Office  São Tomé and Príncipe: Tribunal de Contas  Saudi Arabia: General Court of Audit  Senegal: Cour des Comptes  Serbia: Drzavna revizorska institucija  Seychelles: The Audit Department  Sierra Leone: Audit Service Sierra Leone  Singapore: Auditor General's Office  Slovakia: Najvyšši kontrolný úrad Slovenskej republiky  Slovenia: Court of Audit of Slovenia  Solomon Islands: Office of the Auditor General  Somalia: Office of the Auditor General  South Africa: Auditor-General of South Africa  Republic of Korea: Board of Audit and Inspection  South Sudan: National Audit Chamber  Spain: Court of Auditors  Sri Lanka: National Audit Office  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines: Audit Office  Sudan: National Audit Chamber  Suriname: Rekenkamer van Suriname  Sweden: Swedish National Audit Office  Switzerland: Eidgenössische Finanzkontrolle  Syria: The Central Organization of Financial Control  Taiwan: Control Yuan  Tajikistan: Accounts Chamber of the Republic of Tajikistan  Tanzania: National Audit Office  Thailand: State Audit Office of the Kingdom of Thailand  Timor-Leste: Tribunal de Recurso  Togo: La Cour des Comptes  Tonga: Audit Department  Trinidad and Tobago: Auditor General's Department  Tunisia: Cour des Comptes  Turkey: Court of Accounts  Tuvalu: Office of the Auditor General  Uganda: Office of the Auditor General  Ukraine: Accounting Chamber  United Arab Emirates: State Audit Institution  United Kingdom: National Audit Office  United States: Government Accountability Office  Uruguay: Tribunal de Cuentas de la República  Vanuatu: Office of the Auditor General  Vatican City: Officium Recognitoris Generalis  Venezuela: Contraloría General de la República  Vietnam: State Audit Office of Vietnam  Yemen: Central Organization for Control and Auditing  Zambia: Office of the Auditor General  Zimbabwe: Office of the Auditor General  Europe: European Court of Auditors Association des Institutions Supérieures de Contrôle Ayant en Commun l'usage du français (AISCCUF) Court of Audit of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) Organization of SAIs of Portuguese Speaking Countries (OISC/CPLP) The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) World Bank Government performance auditing CGAP: Institute of Internal Auditors#Other certificates offered by the IIA INTOSAI Development Initiative Negative assurance and Positive assurance UNMAI "Margit Kraker". International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2019. Shah, Anwar (2007), Performance Accountability and Combating Corruption (PDF), Washington, D.C., U.S.: World Bank, p. 309, ISBN 978-0821369418, OCLC 77116846 Hussey, Roger; Ong, Audra Wei Ming (2006), International Financial Reporting Standards Desk Reference, Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, p. 289, ISBN 978-0-471-72715-6, OCLC 57573800 Franda, Marcus F. (2006), The United Nations in the Twenty-first Century: Management and Reform Processes in a Troubled Organization, Lanham, Maryland, U.S.: Rowman & Littlefield, p. 219, ISBN 978-0-7425-5334-7, OCLC 62895793 "United Nations Board of Auditors". "Audit". Archived from the original on 14 October 2009. Retrieved 22 August 2010. "United Nations Board of Auditors". The INTOSAI Financial Audit Guidelines will be based on the International Standards on Auditing (ISA) issued by the IAASB http://www.afrosai-e.org.za/HOME/Menu/TechnicalAdvancement/INTOSAIauditingstandards/tabid/82/Default.aspx Official membership list https://www.intosai.org/about-us/members A draft framework of ISSAI standards: www.afrosai-e.org.za INTOSAI Marks 50 Years International Journal of Government Auditing January 2003