Yulia Volodymyrivna Tymoshenko (Ukrainian: Юлія Володимирівна Тимошенко, IPA: [ˈjul⁽ʲ⁾ijɐ woloˈdɪmɪr⁽ʲ⁾iu̯nɐ tɪmoˈʃɛnko]; née Hrihyan (Грігян); born 27 November 1960) is a Ukrainian politician, who served as Prime Minister of Ukraine in 2005, and again from 2007 until 2010; the first and only woman in Ukraine to hold that position. She has been a member of the Verkhovna Rada as People's Deputy of Ukraine several times between 1997 and 2007, and presently as of 2014, and was First Deputy Prime Minister of Ukraine for the fuel and energy complex from 1999 to 2001. She has the degree of Candidate of Economic Sciences. Tymoshenko is the leader of the Batkivshchyna (Ukrainian: Батьківщина) political party. She supports Ukraine's integration into the European Union and strongly opposes the membership of Ukraine in the Russia-led Eurasian Customs Union. She supports NATO membership for Ukraine. She co-led the Orange Revolution and was the first woman twice appointed and endorsed by parliamentary majority to become prime minister, serving from 24 January to 8 September 2005, and again from 18 December 2007 to 4 March 2010. She placed third in Forbes magazine's list of the world's most powerful women in 2005. Tymoshenko finished second in the 2010 Ukrainian presidential election runoff, losing by 3.5 percentage points to the winner, Viktor Yanukovych. From 2011 to 2014 she was detained due to a criminal case that was seen by many as politically motivated persecution by President Viktor Yanukovych, but after the Revolution of Dignity she was rehabilitated by the Supreme Court of Ukraine and the European Court of Human Rights. In the concluding days of the Revolution of Dignity, she was released after three years in jail. She again finished second in the 2014 Ukrainian presidential election, this time to Petro Poroshenko. After being a heavy favorite in the polls for several years, she came third in the first round of the 2019 Ukrainian presidential election, receiving 13.40% of the vote, thus failing to qualify for the second round. Elected to the Verkhovna Rada (Ukraine's parliament) in 2019, she led her party in opposition. Tymoshenko was born Yulia Hrihyan on 27 November 1960, in Dnipropetrovsk, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union. Her mother, Lyudmila Telehina (née Nelepova), was born on 11 August 1937, also in Dnipropetrovsk. Yulia's father, Volodymyr Hrihyan, who according to his Soviet Union passport was Latvian, was born on 3 December 1937, also in Dnipropetrovsk. He abandoned his wife and young daughter when Yulia was between one and three years old; Yulia used her mother's surname. Yulia's paternal grandfather, Abram Kapitelman (Ukrainian: Абрам Кельманович Капітельман), was born in 1914. After graduating from Dnipropetrovsk State University in 1940, Kapitelman was sent to work in Western Ukraine, where he worked "one academic quarter" as the director of a public Jewish school in the city Sniatyn. Kapitelman was mobilized into the army in the autumn of 1940 and subsequently was killed while taking part in the Great Patriotic War (1941–1945) on 8 November 1944, with the rank of "lieutenant" in Signal corps. In 1977, Tymoshenko graduated from high school No. 75 in Dnipropetrovsk. Tymoshenko constantly helps[according to whom?] the school. In 1978, Tymoshenko was enrolled in the Automatization and Telemechanics Department of the Dnipropetrovsk Mining Institute. In 1979, she transferred to the Economics Department of the Dnipropetrovsk State University, majoring in cybernetic engineering and graduating in 1984 with first degree honors as an engineer-economist. In 1999, she defended her PhD dissertation, titled State Regulation of the tax system, at the Kyiv National Economic University and received a Ph.D. in economics. Tymoshenko has worked as a practicing economist and academic. Prior to her political career, she became a successful but controversial businesswoman in the gas industry, becoming by some estimates one of the richest people in the country. Before becoming Ukraine's first female prime minister in 2005, Tymoshenko co-led the Orange Revolution. She was placed third in Forbes magazine's List of The World's 100 Most Powerful Women 2005. After graduating from the Dnipropetrovsk State University in 1984, Tymoshenko worked as an engineer-economist in the "Dnipro Machine-Building Plant" (which produced missiles) in Dnipropetrovsk until 1988. In 1988, as part of the perestroika initiatives, Yulia and Oleksandr Tymoshenko borrowed 5,000 roubles and opened a video-rental cooperative, perhaps with the help of Oleksander's father, Gennadi Tymoshenko, who presided over a regional film-distribution network in the provincial council. From 1989 to 1991, Yulia and Oleksandr Tymoshenko founded and led a commercial video-rental company "Terminal" in Dnipropetrovsk, In 1991, Tymoshenko established (jointly with her husband Oleksandr, Gennadi Tymoshenko, and Olexandr Gravets) "The Ukrainian Petrol Corporation", a company that supplied the agriculture industry of Dnipropetrovsk with fuel from 1991 to 1995. Tymoshenko worked as a general director. In 1995, this company was reorganized into United Energy Systems of Ukraine. Tymoshenko served as the president of United Energy Systems of Ukraine, a privately owned middleman company that became the main importer of Russian natural gas to Ukraine, from 1995 to 1 January 1997. During that time she was nicknamed the "gas princess". She was also accused of "having given Pavlo Lazarenko kickbacks in exchange for her company's stranglehold on the country's gas supplies", although Judge Martin Jenkins of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, on 7 May 2004, dismissed the allegations of money laundering and conspiracy regarding UESU, Somoli Ent. et al. (companies affiliated with Yulia Tymoshenko) in connection with Lazarenko's activities. During this period, Tymoshenko was involved in business relations (either co-operative or hostile) with many important figures of Ukraine. Tymoshenko also had to deal with the management of the Russian corporation, Gazprom. Tymoshenko claims that, under her management, UESU successfully solved significant economic problems: from 1995 to 1997, Ukraine's multi-billion debt for Russian natural gas was paid; Ukraine resumed international cooperation in machine building, the pipe industry and construction; and Ukraine's export of goods to Russia doubled. In the period of 1995 to 1997, Tymoshenko was considered one of the richest business people in Ukraine. When Tymoshenko made her initial foray into national politics, her company became an instrument of political pressure on her and on her family. UESU top management faced prosecution. Since 1998, Tymoshenko has been a prominent politician in Ukraine. She was not included in the list of "100 richest Ukrainians" in 2006. Tymoshenko entered politics in 1996, when she was elected to the Verkhovna Rada (the Ukrainian parliament) in constituency No. 229, Bobrynets, Kirovohrad Oblast, winning a record 92.3% of the vote. In Parliament, Tymoshenko joined the Constitutional Centre faction. In February 1997 this centrists faction was 56 lawmakers strong and, according to Ukrainska Pravda, at first it supported the policies of Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma. In late 1997, Tymoshenko called for impeachment and the next Ukrainian Presidential elections to be held not in 1999, but in the fall of 1998. In late November 1997, the General Prosecutor of Ukraine asked the Verkhovna Rada to lift Tymoshenko's parliamentary immunity, but the deputies voted against it. Tymoshenko was re-elected in 1998, winning a constituency in the Kirovohrad Oblast, and was also number six on the party list of Hromada. She became an influential person in the parliament, and was appointed the Chair of the Budget Committee of the Verkhovna Rada. After Hromada's party leader Pavlo Lazarenko fled to the United States in February 1999 to avoid investigations for embezzlement, various faction members left Hromada to join other parliamentary factions, among them Tymoshenko, who set up the All-Ukrainian Union "Fatherland" faction in March 1999 in protest against the methods of Lazarenko. "Fatherland" was officially registered as a political party in September 1999, and began to attract the voters who had voted for Yevhen Marchuk in the October 1999 presidential election. In 2000, "Fatherland" went in opposition to President Kuchma. From late December 1999 to January 2001, Tymoshenko was the Deputy Prime Minister for the fuel and energy sector in the cabinet of Viktor Yushchenko. She officially left parliament on 2 March 2000. Under her guidance, Ukraine's revenue collections from the electricity industry grew by several thousand percent. She scrapped the practice of barter in the electricity market, requiring industrial customers to pay for their electricity in cash. She also terminated exemptions for many organizations which excluded them from having their power disconnected. Her reforms meant that the government had sufficient funds to pay civil servants and increase salaries. In 2000, Tymoshenko's government provided an additional 18 billion hryvna for social payments. Half of this amount was collected due to withdrawal of funds from shadow schemes, the ban on barter payments and the introduction of competition rules to the energy market. On 18 August 2000, Oleksandr Tymoshenko, CEO of United Energy Systems of Ukraine (UESU) and Yulia Tymoshenko's husband, was detained and arrested. Tymoshenko herself stated that her husband's arrest was the result of political pressure on her. On 19 January 2001, President Leonid Kuchma ordered Yulia Tymoshenko to be dismissed. Then, Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko silently accepted her dismissal, despite her achievements in the energy sector. Ukrainian media called it "the first betrayal of Viktor Yushchenko". Soon after her dismissal, Tymoshenko took leadership of the National Salvation Committee and became active in the Ukraine without Kuchma protests. The movement embraced a number of opposition parties, such as Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc, "Fatherland", Ukrainian Republican Party, Ukrainian Conservative Republican Party, "Sobor", Ukrainian Social-Democratic Party, Ukrainian Christian-Democratic Party and Patriotic Party. On 9 February 2001, Tymoshenko founded the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc (the National Salvation Committee merged into it), a political bloc that received 7.2% of the vote in the 2002 parliamentary election. She has been head of the Batkivshchina (Fatherland) political party since the party was organised in 1999. On 13 February 2001, Tymoshenko was arrested and charged with forging customs documents and smuggling gas in 1997 (while president of United Energy Systems of Ukraine). Her political supporters organized numerous protest rallies near the Lukyanivska Prison where she was held in custody. In a letter to the editor of the British newspaper Financial Times, Tymoshenko claimed that the President of Ukraine Leonid Kuchma was consciously building a totalitarian system in the country: I believe that Mr Kuchma's regime may go so far as to eliminate me physically, not just politically, but I have made my choice and will continue to fight him by democratic methods. President Kuchma says I have committed a crime. My only "crime" has been to fight the corruption, shadow economy and totalitarianism that have been created by this president of Ukraine. Yulia Tymoshenko Prisoner of Conscience and Former Deputy Prime Minister, Ukraine. In March 2001, Pechersk District Court (Kyiv) found the charges groundless and cancelled the arrest sanction. According to Tymoshenko, the charges were fabricated by Kuchma's regime at the behest of oligarchs threatened by her efforts to eradicate corruption and institute market-based reforms. On 9 April 2003, the Kyiv Court of Appeal issued a ruling that invalidated and cancelled proceedings on the criminal cases against Yulia and Oleksandr Tymoshenko. Despite Tymoshenko being cleared of the charges, Moscow maintained an arrest warrant for her should she enter Russia. In 2005, all charges were declared groundless and lifted. The criminal case was closed in Ukraine in January 2005 due to lack of evidence, and in Russia in December 2005 by reason of lapse of time. On 18 November 2005, the Supreme Court of Ukraine issued a ruling which invalidated all criminal cases against Yulia Tymoshenko and her family. Despite this, the case was reopened in Ukraine since May 2010, after Yanukovych came to power. Tymoshenko on renewed cases against her: "This is a direct instruction from Yanukovych. This is purely political repression – this is obvious" Yulia Tymoshenko's press briefing on 12 May 2010 Tymoshenko's husband, Oleksandr, spent two years (2002–2004) in hiding in order to avoid incarceration on charges the couple said were unfounded and politically motivated by the former Kuchma administration. On 30 December 2010, the US State Department informed the Ukrainian government of its concern, and indicated that "the prosecution of Tymoshenko should not be selective or politically motivated. Once the charges were dropped, Tymoshenko reassumed her place among the leaders of the grassroots campaign against President Kuchma for his alleged role in the murder of the journalist Georgiy Gongadze. In this campaign, Tymoshenko first became known as a passionate, revolutionist leader, an example of this being a TV broadcast of her smashing prison windows during one of the rallies. At the time, Tymoshenko wanted to organise a national referendum to impeach President Kuchma. Our government was doing almost an underground work under the rigorous pressure of president Kuchma and criminal-oligarchic groups. All anti-shadow and anti-corruption initiatives of the Cabinet of Ministers were being blocked, while the Government was being an object of blackmailing and different provocations. People were arrested only because their relatives were working for the Cabinet of Ministers and were carrying out real reforms that were murderous for the corrupted system of power. Yulia Tymoshenko Nezavisimaya Gazeta interview (25 October 2001) On 11 August 2001, civilian and military prosecutors in Russia opened a new criminal case against Tymoshenko accusing her of bribery. On 27 December 2005, Russian prosecutors dropped these charges. Russian prosecutors had suspended an arrest warrant when she was appointed prime minister, but reinstated it after she was fired in September 2005. The prosecutors suspended it again when she came to Moscow for questioning on 25 September 2005. Tymoshenko didn't travel to Russia during her first seven months as prime minister (the first Tymoshenko Government). In January 2002, Tymoshenko was involved in a car accident that she survived with minor injuries. In the Autumn of 2001, both Tymoshenko and Viktor Yushchenko attempted to create a broad opposition bloc against the incumbent president, Leonid Kuchma, in order to win the Ukrainian presidential election of 2004. In late 2002, Tymoshenko, Oleksandr Moroz (Socialist Party of Ukraine), Petro Symonenko (Communist Party of Ukraine) and Viktor Yushchenko (Our Ukraine) issued a joint statement concerning "the beginning of a state revolution in Ukraine". In the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, the communist party stepped out of the alliance, but the other parties remained allied and Symonenko was against a single candidate from the alliance (until July 2006). In March 2004, Tymoshenko announced that leaders of "Our Ukraine", BYuT and Socialist Party of Ukraine were working on a coalition agreement concerning joint participation in the presidential campaign. Tymoshenko decided not to run for president and give way to Viktor Yushchenko. On 2 July 2004, Our Ukraine and the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc established the Force of the people, a coalition which aimed to stop "the destructive process that has, as a result of the incumbent authorities, become a characteristic for Ukraine." The pact included a promise by Viktor Yushchenko to nominate Tymoshenko as prime minister if Yushchenko should win the October 2004 presidential election. Tymoshenko was actively campaigning for Yushchenko, touring and taking part in rallies all over Ukraine. After Viktor Yushchenko had dropped out of the campaign due to his mysterious poisoning, Tymoshenko continued campaigning on his behalf. After the initial vote on 31 October, two candidates – Viktor Yanukovych and Viktor Yushchenko – proceeded to a runoff. As Tymoshenko earlier envisaged, Yushchenko received endorsement from former competitors who didn't make it to the runoff, such as Oleksandr Moroz (Socialist Party), Anatoliy Kinakh (Party of Industrials and Entrepreneurs), former Kyiv city mayor Oleksanrd Omelchenko and others. On 6 November 2004, Tymoshenko asked people to spread the orange symbols (orange was the color of Yushchenko's campaign). "Grab a piece of the cheapest orange cloth, make ribbons and put them everywhere" she said. "Don't wait until the campaign managers give those to you". When allegations of fraud began to spread, the "orange team" decided to conduct a parallel vote tabulation during 21 November 2004 runoff and announce the results immediately to people on Independence Square (Maidan Nezalezhnosti) in Kyiv. Tymoshenko called Kyiv residents to gather on the square and asked people from other cities and towns to come and stand for their choice. "Bring warm clothes, lard and bread, garlic and onions and come to Kyiv" she said. On 22 November 2004, massive protests broke out in cities across Ukraine: The largest, in Kyiv's Maidan Nezalezhnosti, attracted an estimated 500,000 participants. These protests became known as the Orange Revolution. On 23 November 2004, Tymoshenko led the participants of the protest to the President's Administration. On Bankova Street, special riot police prevented the procession from going any further, so people lifted Tymoshenko up and she walked on the police's shields to the Administration building. On 3 December 2004, the Supreme Court of Ukraine invalidated the results of the runoff and scheduled the re-run for 26 December 2004. After the cancellation of Viktor Yanukovych's official victory and the second round of the election, Viktor Yushchenko was elected president with 51.99% of votes (Yanukovych received 44.2% support). During the protests, Tymoshenko's speeches on the Maidan kept the momentum of the street protests going. Her popularity grew significantly to the point where the media began to refer to her as the Ukrainian or Slavic "Joan of Arc" as well as "Queen of the Orange revolution" in addition to her pre existing sobriquet from the 1990s decade as the "Gas Princess". Additional nicknames included "Goddess of the Revolution" and the "Princess Leia of Ukrainian politics". On 24 January 2005, Tymoshenko was appointed acting prime minister of Ukraine under Yushchenko's presidency. On 4 February, Tymoshenko's premiership appointment was ratified by the parliament with an overwhelming majority of 373 votes (226 were required for approval). She is the first woman appointed Prime Minister of Ukraine. The Tymoshenko cabinet did not have any other members of party Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc besides Tymoshenko herself and Oleksandr Turchynov, who was appointed the chief of Security Service of Ukraine. The ministers who were working with her took her side in the later confrontation with Viktor Yushchenko. On 28 July 2005, Forbes named Tymoshenko the third most powerful woman in the world, behind only Condoleezza Rice and Wu Yi. However, in the magazine's list published on 1 September 2006, Tymoshenko's name was not among the top 100. In September 2005, Tymoshenko received the "Person of the Year of Central and Eastern Europe" award according to the 15th International Economic Forum in Krinitsa Gurska. Several months into her government, internal conflicts within the post‐Revolution coalition began to damage Tymoshenko's administration. On 24 August 2005, Viktor Yushchenko gave an Independence Day speech during which he called Tymoshenko's government "the best". Yet on 8 September, after the resignation of several senior officials, including the Head of the Security and Defense Council Petro Poroshenko and Deputy Prime Minister Mykola Tomenko, Tymoshenko's government was dismissed by President Viktor Yushchenko during a live television address to the nation. Yushchenko went on to criticize her work as head of the Cabinet, suggesting it had led to an economic slowdown and political conflicts within the ruling coalition. He said that Tymoshenko was serving interests of some businesses, and the government decision to re-privatize the Nikopol Ferroalloy Plant (previously owned by Leonid Kuchma's son in law Viktor Pinchuk) "was the last drop" that made him dismiss the government. On 13 September 2005, Yushchenko accused Tymoshenko of betrayal of "Orange Revolution" ideas. In his interview for the Associated Press, he said that during the time of her presidency at UESU, Tymoshenko accumulated an 8 million Hryvna debt, and that she had used her authority as prime minister to write off that debt. Tymoshenko has repeatedly stated that the mentioned amount was not a debt, but fines imposed by the Tax Inspection from 1997 to 1998, and that all the cases regarding UESU had been closed before she became prime minister. Tymoshenko blamed Yushchenko's closest circle for scheming against her and undermining the activities of her Cabinet. She also criticised Yushchenko, telling the BBC that he had "practically ruined our unity, our future, the future of the country", without rooting out corruption as he pledged to do and that the president's action was absolutely illogical. At the time, Tymoshenko saw a rapid growth of approval ratings, while president Yushchenko's approval ratings went down. This tendency was later proved by the results of parliamentary elections in 2006, when for the first time ever BYuT outran "Our Ukraine" party, winning 129 seats vs. 81, respectively. During the previous parliamentary elections of 2002, BYuT had only 22 members of parliament, while "Our Ukraine" had 112. The work of Yulia Tymoshenko as prime minister in 2005 was complicated due to internal conflicts in the "orange" team. According to Tymoshenko, President Yushchenko and Petro Poroshenko were trying to turn the National Security and Defense Council into the "second Cabinet of Ministers". Tymoshenko was succeeded as prime minister by Yuriy Yehanurov. Soon after Tymoshenko's discharge in September 2005, the General Prosecutor Office of the Russian Federation dismissed all charges against her. On 18 November 2005, the Supreme Court of Ukraine issued a ruling which invalidated all criminal cases against Tymoshenko and her family. After her dismissal, Tymoshenko started to tour the country in a bid to win the 2006 Ukrainian parliamentary election as the leader of her Bloc. Tymoshenko soon announced that she wanted to return to the post of prime minister. She managed to form a strong team that started a political fight on two fronts – with Viktor Yanukovych's and Viktor Yushchenko's camps. With the Bloc coming second in the election, and winning 129 seats, many speculated that she might form a coalition with Yushchenko's "Our Ukraine" party and the Socialist Party of Ukraine (SPU) to prevent the Party of Regions from gaining power. Tymoshenko again reiterated her stance in regard to becoming prime minister. However, negotiations with "Our Ukraine" and SPU faced many difficulties as the various blocs fought over posts and engaged in counter-negotiations with other groups. On 21 June 2006, the Ukrainian media reported that the parties had finally reached a coalition agreement, which appeared to have ended nearly three months of political uncertainty. Tymoshenko's nomination and confirmation as the new prime minister was expected to be straightforward. However, the political intrigue that took place broke the plan. BYuT partners "Our Ukraine" and Socialist Party of Ukraine (SPU) could not come to agreement regarding distribution of powers, thus creation of the Coalition of Democratic Forces was put on hold. Yushchenko and oligarchs from his narrow circle were trying to impede Tymoshenko from returning to the office of prime minister. Her nomination was preconditioned on the election of her long-time rival Petro Poroshenko from "Our Ukraine" to the position of speaker of the parliament. Oleksandr Moroz, the chairman of the Socialist Party of Ukraine, also expressed his interest in becoming speaker. Tymoshenko stated that she would vote for any speaker from the coalition. Within a few days of the signing of the coalition agreement, it became clear that the coalition members mistrusted each other, since they considered it a deviation from parliamentary procedures to hold a simultaneous vote on Poroshenko as the speaker and Tymoshenko as prime minister. The Party of Regions announced an ultimatum to the coalition demanding that parliamentary procedures be observed, asking that membership in parliamentary committees be allocated in proportion to seats held by each fraction, and demanding chairmanship in certain Parliamentary committees as well as Governorships in the administrative subdivisions won by the Party of Regions. The Party of Regions complained that the coalition agreement deprived the Party of Regions and the communists of any representation in the executive and leadership in parliamentary committees, while in the local regional councils won by the Party of Regions the coalition parties were locked out of all committees as well. Members from the Party of Regions blocked the parliament from 29 June through 6 July. After lengthy negotiations, SPU suddenly pulled out of the Coalition and joined the alliance with the Party of Regions and the Communist Party of Ukraine. Oleksandr Moroz assured that the team of Viktor Yushchenko was conducting secret negotiations with the Party of Regions. According to that deal, Viktor Yanukovych was supposed to become the speaker, while Yuriy Yekhanurov kept the prime minister portfolio. These negotiations were conducted by Yekhanurov himself upon Yushchenko's request. Later, Yekhanurov admitted this fact in his interview with the "Ukrainska Pravda" website. Following the surprise nomination of Oleksandr Moroz from the Socialist Party of Ukraine as the Rada speaker and his subsequent election late on 6 July with the support of the Party of Regions, the "Orange coalition" collapsed. (Poroshenko had withdrawn his candidacy and had urged Moroz to do the same on 7 July). After the creation of a large coalition of majority composed of the Party of Regions, the Socialist Party of Ukraine and the Communist Party of Ukraine, Yanukovych became prime minister, and the other two parties were left in the wilderness. On 3 August 2006, Tymoshenko refused to sign the "Universal of National Unity" declaration initiated by president Yushchenko. The document, signed by Yushchenko, Yanukovych and leaders of Socialist and Communist parties, sealed Yanukovych's appointment as prime minister. Tymoshenko called it "the act of betrayal". In September 2006, Tymoshenko announced that her political force would be in opposition to the new government. Our Ukraine stalled until 4 October 2006, when it too joined the opposition. On 12 January 2007, a BYuT vote in the parliament overrode the president's veto of the "On the Cabinet of Ministers" law that was advantageous for the president. (In exchange, BYuT voted for the "On Imperative Mandate" and "On Opposition" laws). This vote was one of many steps undertaken by BYuT to ruin a fragile alliance between president Yushchenko and prime minister Yanukovych. In March 2007, Yulia Tymoshenko traveled to the United States, where she held high-level meetings with Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Stephen Hadley, the National Security Advisor under President George W. Bush. On 31 March 2007, Tymoshenko initiated a "100 thousand people Maidan" aimed to urge the president to call an early parliamentary election. On 4 April 2007, president Yushchenko issued an edict "On early termination of duties of the Verkhovna Rada" as a reaction to violation of the Constitution by the Party of Regions, which had started dragging individual deputies into the "ruling coalition" (this being illegal, as coalitions should be formed by factions and not by individual deputies). In doing so, the Party of Regions was trying to achieve a constitutional majority of 300 votes which would enable prime minister Yanukovych to override the president's veto and control the legislative process. Party of Regions didn't obey this edict. In order to dismiss the Verkhovna Rada, Yulia Tymoshenko and her supporters in the parliament (168 deputies from BYuT and "Our Ukraine" factions) quit their parliamentary factions on 2 June 2007. That step invalidated the convocation of the Verkhovna Rada and cleared the path to an early election. An early parliamentary election was held on 30 September 2007. Following balloting in the 2007 parliamentary elections held on 30 September 2007, Orange Revolution parties had won majority of 229 votes of BYUT fraction (30,71% of the votes (156 seats) and the Our Ukraine/People's Self-defence faction. On 3 October 2007, an almost final tally gave the alliance of Tymoshenko and President Yushchenko a slim lead over the rival party of Prime Minister Yanukovych, thanks in part to a vigorous BYuT campaign in the industrial east, a Party of Regions stronghold. Although Yanukovych, whose party won the single biggest share of the vote, also claimed victory, one of his coalition allies, the Socialist Party of Ukraine, failed to gain enough votes to retain seats in Parliament. On 15 October 2007, the Our Ukraine–People's Self-Defense Bloc and the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc agreed to form a majority coalition in the new parliament of the 6th convocation. On 29 November, a coalition was signed between the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine–People's Self-Defense Bloc, which was associated with President Yushchenko. Both parties are affiliated with the Orange Revolution. On 11 December 2007, the Coalition failed in its attempt to appoint Tymoshenko prime minister, falling one vote short (225 members of parliament supported her nomination). On 12 December 2007, the media reported on the possible attempted assassination of Yulia Tymoshenko. BYuT and Tymoshenko herself said it was an intimidation. On 18 December, Tymoshenko was once again elected as prime minister (supported by 226 deputies, the minimal number needed for passage), heading the second Tymoshenko Government. On 11 July 2008, the Party of Regions tried to vote no-confidence to Tymoshenko's government in the parliament, but could not collect enough votes. The coalition of Tymoshenko's Bloc (BYuT) and Yushchenko's Our Ukraine–People's Self-Defense Bloc (OU-PSD) was put at risk due to deliberate misinterpretation of Tymoshenko's opinion on the ongoing 2008 South Ossetia War between Georgia and Russia. Yushchenko's office accused her of taking a softer position in order to gain support from Russia in the upcoming 2010 election. Andriy Kyslynskyi, the president's deputy chief of staff, went as far as to accuse her of 'high treason'. According to Ukrainska Pravda and Newswire.ca Tymoshenko expressed her solidarity with Georgia on 13 and 14 August, and later preferred to stay neutral on the issue as according to Constitution President Yuschenko headed foreign policy issues. Tymoshenko on Russo–Georgian war: "We stand in solidarity with the democratically-elected leadership of Georgia. Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected Yulia Tymoshenko's press briefing on 13 August 2008 According to BYuT, Viktor Baloha (Chief of Staff of the Presidential Secretariat) criticized the premier at every turn, doing the dirty job for the President and accusing her of everything from not being religious enough to damaging the economy and plotting to kill him, and the accusation of 'betrayal' over Georgia was simply one of the latest and most pernicious attacks directed at the premier. After Tymoshenko's BYuT voted alongside the Communist Party of Ukraine and the Party of Regions to pass legislation that would facilitate the procedure of impeachment for future presidents and limit the president's power while increasing the prime minister's powers, President Yushchenko's OU-PSD bloc pulled out of the coalition and Yushchenko promised to veto the legislation and threatened to hold an election if a new coalition was not formed soon. This resulted in the 2008 Ukrainian political crisis, which culminated in Yushchenko calling an early parliamentary election on 8 October 2008. Tymoshenko was fiercely opposed to the snap election, stating "No politician would throw Ukraine into snap elections at this important time. But, if Yushchenko and Yanukovych – who are ideologists of snap elections – throw the country into snap elections, then they will bear responsibility for all the consequences of the financial crisis of 2007–2008 on Ukraine". Initially, the election was to be held on 7 December 2008, but was later postponed to an unknown date. Tymoshenko had no intention of resigning until a new coalition was formed. In early December 2008, there were negotiations between BYuT and the Party of Regions to form a coalition, but after Volodymyr Lytvyn was elected Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada (parliament of Ukraine) on 9 December 2008, he announced the creation of a coalition between his Lytvyn Bloc, BYuT and OU-PSD. After negotiations, the three parties officially signed the coalition agreement on 16 December. It was not known whether this coalition would stop the snap election, although Speaker Volodymyr Lytvyn predicted the Verkhovna Rada would work until 2012. On 5 February 2009, Tymoshenko's opponents in the parliament were trying to dismiss her government again, but again the vote failed.[better source needed] The following day, president Yushchenko strongly criticized Tymoshenko and the economic policies of her government. Tymoshenko accused him of spreading "a mix of untruths, panic and hysteria." On 18 December 2008, for the first time Tymoshenko accused the National Bank of Ukraine in the conscious manipulation of the hryvnia, and President Yushchenko of colluding with the leadership of the NBU, which led to depreciation of the national currency to the level of ₴8 per US dollar. A large part of Tymoshenko's second term as prime minister coincided in time with the financial crisis of 2007–2008, which required her government to respond to numerous challenges that could have led the country's economic collapse. Tymoshenko's government launched an anti-corruption campaign and identified it as one of its priorities. The conditions leading to the 2009 gas dispute were created in 2006, under the Viktor Yushchenko government, when Ukraine started buying Russian gas through an intermediary, Swiss-registered RosUkrEnergo. (Fifty percent of RosUkrEnergo shares were owned by the Russian "Gazprom", with 45 percent and 5 percent owned by Ukrainian businessmen Dmytro Firtash and Ivan Fursin, respectively). Some sources indicate that notorious criminal boss Semion Mogilevich (associated with Dmytro Firtash) also owned shares in the company. When Tymoshenko resumed her prime minister duties in 2007, she initiated direct relations between Ukraine and Russia with regard to gas trading. A 2 October 2008 Memorandum signed by Tymoshenko and Vladimir Putin stipulated liquidation of intermediaries in gas deals between the two countries and outlined detailed conditions for future gas contracts. The gas conflict of 2009 broke out because of two factors, the lack of a gas contract for 2009 and a $2.4 billion debt that Ukraine had yet to pay for gas received in 2008.[citation needed] Prime Minister Tymoshenko stated that it was the "RosUkrEnergo" company that was responsible for the debt, rather than the state of Ukraine. She called for an end to corruption in the gas trade area and the establishment of direct contracts with the Russian Federation. "RosUkrEnergo", with the aid of its ties to Yushchenko's administration, managed to disrupt the signing of a gas contract scheduled for 31 December 2008. Oleksiy Miller, head of "Gazprom", stated that trader "RosUkrEnergo" broke down talks between "Gazprom" and "Naftogaz Ukrainy": "Yes indeed, in late December 2008, the prime ministers of Russia and Ukraine came to agreement, and our companies were ready to seal the deal for $235 per 1000 cubic meters of natural gas with the condition that all the export operations from Ukraine will be done bilaterally. RosUkrEnergo then suggested to buy gas at $285 price." On 31 December 2008, president Viktor Yushchenko gave Oleg Dubyna, head of "Naftogaz Ukrainy", a direct order to stop talks, not sign the agreement and recall the delegation from Moscow. The decision made by the president of Ukraine brought on the crisis. On 14 January 2009, Prime Minister Tymoshenko said, "The negotiations on $235 gas price and $1.7–1.8 transit price, that started on October 2 and successfully have been moving forward since, have been broken up because, unfortunately, Ukrainian politicians were trying to keep "RosUkrEnergo" in business as a shadow intermediary... The negotiations between the two prime ministers and later between "Gazprom" and "Naftogaz Ukrainy" were ruined by those Ukrainian political groups, who have gotten and are planning to get corrupt benefits from "RosUkrEnergo"." On 17 January 2009, President of Russia Dmitriy Medvedev said, "I think that our Ukrainian partners and us can trade gas without any intermediaries, especially without intermediaries with questionable reputation. The problem is that some participants of negotiations insisted on keeping the intermediary referring to the instructions from the top." On 1 January 2009, at 10 am, "Gazprom" completely stopped pumping gas to Ukraine. On 4 January, the Russian monopolist offered to sell Ukraine gas for $450 per 1000 cubic meter (minus a fee for gas transit through Ukraine), which was defined as a standard price for Eastern European countries. On 8 January 2009, the prime minister of Russia, Vladimir Putin, said that Ukraine would have to pay $470 for 1000 cubic meters of natural gas. Between 1 and 18 January, Central and Eastern European countries received significantly less gas. Ukrainian heat-and-power stations were working to utmost capacity. Due to sub-zero temperatures, the entire housing and public utilities sectors were on the verge of collapse. On 14 January, the European Commission and the Czech presidency in the European Union demanded the immediate renewal of gas deliveries in full capacity lest the reputations of Russia and Ukraine as reliable EU partners be seriously damaged. On 18 January 2009, after five-day-long talks, prime ministers Putin and Tymoshenko came to agreement on the renewal of gas delivery to Ukraine and other EU countries. The parties agreed upon the following: A return to direct contract deals between "Gazprom" and "Naftogaz Ukrainy"; the removal of non-transparent intermediaries; the introduction of formula-based pricing for Ukraine (which also works for other Eastern European countries); and a switch to a $2.7 transit fee, which is close to the average price in Europe. According to the new gas contract, in 2009 Ukraine paid an average price of $232.98 per 1000 cubic meters, while other European consumers were paying above $500 per 1000 cubic meters. Tymoshenko was a candidate in the Ukrainian presidential elections of 2010, but lost that election to Viktor Yanukovych (Tymoshenko received 45.47% of the votes in the second and final round of the election, 3% less than her rival). In 2009, the relations between Tymoshenko and President Yushchenko, the Secretariat of the President of Ukraine and the oppositional Party of Regions remained hostile. This company then was owned by Dmitry Firtash – 45%, by Yushchenko family – 27%, and the Russian "Gazprom". In 2007, Tymoshenko argued for a direct contract for gas supplies from Russia to Ukraine. In 2008, the two prime ministers signed a Memorandum on the elimination of gas intermediaries. She emphasized early in February 2009 that the "election struggle for the next presidential elections has virtually begun." "This is a competition during economic crisis; [some people] prefer to collect political benefits from these problems instead of solving them together", Tymoshenko said in an interview with German newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in February 2009. Later, in an interview with the French paper Le Monde, the prime minister said that "the president treats her as a rival striving for president's office." She also added that the previously mentioned political instability fuels economic crisis. Tymoshenko then called for an early presidential election. Having long being considered a possible candidate for President of Ukraine in the 2010 election, Tymoshenko announced that she would indeed compete in the upcoming presidential election in a statement broadcast live on national TV on 7 June 2009. Tymoshenko also stated that if she lost the presidential election she would not challenge the results. On 12 September 2009, a tour in support of Tymoshenko's candidacy, called "With Ukraine in Heart", began on Kyiv's Maidan Nezalezhnosti. Popular Ukrainian singers and bands took part in the tour. On 24 October 2009, the delegates of all-Ukrainian union "Batkivshchyna" formally and unanimously endorsed Yulia Tymoshenko as their candidate for the next Presidential election. The 200 thousand congress took place on Kyiv's Independence Square. On 31 October 2009, the Central Election Commission registered Tymoshenko as a candidate for presidential election in 2010. The Tymoshenko candidacy was also endorsed by prominent Ukrainian politicians such as Borys Tarasyuk, Yuriy Lutsenko, former President Leonid Kravchuk, the Christian Democratic Union, the European Party of Ukraine and others. Putin stated that he was cooperating with Tymoshenko as Prime Minister of Ukraine, but that he was not supporting her in the election. As soon as Yushchenko and Yanukovych appear on the tribune, expect failure. And how can we forget the match between Ukraine and Greece, when our team lost the trip to South Africa. Why? Because two "lucky" politicians came to the deciding match and transferred their lucky aura to the entire Ukrainian team. Yulia Tymoshenko's personal blog (7 December 2009) Tymoshenko's campaign was expected to have cost $100 to $150 million. Tymoshenko expected early parliamentary elections after the 2010 presidential election if Yanukovych won the vote, but she was against this. On 1 December 2009, Tymoshenko urged "national democratic forces" to unite around the candidate who garnered the largest number of votes after the first round of the presidential elections. "If we are not able to strengthen our efforts and unite the whole national-patriotic and democratic camp of Ukraine... we will be much weaker than those who want revenge." On 5 December 2009, she declared she would go into opposition if she lost the presidential election. She also complained of flaws in the election legislation, and expressed her certainty that attempts were being made by her opponents to carry out vote rigging. In the first round of the presidential election on 17 January 2010, Tymoshenko took second place with 25% of the vote, and Yanukovych took first place with 35%. The two proceeded to a runoff. On 3 February 2010, two days before the run-off, the deputies from Party of Regions, Communist Party of Ukraine, "Our Ukraine – People's Self-Defense" bloc and independent MPs amended the Law on Election of President, which changed the mode of composition and functioning of election commissions. BYuT warned that these amendments would create opportunities for the massive rigging of elections. Tymoshenko called on president Yushchenko to veto the law. Hanne Severinsen, former rapporteur of PACE Monitoring Committee on Ukraine, also called on the president to veto the law. Severinsen's statement read: "Unfortunately, the Party of Regions, as in 2004, is trying to create conditions for vote fraud." Despite these requests, President Yushchenko signed the amended Law. This action generated vast international criticism from the Council of Europe and from members of the US congress' Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Committee of Voters of Ukraine stated that the amendments to the Law on Election of President "contained the biggest threats for democratic mode of the run-off." Tymoshenko did not receive endorsement from other candidates who had not survived the first round of voting. In the run-off held on 7 February 2010, Yanukovych was elected President of Ukraine. According to the Central Election Commission, he received 48.95% of the votes; Tymoshenko received 45.47% of the votes. Tymoshenko won 17 of 27 constituencies in the western, central and north regions of Ukraine and in Kyiv. Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc members immediately claimed that there was systematic and large-scale vote rigging in the run-off election. However, Tymoshenko herself did not issue a statement about the election until a live televised broadcast on 13 February 2010, in which she said that she would challenge the election result in court. Tymoshenko alleged widespread fraud (according to Tymoshenko, a million votes were invalid) and said Yanukovych was not legitimately elected. "Whatever happens in future, he will never become the legitimately elected President of Ukraine." Tymoshenko did not call people into the streets to protest, and stated that she "won't tolerate civil confrontation." On 10 February 2010, Yanukovych called on Tymoshenko to abandon her protests and resign as prime minister. Yanukovych stated he wanted to form a new coalition, and may try to call snap parliamentary elections. On 12 February, Yanukovych stated he would not rule out talks with Tymoshenko if she would publicly apologize to him for accusations she made during her election campaign. Tymoshenko's government did not want to resign voluntarily. On 17 February 2010, the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine suspended the results of the election on Tymoshenko's appeal. The court suspended the Central Election Commission of Ukraine ruling that announced that Viktor Yanukovych won the election. Tymoshenko withdrew her appeal on 20 February 2010, after the Higher Administrative Court in Kyiv rejected her petition to scrutinize documents from election districts in Crimea and to question election and law-enforcement officials. According to Tymoshenko, "It became clear that the court is not out to establish the truth, and, unfortunately, the court is as biased as the Central Election Commission, which includes a political majority from Yanukovych." Tymoshenko also stated, "At the very least there was rigging of votes using the main methods of falsification, and I think that for history this lawsuit with all the documentation will remain in the Higher Administrative Court of Ukraine, and sooner or later, an honest prosecutor's office and an honest court will assess that Yanukovych wasn't elected President of Ukraine, and that the will of the people had been rigged." On 22 February 2010, Tymoshenko announced in a televised speech that she believed the presidential election to have been rigged and did not recognize its results. "As well as millions of Ukrainians, I state: Yanukovych is not our president", she said. She called on the democratic parliamentary factions to not seek "political employment" at the Party of Regions (meaning to avoid negotiations with the Party of Regions regarding the new coalition) and to "quit arguing and create a united team that would not let an anti-Ukrainian dictatorship usurp the power". The falsifications decided the elections, not you. Like millions of Ukrainians, I assert that Yanukovych is not our president. PM Tymoshenko televised speech (22 February 2010) During a nationally televised address on 22 February, Tymoshenko said of President-elect of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych and "Yanukovych's team" (she referred to them in the speech as "The oligarchy"): "They need cheap labour, poor and disenfranchised people who can be forced to work at their factories for peanuts, they also need Ukraine's riches, which they have been stealing for the last 18 years." During the speech she also accused outgoing President Viktor Yushchenko of "opening the door to massive and flagrant election rigging" days before 7 February runoff of the January 2010 presidential election by amending the election law. During a Cabinet of Ministers meeting on 24 February, Tymoshenko stated, "The moment of truth has arrived: The decision whether or not to side with Yanukovych will show who values the preservation of Ukraine's independence and self-identity and who does not." Tymoshenko and her party, Bloc Yulia Tymoshenko, boycotted the inauguration ceremony of President Yanukovych on 25 February 2010. If the Second Tymoshenko Government could not be preserved, Tymoshenko stated on 22 February 2010, she would go into Parliamentary opposition. On 3 March 2010, the Ukrainian Parliament passed a motion of no confidence in the second Tymoshenko Government in which the cabinet was dismissed with 243 lawmakers voting in favour out of 450 (including seven lawmakers of Bloc Yulia Tymoshenko). (Prime Minister Tymoshenko had demanded this vote herself on 1 March 2010.) On 2 March 2010, the coalition had already lost the parliamentary majority. Before the vote on 3 March, Prime Minister Tymoshenko again stated, "If the dismissal of the government is passed today, at that very same moment our government will leave the cabinet. Our political force will cross into the opposition." Tymoshenko blamed the Lytvyn Bloc and "Our Ukraine, including the leader of Our Ukraine, who announced the position of the faction" for the fall of the cabinet. Tymoshenko resigned from the prime minister post on 4 March 2010. Fellow BYuT member Oleksandr Turchynov was empowered to fulfill the prime minister's duties until a new government was formed on 4 March 2010. On 9 and 15 March 2010, Tymoshenko called on "all of the national patriotic forces" to unite against Yanukovych. On 16 March, a shadow government including BYuT was established. On 10 May 2010, the People's Committee to Protect Ukraine was established, of which Tymoshenko is one of the representatives. Tymoshenko was against the 2010 Ukrainian-Russian Naval Base for Natural Gas treaty, as she believes the agreement harms Ukraine's national interests. On 12 May 2010, Ukraine's prosecutor's office illegally re-opened a 2004 criminal case, which had been closed by the Supreme Court of Ukraine in January 2005 against Tymoshenko regarding accusations that she had tried to bribe Supreme Court judges. As she left the prosecutor's office on 12 May, Tymoshenko told journalists she had been summoned to see investigators again on 17 May, and she linked the move to Russian President Medvedev's visit to Ukraine on 17 and 18 May 2010. Tymoshenko also claimed that she was told by "all the offices of the Prosecutor General's Office" that President Yanukovych had personally instructed the Prosecutor General's Office to find any grounds to prosecute her. In a press conference on 12 May, President Yanukovych's representative in the Verkhovna Rada, Yury Miroshnychenko, dismissed Tymoshenko's statement about Yanukovych's personal interest in prosecuting her. "Yanukovych is against political repression for criticism of the regime," Miroshnychenko stated. On 15 December 2010, the General Prosecutor's Office instituted a criminal case against Tymoshenko, alleging that she misused funds received by Ukraine within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol. She was officially charged on 20 December 2010. Tymoshenko denied the money had been spent on pensions, insisting it was still at the disposal of the environment ministry. She called the investigation against her a witch-hunt. According to government officials, the criminal case against Tymoshenko was a legitimate attempt to uncover corruption by the previous administration. In the case of "Kyoto money" American experts "Covington & Burling" and "BDO USA" stated the following: "the Documents that we were able to see, clearly point out that the Kyoto Target balance account in the amount of approximately 3.3 billion on the date of receipt remained unchanged throughout the period that is considered, and that, moreover, Kyoto funds have not been touched at all in 2009. Since the balance of this account remained unchanged on the date of receipt, any accusations that Prime Minister Tymoshenko "used" these funds contrary to their intended purpose, are obviously false". On 7 August 2014, the Chairman of the State Treasury service Tatiana Slyuz confirmed that the Tymoshenko government has never spent "Kyoto money", the funds were on special accounts and in 2010 were transferred to the Yanukovych government. Tymoshenko was not arrested, but ordered not to leave Kyiv while the inquiry was under way. In the same case, the environment minister in the second Tymoshenko Government, Georgiy Filipchuk, was detained. Filipchuk was the third minister from this government to face criminal charges since its fall in March 2010 (prosecutors charged former Interior Minister Yuriy Lutsenko with abuse of office in early December 2010, and former economy minister Bohdan Danylyshyn was detained in the Czech Republic in October 2010 on similar charges). Lawmakers of BYuT blocked the rostrum and presidium of the Verkhovna Rada the next day in protest against this. That same day, the European People's Party issued a statement in which it "condemns the growth of aggressive, politically motivated pressure by the Ukrainian authorities on the opposition and its leader Yulia Tymoshenko." Tymoshenko dismissed the probe as "terror against the opposition by President Yanukovych." Earlier that month, Ukraine's Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka had stated that there were no political reasons for the interrogations of the opposition leaders Tymoshenko, Lutsenko and Oleksandr Turchynov. New corruption charges against Tymoshenko were filed on 27 January 2011. She was accused of using 1,000 medical vehicles for campaigning in the presidential elections of 2010. According to Tymoshenko, the charges were false and part of "Yanukovych's campaign to silence the opposition." Subsequently, in 2010, the results of the audit of the accounts chamber revealed that the acquisition of these vehicles was provided for from 2008 in the article 87 of the Budget code, the State budget-2009 and article 13 of the Law of Ukraine "On state target programs". In June 2011, the case on the "Kyoto money" and of medical assistance vehicles to the village were suspended — after auditing company "BDO USA", which has branches in over one hundred countries around the world, and a large law firm "Covington & Burling" investigated these cases and stated that they "are not worth the paper on which they are written." A third criminal case against Tymoshenko in connection with alleged abuse of power during the 2009 Russia–Ukraine gas dispute was opened on 10 April 2011. This case was labelled "absurd" by Tymoshenko. On 24 May 2011, prosecutors charged her in connection with this (third criminal) case. She was not arrested. On 26 April 2011, Tymoshenko sued businessman Dmytro Firtash and Swiss-based RosUkrEnergo in a US District Court in Manhattan, accusing them of "defrauding Ukraine's citizenry by manipulating an arbitration court ruling" and "undermining the rule of law in Ukraine" in connection with a 2010 international arbitration court ruling in Stockholm that ordered Ukraine's state energy company Naftogaz to pay RosUkrEnergo 11 billion cubic meters (bcm) of natural gas to compensate for fuel it had "expropriated" plus 1.1 billion bcm as a penalty. Throughout Yanukovych's presidency, Tymoshenko stayed very critical of his and the Azarov Government's performances and intentions which, among others, she accused of selling out to Russia and of being a "funeral of democracy." Tymoshenko has accused "many of Ukraine's neighbours" of turning a blind eye to "Yanukovych's strangulation of Ukraine's democracy, some openly celebrate the supposed 'stability' that his regime has imposed." She believes "Ukraine can return to a democratic path of development only with an active civil society and support from the international community." In May 2010, the Ukrainian General Prosecutor's office started a number of criminal cases against Yulia Tymoshenko which prevented her from normal political activity and from international travel to her allies in the West. The European Parliament passed a resolution condemning the Yanukovych government for persecution of Tymoshenko as well as for prosecution in the "Gas case" and other cases against her and her ministers. On 24 June 2011, a trial started in the "gas case", concerning a contract signed in 2009 with Russian gas company Gazprom to supply natural gas to Ukraine. Tymoshenko was charged with abuse of power and embezzlement, as the court found the deal anti-economic for the country and abusive. Tymoshenko's trial (she was charged in May 2011) for abuse of office concerning a natural gas imports contract signed with Russia in January 2009 started on 24 June 2011 in Kyiv. A number of criminal cases were also opened against former officials from the second Tymoshenko Government. According to Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych, those cases were indiscriminately made to fight corruption in Ukraine. Former President Viktor Yushchenko testified against Tymoshenko during the trial, which he called "a normal judicial process." The trial against Tymoshenko has been referred to as "selective justice" and "political persecution" in statements by the U.S., Russia, United Kingdom, Germany, Italy, Spain and other European countries; in statements by the European Union, NATO, the European People's Party; and in statements by human rights organizations such as Transparency International, Freedom House, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch. Following her conviction, Tymoshenko remained under criminal investigation for ten criminal acts; Ukrainian prosecutors have claimed Tymoshenko committed even more criminal acts. Early in July 2011, the Ukrainian security service (SBU) opened a new criminal investigation into alleged non-delivery of goods by United Energy Systems of Ukraine (in 1996) to Russia for $405.5 million, the SBU maintains that Russia may claim this sum to the State budget of Ukraine (this criminal case was closed in Russia in December 2005 due to lapse of time). On 11 October 2011, the court found Tymoshenko guilty of abuse of power and sentenced her to seven years in prison, banned her from seeking elected office for her period of imprisonment, and ordered her to pay the state $188 million. She was convicted for exceeding her powers as prime minister by ordering Naftogaz to sign the gas deal with Russia in 2009. Tymoshenko did appeal the sentence, which she compared to Stalin's Great Terror, on 24 October 2011. A 2001 criminal case on state funds embezzlement and tax evasion charges against Tymoshenko was reopened in Ukraine on 24 October 2011.[citation needed] On 4 November 2011, the Ukrainian tax police resumed four criminal cases against Tymoshenko. She was charged for these cases on 10 November 2011. Tymoshenko was re-arrested (while in prison) on 8 December 2011, after a Ukrainian court ordered her indefinite arrest as part of the investigation of alleged tax evasion and theft of government funds (between 1996 and 2000) by United Energy Systems of Ukraine. Again, the European Union showed concern over this. On 23 December 2011, Tymoshenko lost her appeal against her sentence for abuse of power. She and her lawyers had boycotted the appeal proceedings, claiming that the "judicial system and justice are totally non-existent in Ukraine today." Tymoshenko lodged a complaint against the verdict at the European Court of Human Rights, which was given priority treatment by the court. On 30 December 2011, Tymoshenko was transferred to the Kachanivska penal colony in Kharkiv. In early January 2012, Tymoshenko's husband Oleksandr Tymoshenko was granted asylum in the Czech Republic, which he had requested at the end of the previous year. In early April 2012, the General Prosecutor's Office began examining the possible involvement of Tymoshenko and former prime minister Pavlo Lazarenko in the murder of Donetsk businessman Olexandr Momot in 1996. A trial concerning alleged misappropriating public funds of United Energy Systems of Ukraine started on 19 April 2012 in Kharkiv. Tymoshenko refused to attend the trial, citing problems with her health. Tymoshenko was then moved against her will from Kachanivska prison to a hospital where she began a hunger strike on 20 April to protest – according to her lawyer Serhiy Vlasenko – "what is happening in the country and what is happening to her in prison." She ended the hunger strike on 9 May 2012. Beginning on 9 May 2012, she received treatment at the hospital after being diagnosed with a spinal disc herniation. The Supreme Court of Ukraine upheld the verdict against Tymoshenko on 29 August 2012. From 29 October to 16 November 2012, Tymoshenko was again on a hunger strike to protest vote rigging in the October 2012 Ukrainian parliamentary election. Fatherland United Opposition nominated Tymoshenko as its candidate for the Ukrainian presidential elections of 2015 on 7 December 2012. On 14 June 2013, the congress of her party approved the decision to nominate her as its candidate in the 2015 Ukrainian presidential election. On 18 January 2013, Tymoshenko was notified that she was a suspect in the murder of businessman and lawmaker Yevhen Shcherban, his wife and two other people in 1996. In May 2013, the Shcherban murder case was suspended. From 25 November to 6 December 2013 (during the Euromaidan protests), Tymoshenko was again on a hunger strike in protest of "President Yanukovych's reluctance to sign the DCFTA" on 6 December. On 24 October 2011, Tymoshenko filed an appeal to the decision of Pechersk district court of Kyiv regarding the "gas case". On 1 December, the Kyiv Court of Appeal started hearing the case. Tymoshenko herself was not present in the courtroom because of her health condition. After the hearing, the judge, Olena Sitaylo, had to call an ambulance and was hospitalized. On 13 December 2011, the Kyiv Court of Appeal resumed the hearing. All subsequent court sessions took place without Tymoshenko's presence. Immediately prior to the hearing of the appeal, the board of judges was altered: Sitaylo, the chief justice, was appointed the day before the first hearing; other justices were appointed several days prior to the court session. Thus, the judges did not have time to study the 84-page case log. The manner of the process proved that the decision to alter the board of judges was made beforehand. At the very end, Tymoshenko's defense boycotted the court session. On 23 December 2011, the Kyiv Court of Appeal issued a ruling which fully supported the verdict of the Pechersk court. The judges didn't find any violations during the pre-trial investigation or trial on the "gas case", overruling the claims of Tymoshenko's defense. On 26 January 2012, Tymoshenko's defense submitted a cassation appeal to the High Specialized Court for Civil and Criminal Cases regarding the "gas case" verdict. On 16 August 2012, after a 7-month delay that impeded filing the case to the European Court of Human Rights, the panel of judges of the aforementioned court began hearing the case. The panel finished hearing the case on 21 August and went to the jury room to make decision. The ruling of the Court, issued on 29 August 2012, stated that the appeal of former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko's defense on the "gas case" should not be satisfied. Media, diplomats, members of parliament and members of an EU special monitoring mission, Pat Cox and Aleksander Kwaśniewski, attended the court sessions. The ruling was announced on the day following public hearing of "Tymoshenko vs Ukraine" (regarding unlawful arrest of ex-prime minister and holding her in custody) case at the European Court of Human Rights. The European Union, PACE, and governments of the United States, Great Britain and Canada expressed frustration with the cassation ruling. "We are deeply disappointed with the consequences of the current situation, when two important opposition leaders cannot stand in the upcoming parliamentary elections, [and] when the court disrespects international standards for fair and transparent processes", a representative of the European Commission, Michael Mann, said in Brussels on 29 August 2012. The "gas case" trial was viewed by many European and American organizations as a politically charged persecution that violates the law. The European Union and multiple international organizations see the conviction as "justice being applied selectively under political motivation." In June 2012, the European Parliament established a special monitoring mission to Ukraine, conducted by former European Parliament President Pat Cox and former Polish President Aleksander Kwaśniewski. Both politicians observed trials, repeatedly visited Tymoshenko in custody and conducted meetings with Ukraine's authorities regarding her release. The European Union shelved the European Union Association Agreement and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the Ukrainian government over the issue. On 30 April 2013, the European Court of Human Rights issued a judgment asserting that "Ms. Tymoshenko's pre-trial detention had been arbitrary; that the lawfulness of her detention had not been properly reviewed; and, that she had no possibility to seek compensation for her unlawful deprivation of liberty." Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) has adopting a resolution on "Keeping political and criminal responsibility separate" in which former prime minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko is recognized as a political prisoner. The United States Senate passed two resolutions calling for the release from prison of former prime minister Tymoshenko. The most recent, presented in the Senate in June 2013, called for Tymoshenko's release in light of the recent European Court of Human Rights ruling, and was adopted on 18 November 2013. An earlier resolution, passed in 2012, condemned the politically motivated prosecution and imprisonment of former prime minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko. On 2 October 2013, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) adopted a resolution calling for the immediate release of Tymoshenko and, two days later, Pat Cox and Aleksander Kwaśniewski, representatives of the European Parliament mission, handed president Yanukovych a petition to pardon Tymoshenko. In December 2012, the united opposition nominated her and later in June 2013 confirmed her as its candidate in the 2015 Ukrainian presidential election. According to the September 2018 indictment in which Paul Manafort confessed as part of a plea bargain with U.S. special prosecutor Robert Mueller, Manafort and his partner Tony Podesta, brother of Hillary Clinton's campaign manager John Podesta, helped the former Ukrainian President to conduct a media campaign in the West directed against Tymoshenko in order to undermine the support for her by the administration of then U.S. President Barack Obama. In exchange for his testimony against Manafort, Mueller gave Tony Podesta and The Podesta Group complete amnesty, including not prosecuting them for being unregistered agents of a foreign government. The campaign was designed to make Tymoshenko look like a supporter of anti-Semitism. The indictment also states that in July 2011, former U.S. journalist Alan Friedman sent Manafort a confidential six-page document entitled "Ukraine – the digital road map", which contained a plan for "destruction" of Tymoshenko using video, articles and social networks. The plan included creating a website, posting on the Internet, and sending out e-mails to "the target audience in Europe and the U.S." It was also proposed to edit the page of Yulia Tymoshenko in Wikipedia in order to emphasize the "corruption and legal proceedings" related to her. Following the Revolution of Dignity, on 21 February 2014, Parliament voted for her release in a 310–54 veto-proof vote. To do so, the members of parliament decriminalized the Article on which Tymoshenko was charged and brought it into compliance with Article 19 of the UN Convention against corruption. That could enable immediate release of Tymoshenko through the corresponding court ruling. However, Viktor Yanukovych fled the country after massive violent clashes in Kyiv that killed more than 80 people without signing the bill into law. On 22 February 2014, the Verkhovna Rada with 322 votes adopted a decree based on the decision of the European Court of Human Rights and corresponding decision of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. On the same day, Tymoshenko was released from Central Clinical Hospital No. 5 in Kharkiv, where she had been receiving treatment under police guard since May 2012, after being diagnosed with a spinal disc herniation. Her release was praised by western leaders. On 28 February 2014, the parliament rehabilitated Yulia Tymoshenko and restored her rights. That enabled her to run for office; however, she has ruled out becoming prime minister again. Kyivsky District Court of Kharkiv closed the criminal case on financial abuse of the United Energy Systems of Ukraine on 28 February 2014. And, on 14 April, the Supreme Court of Ukraine closed the "gas case" against Tymoshenko for "absence of a criminal act". On 25 April 2014, the General Prosecutor of Ukraine launched a pre-trial investigation against a number of officials from its own office and the Pechersky district court and Kyiv's court of appeals (the judges who had sentenced Tymoshenko) because of allegedly "deliberate, systematic and flagrant violation of accused Yulia Tymoshenko's rights to defense, which are granted by Ukraine's current laws". On 24 June 2014, the Supreme Court of Ukraine rehabilitated Tymoshenko. On 22 January 2015, the European Court of Human Rights announced the termination of consideration of the case of Yulia Tymoshenko v. Ukraine in connection to an implied friendly settlement between the parties, after Tymoshenko's agreement with the government's declaration admitting that the criminal prosecution against her had been politically motivated. The Ukrainian government, in its exchange with the Court, had acknowledged a violation of Tymoshenko's rights guaranteed by the European Convention on Human Rights under articles 3 (prohibition of torture), 6 (right to a fair trial), 7 (no punishment without law), 8 (right to respect for private and family life), partly in conjunction with article 13 (right to an effective remedy), article 18 (political motivation), article 10 (freedom of expression) and article 4 of Protocol No. 7 to the convention (right not to be tried or punished twice). Taking note of the Ukrainian government's declaration and following measures, as well as of Tymoshenko's agreement with it, the Court struck out the application from its list of cases, as asked by the government, following article 39 of the convention (friendly settlements). On 19 October 2015, the Kominternivskyi district court of Kharkiv has sentenced two former employees of the Kachanivska penal colony No. 54 to three years in prison for inflicting injuries on Tymoshenko. Immediately after her release from prison on 22 February 2014, Yulia Tymoshenko travelled to Kyiv, where she attended a makeshift memorial to the first slain protesters on Hrushevskogo Street and gave a speech on Maidan stage. In the following days, she had a number of meetings and phone conversations with USA, EU, and OSCE officials. Tymoshenko addressed the European Union, leaders of western democracies and of countries which guaranteed Ukraine's territorial unity according to the Budapest Memorandum; she called for action to stop what she called the "Russian aggression". From 6 to 7 March, Tymoshenko attended a political conference of the European People's Party in Dublin, where she openly discussed events with Angela Merkel, Jose Manuel Barroso, Viviane Reding, Michel Barnier, Mariano Rajoy and Donald Tusk, amongst other notable figures. On 7 March 2014, she was admitted to the Charité hospital in Berlin, Germany, for treatment of her severe back problems. Upon her return to Kyiv, Tymoshenko gathered military and defense experts and suggested launching a special headquarters that would elaborate responses to threats coming from Russia. On 27 March 2014, at a press conference in Kyiv, Tymoshenko stated that she would run in the 2014 presidential election. Two days later, the congress of Batkivshchyna party officially nominated her and on 31 March the Central Election Commission officially registered her as a candidate. The key theses of Tymoshenko's election campaign were the eradication of corruption, the fight against oligarchs, the European path of Ukraine's development (in particular, the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU), countering Russian aggression and restoring the territorial integrity of Ukraine. The election took place on 25 May. Tymoshenko came a distant second behind Petro Poroshenko. She received 12.39% of the vote. On 30 August 2014, Tymoshenko announced her Batkivshchina party would start gathering signatures to trigger a referendum on NATO accession. In the 2014 parliamentary election "Fatherland" received 5.68% of the vote and 19 seats in parliament. In the elections Tymoshenko was placed second on the parties electoral list, after Nadiya Savchenko. After the election Tymoshenko again became faction leader. She is a member of the Committee of the Verkhovna Rada on issues of European integration in the 8th convocation of parliament. After the election, Tymoshenko began reforming the Batkivshchyna party. On March 27, 2014, at a press conference in Kyiv, Yulia Tymoshenko announced her decision to run for president. On March 29, the "Batkivshchyna" congress, which took place on Sofia Maidan, nominated her for the post of President of Ukraine. The key theses of Tymoshenko's pre-election program were the eradication of corruption, the fight against oligarchs, the European path of Ukraine's development (in particular, the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU), countering Russian aggression, and restoring Ukraine's territorial integrity. In order to win the presidential elections and the subsequent political struggle, Ukrainian presidential candidate Yulia Tymoshenko hired political technologist Tal Zilbershtein, who once advised ex-Prime Minister of Israel Ehud Olmert, to her team. Yulia Tymoshenko took second place with a result of 12.81% in the extraordinary elections of the President of Ukraine, which took place in one round on May 25, 2014. Petro Poroshenko won the election. After the elections, Tymoshenko began reforming the Batkivshchyna party.[citation needed] On 11 December 2014, the Rada supported Tymoshenko's initiative on freeing Nadiya Savchenko. On 5 March 2015, Parliament supported a bill to support the volunteer movement in Ukraine. On 21 April 2015, Tymoshenko initiated a working group to check the validity of utility tariffs. On 6 April 2016, Tymoshenko thanked Angela Merkel for her help in establishing peace in eastern Ukraine. 15 May 2016: Faction "Fatherland" preparing a statement in the name of the new Prosecutor General in connection with offenses in the activities of the National Commission, which performs state regulation in the energy and utilities relative to the unjustified increase of gas prices for the population. 16 May 2016: Yulia Tymoshenko held a meeting with the coordinator of the US State Department on the issue of sanctions, Ambassador Dan Fried. The sides discussed the situation in Eastern Ukraine and Crimea, focusing on the politics of U.S. sanctions against Russia. Dan Fried assured Tymoshenko of the support of the United States of America for Ukraine, and its territorial integrity and independence. 23 May 2016: At the initiative of Yulia Tymoshenko All-Ukrainian Union "Fatherland" launched a website "Fair rates", the proceedings of which explain the need to establish adequate tariffs for gas for the population. Tymoshenko is in favor of extending the moratorium on land sales and supporting farmers. She considers negotiations in the format of the Budapest Memorandum to be an effective way to resolve the issue of the war in Donbass. The New Deal of Ukraine is an election program for the post of President of Ukraine, which was presented on 15 June 2018, by the leader of the "Fatherland" party, Yulia Tymoshenko. This program provides for amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine. The program contains four blocks: New social contract New economic course New World Strategy Ecosystem of human life On 20 June 2018, Tymoshenko announced that she would take part in the 2019 Ukrainian presidential election. She was a heavy favorite in the polls until early 2019.[citation needed] Two weeks before the election, candidate Serhiy Taruta pledged his campaign-team would support Tymoshenko's campaign efforts (however, his name was not taken off the ballot, the deadline to withdraw having been exceeded). On 8 February 2019, a new presidential candidate was registered with the same surname and initials as Yulia Tymoshenko – the non-factional people's deputy Yury V. Tymoshenko. It was done with the intention that the voters, especially older people, would make a mistake on the ballot. Yulia Tymoshenko herself called it a "dirty" move by P. Poroshenko. For a long period before the start of the election campaign, Tymoshenko was the leader of opinion polls. The situation changed after the actor Volodymyr Zelenskyy's New Year's announcement of his intention to run for president, after which it was Zelenskyy who began to gain a rating, beating Tymoshenko at the end of January 2019. Later, during the entire election campaign, Tymoshenko shared 2–3 positions in the rating together with the current President Petro Poroshenko. The first round of the election was held on 31 March 2019. With 13.4% of the vote, Tymoshenko came in third behind Zelenskyy (30.2%) and the incumbent Poroshenko (15.9%). While she conceded defeat, she also accused Poroshenko of manipulating the results. In the 2019 parliamentary election, she led the "Fatherland" list which came in third, with 8.18% of the vote and 26 seats in parliament, in ahead of European Solidarity list led by Poroshenko (8.10%). According to the results of the CEC, Tymoshenko's party received 4093 deputy mandates (12.39%) and became one of the leading parties in local elections in Ukraine. In the 2019 parliamentary election, she led the Batkivshchyna list which came in third, with 8.18% of the vote and 26 seats in parliament. Tymoshenko became a member of the Parliamentary Committee on Social Policy and Protection of Veterans' Rights. Tymoshenko's activities in this session of the Rada focussed on opposition to lifting the moratorium on land sales and pushing for government action to lower energy prices. At the start of the term, Tymoshenko's party supported a number of measures put forward by the ruling Servant of the People party. On the first day of the new session of the Rada, Tymoshenko's party supported the bill on lifting parliamentary immunity. On 3 September 2019, the Batkivshchyna party supported the referral to the Constitutional Court of a bill to reduce the number of deputies. However, in November 2019, after the parliament passed a bill to lift the moratorium on land sales, Yulia Tymoshenko announced her transition to opposition to the ruling Servant of the People party. On 18 November 2019, Tymoshenko appealed to the Constitutional Court to immediately consider the petition for the bill on the "land market". In December 2019, Tymoshenko united more than 40 political and public organizations that oppose the sale of land in the National Headquarters for the Protection of Native Land. On 15 December 2019, the National Headquarters approved demands to President Volodymyr Zelenskyy that it be necessary to postpone the adoption of "land laws", extend the moratorium and announce a referendum. The National Corps also joined the all-Ukrainian protest action initiated by the National Headquarters for the Protection of the Motherland. On 19 December 2019, Yulia Tymoshenko and Batkivshchyna deputies addressed the National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine with a statement pointing to conflicts of interest and corruption in the Parliamentary Committee on Agrarian Policy during the consideration of the law on land sales. In November 2020, Tymoshenko's party supported the all-Ukrainian SaveFOP campaign by registering Bill 3853–2 to simplify the taxation system for small businesses. Tymoshenko signed a memorandum of cooperation with the public movement SaveFOP. On 11 January 2021, Tymoshenko called on the authorities to provide Ukrainians with gas at a price no higher than the purchase price. According to Tymoshenko, the price of gas should not exceed ₴3, in this regard, Batkivshchyna registered Bill No. 1177 in the Verkhovna Rada. On 27 January 2021, Tymoshenko initiated a referendum on five issues: the supply of Ukrainian gas and nuclear electricity to the population with a 30% profitability; on the sale of agricultural land; on the sale of strategic property; the issue of legalization of cannabis; about the gambling business. At the same time, Zelenskyy criticized Tymoshenko's referendum, although he himself initiated a nationwide poll on 5 issues, as well as the strengthening of democracy in Ukraine. On 1 March 2021, the Batkivshchyna party demanded that the Government stop importing electricity from Russia and Belarus to Ukraine and launch an investigation into the matter. According to Tymoshenko, the import of Belarusian and Russian electricity threatens the national security of the country. In June 2021, Tymoshenko took part in a meeting of the All-Ukrainian People's Council on holding a referendum against the sale of agricultural land. On 21 July 2021, Tymoshenko announced that the Batkivshchyna party had drafted a new Constitution of Ukraine, which provided for the division of power into four branches of government: legislative, executive, judicial, and control. In September 2021, Tymoshenko called on the Verkhovna Rada to adopt bill No. 4680, which provides for the supply of domestically produced gas to Ukrainian citizens at a low price/ On 28 September 2021, Tymoshenko registered in the Verkhovna Rada a Draft Resolution "On the Creation of a Temporary Investigative Commission to Investigate the Activities of NJSC Naftogaz of Ukraine". On 23 October 2021, Tymoshenko registered in the Verkhovna Rada a draft resolution "On urgent measures to overcome an emergency level crisis that has developed as a result of an increase in energy prices" and a draft law "On Amendments to the Tax Code of Ukraine on the introduction of a reduced value added tax rate on energy carriers and related services". On 26 October 2021, Tymoshenko handed over medical equipment for patients with coronavirus to the Oleksandrivska Clinical Hospital in Kyiv. On 20 June 2022, in the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the Batkivshchyna faction, led by Yulia Tymoshenko, did not support the ratification of the Istanbul Convention. Tymoshenko believes that the Istanbul Convention is not included in the package of requirements of the European Union for granting Ukraine a candidate. She noted that the Verkhovna Rada went against the will of the Ukrainians, because such an important issue should be determined at a national referendum. On 27 January 2022, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted a resolution initiated by Tymoshenko to establish a Temporary Commission of Inquiry to investigate possible corruption that caused significant losses to the revenue side of the state budget, in particular as a result of NJSC Naftogaz of Ukraine. Tymoshenko became a member of this VSC. On 19 July 2022, deputies of the Batkivshchyna faction led by Tymoshenko prevented the theft of 264 billion hryvnias from the budget, which Naftogaz of Ukraine was supposed to spend on an opaque scheme for financing the purchase of natural gas for the next heating season. 29 July 2022 the Verkhovna Rada voted for the legislative initiative of Tymoshenko on the creation of a Temporary Special Commission to Investigate the Crisis in the Energy Market of Ukraine. On 29 July during a working visit to Japan, Tymoshenko discussed the situation in Ukraine with Tokyo Governor Yuriko Koike. On the same day, Tymoshenko spoke at a conference in Tokyo and called for the creation of a new stable security order in the world. In late February 2022, French news channel France24 reported that Tymoshenko urged NATO and the United Nations to protect Ukraine by closing Ukrainian airspace and deploying United Nations peacekeeping forces to her country. In early April 2022, Radio Free Europe published further comments by Tymoshenko on the Russian invasion. Reportedly, she stated that "Vladimir Putin deeply believes that he has a historic mission to recreate the Soviet Union"; that this ambition poses a threat to other Eastern European nations; and that "Ukraine's membership in NATO is the most powerful guarantee, second only to having a strong army, which can once and for all stop any attempts by the Russian Federation to seize Ukraine." On 1 March 2022, Tymoshenko took custody of the Okhmatdyt children's hospital. Tymoshenko donated medicines and essentials to the institution. Tymoshenko also helped to take sick children out of Kyiv and the region to continue treatment and medical care abroad and in the western regions of the country. Tymoshenko created the Center for Humanitarian Aid in the central office of her political party "Batkivshchyna" to help vulnerable groups of the population and the Ukrainian military. On 31 May 2022, Tymoshenko spoke at the Congress of the European People's Party in Rotterdam. Tymoshenko urged those present to contribute in every possible way to granting Ukraine membership in the EU and NATO. Also during the visit, Tymoshenko discussed with the European Commissioner for Health and Food Safety Stella Kyriakidis the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and the issue of global food security. In addition, Tymoshenko discussed the situation in Ukraine with European Commissioner for Budget Johannes Hahn, EPP President Donald Tusk and European Parliament President Roberta Metsola. In an interview with The Daily Telegraph in June 2022, Tymoshenko dismissed that diplomatic efforts will have any impact in the war and that Ukraine "has military might" to "finish" the war. On 5–7 July 2022, in the city of Athens, Tymoshenko took part in a round table meeting of The Economist, where she called on the world community to form a new security system. On 6 July 2022, Tymoshenko discussed with the executive director of the American Jewish Committee, David Harris, joint actions to counter Russian disinformation and propaganda, ways to restore Ukraine's economy, and the possibility of providing specialized medical care to Ukrainians who suffered as a result of the Russian war. On 7 July 2022, Tymoshenko discussed with the Vice President of the European Commission, Margaritis Schinas, the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On the same day, Tymoshenko discussed with the Minister of Health of Greece, Thanos Plevris, the possibility of providing specialized medical assistance to Ukrainians who suffered as a result of Russian aggression. On 19 July 2022, in an interview for the American magazine Time, Tymoshenko said that due to Russian aggression, Ukraine and Africa should stick together to prevent genocide. On 7 August 2022, the British magazine The Economist published an article by Tymoshenko, in which she calls on the world to conclude new agreements in the field of security that will ensure the inviolability of national borders. 14 August 2022 in an interview with the Portuguese publication Sol, Tymoshenko said that in order to defeat Russia, Ukraine needs weapons to return all the territories occupied by the Russians. On 1–2 September 2022, Tymoshenko took part in the "Estoril Conferences-2022" conference in Portugal. On 2 September 2022, the Yulia Tymoshenko scholarship was introduced for talented Ukrainian entrants to the most prestigious Nova School of Business and Economics in Portugal On 6 October 2022 Tymoshenko, in response to the proposal of the Chairman of the Federation Council (Russia) Valentina Matviyenko on the need for Ukraine and Russia to "sit down at the negotiating table", announced during the summit of the heads of the G20 Parliaments in Indonesia, said that peace negotiations with the Russian Federation are possible only after the return of all territories of Ukraine. On 19 October 2022, as part of the participation in the 18th annual Cyprus Summit of The Economist, Tymoshenko discussed with the President of Cyprus Nicos Anastasiades the strengthening of assistance to Ukraine. Also at the Summit, Tymoshenko met with the former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Germany Joschka Fischer. On 27 September 2022, as part of a working visit to Geneva, Tymoshenko discussed the situation in Ukraine with Guy Ryder, Director-General of the International Labour Organization. On 29 September 2022, as part of a working visit to Paris, Tymoshenko met with representatives of the French Democratic Confederation of Labor. On 30 October 2022, Tymoshenko visited the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Kherson Oblast. On 30 May 2023, Tymoshenko visited Ukrainian military personnel undergoing treatment at a hospital in Kharkiv. In the spring of 2023, on the initiative of Tymoshenko, a charity auction was held, where 7 million hryvnias were collected for the purchase of necessary equipment for military hospitals. On 22 June 2023, Tymoshenko took part in an international conference held by the opposition coalition National Council of Resistance of Iran (NCRI) in Paris. On 21–23 June 2023, Tymoshenko took part in a seminar on the topic: "The collapse of authoritarianism" in Gdansk. 30 June 2023, in the Verkhovna Rada, the Batkivshchyna faction was the only parliamentary faction to vote against draft law No. 8401, which returns fines for business. On 31 July 2023, Tymoshenko handed over medical aid to the Ternopil Regional Hospital for wounded Ukrainian soldiers. On 1 August 2023, Tymoshenko registered in the parliament the draft law "On Amendments to Some Legislative Acts of Ukraine Regarding the Improvement of the System of Treatment and Rehabilitation of Servicemen Who Suffered Trauma Related to the Defense of the Motherland During Combat". On 25 August 2023, Tymoshenko handed over humanitarian aid to hospitals in Dnipropetrovsk region and Kramatorsk. In September 2023, Tymoshenko headed the Temporary Special Commission (TSC) on the conditions of treatment of wounded soldiers. As part of the leadership of the TSC, Tymoshenko visits hospitals in Donetsk, Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhia, and Odesa oblasts on humanitarian missions. At the end of September 2023, Tymoshenko brought humanitarian aid for doctors in Toretsk and Pokrovsk in the Donetsk region. In October 2023, Tymoshenko proposed to the Verkhovna Rada a "road map" of urgent actions to improve the treatment of wounded soldiers. On 17 October 2023, Tymoshenko gave a speech on the situation in Ukraine at a meeting of the European People's Party group in Strasbourg. On 24 October 2023, Tymoshenko took part in the international conference "The Economist" in Athens. On 22 November 2023, Tymoshenko and Vietnamese Ambassador to Ukraine Nguyen Hoan Thanh discussed the situation in Ukraine and the further development of relations between the two countries. On 14 December 2023, Tymoshenko held a working meeting with the ambassadors of EU member states in Ukraine. Tymoshenko wants her country to become a member state of the European Union (EU), while also expressing concern about antagonizing Russia, saying: "I try to defend our interests so that we can find a balance in our relations both with the EU and Russia." Tymoshenko supports Ukraine joining NATO, stating it would be "uncomfortable" for Ukraine to remain "in a void, outside all existing security systems". According to Tymoshenko, the question of Ukraine joining any system of collective security would "be resolved only by referendum". Tymoshenko favours close relations with the EU, including the creation of a free trade area between Ukraine and the EU and later a full EU membership. According to Tymoshenko, "The European project has not been completed as yet. It has not been completed because there is no full-fledged participation of Ukraine." She opposes foreign intervention in internal Ukrainian affairs: "Ukraine's realization of its sovereign rights, forming a modern political nation, cannot be considered as a policy aimed against anyone." Tymoshenko does not want to expand the lease contract of the Russian Black Sea fleet in Ukraine, saying: "The Constitution of Ukraine quite clearly stipulates that foreign military bases cannot be deployed in Ukraine, and this constitutional clause is the fundamental basis of the state's security." She also believes in "building a genuine civil society" as the best way to help democracy. Tymoshenko regards Ukraine as a "unitary and indivisible state". Tymoshenko considers separatist attitudes in Ukraine unacceptable: "Love one another, from Donetsk, Crimea, Luhansk, Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv, Lviv, Ternopil, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kyiv and all the other corners of our native land." According to Tymoshenko, citizens in Russian-speaking Dnipropetrovsk already understood Ukrainian in Soviet times and that problems surrounding the Russian language in Ukraine were "exaggerated and don't exist". Tymoshenko opposes the introduction of Russian as a second official state language. On 7 April 2014, she stated she supported the 2012 language law which is aimed at giving Russian and other minority languages (if in a region the percentage of a national minority exceeded 10%) the status of regional language. About her own attitude toward the Ukrainian language, Tymoshenko has stated that "today I am thinking in Ukrainian... and the fact that I know Russian very well, I think it is not a secret for you... you all know that I was brought up in the Russian speaking region in Dnipropetrovsk, to my mind, I spared no effort to speak Ukrainian as soon as possible as I came in the Government." Tymoshenko wrote an article called "Containing Russia" that was published in the May–June 2007 edition of the journal Foreign Affairs. In the article she criticized Russian expansionism. Consequently, the article irked Russia and more than a week after the article was published, Russia responded by calling it an "anti-Russian manifesto" and "an attempt to once again draw dividing lines in Europe." The first Tymoshenko Government was in favor of transparent and honest re-privatization of 3,000 enterprises, as with the case of the Kyvorizhstal steel mill. Tymoshenko believes that Ukraine's economy is excessively monopolized. Tymoshenko is against privatization of the gas transportation system in Ukraine. Tymoshenko lists the salvation of the economy of Ukraine during the 2008–09 Ukrainian financial crisis as one of her achievements. The second Tymoshenko Government has spent 1.6 billion hryvnya on modernizing the coal mining industry. Tymoshenko wants to raise the general level of social standards by equalizing salaries in the industrial and social spheres, and pledged in November 2009 to revamp Ukraine's hospitals and health system within two years. She also pledged tax breaks for farmers. Other economic policies included compensation for depositors who lost Soviet-era savings, price controls on food and medicines to bring inflation down, and calls for a review of murky privatizations and high social spending. Tymoshenko wants to cut the number of taxes by a third to simplify the system, and wants to cut the Value Added Tax (VAT) and offer tax breaks to importers of new technologies to poor regions to boost investment there. In December 2009, the second Tymoshenko Government proposed creating independent anti-corruption bureaus in Ukraine. Tymoshenko believes Ukraine can gain energy security and independence, and she wants to speed up exploration and extraction of oil and natural gas from the Black Sea shelf. Considering nuclear power provides almost 50% of the electricity supply in Ukraine, Tymoshenko's government agreed to cooperate with the company Westin to establish factory production of nuclear fuel in Ukraine, independent of Russia. She also suggested a 10-year tax break for enterprises that would develop alternative energy sources in Ukraine.[citation needed] Tymoshenko is for the cancellation of Verkhovna Rada deputies' immunity from prosecution. For Ukraine, Tymoshenko prefers the proportional representation voting system with open lists. Tymoshenko wants to reform the forming of state executive bodies, and favours giving parliamentary opposition "real instruments of influence on the authorities". She also wants Ukrainian court system reforms and wants devolution of executive power to local authorities. Together with representatives of regional governments, Tymoshenko expanded a Law that aimed to empower local authorities. In the summer of 2009, she claimed she tried to bring together different political parties in order to amend the constitution and switch to a parliamentary form of government. In February 2011, Tymoshenko stated "Viktor Yanukovych's naked attempt to hijack the election that precipitated the Orange Revolution should have resulted in him being banned from running in future elections." In November 2009, Tymoshenko called Ukraine "an absolutely ungovernable country" due to the changes to the Constitution of Ukraine as a part of a political compromise between the acting authorities (former-President Kuchma) and opposition during the Orange Revolution. Tymoshenko has characterised those reforms as "incomplete", and the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc voted against them in December 2004. In January 2010, Tymoshenko called for urgent amendments to the Constitution via the majority of the Verkhovna Rada after a survey or plebiscite is conducted. In April 2011, she still believed the constitution "didn't work". On 21 May 2016, Tymoshenko expressed hope that the EU will provide Ukraine a visa-free regime. Tymoshenko stressed that the Ukrainian state is there to protect the world all over Europe, continuing to fight the Russian aggression. Yulia Tymoshenko's mother, Lyudmila Mykolayivna Telehina (born Nelepova), was born on 11 August 1937 in Dnipropetrovsk. Her father, Volodymyr Abramovych Hrihyan, was born on 3 December 1937, also in Dnipropetrovsk. His Soviet passport gave his nationality as Latvian. His mother was Maria Yosypivna Hrihyan, born in 1909. Ukrainian media have published speculation regarding the genealogy of Tymoshenko. Some of the hypotheses have no scientific evidence (for example, the hypothesis of the Armenian origin of the surname "Grigyan"); or could be designed to create negative publicity, although her Minister of Communications had in 2005 described her origins as half-Jewish, half-Armenian. About her ethnicity, Yulia Tymoshenko herself has said: "On my father's side – everyone is Latvian for ten generations, and on my mother's side – everyone is Ukrainian for ten generations." Tymoshenko's parents were both born in Ukraine and are, therefore, Ukrainian as defined by the Law on Citizenship of Ukraine and by the Ukrainian Constitution. Tymoshenko has said that, like most Soviet citizens, she spoke only Russian in her childhood (although she studied the Ukrainian language and literature at school for ten years, as did all schoolchildren in Soviet Ukraine). In January 2010, Tymoshenko stated that in Dnipropetrovsk she did not have to speak Ukrainian until she was 36 (i.e. before 1996). According to Tymoshenko, her braids are a family tradition. In 1979, Yulia married businessman Oleksandr Tymoshenko (born 11 June 1960). The couple have a daughter – Yevhenia (Eugenia) Tymoshenko (born 20 February 1980) – a graduate of the London School of Economics (Bsc "Government", Msc "Russian and Post-Soviet Studies"). Tymoshenko and her husband rent a house in Kyiv and own an apartment in Dnipro. Houses in Dnipro belong to their relatives. Tymoshenko has declared she never used and will never use or move into a state-owned summer house, in contrast with all former-Presidents and many high-ranking officials of Ukraine, who live in state-owned dachas in Koncha-Zaspa. According to Ukrainian media, Tymoshenko lives in an estate in Koncha-Zaspa, "rented from a friend". In March 2014, Tymoshenko opened the door of her house to public activists and guided them around. In her spare time, before she was imprisoned, Tymoshenko ran on a treadmill for exercise and listened to the music of Andrea Bocelli, Sarah Brightman, Anna Netrebko and Alessandro Safina. Ukrainska Pravda and Лівий берег are her favourite news sources.[need quotation to verify] Tymoshenko stated that she watched the Tunisian Revolution and Egyptian Revolution of 2011 "with joy and admiration". On 23 August 2020, Tymoshenko tested positive for COVID-19 and was hospitalized in serious condition, with one of her spokespeople saying that "her condition is assessed as serious, her temperature is up to 39 (Celsius)." On 25 August, Tymoshenko was moved to the intensive care unit after her health worsened and prompted a transfer, a spokeswoman said, adding that she remains in "serious condition." On 2 September, Tymoshenko announced through her Facebook account that "Finally today, my crisis condition is behind. And although recovery is still a distant prospect, now there is an opportunity to return to normal life, step by step," adding "that fighting off a serious disease for almost two weeks alters the perception of reality". On 11 September Tymoshenko's press secretary Maryna Soroka announced that Tymoshenko had tested negative for COVID-19. Tymoshenko is a voluble public performer. Her fiery rhetoric made her an icon of the Orange Revolution. Tymoshenko's critics have suggested that, as an oligarch, she gained her fortune improperly. Her former business partner, former Ukrainian prime minister Pavlo Lazarenko, was convicted in the United States on charges of money laundering, corruption and fraud, the magnitude of which was in the billions of dollars. However, on 7 May 2004, Judge Martin Jenkins of the US District Court for the Northern District of California dismissed the allegations of Tymoshenko's involvement in Lazarenko's murky business. Her transition from oligarch to reformer was believed by many voters to be both genuine and effective. Discrepancies between her declared income and her luxurious designer outfits, have been pointed out in the Ukrainian tabloids. When Tymoshenko joined the Yushchenko government, she did not speak Ukrainian. According to fellow Ukrainian politician Borys Tarasyuk, in 2002 Tymoshenko "only spoke Russian even when I spoke to her in Ukrainian", but since then she has made the transition to speaking only Ukrainian. During her second stint as prime-minister her ratings in opinion polls fell. In early 2008, in opinion polls for the 2009 Ukrainian presidential election, she stood at 30% but by late April 2009 that had shrunk to 15% According to a poll carried out between 29 January and 5 February 2009 by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology, just over 43% of the Ukrainian voters believed Tymoshenko should leave her post, whereas just over 45% believed she should stay. According to an opinion poll carried out between 3 and 12 February 2009 by the "Sofia" Center for Social Studies, some 59.1% of those polled believed that the activities of (then) Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko were aimed at the defense of her own interests and that of her entourage, some 4.2% said her activities were aimed at the defense of interests of foreign states, and some 23.9% believed that Tymoshenko worked for the sake of national interests. 77.7% of the respondents were unsatisfied with the economic policy of the second Tymoshenko Government. Some 71.8% believed that this government was not able to lead the Ukrainian economy out of the 2008–09 Ukrainian financial crisis or even change the situation in Ukraine to better; 18.1% of respondents did think that the government could do that. Despite the neck-to-neck 2010 presidential race, many experts believed that Tymoshenko would win the vote due to her ability to "hike her popularity just before the voting day". JP Morgan Securities Inc. experts said that Tymoshenko's victory in presidential election would "bring stability in 2010, with budget consolidation, better terms of crediting and higher influx of capital. As a result, the economy will have better prospects of growing in the second half of 2010 and 2011". Tymoshenko has been ranked three times by Forbes magazine among the most powerful women in the world. During her first term in 2005, she was ranked third (behind Condoleezza Rice and Wu Yi), in 2008 she was number 17 and in 2009 at number 47. According to the Ukrainian magazine Focus, Tymoshenko placed first in an annual ranking of the most influential women in Ukraine in 2006–2010 (five years). During the Orange Revolution, some Western media publications dubbed her the "Joan of Arc of the Revolution". In December 2011, Tymoshenko's party BYuT-Batkivschyna nominated her for the Nobel Peace Prize. Russian prime minister Vladimir Putin has stated (in November 2009) he found it comfortable to work with his (then) Ukrainian counterpart Yulia Tymoshenko and also praised her for strengthening Ukrainian sovereignty and building stable ties with Moscow and called the second Tymoshenko Government "efficient and a force for stability". It has been suggested by Reuters that the Russian government, after seeing her opposition to Viktor Yushchenko, supported her since late 2008, although Putin denied it. Former ally and President of Ukraine Victor Yushchenko stated in November 2009, "I am sure that every week spent by Yulia Tymoshenko in the post of prime minister leads the country to a catastrophe. Because of Yulia Tymoshenko, it is a crisis, a crisis in everything". Yushchenko has repeatedly accused his former ally turned rival Tymoshenko of acting in the interests of Russia, although she firmly denied the allegations. On 31 May 2010, Yushchenko stated that Tymoshenko was his "worst mistake", "The most serious mistake was to give the power to her twice". Expert in Ukrainian politics Dr. Taras Kuzio believes that he has always prioritized personal revenge against Tymoshenko over Ukraine's national interests. In her turn, Tymoshenko has blamed President Viktor Yushchenko for obstructing the government-proposed anti-crisis measures and efforts to form a broad coalition to battle the crisis. "The president is using flashy words today to deprive the nation, first of all its government, of the opportunity to counter the crisis, and to leave the nation without a government it logically needs" she said. "Viktor Yushchenko has no right to any criticism. He is the incumbent president. He only has the right to work and to serve Ukraine. He will have the right to criticize when he joins the opposition. Now he must work and answer for his moves". Former Ukrainian Minister of Finance of Ukraine Viktor Pynzenyk has called Tymoshenko's decisions "normally guided by 'adventurous populism'", which she saw as a tool to "consolidate power in her own hands" and believed Tymoshenko should have "taken advantage of the opportunity presented by the 2008–2009 Ukrainian financial crisis to reform". Party of Regions Deputy Head Borys Kolesnykov stated on 11 February 2010, "Tymoshenko was the most effective politician during the entire period of Ukraine's recent history". Former European High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana has called Tymoshenko "a patriot regardless of the position in which you have found yourself". President Viktor Yanukovych stated about Tymoshenko on 13 May 2010, "She likes to create a sensation. We have grown used to this extravagant woman". Vitaly Chepinoha has closely collaborated with Tymoshenko during various elections for more than a decade. In some newspapers and television programs, Tymoshenko has been referred to as Lady Yu (Ледi Ю, Леди Ю). Order of Saint Varvara, Great Martyr from Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Moscow Patriarchate (1998) Third-most powerful woman in the world, rating by Forbes magazine (July 2005) "Person of the year in Central and Eastern Europe" award at International Economic Forum in Krynica-Zdrój, Poland (September 2005) "Prix de la fondation Crans Montana" award for efficient governance and anti-corruption campaign at the annual session of the Crans Montana Forum (December 2005) "For Political Courage" by French magazine "Politique internationale"; it was the first award given to a Ukrainian nominee over the last 25 years of the magazine's history (March 2007) Award by American NGO Conservative Political Action Conference for contribution to democracy development. (March 2007) "Shakhtarska Slava" award on Coalminer Day in Luhansk (2008) The Order of the Holy Sepulchre award from the Jerusalem Orthodox Church, given to Tymoshenko by Patriarch Theophilos III of Jerusalem (October 2008) The Saint Andrew the First-Called Order of II degree (the highest church award of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyivan Patriarchate) from Apostolic Patriarch of Ukraine Philaret (2011) The Pope Boniface VIII International Award (October 2012). (The first person to receive the award was Pope John Paul II.) Manuel Carrasco Formiguera medal for her contribution to the defense of democracy and freedom and the struggle for the restoration of the rule of law in Ukraine, awarded by the Democratic Union of Catalonia party (July 2013). On 18 October 2014, in Khmelnytskyi, journalists presented Yulia Tymoshenko with the Yakov Halchevsky Prize "For significant contribution to the development of democracy and asceticism in state-building in Ukraine." The Batkivshchyna leader was awarded this prize in 2011. The diploma was presented to Yulia Tymoshenko in the Pechersk court, and the award was presented to Yakov Galchevsky's book "Against the Red Occupiers" by journalists in 2014. In March 2023, Yulia Tymoshenko received the Bush-Thatcher Award for Freedom and Democracy. In 2004 Korrespondent magazine named Yulia Tymoshenko "Revolutionary of the Year". In 2006 Korrespondent magazine ranked Tymoshenko as its 2005 "Personality of the Year", naming her in the TOP 100 most influential politicians of Ukraine, 2nd place (Women with nimbus), Person of the year.[need quotation to verify] 2007 Yulia Tymoshenko, Focus magazine, the most influential women of Ukraine, 1st place. Yulia Tymoshenko, Korrespondent magazine, TOP 100 the most influential politics of Ukraine, 4th place (Woman-brand), Person of the year. Yulia Tymoshenko, Focus magazine, 200 the most influential Ukrainians, 2nd place. 2009 Yulia Tymoshenko, Korrespondent magazine, TOP 100 the most influential Ukrainians, 1st place (Dream women). Yulia Tymoshenko, Focus magazine, the most influential women of Ukraine, 1st place. Yulia Tymoshenko, Focus magazine, TOP 200 the most influential politicians of Ukraine, 1st place. Between 2007 and 2013 in Ukraine, Tymoshenko was the most popular politician on the Internet, in blogs and social networks. As of 2010[update] Yulia Tymoshenko was the most popular foreign politician in the Russian media. In 2012 the national rating (28 December 2012) by the Razumkov Center and the "Foundation for Democratic Initiatives [uk]" recognised Yulia Tymoshenko as the best prime minister of Ukraine – 19.5%, compared with Viktor Yanukovych – 11.4%, Mykola Azarov – 8.6%, Leonid Kuchma – 5.6%, Viktor Yushchenko – 3.9%, Pavel Lazarenko – 2.2%. According to the sociological group "Rating" Yulia Tymoshenko was ranked as third most trusted politician in early April 2021, behind President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and then-Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Dmytro Razumkov. 2009 — «Julia» – American film studio «Coppola Productions». 2011 — documentary (25 minutes) shown to delegates to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly, 8 October 2011. 2007 — «Julia, Yulechka» – Antonina Nikolaevna Ulyakhina (Dnipropetrovsk) 2007 — «Julia, Julia Vladimirovna» Antonina Nikolaevna Ulyakhina (Dnipropetrovsk) "Yulia Tymoshenko", a play by Adriana Altaras and Maksim Kurochkin in the Hans Otto Theater in Potsdam, Germany. (September 2006) The play "Who Wants to Kill Yulia Tymoshenko?", first performed at the opening night of the 2013 Edinburgh Festival Fringe, portrayed the political fight of Yulia Tymoshenko and her imprisonment. (August 2013) On 4 October 2014 in Milan, Italy, Yulia Tymoshenko's daughter Eugenia Tymoshenko presented the book "Ukraine, Gas and Handcuffs: The Trial of Yulia Tymoshenko" (Italian: «Ucraina, gas e manette: il processo a Yulia Tymoshenko»). The title, "Ukraine, Gas and Handcuffs: The Trial of Yulia Tymoshenko", demonstrates a clear understanding that energy is the key source of Ukraine's dependence. The author, Matteo Cazzulani, draws a clear parallel between Ukraine and the fate of Yulia Tymoshenko, denied her freedom because of her fight against corruption, the oligarchy and the dependence of the Ukrainian energy-sector on Russian energy. On 7 December 2005, Bloc of Yulia Tymoshenko held a convention in Kyiv. At this convention Yulia Tymoshenko presented a new ideology of the Bloc ("solidarism") and announced the first top 10 of the party list for the upcoming parliamentary election of 2006. Unlike the other parties that ran for election, BYuT did not disclose the rest of the names on the list. On 26 March 2006, BYuT won 22.27% of votes (5,648,345 votes) and came first in 14 regions of Ukraine. See more at 2007 Ukrainian political crisis. The key purpose of her visit was to explain to the US administration "the biggest problem of Ukrainian politics": Yanukovych's actions toward unconstitutional enlargement of the "ruling coalition" that could potentially remove Viktor Yushchenko from power. The only possible solution envisaged by Tymoshenko was dismissal of the Verkhovna Rada (according to the Constitution) and an early parliamentary election. In addition to meeting with top officials of the Bush administration, Tymoshenko gave speeches at the Kennedy Center for Strategic and International Studies and the National Press Club. She also received an award for her contribution to the development of democracy in Ukraine from the influential NGO Conservative Political Action Conference. On 31 March 2007, Tymoshenko and her political party initiated and conducted the "100 thousand people Maidan". Other Orange Revolution leaders such as Viacheslav Kyrylenko and Yuriy Lutsenko attended the meeting. The participants urged president Yushchenko (who was not there) to dismiss the Verkhovna Rada and call early election. During this trip she received an award for contribution into democracy development from Conservative Political Action Conference. Tymoshenko herself outlines the biggest achievements of her government introducing anti crisis program for the key industries (mining and metallurgical sector, agrarian sector, chemical production, construction and development), strengthening Ukraine's energy independence through direct gas deals with Russian Federation, restoring Ukraine's fame as the world's bread basket due to unprecedentedly rich crops of grain (53.3 million tons in 2008, and 46 million tons in 2009), preventing drop in the agricultural production, revitalization of high-tech industries such as space engineering and aircraft construction, resuming of series construction of Antonov aircraft, getting final UEFA's confirmation for conduct Euro-2012 tournament in Ukraine, introducing independent high school graduate testing, obtaining WTO membership, and commencing negotiations on EU association. Tymoshenko introduced an apparatus of the Cabinet of Ministers' Commissioner for anti corruption issues and made sure that a number of anti corruption laws and government regulations (acts) were adopted. Tymoshenko herself was personally in charge of fight with "gas" and "land" mafia, which, in the first case, ended up with removal of corruption intermediary from gas trade between Russia and Ukraine; in the second case it ended up with introduction of free of charge registration and issuing land ownership documents for citizens. According to Tymoshenko, the efficient anti corruption campaign [167] and significant financial discipline armed the government with additional resources for dealing with burning social problems during the crisis period. Due to that the following goals were achieved: pensions, stipends and salaries to the state-run organizations' employees were paid on time; gas and electricity prices for households were not raised; people received their deposits from the bankrupt banks; additional payments for teachers, healthcare workers and librarians were provided; financial aid to families with a newborn child was increased in several times; those who qualify, received more than 5500 state subsidized apartments; about 6 million of clients of former Soviet Oshchadbank received compensations for their lost savings; people could register their land plots free of charge. These criminal cases were opened against officials from the second Tymoshenko Government (prosecutors have not accused them of corruption, or assignment of funds, but rather have accused them of abuse of power): Prime minister – Tymoshenko Minister of Police – Yuriy Lutsenko Minister of Defence – Ivashchenko Minister of Finance – Danylyshyn [uk] Minister of Natural Resources – Filipchuk [uk] Deputy Minister of Justice – Korneichuk [uk] Head of Customs of Ukraine – Makarenko Head of the regional customs – Shepitko Head of the State Treasury of Ukraine – Slyuz; Deputy head – Gritsoun Deputy head of "Naftogaz" (state monopoly on trade in gas and oil) – Didenko Governor of Dnipropetrovsk region (former Minister of Transport) – Bondar Minister and former mayor of Lviv – Vasyl Kuybida. Source: Minister and former mayor of Lviv – Kuybida First Deputy Prime Minister Oleksandr Turchynov – repeatedly summoned for questioning In December 2010 Tymoshenko had stated she might run for President in 2015, but that this also depended on her family. It was subsequently revealed that significant portions of the article were paraphrased from an article written by former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. Tymoshenko's staff denied allegations of plagiarism on the grounds that the Foreign Affairs format does not usually include attributions. Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov wrote an article called "Containing Russia: Back To The Future?" for the same journal which was apparently meant to be a response to Tymoshenko. He withdrew the article before publication, accusing the editors of changing his text and said his article was subjected to "censorship". Tymoshenko's daughter Yevhenia Tymoshenko received a medal for her contribution to the defense of democracy and human rights from the same organization in October 2012. An orange revolution: a personal journey through Ukrainian history by Askold Krushelnycky, Harvill Secker, 2006, ISBN 978-0-436-20623-8, p. 169. Як змінювався гендерний склад Кабміну за час незалежності України [How the gender composition of the Cabinet changed during Ukraine's independence]. Слово і Діло (in Ukrainian). 6 March 2020. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. (in Ukrainian) Тимошенко Юлія Володимирівна Archived 27 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Rada.gov.ua (29 August 2019) Тимошенко Ю. В. «Государственное регулирование налоговой системы: Диссертация на соискание учёной степени кандидата экономических наук». 1999. Национальная библиотека Украины им. В. И. Вернадского "NATO's Ukraine challenge Ukrainians want membership, but obstacles abound". www.brookings.edu. 6 June 2019. "100 most powerful women in the world". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 January 2006. "Ukrainian Supreme Court rehabilitates Julia Tymoshenko". Vestnikkavkaza. 24 June 2014. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "European Court discontinues examination of second case brought by former Ukrainian Prime Minister Tymoshenko" (PDF). ECHR Press Release. 22 January 2015. "The woman in a white dress, Master's thesis". 2018. "Ukraine election: Comedian leads presidential contest". BBC. 1 April 2019. "Фракция Тимошенко перешла в оппозицию". pravda.com.ua. 13 November 2019. "Azeri reporter pesters Yulia Timoshenko about being Armenian". Armeniandiaspora.com. 27 December 2004. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Ivanova, Galina (12 November 2007). "Yuliya Tymoshenko". Russianelection2008.blogspot.com. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Eastern Europe, Russia and Central Asia 2004 (Regional Surveys of the World) by Europa Publications, Routledge, 2003, ISBN 978-1-85743-187-2, p. 604. Chobit', Dmytro. "ЮЛІЯ ТИМОШЕНКО: І. РОДОВІД Ю. ТИМОШЕНКО (Yuliya Tymoshenko: [Part] I. Ancestry of Yu. Tymoshenko)" (in Ukrainian). Makuha.info. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2014. (in Russian) Тимошенко Юлия, Korrespondent "Anna Usik. Classmates wrote off work in mathematics at Julia Tymoshenko. Newspaper "Newspaper in Ukrainian" № 1039, 09.06.2010. Category "People". Website "Gazeta.ua"". Gazeta.ua. 8 June 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2011. (in Ukrainian) Школы, которым повезло, Comments.ua 31 August 2011 "Government portal: Julia Tymoshenko got acquainted with the achievements of "the National Mining University in Dnipropetrovsk"". Kmu.gov.ua. 18 September 2009. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Тимошенко, Юлия: Бывший премьер-министр Украины [Yulia Tymoshenko: Former Ukrainian Prime Minister]. LENTA.ru (in Russian). 19 October 2011. Retrieved 7 November 2007. "Dissertation of Y. Tymoshenko "State Regulation of the tax system"". Nbuv.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 2 August 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2013. BBC News profile "Eurasian Home Databases – Personalities – Tymoshenko Yuliya Volodymyrivna". eurasianhome.org. 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. "Alexander Fidel. "Unsinkable Tymoshenko". Weekly "2000", № 3 (542), 21–27 January 2011". 2000.net.ua. 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Ukraine's Gold-Plaited Comeback Kid, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (23 September 2008) Varfolomeyev, Oleg (6 February 1998). "Will Yulia Tymoshenko be Ukraine's first woman prime minister?". PRISM, Volume 4, Issue 3. The Jamestown Foundation. Archived from the original on 25 November 2006. Retrieved 4 February 2007. Staff Country Report Ukraine, International Monetary Fund (October 1997) Ukraine: State and Nation Building by Taras Kuzio, Routledge, 1998, ISBN 0415171954. Ukraine's Tymoshenko: 'gas princess', prisoner, and next president? reuters accessed 26 February 2022 How Ukraine Became a Market Economy and Democracy by Anders Åslund, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 2009, ISBN 0-88132-427-2. More gas charges against Tymoshenko, United Press International (29 March 2012) According to Matthew Brzezinski (author of "Casino Moscow: A Tale of Greed and Adventure on Capitalism's Wildest Frontier"), she "gained control over nearly 20% of Ukraine's gross national product, an enviable position that probably no other private company in the world could boast." Quoted by James Meek, "The millionaire revolutionary," The Guardian (26 November 2004) "U.S. judge throws out 23 of 53 counts against Lazarenko (05/23/04)". Ukrweekly.com. 23 May 2004. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Kupchinsky, Roman (8 April 2008). "Many Charges Dropped Against Ukraine's Ex-Premier". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 1 October 2021. Victor Pinchuk: formation, privatization, kidnapping Archived 4 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Journal of business Entrepreneur (25 June 2011) Ukrainian Oligarchs, The Ukrainian Week (29 August 2011) Igor Kolomoisky: "I said Pinchuk, "Life it's a supermarket, take whatever you like, but the ticket office front" Archived 16 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Journal of business Entrepreneur (23 December 2010) Annual Survey of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union 1997: The Challenge of Integration, by Institute for East-West Studies, M. E. Sharpe, 1998, ISBN 978-0-7656-0359-3, p. 173. ""Юлия" – документальный фильм о Юлии Тимошенко". YouTube. 25 January 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Yulia ( documentary by Coppola Production)". Youtube.com. 25 January 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. ""100 richest people in Ukraine" by the experts of the magazine "Focus" in 2007". Unian.net. 23 March 2007. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Фото: Корреспондент (7 September 2010). "The Golden Hundred: a complete list of the richest people of Ukraine". Korrespondent.net. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Прем'єр-міністр Юлія Тимошенко. Неофіційна біографія [Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko. Unofficial Biography]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 8 July 2023. Kuzio, Taras (1998). Contemporary Ukraine: Dynamics of Post-Soviet Transformation. M.E. Sharpe. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-7656-3150-3. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Annual Survey of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union 1997: The Challenge of Integration by Peter Rutland, M. E. Sharpe, 1998, ISBN 978-0-7656-0359-3, p. 174. "CECU1998 People's Deputies elected in single-mandate constituencies". Central Election Commission of Ukraine. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "People's deputies who have left: Elections 29 November 1998". Central Election Commission of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Annual Survey of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union 1997: The Challenge of Integration, by Institute for East-West Studies, M.E. Sharpe, ISBN 978-0-7656-0359-3, p. 172. Ukrainian Parliament Formed Its Permanent Committees Archived 11 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Embassy of Ukraine to the United States of America (21 July 1998) Åslund, Anders; McFaul, Michael (2006). Revolution in Orange: The Origins of Ukraine's Democratic Breakthrough. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-87003-221-9. Whitmore, Sarah (20 May 2004). State Building in Ukraine: The Ukrainian parliament, 1990-2003. Taylor & Francis. p. 106. ISBN 978-0-203-39812-8. Kuzio, Taras (13 September 2013). "4". Democratic Revolution in Ukraine: From Kuchmagate to Orange Revolution. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-99647-7. (in Ukrainian) All-Ukrainian Union "Fatherland", RBC Ukraine Lushnycky, Andrej N.; Riabchuk, Mykola (2009). Ukraine on Its Meandering Path Between East and West. Peter Lang. p. 87. ISBN 978-3-03911-607-2. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Energy Dependency, Politics and Corruption in the Former Soviet Union: Russia's Power, Oligarchs' Profits and Ukraine's Missing Energy Policy, 1995–2006 by Margarita M. Balmaceda, Routledge, 2007, ISBN 978-0-415-43779-0, p. 59. Tymoshenko 1 & 2 Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Kyiv Post (6 July 2006) Women's Social Activism in the New Ukraine: Development and the Politics of Differentiation by Sarah D. Phillips, Indiana University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-253-21992-3, p. 44. Mycio, Mary (9 February 2001). "Ukraine's Deputy Premier May Be Out, but She's Not Down". Articles.latimes.com. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Tymoshenko says husband's arrest is the result of political pressure on her". Kyivpost.com. 21 November 2000. Retrieved 28 December 2013. ""Yushchenko betrayed Tymoshenko" (source in Ukrainian language)". Pravda.com.ua. 23 January 2001. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Europa World Year Book 2, Routledge, 2004, ISBN 978-1-85743-255-8, p. 4295. "February 9 – historical date?". Pravda.com.ua. 9 February 2001. Retrieved 9 February 2001. "Тернопільська обласна організація Батьківщина". batkivshchyna.te.ua. The countries of the former Soviet Union at the turn of the twenty-first century: the Baltic and European states in transition by Ian Jeffries, ISBN 978-0-415-25230-0 (2004), p. 536. (in Ukrainian) Пристрасті за українською Жанною д'Арк, Ukrainska Pravda (19 February 2001) (in Ukrainian) Тимошенко британцям: Кучма будує тоталітаризм Tymoshenko British: Kuchma builds totalitarianism , ua.korrespondent.net (14 March 2001) Tymoshenko, Yulia (14 March 2001). "Письмо Тимошенко в Financial Times" [Tymoshenko's Letter to the Financial Times]. Maidan.org.ua. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2022. ANALYSIS-Russia finds unlikely ally in Ukraine's Tymoshenko, Reuters (5 October 2008) Arrest warrant lifted on Tymoshenko Archived 25 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Euronews (26 September 2005) "Tymoshenko faces yet another investigation". Kyiv Post. 5 July 2011. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. "New criminal case is filed against Tymoshenko". UNIAN. 13 October 2011. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Fawkes, Helen (26 September 2005). "Ukraine ex-PM warrant cancelled". BBC News. Retrieved 26 May 2010. Johnson, Gregory (21 November 2008). "Yulia Tymoshenko of Ukraine". ResourcesForLife.com. Archived from the original on 26 May 2016. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Tymoshenko received a decision to initiate a criminal case". Ria.ru. 12 May 2010. Retrieved 12 May 2010. A political and economic dictionary of Eastern Europe by Alan John Day, Roger East and Richard Thomas, Routledge, 2002, ISBN 978-1-85743-063-9, p. 212. The Countries of the Former Soviet Union at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century: The Baltic and European States in Transition by Ian Jeffries, Routledge, 2004, ISBN 978-0-415-25230-0, p. 536. Profiles of people in power: the world's government leaders by Roger East, Carina O'Reilly and Richard Thomas, Routledge, 2006, ISBN 978-1-85743-346-3, p. 600. "США предупреждают Украину в связи с арестами оппозиции". Inopressa. 31 December 2010. Ian Jeffries (2004) The countries of the former Soviet Union at the turn of the twenty-first century: the Baltic and European states in transition, ISBN 978-0-415-25230-0, p. 542. "It is possible to establish order in this country in two or three years", Julia Tymoshenko official website (25 October 2001) The countries of the former Soviet Union at the turn of the twenty-first century: the Baltic and European states in transition by Ian Jeffries, ISBN 978-0-415-25230-0 (2004), p. 546. "Russia Drops Charges Against Ukrainian". The New York Times. Reuters. 27 December 2005. Archived from the original on 22 June 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2012. Russian prosecutors cancel arrest warrant for Tymoshenko, UA-Reporter (27 September 2005) "Ukraine opposition leader injured". BBC News. 29 January 2002. Retrieved 5 October 2007. Understanding Ukrainian Politics: Power, Politics, and Institutional Design by Paul D'Anieri, M. E. Sharpe, 2006, ISBN 978-0-7656-1811-5, p. 117. Ukraine coalition born in chaos, BBC News (11 July 2006) "Tymoshenko does not regret supporting Yushchenko in 2004". En.for-ua.com. 11 December 2009. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Khokhlova, Veronica (26 November 2004). "New Kids on the Bloc". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 29 July 2012. Profile: Viktor Yushchenko, BBC News (9 October 2008) Ukraine's 'goddess of revolution', BBC News (5 December 2004) Westcott, Kathryn (4 October 2007). "The queen of Ukraine's image machine". BBC. "Orange princess", "Gas Princess", "Goddess of the Revolution", the "Princess Leia of Ukrainian politics", "a Slavic Joan of Arc" – her nicknames over the years have acquired mythological proportions. "Yulia Tymoshenko". The Moscow Times via the internet archive. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Laws of Ukraine. Presidential decree No. 144/2005: On the recognition of J. Tymoshenko as the Prime Minister of Ukraine. Adopted on 4 February 2004. (Ukrainian) MacKinnon, Mark (21 February 2014). "Peace deal that frees Yulia Tymoshenko a harsh blow to Ukraine's President". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Tymoshenko Appointed, Names Reformist Cabinet". The Moscow Times. 7 February 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. President Yushchenko Appoints the New Prime Minister and Members of Her Cabinet, European Parliament (4 February 2005) "CEC: Turchynov thinks Yushchenko removed Tymoshenko to use the administrative resource". Ukrainian Pravda. 28 September 2005. Retrieved 28 September 2005. MacDonald, Elizabeth; Schoenberger, Chana R. (28 July 2005). "The 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Retrieved 5 October 2007. "The 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. 31 August 2006. Archived from the original on 5 October 2006. "TYMOSHENKO BECAME A MAN OF THE YEAR". Pravda.com.ua. Retrieved 8 September 2005. Zinchenko's bombshell, Kyiv Post (7 September 2005) Oleksandr Zinchenko talks, Kyiv Post (21 December 2005) Orange Revolution in turmoil, BBC News (8 September 2005) "CEC: The statement by Yushchenko on the Maidan on the occasion of Independence Day". Ukrainian Pravda. 24 August 2005. Retrieved 24 August 2005. Design for a New Europe by John Gillingham, Cambridge University Press, 2006, ISBN 978-0-521-68664-8, p. 207. Ukraine leader sacks government, BBC News (8 September 2005) State-Building: A Comparative Study of Ukraine, Lithuania, Belarus, and Russia by State-Building: A Comparative Study of Ukraine, Lithuania, Belarus, and Russia, Central European University Press, 2007, ISBN 978-963-7326-90-5, p. 184. Ukraine: A Post-Orange Revolution Political Timeline, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (21 March 2006 ) Slivka, Andrey (1 January 2006). "Bitter Orange". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved 29 July 2012. "In Ukraine, old whiff of scandal in new regime". Articles.chicagotribune.com. 27 September 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Ukraine president lashes out at ousted PM". Usatoday30.usatoday.com. 13 September 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Ukrainian ex-PM slams dismissal". BBC News. 9 September 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Yushchenko fires government – Sep 8, 2005". Edition.cnn.com. 8 September 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "CEC: Parliamentary elections in March 2002". Ukraine Reforms. 15 May 2013. Retrieved 31 March 2002. "Ukraine's Ex-Premier Splits With Her Partner". Washingtonpost.com. 10 September 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "CEC: The Supreme court put the point in the case of Tymoshenko in 2005. DOCUMENT". Censor Net. 27 October 2011. Retrieved 27 October 2011. Europe's Influence on Ukrainian State Building – A Struggle for Identity between Europe and Russia (Master Thesis) by Alexandra Weber, University of Hamburg, 2006, ISBN 978-3-638-61729-1, p. 75. "CEC: The orbit of the government of Yulia Tymoshenko". Ukrainian Pravda. 21 December 2007. Retrieved 21 December 2007. Ukraine leaders jostle for power, BBC News (27 March 2006) Timeline: Ukraine, BBC News (last updated 26 October 2009) Ukraine allies 'agree coalition', BBC News (21 June 2006) Ukraine coalition deal confirmed, BBC News (22 June 2006) ""Чинник Мороза"". day.kyiv.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 8 July 2023. Oleksandr Moroz announced a new coalition for Ukraine Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, European Forum for Democracy and Solidarity (11 July 2006) https://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews[tt_news]=31839, The Jamestown Foundation (4 July 2006)[dead link] Opposition Blocks Ukrainian Parliament Session, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (27 June 2006 ) Ukrainian coalition, opposition to hold round table aimed to solve political crisis, Kyiv Post (3 July 2006) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Sit-in disrupts Ukraine assembly". BBC News. 29 June 2006. Retrieved 26 August 2006. ELECTION OF NEW PRIME MINISTER AND GOVERNMENT, European Country of Origin Information Network (August 2006) "CEC: Yanukovych would not be Prime Minister, and speaker". information Agency Unian. 15 June 2006. Retrieved 15 June 2006. Lawmakers loyal to Yushchenko call for new elections in Ukraine after pro-Russian parties announce coalition, Kyiv Post (11 July 2006) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine's Orange coalition falls apart after Socialists break ranks, Kyiv Post (7 July 2006) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine's political fate shifts amid Rada chaos, Kyiv Post (13 July 2006) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine's Leftists Announce New Coalition, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (7 July 2006 ) (in Ukrainian) У Секретаріаті Президента України підписали Універсал національної єдності The Universal of National Unity was signed in the Secretariat of the President of Ukraine, Radiosvoboda.org (03.09.2006) "We will be either in the opposition or we will fight in a new election"[permanent dead link], Yulia Tymoshenko official website (7 July 2006) "Ukraine: Two Viktors, But No Clear Winner". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 6 October 2006. "Ukrainian rivals rally in capital". BBC News. 1 April 2007. (in Ukrainian) На 8 Березня Тимошенко чекає від Ющенка рішення про розпуск парламенту On 8 March Tymoshenko expects Yushchenko to dissolve parliament, Gazeta.ua (06.03.2007) Tymoshenko tells U.S. that Ukraine is in "deep constitutional crisis" Archived 8 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, The Ukrainian Weekly (11 March 2007) "Russia's Putin says comfortable with Ukraine's Tymoshenko". Kyiv Post. 20 November 2009. Archived from the original on 17 February 2011. "Putin gives Ukraine a break on gas deal". Kyiv Post. 20 November 2009. Archived from the original on 24 November 2009. Позачергові вибори народних депутатів України – 30 вересня 2007 року – Протокол Центральної Виборчої Комісії: Про результати виборів народних депутатів України [Extraordinary election of national deputies of Ukraine – 30 September 2007 – Protocol of the Central Election Commission: On the results of elections of people deputies of Ukraine] (PDF). cvk.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). 30 September 2007. Retrieved 11 November 2015. Rahder, Karl (8 October 2007), "Tymoshenko on Top", ISN Security Watch "Orange bloc edges to poll victory". BBC News. 3 October 2007. Retrieved 26 August 2006. "The Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc and Our Ukraine – People's Self-Defense get the majority. Socialist Party of Ukraine does not pass". Newsru.ua. 1 October 2007. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2007. "Ukrainian Parliament Continues Shift Towards Yushchenko". Korrespondent (in Russian). 15 October 2007. Retrieved 15 October 2007. "Parliament named Tymoshenko as the Prime Minister of Ukraine". Korrespondent (in Russian). 18 December 2007. Retrieved 18 December 2007. Premier survives no confidence vote, Daily Express (11 July 2008) "Ukraine PM Accused of 'High Treason'". The New York Sun. 19 August 2008. Archived from the original on 23 July 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "Tymoshenko keeps silent on Georgia. Nemyria takes the blow". Ukrainska Pravda. 14 August 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2008. "Tymoshenko's spokesperson has refuted her Georgian support". Ukrainska Pravda. 14 August 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2008. "Tymoshenko: Ukraine Stands in Solidarity with Georgia". Newswire.ca. 13 August 2008. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Newsletter for the international community providing views and analysis from the Bloc of Yulia Tymoshenko (BYuT)" (PDF). Bloc Yulia Tymoshenko. 8 September 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2008. Retrieved 8 September 2008. "Baloha: Tymoshenko not Orthodox, she practices another faith". UNIAN. 29 July 2008. Retrieved 29 July 2008. "Baloha: Tymoshenko promised Putin not to support Ukraine's joining NATO MAP". UNIAN. 16 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. "Baloha accuses Tymoshenko of deliberate destroying coalition UNIAN". 10 April 2008. Retrieved 10 April 2008. "Baloha calls on to sack Ministers from government's economic bloc". UNIAN. 15 April 2008. Retrieved 15 April 2008. "Tymoshenko 'calms down' Baloha saying his chief must not be concerned". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency. 1 September 2008. Retrieved 10 September 2008. "Why Ukraine's Pro-Western Coalition Split". Time. 4 September 2008. Retrieved 10 September 2008. "Yushchenko May Dissolve Ukraine Parliament, Call Vote". Bloomberg. 3 September 2008. Archived from the original on 26 June 2009. Retrieved 10 September 2008. "Ukraine gets third election in three years". Radio Netherlands. 8 October 2008. Archived from the original on 8 March 2009. Retrieved 8 October 2008. "Snap election called in Ukraine". BBC News. 8 October 2008. Retrieved 8 October 2008. "Tymoshenko to propose creating "megacoalition" during NSDC meeting". Personal web site of Yulia Tymoshenko. 20 October 2008. Archived from the original on 31 December 2008. Ukraine calls early election, Reuters, 8 October 2008. "Ukraine president calls election for December". The Irish Times. 9 October 2008. Retrieved 9 October 2008.[permanent dead link] "Ukraine election date is uncertain, says president". UNIAN. 22 October 2008. "Finance crises delay Ukraine vote". BBC News. 20 October 2008. "Ukraine's president says no election this year". UNIAN. 12 November 2008. "Tymoshenko Not Intending To Resign". Ukrainian News Agency. 10 October 2008. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. "Tymoshenko won't resign until a new coalition is formed". UNIAN. 10 October 2008. Experts Admit Party Of Regions-Tymoshenko Bloc Coalition If Pliusch Nominated For Speaker's Position, Ukrainian News Agency (3 December 2008) Archived 8 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine coalition set to reform, BBC News (9 December 2008) New parliamentary majority receives name, UNIAN (11 December 2008) Lavrynovych Speaking About Majority Between BYuT, OU PSD, Lytvyn Bloc And Communist Party Faction At Rada Archived 8 December 2012 at archive.today, Ukrainian News Agency (13 December 2008) "Lytvyn announced about creating a coalition between BYuT, the "Our Ukraine" – People's Self-Defense Bloc faction and the Lytvyn Bloc. However, the coalition agreement has not been signed so far." "Tymoshenko Bloc, OU-PSD, And Lytvyn Bloc Sign Rada Coalition Agreement". Ukrainian News Agency. 16 December 2008. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. President calls on VR to focus on overcoming economic crisis, UNIAN (11 December 2008) Yushchenko categorically opposed to "coalition of three" – Hrytsenko, UNIAN (15 December 2008) Presidential Secretariat urges parliament to include early election funds in 2009 budget Archived 30 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (15 December 2008) "Lytvyn Predicts Rada's Work Until 2012". Ukrainian News Agency. 13 December 2008. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. 'I can reassure everyone that snap elections will not be held... If the Rada is working adequately and the public sees its efficiency, the Parliament will work next four-year', he said. "Ukraine Parliament fails to pass non-confidence bill against cabinet". Economic Daily. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Cullison, Alan (6 February 2009). "Rivalry Deepens Ukraine Economic Woe". Online.wsj.com. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "The scandalous Tymoshenko briefing: President covers and earns on currency speculation". Pravda.com.ua. 18 December 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2008. "Achievements". Tymoshenko.ua. 24 December 2013. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "The russo-ukrainian gas dispute of January 2009: a comprehensive assessment". Oxfordenergy.org. Retrieved 1 March 2009. Harding, Luke (December 2010). "WikiLeaks cables link Russian mafia boss to EU gas supplies". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "New and conflicting details emerge over Mogilevich's alleged involvement in nation". Kyivpost.com. 10 December 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Yulia Tymoshenko: RosUkrEnergo has lost nothing, but only paid off its debts to Gazprom". Kmu.gov.ua. 1 January 2009. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Oleh Dubyna Yushchenko and RUE guilty of 20-day gas spat with Russia in 2008". Zik.ua. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Prosecution witness confirms links between Yushchenko and RosUkrEnergo (audio)". Tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Bierman, Stephen (8 January 2009). "Russia-Ukraine Gas Row May Center on RosUkrEnergo, Analyst Says". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Green, Niall (3 January 2009). "Russia cuts off Ukrainian gas supply – World Socialist Web Site". "Putin: if Ukraine goes to $ 470, transit is possible for 3–4 dollars". Unian.ua. 8 January 2009. Retrieved 8 January 2009. "THE NEW GAS DEAL: THREATS AND RISKS FOR UKRAINE". Ukraineanalysis.wordpress.com. 1 February 2009. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Gazprom says natural gas prices for Europe to drop in 2009". En.ria.ru. 12 November 2008. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Ukraine PM to stand for president, BBC News (7 June 2009) Because no candidate in the first round ballot had 50% or more votes, the two highest polling candidates faced off in a second round of the elections (Source: Presidential election gets under way in Ukraine, Kyiv Post (17 January 2010)) Archived 3 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Ukrainian PM to face old rival in runoff election, Reuters (18 January 2010) (in Ukrainian)Regular elections of the President of Ukraine 17 January 2010, Central Election Commission of Ukraine Archived 19 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko accuses Yuschenko of obstructing executive authorities' teamwork Archived 15 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (6 February 2009) Yuschenko demands immediate amendments to 2009 budget to save Ukraine's economy – televised address to nation Archived 15 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (30 January 2009) Tymoshenko told based on what a conflict with Yushchenko[permanent dead link], zaxid.net (29 March 2011) Agreement with Russia threatens Ukraine's security – President, UNIAN (10 February 2009) Presidential secretariat considers PM's report "theatrical performance" Archived 15 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (5 February 2009) Premier says Regions Party wanted to destabilize government work, Interfax-Ukraine (5 February 2009) and Putin has thwarted a deal-Firtash Yushchenko, Kaczynski[permanent dead link], maidan.org.ua (20 February 2009) Tymoshenko: RosUkrEnergo has lost nothing, but only paid off its debts to Gazprom, kmu.gov.ua (11 February 2009) Tymoshenko: Political Competition Accounts For Conflict With Yuschenko, Ukrainian News Agency (11 February 2009) Archived 15 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Rada Denies Support To No Confidence In Cabinet, Ukrainian News Agency (5 February 2009) Archived 30 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine "Ukrainian parliament rejects no-confidence vote in government". Interfax-Ukraine. 5 February 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2016. Tymoshenko: Yushchenko – my political opponent Archived 18 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine, economics.unian.net (10 February 2009) Tymoshenko told the Europeans about his relationship with Yushchenko, Pravda.com.ua (10 February 2009) Tymoshenko: "There must be elections in Ukraine", Lemonde.fr (3 March 2009) Feifer, Gregory (2 October 2007). "Ukraine's Tymoshenko Likely Prime Minister". NPR. Retrieved 5 October 2007. Olearchyk, Roman; Wagstyl, Stefan (2 October 2007). "A tough and populist maverick". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 5 October 2007. Yulia Tymoshenko Won't Be President Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Kommersant (17 April 2008) Tymoshenko not to challenge election results if defeated, Interfax-Ukraine (24 September 2009) Tymoshenko promised not to dispute results of election of President, UNIAN (24 September 2009) Artists included Ruslana, Oleksandr Ponomaryov, Ani Lorak, Potap and Nastia Kamenskikh, Tina Karol, Natalia Mogilevska, Iryna Bilyk, TIK, TNMK, "Druha Rika", Mad Heads XL. See the concert here "VideoInfo.com.ua". Archived from the original on 22 September 2009. Retrieved 24 September 2009. "Events by themes: Allukrainian round "With Ukraine in a heart!"". unian.net. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Mogilevska went to Tymoshenko, UNIAN (11 September 2008) "Tymoshenko enters presidential race". 25 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. "Ukraine PM enters tight presidential race". 24 October 2009. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 1 March 2022. "The RESOLUTION from October 31, 2009 № 228 On registration of the candidate on a post of the President of Ukraine Tymoshenko Yulia Vladimirovna". Cvk.gov.ua. 31 October 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009.[permanent dead link] (in Ukrainian) Тимошенко розповіла, як розвантажувала шини, а Скрипка за неї співав, Табло ID (26 October 2009) Christian-Democratic Union party to support Tymoshenko at presidential election, Kyiv Post (28 November 2009) Archived 2 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine European Party gives its support to Tymoshenko in presidential race, Interfax-Ukraine (4 December 2009) "Interior Minister takes short leave, urges voters to support Tymoshenko". Kyiv Post. 11 December 2009. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Russia's Putin says not backing Ukraine's Tymoshenko, Reuters (3 December 2009) In Ukrainian election, Russia supports Yanukovych, Pravda.com.ua (31 January 2010) Pro-Russian candidate[permanent dead link], ua.ukrrudprom.ua (1 September 2009) Who Is Really Pro-Russian Candidate for President of Ukraine, volyn.com.ua (22 August 2009) About football and luck Archived 12 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Yulia Tymoshenko official personal blog (7 December 2009) "Paid advisers descend on candidates, nation". Kyiv Post. 19 November 2009. Archived from the original on 23 November 2009. Tymoshenko: Early parliamentary elections may follow presidential ballot in Ukraine, Kyiv Post (26 November 2009) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko urges national democratic forces to unite around candidate in second round, Interfax-Ukraine (1 December 2009) Severinsen: Party of Regions has again created conditions for falsification of elections Archived 7 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine, tsn.ua (4 February 2010) "Official Election Results 2010. The First Round". Pravda.com.ua. 18 January 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2010. "Hanne Severinsen: Party of Regions trying to repeat 2004". Tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "PACE statement". Ukrinform.ua. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Statement of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe". Csce.gov. 19 January 2010. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Новий закон – найбільша загроза виборам, Українська правда". Pravda.com.ua. 5 February 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Kudelia, Serhiy (29 January 2010). "Tymoshenko's Looming Defeat: How Did She Make It Inevitable?". Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. "The Results of the 2010 Election. The Second Round". Pravda.com.ua. 7 February 2010. Retrieved 7 February 2010. Turchynov: vote rigging in favor of Yanukovych was systematic, large-scale, Kyiv Post (10 February 2010) Archived 9 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Nataliya Korolevska: victory will be ours, Yulia Tymoshenko official website (8 February 2010) Archived 15 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine Andriy Shevchenko: whole gamut of fraud in Donbas, Yulia Tymoshenko official website (8 February 2010) Archived 15 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine's Tymoshenko Slams Rival, No Comment On Election Result, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (11 February 2010) Ukraine election: Yanukovych urges Tymoshenko to quit, BBC News (10 February 2010) "Tymoshenko calls Ukraine vote rigged". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. (14 February 2010) "Yulia Tymoshenko's appeal to the people". Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko. 13 February 2010. Archived from the original on 17 February 2010. "Update: Tymoshenko says Ukraine vote was rigged". Kyiv Post. 14 February 2010. Archived from the original on 29 January 2011. "Ukraine: Tymoshenko vows to contest election result". BBC News. 15 February 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Yanukovych: Talks with Tymoshenko possible only if she apologizes". Kyiv Post. 12 February 2010. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. "Update: Ukraine turmoil as defiant Tymoshenko clings on as Prime Minister". Kyiv Post. Reuters. 11 February 2010. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010. High Court in Ukraine Weighs Appeal on Election, The New York Times (17 February 2010) Ukrainian election results suspended on appeal, Associated Press (17 February 2010) Archived 21 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine Ukrainian election result suspended after PM's appeal, BBC News (17 February 2010) Levy, Clifford J. (21 February 2010). "Ukraine Leader Drops Vote Challenge". The New York Times. p. A8. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2013. Yulia Tymoshenko: sooner or later an honest court will assess the fraudulent 2010 elections, Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko (20 February 2010) Archived 10 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine Yulia Tymoshenko will not challenge election results in Supreme Court, Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko (20 February 2010) Archived 18 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine Yulia Tymoshenko's address to the people of Ukraine, Yulia Tymoshenko official website (22 February 2010) Archived 23 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko fights on, refuses to recognize Yanukovych win, Kyiv Post (25 February 2010) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Half-empty chamber greets Ukraine's new president, Kyiv Post (25 February 2010) Archived 12 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine "Ukraine parliament votes out Tymoshenko's government". Kyiv Post. 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. MPs desert defeated Ukraine candidate Yulia Tymoshenko, BBC News (21 September 2010) Tymoshenko demands parliament should consider her government's dismissal on 2 March, Kyiv Post (1 March 2010) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko: Dissolution of parliamentary coalition illegal, Kyiv Post (2 March 2010) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko says cabinet won't stay on as caretaker, Kyiv Post (3 March 2010) Archived 24 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko: Government members will immediately leave offices after Rada's decision on cabinet dismissal, Kyiv Post (3 March 2010) Archived 6 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine "Press secretary: Tymoshenko vacates premier's post". Kyiv Post. 4 March 2010. Archived from the original on 7 March 2010. Cabinet: Turchynov will fulfill premier's duties until new government is formed, Kyiv Post (4 March 2010) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Ex-premier Tymoshenko calls for Ukrainians to join opposition, RIA Novosti (9 March 2010) Tymoshenko calls on opposition to unite, Kyiv Post (15 March 2010) Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Yushchenko jumps back into political fray, visiting relatively friendly territory in Lviv, Kyiv Post (11 March 2010) Archived 15 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine Eight parties sign agreement on creation of united opposition, Kyiv Post (16 March 2010) Archived 22 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine "Ющенко і Яценюк проігнорували Комітет захисту України". Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 8 July 2023. Police move to dampen protest turnout, Kyiv Post (11 May 2010) Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Yulia Tymoshenko: Yanukovych-Medvedev agreement will be terminated, Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko (23 April 2010) Archived 6 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine Old bribe case re-opened against Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (12 May 2010) Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Day in pictures (12 May 2010), BBC News (12 May 2010) Tymoshenko claims president ordered prosecutors to put her in jail, Kyiv Post (12 May 2010) Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Yanukovych bears no grudges against Tymoshenko". zik.com.ua. 12 May 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "General Prosecutor's Office instituted criminal case against Tymoshenko". UNIAN. 15 December 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Ukraine ex-PM Tymoshenko charged with misusing funds, BBC News (20 December 2010) Tymoshenko says she is charged with misuse of 'green money', Interfax-Ukraine (20 December 2010) Former Ukrainian prime minister charged with abuse of power – document, Interfax-Ukraine (21 December 2010) Joint statement Covington & Burling LLP and BDO regarding the accusations against Tymoshenko June 18, 2011, Pravda (18 June 2011) Tymoshenko's government did not spend Kyoto money", the state Treasury, Rbk (7 August 2014) Levy, Clifford J. (15 December 2010). "Ukraine: Investigation of Ex-Premier". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 July 2012. Criminal proceedings keep Tymoshenko from European People's Party summit, Kyiv Post (16 December 2010) Archived 20 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine Prosecutors launch probe of Tymoshenko, arrest her environment minister, Kyiv Post (16 December 2010) Archived 12 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine BYUT lawmakers blocked rostrum and presidium of VRU, UNIAN (16 December 2010) European People's Party condemns 'politically motivated' government pressure on Ukrainian opposition, Kyiv Post (16 December 2010) Archived 29 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko probed for abuse of office, Kyiv Post (16 December 2010) Archived 29 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Prosecutor general says there were no politics in questioning Tymoshenko and Turchynov". Kyiv Post. 10 December 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011. "New charges against Ukraine's ex-premier". Kyiv Post. 27 January 2011. Archived from the original on 3 March 2011. "Tymoshenko: authorities have fabricated another charge against me". UNIAN. 28 January 2011. Retrieved 29 January 2016. the law of Ukraine On state targeted programmes, Zakon2.rada.gov.ua (12 December 2012) "Про Державний бюджет України на 2009 рік". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України. Ukraine investigates Tymoshenko over Russia gas deal (updated), Kyiv Post (11 April 2011) Archived 15 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Gas charges 'absurd', says Tymoshenko, United Press International (12 April 2011) Ukraine ex-premier Tymoshenko charged over gas deals, BBC News (24 May 2011) Investigation into Tymoshenko's case completed, no need to arrest her, says PGO, Interfax-Ukraine (24 May 2011) Ukrainian ex-PM sues gas company, businessman in US court, Reuters (27 April 2011) Prisoner of independence Archived 18 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine, Novaya Gazeta (12 October 2011) Yulia Tymoshenko urges West to stop ignoring Russian takeover of Ukraine, The Daily Telegraph (19 October 2010) New media freedom battle grips Ukraine, BBC News (30 July 2010) Thousands protest Russia-Ukraine deal Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (24 April 2010) Ukraine's Tymoshenko questioned over corruption, CNN (15 December 2010) Tymoshenko, Yulia (7 February 2011). "The Orange Revolution Betrayed". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Tymoshenko: active civil society will help return democracy to Ukraine, UNIAN (8 February 2011) Statement by Senator John McCain & EPP President Wilfried Martens on Ukraine, European People's Party (7 March 2011) Tymoshenko to present a picture of Ukrainian events in Brussels Archived 29 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, for-ua.com (17 March 2011) European Parliament resolution of 9 June 2011 on Ukraine: the cases of Yulia Tymoshenko and other members of the former government, europarl.europa.eu (9 June 2011) "The trial of Tymoshenko. Started". Pravda.com.ua. 24 June 2011. Retrieved 24 June 2011. Boiko: Naftogaz will not withdraw civil suit against Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (7 October 2011) Archived 15 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Protesters gather as Tymoshenko trial resumes in Kiev". BBC News. 8 August 2011. Retrieved 20 August 2011. Byrne, Peter; Grushenko, Kateryna (11 March 2011). "Jailhouse Watch: Many former top officials remain in jail for months". Kyiv Post. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Yanukovych: Over 400 officials of current government stand trial Kyiv Post (25 August 2011) Archived 29 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine Yanukovych vows to put an end to corruption Kyiv Post (15 September 2011) Archived 27 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Yanukovych: 'Some misinform international community about Ukraine' Kyiv Post (7 February 2011) Archived 14 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine Retreats to a Dark Past, Der Spiegel (18 October 2011) "Amnesty International believes that "the verdict Tymoshenko" is politically motivated". Infosud.ru. 11 October 2011. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Piling cases on Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (3 November 2011) Archived 29 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine Getting Yulia, Kyiv Post (3 November 2011) Archived 30 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine ex-PM Yulia Tymoshenko jailed over gas deal, BBC News (11 October 2011) The Tymoshenko verdict. Full text of the sentence, "Law & Business" (13 October 2011) Tymoshenko convicted, sentenced to seven years in prison, ordered to pay state $188 million (update), Kyiv Post (11 October 2011) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko files appeal against court ruling in gas case, Kyiv Post (24 October 2011) Archived 24 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine Tax police resumes four criminal cases against Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (7 November 2011) Archived 21 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ukraine heaps more charges on Tymoshenko (updated), Kyiv Post (11 November 2011) Archived 14 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine Vlasenko: investigators illegally presented Yulia Tymoshenko with new charges, UNIAN (11 November 2011) Ukraine tax authorities file charges against Tymoshenko, Interfax Ukraine (11 November 2011) Ukraine 're-arrests' Tymoshenko, EU sends envoy, Kyiv Post (9 December 2011) Archived 1 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Teixeira: EU concerned about new arrest Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (9 December 2011) Archived 28 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine Tymoshenko faces indefinite arrest, Kyiv Post (9 December 2011) Archived 16 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine Lawyer: Tymoshenko arrested 'for life', Kyiv Post (9 December 2011) Archived 2 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Jailed Tymoshenko seen by EU Commissioner Stefan Fuele, BBC News (13 December 2011) Ukraine's Tymoshenko loses appeal against jail term, BBC News (23 December 2011) Tymoshenko sentence in gas supply case takes legal force, Kyiv Post (23 December 2011) Archived 30 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine Official statement by Yulia Tymoshenko, Kyiv Post (22 December 2011) Press release, ECtHR (20 December 2011) Tymoshenko moved to prison in Kharkiv (updated), Kyiv Post (30 December 2011) Tymoshenko moved to Kachanivska penal colony in Kharkiv (updated), Kyiv Post (30 December 2011) Czechs give asylum to spouse of Ukraine's Tymoshenko Reuters (6 January 2012) "Husband of Ukraine's Tymoshenko wins Czech asylum". BBC. 6 January 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2012. (in Ukrainian) Генпрокуратура перевіряє Тимошенко на причетність до ще одного вбивства, BBC Ukrainian (7 April 2012) "Ukraine's Tymoshenko refuses to attend new tax trial". BBC News. 19 April 2012. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Ukraine's jailed ex-PM Tymoshenko 'on hunger strik, BBC News (24 April 2012) Ukraine's Tymoshenko moved from prison to hospital; ends hunger strike, The Globe and Mail (9 May 2012)[dead link] "Opposition leaders visit Tymoshenko's hospital". Kharkiv: Kyiv Post. 13 November 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2014. "German doctors arrive at Kharkiv-based clinic to see Tymoshenko", Kyiv Post, Kharkiv, 15 November 2012 "Rome mayor's office puts up Tymoshenko portrait on facade", Kyiv Post, 26 November 2012 "Ukraine opposition leader demands closure of protesters' cases, Tymoshenko release", Interfax-Ukraine, 21 February 2014, retrieved 24 February 2014 "France disappointed by Tymoshenko appeal rejection", rapsinews.com, Paris, 31 August 2012 "Ukraine's Highest Court Upholds Tymoshenko Verdict". The Wall Street Journal. Associated Press. 29 August 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2012. Ukraine's highest court upholds Tymoshenko verdict, Arkansas Online (29 August 2012 ) "Ukraine's jailed Tymoshenko calls off hunger strike". Kyiv Post. Reuters. 16 November 2012. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Chief doctor:Tymoshenko to have recovered from hunger strike by end of this week". Kyiv Post. Interfax-Ukraine. 28 November 2012. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Tymoshenko to decide whether to continue hunger strike, Kyiv Post (13 November 2012) United Opposition nominates Tymoshenko as single presidential candidate, Kyiv Post (7 December 2012) Yatseniuk:Tymoshenko will be able to run for presidency in 2015, Kyiv Post (7 December 2012) Batkivschyna to nominate Tymoshenko for presidency, Yatseniuk heads party's political council, Interfax-Ukraine (14 June 2013) Tymoshenko still ready to run for president, Kyiv Post (10 December 2010) "UKRAINIAN EX-PM SUSPECTED IN MURDER CASE". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2013. Tymoshenko accused of murder Archived 18 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Euronews (19 January 2013) Jailed Ukraine ex-PM Tymoshenko suspected in long-dormant murder case, Montreal Gazette (19 January 2013) Ukraine Prosecutors Say Tymoshenko May Face Murder Charge, Bloomberg L.P. (18 January 2013) Ukraine prosecutor accuses Tymoshenko of murder, Reuters (18 January 2013) "Defender: Shcherban murder case suspended. No evidence against Yulia Tymoshenko (video)". Tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Tymoshenko stops hunger strike, Interfax-Ukraine (6 December 2013) Jailed Tymoshenko on hunger strike over EU U-turn by Ukraine Archived 23 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Euronews (25 November 2013) Ukraine opposition leader Tymoshenko ends prison hunger strike, Euronews (6 December 2013) Russia and Ukraine leaders seek partnership treaty, BBC News (6 December 2013) "Tymoshenko filed the appeal on a sentence on "gas business"". Bbc.com. 24 October 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2011. Свобода, Радіо (1 December 2011). "The court considered possible a preliminary review of the complaint Tymoshenko without her". Радіо Свобода. Radio Svoboda. Retrieved 1 December 2011. "The trial of Tymoshenko will continue "in any weather"". Novaukraina.org. 20 December 2011. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Protection of Tymoshenko will not go to court". Fakty.ictv.ua. 22 December 2011. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2011. "Court of Appeals leaves Yulia Tymoshenko in custody". En.for-ua.com. 14 December 2011. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Tymoshenko's defense submitted cassation appeal against "gas sentence"". En.for-ua.com. 26 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 July 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Tymoshenko's cassation in gas case read out in court". Kyivpost.com. 17 August 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "The European Court of human rights has completed its public hearings in the case "Tymoshenko against Ukraine"". Rbc.ua. 28 August 2012. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "A staunch court". Day.kyiv.ua. 4 September 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "EU deeply disappointed by court ruling on Tymoshenko's appeal against gas case verdict". Old.nrcu.gov.ua. 29 August 2012. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 29 August 2012. "Legal Monitoring in Ukraine III: Preliminary Report on the investigations against Yulia Tymoshenko in November 2011" (PDF). The Danish Helsinki Committee for Human Rights. 8 November 2011. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Omtzigt, Pieter (23 April 2013). "Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights: Keeping political and criminal responsibility separate (draft resolution)" (PDF). Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2013. "ECHR". Echr.coe.int. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Spillius, Alex (20 September 2013). "EU to Kiev: free Yulia Tymoshenko, or no pact". Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Захаров заявил, что Тимошенко – безусловно политзаключенная [Zakharov declared that Tymoshenko – is undoubtedly a political prisoner]. LIGA.net (in Russian). 7 June 2012. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Danish Helsinki Committee: Legal Monitoring in Ukraine II, Full Text". Khpg.org. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "EU feels let down by Ukraine over Tymoshenko". Euronews. 11 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "The mission of the European Parliament under the slogan "Julia will" have arrived to Timoshenko". Ipress.ua. 15 June 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2013. Yulia Tymoshenko sentenced (12 October 2011). "Yulia Tymoshenko sentenced". OSW. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "EU leaders:Ratification of Association Agreement and DCFTA depends on settlement of Tymoshenko-Lutsenko issue". Kyiv Post. Interfax-Ukraine. 20 July 2012. "HUDOC Search Page". Hudoc.echr.coe.int. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "PACE: Yulia Tymoshenko is a political prisoner". tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013. Retrieved 2 July 2013. "United States Senate Resolution on Ukraine. Full Text". Beta.congress.gov. 18 November 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "U.S. Senate Adopts Resolution Demanding Ukraine Release Tymoshenko Under European Court of Human Rights' Ruling on Her Illegal Detention And Arrest". Un.ua. 20 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 November 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Committee on Foreign Relations. "US Congress Resolution 165". Govtrack.us. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "US Congress Resolution 466". Opencongress.org. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "PACE calls for Tymoshenko release". Kyivpost.com. 2 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Cox, Kwasniewski asking Yanukovych to pardon Tymoshenko". Ukrinform.ua. 4 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. On 21 February 2014, Parliament voted to allow the release of former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, who has been imprisoned for more than two years. "Manafort's Mysterious Israeli Connection: Everything We Know So Far". Haaretz. 18 September 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. Harding, Luke (5 April 2018). "Ex-Trump aide Paul Manafort approved 'black ops' to help Ukraine president". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 April 2018. Chaiten, Daniel (30 July 2018). "Robert Mueller offers Tony Podesta immunity to testify against Paul Manafort: Report". The Washington Examiner. Retrieved 30 July 2018. Arnsdorf, Isaac (12 April 2017). "Podesta Group Files Disclosures After Being Offered Immunity In Exchange For Testifying Against Manafort". Politico. Retrieved 12 April 2017. Paul Manafort’s Plea Deal Could Be Bad News For A Bunch Of Washington Operatives, HuffPost (14 September 2018) Higgins, Andrew; Cramer, Andrew (21 February 2014). "Embattled Ukraine President Signs Compromise Deal as Parliament Votes to Free His Imprisoned Rival". New York Times. Retrieved 21 February 2014. Danilova, Maria; Karmanau, Yuras (21 February 2014). "Tensions high at Kyiv protest camp despite ground-breaking deal". CTV News. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Ukraine's Tymoshenko Declares Presidential Candidacy". Voice of America. 27 March 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Ukraine: Speaker Oleksandr Turchynov named interim president". BBC News. 23 February 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Ukraine protests timeline". BBC News. 23 February 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Council of Europe Committee of Ministers urges Ukrainian government to compensate Tymoshenko for violated rights". Kyivpost.com. Interfax-Ukraine. 6 December 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2015. Walker, Shaun (24 February 2014). "Yulia Tymoshenko is back centre stage in Ukraine – but not all want her there". The Guardian. Kyiv. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Yulia Tymoshenko meets with EU and U.S. diplomats (photos) – Yulia Tymoshenko. Official Website". Tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Ally of Opposition Icon Tymoshenko Voted Acting Ukraine President". NBC News. 23 February 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2014. "President Yanukovych and Ukraine opposition sign early poll deal". Kyiv: The Sun (Malaysia). 21 February 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2014. Kharkiv court drops charges against Tymoshenko in UESU case, Interfax-Ukraine (28 February 2014) "Ukrainian Prosecutor General's Office opens case vs. judges who sentenced Tymoshenko". ITAR-TASS. 25 April 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Ukrainian Supreme Court closes Tymoshenko's 'gas case'". ITAR-TASS. 14 April 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Ukrainian Supreme Court closes Tymoshenko's 'gas case'". ITAR-TASS. 14 April 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Ukraine: Court "discontinues" examination of Tymoshenko human rights complaint". humanrightseurope.org. Archived from the original on 28 June 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2015. "ECHR:Tymoshenko suit over Ukraine treatment settled". dw.com. 22 January 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Tymoshenko's jailers sentenced to three years in prison". Censor.NET. 20 October 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2019. "Video: Freed Yulia Tymoshenko praises 'heroes and liberators'". Telegraph. 23 February 2014. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Danilova, Maria. "Tymoshenko: West Must Stop Russia's Aggression". Huffingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Lynch, Suzanne (4 March 2014). "Tymoshenko among Kiev uprising figures to visit Dublin". The Irish Times. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Timoschenko in Berlin – Charité-Ärzte bereiten Behandlung vor" [Tymoshenko in Berlin – Charité-Ärzte doctors prepare for treatment]. Berliner Morgenpost (in German). 7 March 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Reevell, Patrick; Herszenhorn, David M.; Erlanger, Steven; Gladstone, Rick (27 March 2014). "Former Prime Minister Announces Candidacy for President of Ukraine". The New York Times. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Election of the President of Ukraine 2014 Yulia Tymoshenko. Pre-election program". CVK. 31 March 2014. "Poroshenko wins presidential election with 54.7% of vote – CEC". Radio Ukraine International. 29 May 2014. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. Stern, David (25 May 2014). "Petro Poroshenko claims Ukraine presidency". BBC News Online. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Chocolate King Poroshenko beats Orange Princess Tymoshenko". Pravda.ru. 26 May 2014. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "Tymoshenko announces start of preparations for NATO accession referendum". ITAR-TASS. 30 August 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Poroshenko Bloc to have greatest number of seats in parliament". Ukrinform. 8 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2015. (in Ukrainian) Full electoral list of "Fatherland", TVi (15 September 2014) Six factions formed in parliament, National Radio Company of Ukraine (27 November 2014) "Committee on issues of European integration". Official portal (in Ukrainian). Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Tymoshenko announced reform in "Fatherland": "I am working on the reform of the party"". Сensor.net. 4 February 2014. "Юлія Тимошенко: я балотуватимуся на посаду президента на виборах 25 травня (фото, відео) - Юлія Тимошенко. Офіційний сайт". 28 March 2014. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 29 December 2023. ""Батьківщина" висунула Тимошенко в президенти - "Факти"". 2 April 2014. Archived from the original on 2 April 2014. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Wayback Machine". 27 February 2018. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Війна штабів. Навіщо їй участь, а йому - перемога". 11 May 2014. Archived from the original on 11 May 2014. Retrieved 29 December 2023. FÄRM, Göran. "ELECTION OBSERVATION DELEGATION TO THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS IN UKRAINE" (PDF). "Цен тральної в иборчо ї комі сі ї: Про результати виборів президента україни" [On the results of the presidential elections of Ukraine] (PDF). Central Election Commission of Ukraine (in Ukrainian). 25 May 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Rada supports Yulia Tymoshenko's initiative on freeing Nadiya Savchenko". Yulia Tymoshenko's official site. 11 December 2014. Archived from the original on 21 July 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Верховна Рада підтримала довгоочікувані зміни до закону про волонтерство [Supreme Council supported the long-awaited changes to the law on volunteering]. samoorg.com.ua (in Ukrainian). 6 March 2015. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Yermochenko, Oleksandr (21 April 2015). У Раді створили робочу групу з перевірки обгрунтованості комунальних тарифів [The Rada has established a working group to check the validity of utility tariffs] (in Ukrainian). UNN news. Retrieved 6 November 2015. "We are grateful to Angela Merkel". Yulia Tymoshenko's official site. 6 April 2016. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2016. ""Батьківщина" готує заяву в ГПУ щодо необґрунтованого завищення ціни на газ для населення з боку НКРЄ". Батькiвщина. 14 May 2016. "Юлія Тимошенко зустрілася з координатором Держдепу США з питань санкцій". Батькiвщина. 16 May 2016. ""Батьківщина" запустила сайт "Справедливі тарифи"". Батькiвщина. 23 May 2016. Demand Fair Rates Archived 30 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine ""Fatherland" has achieved an extension of the moratorium on the sale of agricultural land". Fatherland (in Ukrainian). 7 December 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2018. "Yulia Tymoshenko: guarantee of peace return to Ukraine – implementation of the Budapest Memorandum". Fatherland (in Ukrainian). 13 April 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2018. НОВАЯ НАРОДНАЯ КОНСТИТУЦИЯ (Report) (Новый курс Украины ed.). 2018. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2021. НОВАЯ СТРАТЕГИЯ МИРА И БЕЗОПАСНОСТИ (Report) (Новый курс Украины ed.). 2018. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2021. Tymoshenko says she will run for president in 2019, Interfax-Ukraine (20 June 2018) "Taruta announces support for Tymoshenko at presidential elections". Interfax-Ukraine. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Ще один кандидат знявся на користь Гриценка [Another candidate appeared in favor of Hrytsenko]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 8 July 2023. ""Double" for Tymoshenko. 10 facts about Yulia Tymoshenko". Espreso.tv (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 13 February 2019. "Tymoshenko was expelled from the "Popular Front" because of plans to run for president". Hromadske.ua (in Ukrainian). 17 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. "Tymoshenko claims that People's Deputy Yuriy Tymoshenko is a technical candidate from the government against her". ua.interfax (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 8 February 2019. ""Surfing" on moods: why does Tymoshenko lead the presidential rating?". BBC News Україна (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 20 November 2018. "Ukraine faces a choice. Which of the race leaders will advance to the second round". lrt.lt (in Russian). 29 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2019. First round results of the 2019 Ukrainian presidential election, Central Election Commission of Ukraine "Ukraine's Tymoshenko, out of presidential contention, accuses Poroshenko of cheating". CBC. 2 April 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2013. "Final Ukraine Election Results Confirm Zelenskiy Landslide". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 26 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. CEC named the party leaders in the local elections in Ukraine, lb.ua (18 November 2020) "Tymoshenko's Batkivshchyna party moves to opposition over land market law". KyivPost. 13 November 2019. Retrieved 24 November 2019. "People's Deputies of Ukraine. Yulia Tymoshenko". Official web portal of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 29 August 2019. "Rada removed immunity from people's deputies". pravda. Retrieved 7 March 2021. ""Fatherland" advocates reducing the number of deputies and giving the people the right of legislative initiative". Fatherland (in Ukrainian). 3 September 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019. ""Fatherland" Tymoshenko goes into opposition to Zelensky's party". DW (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 7 March 2021. "Tymoshenko's Batkivshchyna party moves to opposition over land market law". kyivpost. 13 November 2019. Retrieved 18 November 2019. "National HQ for protection of native land requires Zelensky to hold referendum". interfax. Retrieved 6 December 2019. "Нацкорпус підтримає всеукраїнську акцію протесту, ініційовану Національним штабом захисту рідної землі". Національний корпус (in Ukrainian). 15 December 2019. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Batkivshchyna calls on NABU to investigate corruption in pushing for land sale law". Батькивщина (in Ukrainian). 19 December 2019. Retrieved 19 December 2019. "Акция SaveФОП: предприниматели Украины отступать не намерены". DW (in Russian). Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Люди не должны платить за газ больше, чем он обошелся госмонополии – Тимошенко". Интерфакс Украина (in Russian). Retrieved 11 April 2019. "Tymoshenko To Initiate Referendums On 5 Issues". ukranews. 27 January 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. "Як українці відповіли на "5 питань Зеленського" – "Рейтинг"". Укрінформ (in Ukrainian). 25 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. "Тимошенко потребовала от СБУ расследовать импорт электроэнергии из РФ". MK (in Russian). March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Tymoshenko: Batkivschyna submiting all necessary documents for start of referendum on land sale to CEC". Interfax-Ukraine. "Tymoshenko: Batkivschyna develops draft Constitution with fourth control branch of power". Interfax-Ukraine. 21 July 2021. Retrieved 1 August 2021. ""Батькивщина" требует от Рады принять два тарифных закона". Interfax.com.ua. 9 September 2021. ""Зробимо це разом?" Тимошенко оголосила війну "Нафтогазу"". Glavcom.ua. 28 September 2021. "Владі слід дослухатися до пропозицій Тимошенко, – експерт". Obozrevatel.com. 23 November 2021. "The whole country must become a united team in the fight against COVID – Yulia Tymoshenko". Apostrophe.ua (in Ukrainian). 26 October 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2021. "As factions and groups voted for the ratification of the Istanbul Convention". Glavcom.ua. 20 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Deputy of Ukraine have ratified the Istanbul Convention to gain EU candidate status". Lb.ua. 20 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Парламент створив комісію для перевірки Нафтогазу через можливі втрати держбюджету. Деталі". Liga.net (in Ukrainian). 27 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. (in Ukrainian) У Тимошенко заявили о сломанной депутатами "газовой" афере "Нафтогаза", Zn.ua 19 July 2022) "Damn, well, explain to me - Tymoshenko broke down in the Rada due to gas (video)". Konkurent.ua. Retrieved 20 July 2022. ""Naftogaz" misleads the Cabinet of Ministers, the Verkhovna Rada and international partners: it asks twice to allocate UAH 150 billion for the purchase of gas, - Tymoshenko. DOCUMENT". Censor.net. 23 July 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022. (in Ukrainian) Депутати створили слідчу комісію щодо кризи на енергетичному ринку, Lb.ua 29 July 2022 "Yulia Tymoshenko met with the governor of Tokyo". ba.org.ua. 29 July 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2022. "Yulia Tymoshenko called for the creation of a new stable security order in the world". ba.org.ua. 29 July 2022. Retrieved 29 July 2022. "'Putin is ready for anything,' says Ukraine's ex-PM Yulia Tymoshenko". France24. 28 February 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2022. Maximof, Yeger. "Former Ukrainian PM Yulia Tymoshenko: Putin On 'Historic Mission' To Recreate The Soviet Union". Radiofreeeurope/Radioliberty. Retrieved 7 April 2022. (in Ukrainian) Batkivshchyna team takes custody of Okhmatdet, - Tymoshenko, rbc.ua (1 March 2022) (in Ukrainian) Batkivshchyna provides diplomatic and humanitarian assistance, support for the military - Tymoshenko, interfax.com.ua (18 March 2022) (in Ukrainian) Только разгром армии РФ и режима Путина приведет к скорейшему прекращению войны, – Тимошенко, obozrevatel.com (1 June 2022) Freeman, Colin (3 July 2022). "Yulia Tymoshenko: Peace only comes when we 'finish' Vladimir Putin by military might". The Telegraph. Retrieved 4 July 2022. "At the round table of The Economist, Tymoshenko called to rebuild the global security system". Obozrevatel.com. 5 July 2022. (in Ukrainian) Юлія Тимошенко зустрілася з Виконавчим директором Американського єврейського комітету, ba.org.ua (6 July 2022) (in Ukrainian) Юлія Тимошенко зустрілася з Віцепрезидентом Єврокомісії, ba.org.ua (7 July 2022) (in Ukrainian) Юлія Тимошенко зустрілася з міністром охорони здоров’я Греції, ba.org.ua (7 July 2022) "Ukraine and Africa Must Stand Together—Even as Russia Blocks Food Exports". Time. 19 July 2022. "Yulia Tymoshenko believes the war offers a chance to revitalise European security structures". Economist.com. 7 August 2022. "Yulia Tymoshenko: "Putin quer criar um novo tipo de império para o século XXI"". Sol.sapo.pt. 14 August 2022. (in Ukrainian) У Португалії засновано стипендію Юлії Тимошенко для вступу до Школи бізнесу та економіки NOVA – "Батьківщина", Interfax.com.ua (2 September 2022) (in Ukrainian) Only the capitulation of Russia and the death of Putin's regime: Tymoshenko on Matvienko's call for negotiations, obozrevatel.com (1 October 2022) (in Ukrainian) Yulia Tymoshenko met with the President of Cyprus, Centernews.com.ua (19 October 2022) (in Ukrainian) Yulia Tymoshenko met with the former Minister of Foreign Affairs of Germany, ba.org.ua (18 October 2022) (in Ukrainian) Yulia Tymoshenko met with the Director General of the International Labor Organization, - Serhii Yevtushok, Rvnews.rv.ua (4 October 2022) (in Ukrainian) Yulia Tymoshenko met with representatives of the French Democratic Confederation of Labor, Centernews.com.ua (29 September 2022) (in Ukrainian) Tymoshenko showed cats in Kherson Region (photo), Glavcom.ua (30 October 2022) (in Ukrainian) [1], vsim.ua (30 May 2023) (in Ukrainian) [2], ba.org.ua (2 May 2023) (in Ukrainian) [3], progolovne.ck.ua (12 May 2023) "Conférence à Paris pour annoncer le soutien de 117 anciens dirigeants au peuple iranien et à sa Résistance". National Council of Resistance of Iran (in French). 22 June 2023. (in Ukrainian) [4], ba.org.ua (23 June 2023) "Second Nobel Laureate Signs Gdańsk Declaration". thebrenthurstfoundation.org. 28 June 2023. (in Ukrainian) [5], gordonua.com (1 July 2023) (in Ukrainian) [6], buhplatforma.com.ua (3 July 2023) (in Ukrainian) [7], ye.ua (3 July 2023) (in Ukrainian) [8], vsim.ua (30 June 2023) (in Ukrainian) [9], subota.online (4 July 2023) (in Ukrainian) [10], glavcom.ua (4 June 2023) (in Ukrainian) [11], gazeta1.com (31 June 2023) (in Ukrainian) [12], dv-gazeta.info (17 August 2023) (in Ukrainian) [13], petropavlivka.city (25 August 2023) (in Ukrainian) [14], glavcom.ua (25 September 2023) (in Ukrainian) [15], fakty.ua (27 September 2023) (in Ukrainian) [16], gordonua.com (27 September 2023) (in Ukrainian) [17], centernews.com.ua (10 October 2023) (in Ukrainian) [18], odessamedia.net (18 October 2023) (in Ukrainian) [19], ba.org.ua (24 October 2023) (in Ukrainian) [20], ba.org.ua (22 November 2023) (in Ukrainian) [21], odessit.in.ua (15 December 2023) Ukraine's Dangerous Game by Federico Fubini, Foreign Policy. Tymoshenko: Ukraine will become a member of the European Union, UNIAN (3 March 2008) Tymoshenko sure Ukraine will join European Union, Kyiv Post (31 October 2009) Yulia Tymoshenko hopes today's sitting of Ukraine-EU Cooperation Council to give powerful impetus for Ukraine's accedence to the EU, Personal web site of Yulia Tymoshenko (16 June 2009) Updated: Tymoshenko wants to take country into EU in 5 years, Kyiv Post (14 January 2010) Tymoshenko: European project not finished because Ukraine is not there, UNIAN (4 June 2009) Ukraine will independently decide on its domestic, foreign policies, says Tymoshenko, Interfax-Ukraine (14 August 2009) Tymoshenko: Constitution is the main priority regarding deployment of Russian fleet in Ukraine, Kyiv Post (14 January 2010) Yulia Tymoshenko: we must realize that Ukraine is an indivisible state, Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko (24 August 2010) "Tea with the Financial Times: Yulia Tymoshenko". www.unian.info. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Yulia Tymoshenko: In Ukraine there will be "mova" (Ukrainian language), not "yazyk" (Russian language)!, Web portal of the Ukrainian Government (25 September 2008) Ukrainian premier against granting national status to Russian language, Kyiv Post (20 August 2009) Russian language must retain regional language status – Tymoshenko, Interfax-Ukraine (7 April 2014) Lytvyn:Program for development of Ukrainian language should be adopted before elections, Kyiv Post (24 August 2012) Ukrainians protest against Russian language law, The Guardian (4 July 2012) Y. Tymoshenko, "Containing Russia" in Foreign Affairs, May–June 2007, pp. 69–83. I. Khrestin, "The Kremlin's Issue with Foreign Affairs Archived 31 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine" in The Weekly Standard, 17 April 2007. Russian Embassy to South Africa, Russian MFA Information and Press Department Commentary Regarding a Question from RIA Novosti Concerning Yulia Tymoshenko's Article 'Containing Russia' in the Journal Foreign Affairs. Editor's note, Foreign Affairs Vol 86 Issue 5 (September–October 2007) p. 195 "The Article by Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey Lavrov "Containing Russia: Back to the Future?"" (in Russian). Mid.ru. 19 July 2007. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2011. RFERL. Ukraine revisits state sell-offs, BBC News (16 February 2005) Myers, Steven Lee (9 September 2005). "Ukraine Leader Fires Cabinet as Reform Coalition Splits". The New York Times International. Retrieved 8 October 2013. Tymoshenko: Ukraine's economy excessively monopolized, Kyiv Post (7 October 2009) Tymoshenko promises not to allow privatization of Ukraine's gas transportation system, Kyiv Post (16 November 2009) Achievements, Official website of Yulia Tymoshenko Archived 3 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine Yulia Tymoshenko: Effective development of coal industry is the future of Ukraine, Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (25 August 2009) Government plans raise general level of social standards, says Tymoshenko, Interfax-Ukraine (1 October 2009) Tymoshenko pledges to revamp ailing hospitals by 2012, Kyiv Post (1 November 2009) Tymoshenko promises tax breaks for farmers, Interfax-Ukraine (25 November 2009) Ukraine's election: portraits of main players, Kyiv Post (1 January 2010) Economic policies of Ukraine's election front-runners, Kyiv Post (18 January 2010) Tymoshenko proposes creating independent anti-corruption bureaus in Ukraine, Kyiv Post (8 December 2009) Tymoshenko denies seeking deputy immunity from prosecution, Kyiv Post (8 May 2010) Tymoshenko: Proportional voting system is the best for Ukraine, Kyiv Post (26 May 2010) Tymoshenko proposes to change staff policy in country cardinally, UNIAN (22 October 2009) Tymoshenko promises to establish 'dictatorship of law' if she wins at presidential elections, Kyiv Post (5 October 2009) Tymoshenko speaks in support of decentralization of power, Kyiv Post (5 October 2009) Tymoshenko approves of Poroshenko as foreign minister, Kyiv Post (9 October 2009) Tymoshenko: idea of united opposition is great deception by Yanukovych, UNIAN (15 April 2010) Tymoshenko calls Ukraine 'absolutely ungovernable', Kyiv Post (26 November 2009) The Report: Emerging Ukraine 2007. Oxford Business Group. 2007. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-902339-68-9. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Ukraine's constitutional crisis drags on Archived 24 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Taras Kuzio, Kyiv Post (10 January 2007) Tymoshenko: Constitution must be amended after survey conducted on form of government, Kyiv Post (20 January 2010) The Ukrainian people deserve to receive a visa-free regime – Tymoshenko, uapress.info (21 May 2016) "Final Ukraine Results Give Zelenskiy 30 Percent Of Presidential Vote". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 4 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Poroshenko wins presidential election with 54.7% of vote – CEC". Radio Ukraine International. 29 May 2014. Archived from the original on 29 May 2014. (in Russian) Results election of Ukrainian president, Телеграф (29 May 2014) (in Ukrainian) ЦВК оприлюднила офіційні результати 1-го туру виборів, Gazeta.ua (25 January 2010) "Yulia Timoshenko received 45.47 percent, or 11.6 million votes". Archived from the original on 30 November 2010. Retrieved 11 March 2014. "Тимошенко - україно-латишка, але любить євреїв". Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Debate Rages Over Whether Ukraine Presidential Hopeful Is Jewish". Haaretz. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Kyiv Post. Independence. Community. Trust - Nation - Campaign gets dirty: Leaflets smear Tymoshenko as 'Jew'". 8 February 2010. Archived from the original on 8 February 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Война информационная, священная война…". Украинская правда (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 18 April 2023. In Sniatyn install a plaque Abram Kapitelmanu – grandfather Tymoshenko. Archived 4 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine, ru.tsn.ua, 2 September 2009. – Provocative initiative "Party of Regions" (the author is a former member of "the Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc" Zinovy Boychuk) – under the advocacy company of "Tymoshenko is Jewish woman". "Рабинович призывает не спекулировать на избиении студента-еврея в Киеве". korrespondent.net (in Russian). Retrieved 18 April 2023. "# b2_2 The reply of the Prime Minister of Ukraine Yulia Tymoshenko to blame the Minister of Transport "Chervonenko, Eugene Alfredovich", autumn 2005". Farysei.narod.ru. Retrieved 11 October 2011. "Citizenship". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2008. "Law on Citizenship of Ukraine". Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2008. "Kyiv Post. Independence. Community. Trust - Opinion - OP-ED - Gender bias, anti-Semitism contributed to Yanukovych's victory". 18 December 2010. Archived from the original on 18 December 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Новости, Р. И. А. (3 January 2010). "Тимошенко признала, что украинский язык выучила в 36 лет". РИА Новости (in Russian). Retrieved 18 April 2023. Russian: Я начала говорить на украинском, когда мне было где-то 36 лет, а до этого у меня мама и вся семья – мы все разговаривали на русском. У меня до сих пор мама обычно не разговаривает на украинском. (I began to speak in Ukrainian when I was around 36. Before that, my mother and the rest of my family, we all conversed in Russian. My mother still usually doesn't talk in Ukrainian.) "Dossier: Yulia Tymoshenko". File.liga.net. 27 November 1960. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Yulia Tymoshenko's daughter: 'My mother's trial was a trial of revenge', The Guardian (16 October 2011) Eugenia Tymoshenko: the fight to save my mother Yulia, The Guardian (23 September 2012) "Донька Тимошенко взяла мамине прізвище. Для політики?". Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Tymoshenko declares her incomes". www.unian.info. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "As President, Yulia Tymoshenko will not use state dachas - Yulia Tymoshenko. Official Website". 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Yulia Tymoshenko has never used a government summer house - Yulia Tymoshenko. Official Website". 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Tuchynska, Svitlana (29 April 2010). "Ukrainska Pravda exposes how Yanukovych acquired Mezhygirya mansion - Apr. 29, 2010". Kyiv Post. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "While leading lavish lifestyles, politicians declare almost pauper-like incomes, assets". Kyiv Post. 17 June 2010. Archived from the original on 23 June 2010. Тимошенко на підборах показала активістам свій маєток у Конча-Заспі [Tymoshenko showed activists around her mansion in Koncha Zaspa in her high heels] (in Ukrainian). Tabloid.pravda.com.ua. 27 March 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Тимошенко у домогосподарки не піде, а у Facebook - обіцяє". ТаблоID. Retrieved 18 April 2023. Tiwari, Pushkar (23 August 2020). "Former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko in critical condition after testing coronavirus positive". Zee News. Retrieved 23 August 2020. Verbyany, Volodymyr (25 August 2020). "Ex-Ukrainian PM Tymoshenko Moved to Intensive Care With Covid-19". Bloomberg. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "Tymoshenko speaks up first time after testing COVID-19 positive". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency. 2 September 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2020. "Tymoshenko recovers from coronavirus – press secretary". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency. 11 September 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2020. Ukraine's Yanukovich shuns TV face-off with rival, Kyiv Post (1 February 2010) "Former Ukraine PM is jailed in US". BBC News. 25 August 2006. Retrieved 26 August 2006. Kupchinsky, Roman (10 May 2004). "Many Charges Dropped Against Ukraine's Ex-Premier". Rferl.org. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Levy, Clifford J. (7 October 2007). "'The braid' is crowning glory for the Ukrainian politician Yulia Tymoshenko". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 July 2012. (in Ukrainian) Тимошенко і "Віттон" – Люксембурзький "мове тон", Tablo ID (17 June 2009) (in Ukrainian) Юлія Тимошенко і Катерина Ющенко вдарили по Chanel, Tablo ID (19 November 2008) Bilaniuk, Laada (2005). Contested Tongues: Language Politics and Cultural Correction in Ukraine. Cornell University Press. pp. 68–69. ISBN 0-8014-7279-2. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Orange Leaders Face Shutout in Ukraine Election". ABC News. 13 January 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2016. See 2010 Ukrainian presidential election#Opinion polls for references and more information "Poll says Ukraine's president should step down now". UNIAN/RIA Novosti. 17 February 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Majority of Ukrainians believe Tymoshenko defends her own interests". UNIAN. 17 February 2009. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Ukrainians have lost confidence in government's handling of crisis, says poll". Interfax-Ukraine. 17 February 2009. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "What's in store for Ukraine if Tymoshenko wins presidential election". Zik.ua. 31 October 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "The 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. 27 August 2008. Retrieved 27 August 2008. "The 100 Most Powerful Women – No.47 Yulia Tymoshenko". Forbes. 20 August 2009. ТОП-100 найвпливовіших жінок: родички Кучми та Ющенка і "невмируща" Тимошенко [Top 100 most influential women: relatives of Kuchma and Yushchenko and the "immortal" Tymoshenko] (in Ukrainian). Tabloid.pravda.com.ua. 18 November 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2015. 100 самых влиятельных женщин Украины. Рейтинг Фокуса [The 100 most influential women in Ukraine. Focus's rating] (in Russian). Focus.ua. 18 November 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Korolevska: BYT nominating Tymoshenko for Nobel Peace Prize". Kyiv Post. 15 December 2011. Archived from the original on 30 December 2011. "Tymoshenko's activity at post of Prime Minister is reason of crises in Ukraine – Yushchenko". UNIAN. 24 November 2009. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Yushchenko told about his 'worst mistake', Kyiv Post (31 May 2010) "Yushchenko's hand in the imprisonment of Yulia Tymoshenko". Kyiv Post. 17 November 2011. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011. "Tymoshenko blames Yushchenko for obstructing government's fight against crisis". Kyivpost.com. 9 June 2009. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Pynzenyk, ex-finance minister, calls Tymoshenko "destructive force"". Kyiv Post. 3 December 2010. Archived from the original on 4 December 2010. "Regions Party calls Tymoshenko most effective opposition figure in Ukraine". Kyiv Post. 11 February 2010. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010. "Solana happy with Tymoshenko's constructive mood in opposition". Kyiv Post. 1 April 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. "Yanukovych says will not intervene over Tymoshenko". Kyiv Post. 13 May 2010. Archived from the original on 15 May 2010. "Images of Леди Ю". Retrieved 18 February 2011. "of Ледi Ю (less extent)". 3 October 2007. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Images of Lady Yu (lesser extent)". 19 January 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Ukrainian News Portal". Mukachevo.net. Retrieved 18 February 2011. (in Ukrainian) Family and Home Archived 28 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Мужчины Леди Ю". From-ua.com. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Тайна богатства Леди Ю". Vlasti.net. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Тимошенко: прошлое и будущее Леди Ю". Obozrevatel.com. 27 November 2010. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Comedy club ua – Леди Ю. ( или казнь Миледи ) (video)". Video.bigmir.net. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Четыре дела Леди Ю". Donbass.ua. 27 November 2010. Retrieved 18 February 2011. Top-POP. "Прощальное фото правительства Леди Ю". Kp.ua. Retrieved 18 February 2011. (in Ukrainian) Історія об'єднання "Нашої України" та БЮТ [репортаж, відео], 5 Kanal (12 December 2010) "Forum Ekonomiczne". Forum-ekonomiczne.pl. 18 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Prix de la Fondation | Crans Montana Forum – Committed to a more Humane and Impartial World". Cmf.ch. 12 November 2011. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Yevheniya Tymoshenko receives award in Geneva". Photo.ukrinform.ua. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Tymoshenko went to France for the Politique Internationale award". unian. 27 March 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2007. "Tymoshenko was awarded the miner's order". focus. 29 August 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008. "Tymoshenko decorated with Pope Boniface VIII award". kyivpost. 10 August 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Yulia Tymoshenko awarded for her contribution to defending democracy". Tymoshenko.ua. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Журналисты Хмельницкой вручили Юлии Тимошенко награду за развитие государства". batkivshchyna. 18 October 2014. Archived from the original on 21 October 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2015. Юлія Тимошенко отримала визначну нагороду Буша-Тетчер за Свободу і Демократію [Yulia Tymoshenko received the prestigious Bush-Thatcher Freedom and Democracy Award]. dv-gazeta.info (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 31 March 2023. "KORRESPONDENT MAGAZINE NAMES PERSONALITIES OF 2004". www.ukrinform.net. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Korrespondent magazine names Tymoshenko Personality of the Year – Jan. 19, 2006". KyivPost. 18 January 2006. "(Russian language) Popularity rating of politicians on the Internet: Tymoshenko ahead of Yanukovych". Delo.ua. 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Кутик, Максим (9 February 2012). "(Russian language) Yulia Tymoshenko is the most popular politician in the blogs of Ukraine. 2007". Ain.ua. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Кутик, Максим (9 February 2012). "Yulia Tymoshenko is the most popular politician in the blogs of Ukraine". Ain.ua. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Самый популярный политик в «Одноклассниках» и «ВКонтакте» – это Тимошенко [The most popular politician in "Odnoklassniki" and "VKontakte" – is Tymoshenko]. UAINFO (in Russian). 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. "(Russian language) Yulia Tymoshenko is the most popular foreign policy in the Russian media". Top.novostimira.biz. 1 October 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Тимошенко лидирует в рейтинге премьер-министров Украины – опрос [Yulia Tymoshenko leads in the ratings as the best Prime Minister of Ukraine – survey]. Korrespondent.net (in Russian). 27 December 2012. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Рейтинг доверия среди украинцев возглавили Зеленский, Разумков и Тимошенко". rbc.ua. Retrieved 9 April 2021. "Yulia" – via IMDb. "The trial of Yulia Tymoshenko. True story" – via www.youtube.com. "The Hans Otto Theater". Potsdam.de. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2013. "Who Wants to Kill Yulia Tymoshenko? (Edinburgh Fringe) – Reviews". Whatsonstage.com. 8 August 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2013. Ucraina, gas e manette: il processo a Yulia Tymoshenko, by Matteo Cazzulani, ISBN 9788891157478. "La figlia di Yulia Tymoshenko "Diritti umani negati a mia madre"". milano.corriere.it. 5 October 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014. "Vera storia del processo Tymoshenko. Pilotato da Mosca". 5 October 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014. "Book on persecution of Yulia Tymoshenko presented in Italy". 4 October 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 4 October 2014. "Profile: Yulia Tymoshenko". BBC News. 4 March 2010. (article is updated on an occasional basis) Skard, Torild (2014) "Yulia Tymoshenko" in Women of power – half a century of female presidents and prime ministers worldwide, Bristol: Policy Press, ISBN 978-1-44731-578-0, pp. 353–8 Aslund/McFaul, Anders/Michael A. (2006). Revolution in Orange: The Origins of Ukraine's Democratic Breakthrough. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. ISBN 0-87003-221-6. The Report: Emerging Ukraine 2007, Oxford Business Group, 2007, ISBN 978-1-902339-68-9 Yulia Tymoshenko at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Official website[dead link] Yulia Tymoshenko profile at BBC News Online Yulia Tymoshenko biography Archived 9 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine at The Moscow Times Yulia Tymoshenko collected news and commentary at the Kyiv Post Yulia Tymoshenko collected news and commentary at The New York Times Yulia Tymoshenko approval rating by Razumkov Centre Portals:  Biography  Politics  Ukraine