Joomla (/ˈdʒuːm.lɑː/), also spelled Joomla! (with an exclamation mark) and sometimes abbreviated as J!, is a free and open-source content management system (CMS) for publishing web content on websites. Web content applications include discussion forums, photo galleries, e-Commerce and user communities and numerous other web-based applications. Joomla is developed by a community of volunteers supported with the legal, organisational and financial resources of Open Source Matters, Inc. Joomla is written in PHP, uses object-oriented programming techniques ,simple software design patterns, and stores data in a Structured Query Language (MySQL) database. It has a software dependency on the Symfony PHP framework. Joomla includes features such as page caching, RSS feeds, blogs, search, and support for language internationalisation. It is built on a model–view–controller web application framework that can be used independently of the CMS. As of 23′rd March 2024 Joomla has 5,635 extensions hosted at Joomla! Extensions directory , and more are available from other sources. As of 2024, Joomla! was estimated to be the best open-source CMS on the Internet,winning the CMS critic award. Joomla has a web template system using a template processor. Its architecture is a front controller, routing all requests for non-static URIs via PHP which parses the URI and identifies the target page. This allows support for more human-readable permalinks. The controller manages both the frontend, public-facing view, and a backend (GUI-driven) administration interface. The administration interface (a) stores management and content information within a database, and (b) maintains a configuration file (configuration.php, usually located in the file system root of the Joomla installation). The configuration file provides the connection between the server, database and file system and facilitates migrating the website from one server to another. The backend interface allows website operators to manage users, menus, extensions and web content. Joomla is designed to be used by people who have basic website creation skills and requires an Apache–MySQL–PHP server like LAMP or WAMP. Commercially based web hosting services may include control panels for automatically installing Joomla for their customers. Joomla may be used to create localhosted-web applications that run on a range of AMP servers. Risk management, backup and recovery are the website operator's responsibility. Joomla does not have website backup or recovery facilities built into the core CMS; third party-written products (as installable extensions or in standalone products) exist. Other software facilities (whether as natively installable extensions utilising the Joomla framework or via "software bridges") extend a website's range of applications to include discussion forums, photo galleries, e-Commerce, user communities, and numerous other web-based applications. Joomla is primarily used to create websites with variable, i.e. dynamic content that can be edited by multiple people without in-depth knowledge of website creation. Within Joomla, a strict distinction is made between three levels: the functional structure, the actual page content, and the layout. Setting up the functional structure, often referred to as management, is complex and requires in-depth knowledge. It is therefore often in the hands of a suitably trained individual, known as an administrator. This must install Joomla on a web server, usually, an Apache web server, and a MySQL database server is also required. This usually involves downloading a finished package such as XAMPP and installing a virtual web server on a local computer. The desired Joomla package can then be downloaded and made able to run offline. Only the fully set up website is then uploaded to a web server. From now on, the page content can be entered by any number of authors using an easy-to-use editor such as TinyMCE. The editor can be accessed using a web browser, so authors can enter their content from anywhere with internet access. Using user management, the administrator can set individual access and writing rights for each author and each piece of content. This makes it possible that some authors, for example, can only influence the content, while others can also influence the underlying functional structure. To determine the identity of the authors, access is protected by a password. Unlike when creating static websites, the authors do not need to know languages such as HTML and CSS. By using JavaScript, the content looks almost the same when it is created as it will later appear in the visitor's web browser (WYSIWYG principle). The term content management system (CMS), which is common for such software, is derived from the two English terms mentioned above, content and management. The layout is designed using so-called templates, which give the website a uniform visual appearance regardless of structure and content. The templates can be easily changed by the administrator, which fundamentally changes the appearance of the website with the same content. Since the production of templates is relatively complex, they are usually made by third parties. There are several free templates whose colors can be adjusted to suit the needs of the user, but the appearance of these pages is still noticeably similar. There are also commercial manufacturers of templates, but their more individual products - in contrast to Joomla - require a fee. Content management systems are unsuitable for small and manageable websites with a few subpages and largely unchangeable content, which are only maintained by a single person, because of their complexity and the higher demands on the server hardware. A website builder or a simple CMS is better suited for such tasks. A slimmed-down and therefore clearer version of Joomla is neither available nor planned nor can it be set within the program. The advantages of Joomla are: User-friendly operation Easily expandable through various components, modules, and plugins Flexible and therefore easy to modernize design Valid HTML and CSS (at least in the standard templates). Joomla was the outcome of a fork of Mambo on 17 August 2005. At that time, the Mambo name was a trademark of Miro International Pvt. Ltd, who formed a non-profit foundation with the stated purpose of funding the project and protecting it from lawsuits. The Joomla development team claimed that many of the provisions of the foundation structure violated previous agreements made by the elected Mambo Steering Committee, lacked the necessary consultation with key stakeholders and included provisions that violated core open source values. Joomla's original co-founders, Andrew Eddie, Brian Teeman, Johan Janssens, Jean-Marie Simonet et al., established Open Source Matters, Inc. (OSM) to distribute information to the software community. Project leader Eddie wrote a letter that appeared on the announcements section of the public forum at mamboserver.com. Over one thousand people joined OpenSourceMatters.org within a day, most posting words of encouragement and support. Miro CEO Peter Lamont responded publicly to the development team in an article titled "The Mambo Open Source Controversy—20 Questions With Miro". This event created controversy within the free software community about the definition of open source. Forums of other open-source projects were active with postings about the actions of both sides. In the two weeks following Eddie's announcement, teams were reorganised and the community continued to grow. Eben Moglen and the Software Freedom Law Center (SFLC) assisted the Joomla core team beginning in August 2005, as indicated by Moglen's blog entry from that date and a related OSM announcement. The SFLC continues to provide legal guidance to the Joomla Project as one of OSM's partners. On 18 August Eddie called for community input to suggest a name for the project. The core team reserved the right for the final naming decision and chose a name not suggested by the community. On 22 September the new name, Joomla!, was announced. It is the anglicised spelling of the Swahili word jumla, meaning "all together" or "as a whole" that also has a similar meaning in at least Amharic, Arabic, Turkic languages and Urdu. On 26 September, the development team called for logo submissions from the community and invited the community to vote on the logo; the team announced the community's decision on 29 September. Beginning in October 2005 guidelines covering branding, licensing and use of the registered trademark were published. On 28 January 2008 the first major revision to Joomla was announced: Joomla 1.5 was popular but criticised for its inflexible and limited approach to access control. Independently of the project, Andrew Eddie and Louis Landry created a company called JXtended to continue the development of Control—an ACL component—that could integrate with Joomla 1.5. In July 2009 Eddie presented his ideas to the Joomla User Group Brisbane. In July 2009 of that year, the Joomla project announced a restructuring of its management: a new Joomla Leadership Team replacing the Core Team that had originally led the project. This redefined the role of the team leading the project and structured it more around community involvement in events, the Google Summer of Code projects and other activities; the intention of the new approach to team-building was also an effort to increase community participation in the development process instead of relying upon a small group of coders to do most of the work. According to Google Trends, interest in Joomla peaked around the period 2009–2010. In January 2011—largely as the result of the collaboration between Eddie and Landry—a second major revision of Joomla was released: Joomla 1.6. Prior to the stable release of Joomla 1.6, Eddie relinquished his roles on OSM's board and project leadership; Louis Landry announced his retirement from the project the following year. Following Eddie's departure, in September 2011, OSM sought feedback from the community, including the possibility of constituting the governing body under a new name, to restructure the board's membership and project leadership. In 2010, with preparations for Joomla 1.6 nearly completed, Amy Stephen, Klas Berlic, Marco Barbosa, Matt Thomas et al. started a project to refactor the Joomla code. Code-named Molajo (an anagram of Joomla), the group felt that the existing Joomla CMS hindered end-users and developers adopting Joomla because (a) the Joomla CMS did not offer a range of packages containing a themed sets of web applications—like other CMS products had been doing for some time—and (b) the traditional MVC approach decreased developers' productivity in creating new components for Joomla. Community reaction to Molajo was mixed. Some commentators claimed that it was a fork of the Joomla CMS—a claim strongly rejected by Stephen—while others contended that its activities would undermine the future of the Joomla CMS. Against these headwinds, Molajo made its public debut at the J and Beyond conference in The Netherlands in 2011. Lacking support from OSM, an enthusiastic following from the Joomla community and unable to progress beyond pre-Alpha status, Molajo collapsed around the middle of 2015. In January 2012 another major revision was announced: Joomla 2.5 (essentially bringing together the two previous minor releases in the preceding year). Joomla 2.5 brought much sought-after enhancements and a new API making it easier for novice users, additional multilanguage capability and the ability for users to update with "one-click". Shortly after the release of Joomla 2.5, work was under way on the Joomla 3.x. Joomla 3.x was focused on mobile-friendly websites on the front-end, as well as a more intuitive back-end. With greater ease in site navigation and a more user-friendly means of editing Joomla site content, Joomla 3.x became the most popular version of the CMS eventually making all previous versions obsolete. In March 2014, after seeking community feedback and a submission from the Production Leadership Team, a newly constituted OSM board approved changing the licensing for the framework from GPLv2 to LGPL. Although the proposal only affected the licensing of the framework and not the CMS, the decision sparked a fierce debate within the community. In the end, the framework did not adopt LGPL and is still licensed under GPLv2. In August 2014, the Joomla CMS development team released a plan for new version releases. Towards the end of 2014—three years after calling for feedback about ways to reorganise the project and with Joomla 3.x into its fourth minor revision—the community discussed the leadership structure changes. Eddie, although no longer an active contributor to the project, argued that the code for Joomla 3.x was "too fat and heavy to maintain with the current level of contribution"; he recommended mothballing the current CMS series and develop a less cumbersome Joomla 4. Eddie went further to criticise OSM's vision, entrepreneurship and management of the project. Other commentators also expressed their opinion that OSM had become dysfunctional. Criticism mounted about the plan for future development of the Joomla CMS. An opinion written in May 2015 by Nicholas Dionysopoulos (founder of Akeeba Ltd.) shared some of Eddie's earlier observations about OSM lacking vision, entrepreneurship and its ability to manage the project. Dionysopoulos disagreed with Eddie about the major cause of problems with Joomla 3.x; it was Dionysopoulos' view that the cause of most problems with Joomla 3.x lay within "the processes of Joomla! the organisation". Dionysopoulos' views gathered momentum within the community and led to the formation of the Joomla 4 working group (which later became the Joomla X working group). In March 2017 the project announced the retirement of Joomla 3 and unveiled its plans to develop Joomla 4. This effectively brought an end to the work of the Joomla X working group (although it would be another two years before that Joomla X working group's activity was placed in "archived" status). In an effort to improve the relationship with the community the development team revised the 2014 plan and, in June 2018, produced a new roadmap with the expectation that Joomla 4.0 would be released in a stable form before the end of 2018. During the period 2017-2018 the developers created six alpha test releases for Joomla 4. In January 2019 the developers released an updated plan revising previously announced estimated time frames; the roadmap was revised several times during 2020. Community concerns intensified about the handling the Joomla project—two years after announcing plans to retire Joomla 3 (but having already released two minor versions with plans for a third)—and by the end of 2019 a further six alpha test releases of Joomla 4 were produced for public discussion. On one hand some people questioned whether the community had lost its influence in driving the project while, from the developers' viewpoint, the other side defended the project by observing that things would be more productive if the community had been more actively engaged in testing, rather than criticising, the alpha releases. These discussions revealed a growing sense of division between developers on one side and end users on the other. A lengthy debate, started in March 2019 and initially focused on the aesthetics and usability of the Joomla 4 backend interface, highlighted an overall sense of disappointment with management and progress of the project. Although the debate was weighted heavily on criticising the backend aesthetics, people on all sides of the discussion aired their dissenting opinions about why the Joomla 4 project had become distracted by feature creep, software bloat, eventual cost overrun and lack of trust. Against a background of unrelenting criticism from within the community and declining popular interest in Joomla at the time a conference was held in January 2020 to develop a strategy for the future. The conference identified several key areas for further work but basically accepted the premise that faults related mainly to the project's organisational framework rather than the quality of the product. On 28 May 2020 the Joomla team disclosed that a data breach had occurred that potentially affected 2,700 users by exposing their personal details. The incident was discovered by an internal audit of the website that also highlighted the presence of superuser accounts owned by individuals outside OSM. Although no evidence was found of any unauthorised access to personal information, action was immediately taken to mitigate the risk including a requirement for all users to change their passwords. The COVID-19 pandemic impacted Joomla planned events resulting in the cancellation of the main world-wide conferences. 2020-2021. Version 4.0 was released on August 17, 2021, and has a fundamentally customized user interface. For example, the editor and media manager were revised. There are also now customizable email templates, improved accessibility, a new search function, a revised code architecture for higher security, speed improvements, and new functions for collaboration in author teams. 2021-2023. Version 5.0 was released on October 17, 2023, and increases the minimum version for PHP (8.1), MySQL (8.0.13) and PostgreSQL (12). Additionally, MariaDB (10.4) is now officially supported. The backend template has been given a dark mode and many improvements have been made to the codebase. Version 5.1 was released on 24 Feb 2024. The first chart below shows the prevalence of the different versions of Joomla among all websites using Joomla in January 2023. The second chart below shows the prevalence of the different versions of Joomla in the last 180 days up to 7 December 2023. More data on Joomla! Usage Statistics page. Joomla is maintained as an open-source project by a community of volunteers and licensed under the GNU General Public License on an "as is" basis, without any warranty of any kind including implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. The source code is maintained on GitHub. The top three most popular public forums for discussing Joomla and seeking technical advice are The Joomla Forum, Joomla on Stack Exchange, andt mattermost which is Joomla's custom collaboration tool. Many users have created extensions (modules and components) for Joomla, which they usually make available to the user community free of charge - for example, an online shop solution with VirtueMart. In this way, Joomla offers a considerable range of functions that cover practically all common applications. In addition to the advantages, these extensions have repeatedly caused security problems in the past, so the user should exercise a certain degree of caution (see Security section ). In addition to the free extensions, there are also some commercial products for Joomla, but these are controversial in terms of licensing. When it comes to extensions, a distinction is made between plugins, components, modules, and templates: Plugins change the Joomla! program code, components add additional functionality, and modules display data from the Joomla! core or other extensions and the templates determine the appearance and the Page structure. Due to its popularity and known security problems, Joomla installations are repeatedly the target of attacks, especially in the form of so-called defacements. However, according to an IBM study from 2008, the number of security gaps in web applications has generally increased dramatically, so that in principle all systems are affected by this problem. In the Joomla development team, there is a special department that is only concerned with finding bugs and is called the “Bug Squad”. Above all, the numerous third-party components cause an increased security risk, which is exploited by hackers. Some of these extensions require very extensive rights on the server, which are usually not explicitly listed. Programming-related security deficiencies, on the other hand, are rare and are usually eliminated quite quickly. Users can find help in the respective online community to keep their system up to date. However, many – especially private – users neglect maintaining a website and are not aware of the resulting problems. Joomla has adopted a new development strategy with the introduction of 1.6. The basic idea is the more continuous publication of Standard Support Release (SSR). This is intended to ensure that user requests are incorporated into the Joomla core more quickly and stabilized live for the benefit of future publications. Many users are critical of the rapid change between major releases, especially when complex applications have been developed for a Joomla website and the creator has to update the core in order to receive current security updates. On April 25, 2014, the developers announced that the previous system consisting of different LTR (Long Term Release) and STR (Short Term Release) version rails would be abandoned in favor of a linear version cycle. The first release after this change was version 3.3.1. J and Beyond is a conference largely aimed at Joomla developers and site integrators and is hosted in Europe around May each year. Joomla is primarily funded by private sponsorships that offset OSM's operational costs; these costs include taxes, accounting, presence at ground events, operation of domains and so forth. The project receives the rest of its revenue from website advertising, commissions, examination fees and Google Summer of Code. The so-called JUGs are local groups of Joomla users and developers who meet regularly to exchange information about Joomla, plan projects (e.g. workshops), and of course, get to know each other and thus the social component of open source -Maintain software. JUGs currently exist (as of March 2019) in the cities of Augsburg, Berlin, Böblingen, Dresden, Freiburg Breisgau, Friedrichshafen, Fulda, Gifhorn, Hamburg, Hanover, Pott, Karlsruhe, Koblenz, Cologne, Landshut, Lübeck, Munich, Nuremberg, Rhine-Main, Sauerland, Stuttgart, Wolfenbüttel, as well as in Switzerland and Austria. The following chart shows Joomla's share of the CMS market (against the market leader, WordPress, as a comparison). The following chart shows the trend of searches on Google about Joomla over time. Free and open-source software portal Comparison of web frameworks List of content management systems extensions are sub-classed as components, plugins, modules, templates and languages; some extensions are included with the "core" CMS package while other (usually third party-developed) variations or enhancements, can be optionally installed later Apache can be replaced by Nginx or Internet Information Services Only verifiable citations from "Joomla! Awards" are included in this table. "Welcome to Open Source Matters!". Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Release 5.0.1". 27 November 2023. "Release Joomla! 4.2.7". Retrieved 2 February 2023. Joomla Technical Requirements "Joomla! Extensions Directory". extensions.joomla.org. Retrieved 11 December 2022. "How to Move a Joomla Site to a New Server". hostup.org. 28 April 2019. Retrieved 28 April 2019. Eddie, Andrew (8 April 2006). "Joomla! Developer Blog: So Really—What's the Difference". Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Joomla Forum Discussion by Development Team members and Community". 7 May 2007. Retrieved 7 May 2007. Teeman, Brian (17 August 2015). "Joomla is ten years old today". Retrieved 1 December 2020. Eddie, Andrew (17 August 2005). "Mambo Open Source Development Team—Letter to the community". Retrieved 13 February 2014. Shreves, Ric (21 August 2005). "The Mambo Open Source Controversy—20 Questions With Miro". Archived from the original on 18 March 2007. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Alt URL Moglen, Eben (August 2005). "Why I like Open Source Matters (was Why I Like Mambo)". Archived from the original on 21 February 2012. Retrieved 8 October 2008. Russell, Peter (2005). "Award-winning Development Team Welcomes New Arrival—Joomla!". Retrieved 8 October 2008. "Partners". Joomla.org. Retrieved 8 October 2008. "Logo Usage and Brand Guide". docs.joomla.org. Retrieved 8 October 2008.[permanent dead link] "Multi-Level User Access With Joomla". 7 June 2007. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Newsletter—Welcome to JXtended". JXtended Solutions. December 2007. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Lifting the lid on Joomla 1.6" (PDF). 7 June 2009. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Google Trends—Explore—joomla (search term)". Archived from the original on 5 March 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "The Path Forward: Migration and the Future". Joomla.org. 20 January 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Andrew Eddie resigns from the Joomla! project". Joomlablogger. 31 August 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2020. Landry, Louis (3 August 2011). "My Retirement". Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Proposed leadership structure changes & request for community feedback". community.joomla.org. 28 March 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Joomla 1.6 upgrading FAQ - Discussion". 22 January 2011. Retrieved 7 May 2007. "History repeating iself?". 1 February 2011. Retrieved 7 May 2007. Stephen, Amy, et al. (Molajo team) (6 May 2011). What is Molajo?. J and Beyond 2011 conference. Kerkrade, The Netherlands. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Stephen, Amy (31 August 2015). "Molajo (GitHub)". GitHub. Retrieved 30 November 2020. Severdia, Ron; Gress, Jennifer (2014). Using Joomla: Efficiently build and manage custom websites. O'Reilly Media. p. 2. ISBN 978-1-449-34539-6. "Feedback on potential Joomla! Framework LGPL license change". 21 February 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "LGPL License Change Approved for the Joomla Framework". community.joomla.org. 28 March 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Joomla Framework changes to LGPL". 28 March 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "What is the Joomla! Framework?". framework.joomla.org. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Roadmap". developer.joomla.org. 9 August 2014. Archived from the original on 1 September 2006. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Update on the proposed leadership structure changes". 7 November 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Dionysopoulos, Nicholas (2 November 2014). "Refactoring Joomla!". Retrieved 1 December 2020. Dionysopoulos, Nicholas (15 May 2015). "The problem is the vision". Retrieved 1 December 2020. Dings, Marco (20 July 2015). "Joomla! 4 working group". developer.joomla.org. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Braczek, Niels (28 April 2016). "Current State of Joomla!X". volunteers.joomla.org. Retrieved 4 December 2020. Nguyen, Henry (8 December 2016). "The future of Joomla: How Joomla will evolve in the next versions?". Joomlashine. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "Joomla! 3 Retiring as Joomla! 4 Comes to Life". developer.joomla.org. 31 March 2017. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "OSM Board Meeting minutes". Open Source Matters, Inc. 4 April 2019. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Joomla! Project Roadmap". developer.joomla.org. 7 June 2018. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2020. "Joomla 4 is on the horizon …". developer.joomla.org. 28 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Joomla! Project Roadmap". developer.joomla.org. 15 January 2019. Archived from the original on 28 January 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2020. "Joomla! Project Roadmap". developer.joomla.org. 24 November 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2020. "What's holding back the release of Joomla 4 Beta now?". forum.joomla.org. 14 January 2020. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "About the design of the administration?". forum.joomla.org. 17 March 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "Towards a Product Led Future—Forum for the Future". community.joomla.org. Marbella, Spain. 15 January 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Forum for the Future: where are we now?". community.joomla.org. 20 October 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Joomla team discloses data breach". ZDnet. 1 June 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "JRD Security Incident Notification". community.joomla.org. 28 May 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2021. Mitchell, Brian (30 May 2020). Essential Joomla. J and Beyond 2020 conference. Cologne, Germany. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "Versions of Joomla". Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Recent versions of Joomla". Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Joomla! Sponsorships Opportunities". joomla.org. 26 February 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "2019/2020 Budget Overview". community.joomla.org. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "Market share yearly trends for content management systems". W3Techs - World Wide Web Technology Surveys. 1 January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023. Media related to Joomla! at Wikimedia Commons Official website