Augusto José Ramón Pinochet Ugarte (25 November 1915 – 10 December 2006) was a Chilean military officer and politician who served as Chile's head of state under various titles from 1973 to 1990, first as the leader of the Military Junta of Chile from 1973 to 1981, being declared President of the Republic by the junta in 1974 and thus becoming the de facto dictator of Chile, and from 1981 to 1990 as de jure president after a new constitution which confirmed him in the office was approved by a referendum in 1980. His rule remains the longest of any Chilean leader. Augusto Pinochet rose through the ranks of the Chilean Army to become General Chief of Staff in early 1972 before being appointed its Commander-in-Chief on 23 August 1973 by President Salvador Allende. On 11 September 1973, Pinochet seized power in Chile in a military coup, with the support of the United States, that toppled Allende's democratically elected left-wing Unidad Popular government and ended civilian rule. In December 1974, the ruling military junta appointed Pinochet Supreme Head of the nation by joint decree, although without the support of one of the coup's instigators, Air Force General Gustavo Leigh. After his rise to power, Pinochet persecuted leftists, socialists, and political critics, resulting in the executions of 1,200 to 3,200 people, the internment of as many as 80,000 people, and the torture of tens of thousands. According to the Chilean government, the number of executions and forced disappearances was at least 3,095. Operation Condor, a U.S.-supported terror operation focusing on South America, was founded at the behest of the Pinochet regime in late November 1975, his 60th birthday. Under the influence of the free market–oriented "Chicago Boys", Pinochet's military government implemented economic liberalization following neoliberalism, including currency stabilization, removed tariff protections for local industry, banned trade unions, and privatized social security and hundreds of state-owned enterprises. Some of the government properties were sold below market price to politically connected buyers, including Pinochet's son-in-law Julio Ponce Lerou. The regime used censorship of entertainment as a way to reward supporters of the regime and punish opponents. These policies dramatically increased economic inequality and produced high economic growth. They caused the 1982 monetary crisis, and thus produced its devastating effects on the Chilean economy. Pinochet's wealth grew considerably during his years in power through dozens of bank accounts secretly held abroad and holdings in real estate. He was later prosecuted for embezzlement, tax fraud, and kickbacks on arms deals. Pinochet's 17-year rule was given a legal framework through a controversial 1980 plebiscite, which approved a new constitution drafted by a government-appointed commission. In a 1988 plebiscite, 56% voted against Pinochet's continuing as president, which led to democratic elections for the presidency and Congress. After stepping down in 1990, Pinochet continued to serve as Commander-in-Chief of the Chilean Army until 10 March 1998, when he retired and became a senator-for-life in accordance with his 1980 Constitution. However, while in London in 1998 Pinochet was arrested under an international arrest warrant in connection with numerous human rights violations. Following a legal battle, he was released on grounds of ill-health and returned to Chile on 3 March 2000. In 2004, Chilean Judge Juan Guzmán Tapia ruled that Pinochet was medically fit to stand trial and placed him under house arrest. By the time of his death on 10 December 2006, about 300 criminal charges were still pending against him in Chile for numerous human rights violations during his 17-year rule, as well as tax evasion and embezzlement during and after his rule. He was also accused of having corruptly amassed at least US$28 million. Augusto José Ramón Pinochet Ugarte was born in Valparaíso on 25 November 1915. He was the son and namesake of Augusto Pinochet Vera (1891–1944), a descendant of an 18th century French Breton immigrant from Lamballe and Avelina Ugarte Martínez (1895–1986), a woman of Basque heritage. Pinochet went to primary and secondary school at the San Rafael Seminary of Valparaíso, the Rafael Ariztía Institute (Marist Brothers) in Quillota, the French Fathers' School of Valparaíso, and then to the Military School in Santiago, which he entered in 1931. In 1935, after four years studying military geography, he graduated with the rank of alférez (Second Lieutenant) in the infantry. In September 1937, Pinochet was assigned to the "Chacabuco" Regiment, in Concepción. Two years later, in 1939, then with the rank of Sub-lieutenant, he moved to the "Maipo" Regiment, garrisoned in Valparaíso. He returned to Infantry School in 1940. By late 1945, Pinochet had been assigned to the "Carampangue" Regiment in the northern city of Iquique. Three years later, he entered the Chilean War Academy but had to postpone his studies because, being the youngest officer, he had to carry out a service mission in the coal zone of Lota. The following year, he returned to his studies in the academy. After obtaining the title of Officer Chief of Staff, in 1951, he returned to teach at the Military School. At the same time, he worked as a teachers' aide at the War Academy, assisting with military geography and geopolitics classes. He was also the editor of the institutional magazine Cien Águilas ('One Hundred Eagles'). At the beginning of 1953, with the rank of major, he was sent for two years to the "Rancagua" Regiment in Arica. While there, he was appointed professor of the Chilean War Academy, and returned to Santiago to take up his new position. In 1956, Pinochet and a group of young officers were chosen to collaborate in the organization of the War Academy of Ecuador in Quito. He remained with the Quito mission for four-and-a-half years, during which time he studied geopolitics, military geography and military intelligence. At the end of 1959, he returned to Chile and was sent to General Headquarters of the 1st Army Division, based in Antofagasta. The following year, he was appointed commander of the "Esmeralda" Regiment. Due to his success in this position, he was appointed sub-director of the War Academy in 1963. In 1968, he was named Chief of Staff of the 2nd Army Division, based in Santiago, and at the end of that year, he was promoted to brigadier general and Commander in Chief of the 6th Division, garrisoned in Iquique. In his new function, he was also appointed Intendent of the Tarapacá Province. In January 1971, Pinochet was promoted to division general and was named General Commander of the Santiago Army Garrison. On 8 June 1971, following the assassination of Edmundo Perez Zujovic by left-wing radicals, Allende appointed Pinochet a supreme authority of Santiago province, imposing a military curfew in the process, which was later lifted. However, on 2 December 1971, following a series of peaceful protests against economic policies of Allende, the curfew was re-installed, all protests prohibited, with Pinochet leading the crackdown on anti-Allende protests. At the beginning of 1972, he was appointed General Chief of Staff of the Army. With rising domestic strife in Chile, after General Prats resigned his position, Pinochet was appointed commander-in-chief of the Army on 23 August 1973 by President Salvador Allende just one day after the Chamber of Deputies of Chile approved a resolution asserting that the government was not respecting the Constitution. Less than a month later, the Chilean military deposed Allende. On 11 September 1973, the combined Chilean Armed Forces (the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Carabineros) overthrew Allende's government in a coup, during which the presidential palace, La Moneda, was shelled. That is where Allende was said to have committed suicide. While the military claimed that he had committed suicide, controversy surrounded Allende's death, with many commentators claiming that he had been assassinated, a theory denied by the Chilean Supreme Court in 2014. In his book about the coup, The Decisive Day (El día decisivo, 11 de septiembre de 1973), Pinochet said that he was the leading plotter of the coup and had used his position as commander-in-chief of the Army to coordinate a far-reaching scheme with the other two branches of the military and the national police. In later years, however, high military officials from the time, such as Gustavo Leigh, commander-in-chief of the air force, have said that Pinochet reluctantly became involved only a few days before the coup was scheduled to occur, and followed the lead of the other branches (especially the Navy, under Admiral Merino) as they executed the coup. The new government rounded up thousands of people and held them in the national stadium, where many were killed. This was followed by brutal repression during Pinochet's rule, during which approximately 3,000 people were killed, while more than 1,000 are still missing. In the months that followed the coup, the junta published a book with text written by historian Gonzalo Vial and admiral Patricio Carvajal, titled El Libro Blanco del cambio de gobierno en Chile ('The White Book on the Change of Government in Chile'), commonly known as El Libro Blanco, in which they said that they were in fact anticipating a self-coup (the alleged Plan Zeta, or Plan Z) that Allende's government or its associates were purportedly preparing. United States intelligence agencies believed the plan to be untrue propaganda. Although later discredited and officially recognized as the product of political propaganda, Gonzalo Vial Correa insists in the similarities between the alleged Plan Z and other existing paramilitary plans of the Popular Unity parties in support of its legitimacy. Pinochet was also trained by the School of the Americas (SOA) where it is likely he first encountered the ideals of the coup. Canadian reporter Jean Charpentier of Télévision de Radio-Canada was the first foreign journalist to interview General Pinochet following the coup. After Allende's final radio address, he shot himself rather than becoming a prisoner. The Church Report investigating the fallout of the Watergate scandal stated that while the U.S. tacitly supported the Pinochet government after the 1973 coup, there was "no evidence" that the US was directly involved in it. This view has been contradicted by several academics, such as Peter Winn, who writes that the role of the CIA was crucial to the consolidation of power after the coup; the CIA helped fabricate a conspiracy against the Allende government, which Pinochet was then portrayed as preventing. He stated that the coup itself was possible only through a three-year covert operation mounted by the United States. Winn also points out that the US imposed an "invisible blockade" that was designed to disrupt the economy under Allende, and contributed to the destabilization of the regime. Author Peter Kornbluh argues in The Pinochet File that the US was extensively involved and actively "fomented" the 1973 coup. Authors Tim Weiner (Legacy of Ashes) and Christopher Hitchens (The Trial of Henry Kissinger) similarly argue the case that US covert actions actively destabilized Allende's government and set the stage for the 1973 coup. Despite denial of countless American agencies, current declassified documentation has proven the American involvement. Nixon and Kissinger, along with both private and public intelligence agencies were "apprised of, and even enmeshed in, the planning and executing of the military takeover." Along with this, CIA operatives directly involved, such as Jack Devine, have also come out and declared their involvement in the coup. Devine stating, "I sent CIA headquarters a special type of top-secret cable known as a CRITIC, which ... goes directly to the highest levels of government." The US provided material support to the military government after the coup, although criticizing it in public. A document released by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 2000, titled "CIA Activities in Chile", revealed that the CIA actively supported the military junta after the overthrow of Allende, and that it made many of Pinochet's officers into paid contacts of the CIA or U.S. military, even though some were known to be involved in human rights abuses. The CIA also maintained contacts in the Chilean DINA intelligence service. DINA led the multinational campaign known as Operation Condor, which amongst other activities carried out assassinations of prominent politicians in various Latin American countries, in Washington, D.C., and in Europe, and kidnapped, tortured and executed activists holding left-wing views, which culminated in the deaths of roughly 60,000 people. The United States provided key organizational, financial and technical assistance to the operation. CIA contact with DINA head Manuel Contreras was established in 1974 soon after the coup, during the Junta period prior to official transfer of Presidential powers to Pinochet; in 1975, the CIA reviewed a warning that keeping Contreras as an asset might threaten human rights in the region. The CIA chose to keep him as an asset, and at one point even paid him. In addition to the CIA's maintaining of assets in DINA beginning soon after the coup, several CIA assets, such as CORU Cuban exile militants Orlando Bosch and Guillermo Novo, collaborated in DINA operations under the Condor Plan in the early years of Pinochet's presidency. A military junta was established immediately following the coup, made up of General Pinochet representing the Army, Admiral José Toribio Merino representing the Navy, General Gustavo Leigh representing the Air Force, and General César Mendoza representing the Carabineros (national police). As established, the junta exercised both executive and legislative functions of the government, suspended the Constitution and the Congress, imposed strict censorship and curfew, banned all parties and halted all political and perceived subversive activities. This military junta held the executive role until 17 December 1974, after which it remained strictly as a legislative body, the executive powers being transferred to Pinochet with the title of President. The junta members originally planned that the presidency would be held for a year by the commanders-in-chief of each of the four military branches in turn. However, Pinochet soon consolidated his control, first retaining sole chairmanship of the military junta, and then was proclaimed "Supreme Chief of the Nation" ("Jefe Supremo de la Nación"), the de facto provisional president, on 17 June 1974 by Decree Law No. 527. He was officially titled "President of the Republic" on 17 December 1974. General Leigh, head of the Air Force, became increasingly opposed to Pinochet's policies and was forced into retirement on 24 July 1978, after contradicting Pinochet on that year's plebiscite (officially called Consulta Nacional, or National Consultation, in response to a UN resolution condemning Pinochet's government). He was replaced by General Fernando Matthei. Pinochet organized a plebiscite on 11 September 1980 to ratify a new constitution, replacing the 1925 Constitution drafted during Arturo Alessandri's presidency. The new Constitution, partly drafted by Jaime Guzmán, a close adviser to Pinochet who later founded the right-wing party Independent Democratic Union (UDI), gave a lot of power to the President of the Republic—Pinochet. It created some new institutions, such as the Constitutional Tribunal and the controversial National Security Council (COSENA). It also prescribed an 8-year presidential period, and a single-candidate presidential referendum in 1988, where a candidate nominated by the Junta would be approved or rejected for another 8-year period. The new constitution was approved by a margin of 67.04% to 30.19% according to official figures; the opposition, headed by ex-president Eduardo Frei Montalva (who had supported Pinochet's coup), denounced extensive irregularities such as the lack of an electoral register, which facilitated multiple voting, and said that the total number of votes reported to have been cast was very much larger than would be expected from the size of the electorate and turnout in previous elections. Interviews after Pinochet's departure with people involved with the referendum confirmed that fraud had, indeed, been widespread. The Constitution was promulgated on 21 October 1980, taking effect on 11 March 1981. Pinochet was replaced as President of the Junta that day by Admiral Merino. During Pinochet's reign it is estimated that some one million people had been forced to flee the country. Armed opposition to the Pinochet rule continued in remote parts of the country. In a massive operation spearheaded by Chilean Army para-commandos, some 2,000 security forces troops were deployed in the mountains of Neltume from June to November 1981, where they destroyed two MIR bases, seizing large caches of munitions and killing a number of guerrillas. According to author Ozren Agnic Krstulovic, weapons including C-4 plastic explosives, RPG-7 and M72 LAW rocket launchers, as well as more than 3,000 M-16 rifles, were smuggled into the country by opponents of the government. In September 1986, weapons from the same source were used in an unsuccessful assassination attempt against Pinochet by the FPMR. His military bodyguard was taken by surprise, and five members were killed. Pinochet's bulletproof Mercedes Benz vehicle was struck by a rocket, but it failed to explode and Pinochet suffered only minor injuries. He shut down parliament, suffocated political life, banned trade unions, and made Chile his sultanate. His government disappeared 3,000 opponents, arrested 30,000 (torturing thousands of them) ... Pinochet's name will forever be linked to the Desaparecidos, the Caravan of Death, and the institutionalized torture that took place in the Villa Grimaldi complex. — Thor Halvorssen, president of the Human Rights Foundation, National Review Almost immediately after the military's seizure of power, the junta banned all the leftist parties that had constituted Allende's UP coalition. All other parties were placed in "indefinite recess" and were later banned outright. The government's violence was directed not only against dissidents but also against their families and other civilians. The Rettig Report concluded that 2,279 people who disappeared during the military government were killed for political reasons or as a result of political violence. According to the later Valech Report approximately 31,947 were tortured and 1,312 exiled. The exiles were pursued all over the world by the intelligence agencies. In Latin America, this was carried out under Operation Condor, a cooperation plan between the various intelligence agencies of South American countries, assisted by a United States CIA communication base in Panama. Pinochet believed these operations were necessary in order to "save the country from communism". In 2011, the commission identified an additional 9,800 victims of political repression during Pinochet's rule, increasing the total number of victims to approximately 40,018, including 3,065 killed. Some political scientists have ascribed the relative bloodiness of the coup to the stability of the existing democratic system, which required extreme action to overturn. Some of the worst cases of human rights violation occurred during the early period: in October 1973, at least 70 people were killed throughout the country by the Caravan of Death. Charles Horman and Frank Teruggi, both U.S. journalists, "disappeared", as did Víctor Olea Alegría, a member of the Socialist Party, and many others, in 1973. British priest Michael Woodward, who vanished within 10 days of the coup, was tortured and beaten to death aboard the Chilean naval ship, Esmeralda. Many other important officials of Allende's government were tracked down by the Dirección de Inteligencia Nacional (DINA) under the auspices of Operation Condor. General Carlos Prats, Pinochet's predecessor and army commander under Allende, who had resigned rather than support the moves against Allende's government, was assassinated in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1974. A year later, the murder of 119 opponents abroad was disguised as an internal conflict, the DINA setting up a propaganda campaign to support this idea (Operation Colombo), a campaign publicised by the leading newspaper in Chile, El Mercurio. Other victims included Carmelo Soria, a UN diplomat working for the CEPAL, assassinated in July 1976; and Orlando Letelier, a former Chilean ambassador to the United States and minister in Allende's cabinet, assassinated after his release from internment and exile in Washington, D.C. by a car bomb on 21 September 1976. Documents which were released in 2015 which alleged Pinochet ordered Letelier's assassination, though Michael Townley, who directly carried out the assassination, implied otherwise in letters. This led to strained relations with the US and to the extradition of Michael Townley, a US citizen who worked for the DINA and had organized Letelier's assassination. Other targeted victims, who escaped assassination, included Christian-Democrat Bernardo Leighton, who escaped an assassination attempt in Rome in 1975 by the Italian terrorist Stefano delle Chiaie; Carlos Altamirano, the leader of the Chilean Socialist Party, targeted for murder in 1975 by Pinochet, along with Volodia Teitelboim, member of the Communist Party; Pascal Allende, the nephew of Salvador Allende and president of the MIR, who escaped an assassination attempt in Costa Rica in March 1976; and US Congressman Edward Koch, who became aware in 2001 of relations between death threats and his denunciation of Operation Condor. Furthermore, according to later investigations, Eduardo Frei Montalva, the Christian Democrat President of Chile from 1964 to 1970, may have been poisoned in 1982 with toxins produced by DINA biochemist Eugenio Berrios. Though this accusation would eventually result in convictions, it was determined by 2021 that Montalva was in fact not a homicide victim. Despite having Pinochet as its highest commander, a "confession" which Michael Townley made in 1978 described Gen. Manuel Contreras as the one who oversaw and ordered DINA's missions, even noting that he carried out numerous Operation Condor missions in Europe and the Letelier-Moffitt assassination "following orders from Gen. Contreas". In a letter which Townley personally sent to Contreas after he was implicated in the U.S. and Chilean press as the lead suspect in the Letelier-Montiff assassination, Townley, using the alias J. Andreas Wilson, indicated his belief that Contreras had not “let his Excellency [Pinochet] know the truth about this case.” Nevertheless, it was also acknowledged that the Pinochet regime made a major push cover up its role in the assassination. The extensive cover-up efforts were codenamed “Operación Mascarada.” It was also revealed that Townley, who was expelled from Chile to the United States in April 1978, believed that Contreas and Pedro Espinoza were actually more likely to make an attempt on his life than Pinochet. Protests continued, however, during the 1980s, leading to several scandals. In March 1985, the murder of three Communist Party members led to the resignation of César Mendoza, head of the Carabineros and member of the junta since its formation. During a 1986 protest against Pinochet, 21-year-old American photographer Rodrigo Rojas DeNegri and 18-year-old student Carmen Gloria Quintana were burnt alive, with only Carmen surviving. In August 1989, Marcelo Barrios Andres, a 21-year-old member of the FPMR (the armed wing of the PCC, created in 1983, which had attempted to assassinate Pinochet on 7 September 1986), was murdered by a group of military personnel who were supposed to arrest him on orders of Valparaíso's public prosecutor. This case was included in the Rettig Report. Among the killed and disappeared during the military junta were 440 MIR guerrillas. In December 2015, three former DINA agents were sentenced to ten years in prison for the murder of a 29-year-old theology student and activist, German Rodriguez Cortes, in 1978.[citation needed] The same month, 62-year-old Guillermo Reyes Rammsy, a former Chilean soldier during the Pinochet years, was arrested and charged with murder for boasting of participating in 18 executions during a live phone-in to the Chilean radio show "Chacotero Sentimental". On 2 June 2017, Chilean judge Hernan Cristoso sentenced 106 former Chilean intelligence officials to between 541 days and 20 years in prison for their role in the kidnapping and murder of 16 left-wing activists in 1974 and 1975. The first country in the world to make that momentous break with the past—away from socialism and extreme state capitalism toward more market-oriented structures and policies—was not Deng Xiaoping's China or Margaret Thatcher's Britain in the late 1970s, Ronald Reagan's United States in 1981, or any other country in Latin America or elsewhere. It was Pinochet's Chile in 1975. — Robert Packenham & William Ratliff, Hoover Institution In 1973, the Chilean economy was deeply depressed for several reasons. Allende's government had expropriated many Chilean and foreign businesses, including all copper mines, and had controlled prices. Inflation had reached 606%, income per capita had contracted by 7.14% in 1973 alone and 30% compared to 1970, GDP had contracted by 5% in 1973, and public spending rose from 22.6% to 44.9% of GDP between 1970 and 1973, creating a deficit equal to 25% of GDP. While some authors like Peter Kornbluh also argue that economic sanctions by the Nixon administration helped to create the economic crisis, others like Paul Sigmund and Mark Falcoff argue there was no blockade because aid and credit still existed (albeit in smaller quantities), and no formal trade embargo had been declared. By mid-1975, after two years of Keynesianism, the government set forth an economic policy of free-market reforms that attempted to stop inflation and collapse. Pinochet declared that he wanted "to make Chile not a nation of proletarians, but a nation of proprietors". To formulate the economic rescue, the government relied on the so-called Chicago Boys and a text called El ladrillo, and although Chile grew very quickly between 1976 and 1981, at an average of 7,2%, it had a large amount of debt which made Chile the most affected nation by the Latin American debt crisis. In sharp contrast to the privatization done in other areas, Chile's nationalized main copper mines remained in government hands, with the 1980 Constitution later declaring the mines "inalienable". In 1976 the State-owned enterprise Codelco was established to exploit them; a new law in 1982 opened new mineral deposits to private investment. In November 1980, the pension system was restructured from a PAYGO-system to a fully funded capitalization system run by private sector pension funds. Healthcare and education were likewise privatized, and private hospitals and private schools existed alongside free State-run hospitals and schools. This "dual system" also extended to insurance and social security services, as State-owned FONASA (National Healthcare Fund) was created in 1979 and the private and paid ISAPRES (Institutions of Previsional Health) were created in 1981. Wages decreased by 8%. Due to neoliberal opposition to the Welfare State family allowances in 1989 were 28% of what they had been in 1970 and the budgets for education, health and housing had dropped by over 20% on average. The junta relied on the middle class, the oligarchy, foreign corporations, and foreign loans to maintain itself. Businesses recovered most of their lost industrial and agricultural holdings, for the junta returned properties to original owners who had lost them during expropriations, and sold other industries expropriated by Allende's Popular Unity government to private buyers. This period saw the expansion of business and widespread speculation. Financial conglomerates became major beneficiaries of the liberalized economy and the flood of foreign bank loans. Large foreign banks reinstated the credit cycle, as debt obligations, such as resuming payment of principal and interest installments, were honored. International lending organizations such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Inter-American Development Bank lent vast sums anew. Many foreign multinational corporations such as International Telephone and Telegraph (ITT), Dow Chemical, and Firestone, all expropriated by Allende, returned to Chile. Pinochet's policies eventually led to substantial GDP growth, in contrast to the negative growth seen in the early years of his administration, while public debt also was kept high mostly to finance public spending which even after the privatization of services was kept at high rates (though far less than before privatization), for example, in 1991 after one year of post-Pinochet democracy debt was still at 37.4% of the GDP. The Pinochet government implemented an economic model that had three main objectives: economic liberalization, privatization of state-owned companies, and stabilization of inflation. In 1985, the government initiated a second round of privatization, revising previously introduced tariff increases and creating a greater supervisory role for the Central Bank. Pinochet's market liberalizations have continued after his death, led by Patricio Aylwin. According to a 2020 study in the Journal of Economic History, Pinochet sold firms at below-market prices to politically connected buyers. Critics argue the neoliberal economic policies of the Pinochet regime resulted in widening inequality and deepening poverty as they negatively impacted the wages, benefits and working conditions of Chile's working class. According to Chilean economist Alejandro Foxley, by the end of Pinochet's reign around 44% of Chilean families were living below the poverty line. According to The Shock Doctrine by Naomi Klein, by the late 1980s, the economy had stabilized and was growing, but around 45% of the population had fallen into poverty while the wealthiest 10% saw their incomes rise by 83%. But others disagree, Chilean economist José Piñera argues that 2 years after Pinochet took power, poverty was still at 50% and the liberal reforms reduced it to 7.8% in 2013 as well as income per capita rising from US$4.000 in 1975 to US$25.000 in 2015, supporters of the reforms also argue that when Pinochet left power in 1990 poverty had fallen to 38% and some claim that since the consolidation of the neoliberal system inequality has been reducing. Others disagree, as protests erupted in late 2019 in response to growing inequality in the country which can be traced back to the neoliberal policies of the Pinochet dictatorship. American scholar Nancy MacLean wrote that the concentration of money in the hands of the very rich and the perversion of democracy through the privatization of government was always the goal. She contends this was the effective meaning of the theoretical model known as public choice, whose architect, James M. Buchanan, traveled to Chile and worked closely with the Pinochet regime. MacLean's account, however, has come under scrutiny. Economist Andrew Farrant examined the Chilean constitutional clauses that MacLean attributes to Buchanan and discovered that they pre-dated his visit. He concludes that "evidence suggests that Buchanan's May 1980 visit did not particularly influence the subsequent drafting of the Chilean Constitution" and "there is no evidence to suggest that Buchanan had any kind of audience with Pinochet or corresponded with the Chilean dictator." According to the transitional provisions of the 1980 Constitution, a referendum was scheduled for 5 October 1988, to vote on a new eight-year presidential term for Pinochet. Confronted with increasing opposition, notably at the international level, Pinochet legalized political parties in 1987 and called for a vote to determine whether or not he would remain in power until 1997. If the "YES" won, Pinochet would have to implement the dispositions of the 1980 Constitution, mainly the call for general elections, while he would himself remain in power as president. If the "NO" won, Pinochet would remain President for another year, and a joint Presidential and legislative election would be held. Another reason for Pinochet's decision to call for elections was the April 1987 visit of Pope John Paul II to Chile. According to the US Catholic author George Weigel, he held a meeting with Pinochet during which they discussed a return to democracy. John Paul II allegedly pushed Pinochet to accept a democratic opening of his government, and even called for his resignation. Political advertising was legalized on 5 September 1987, as a necessary element for the campaign for the "NO" to the referendum, which countered the official campaign, which presaged a return to a Popular Unity government in case of a defeat of Pinochet. The Opposition, gathered into the Concertación de Partidos por el NO ("Coalition of Parties for NO"), organized a colorful and cheerful campaign under the slogan La alegría ya viene ("Joy is coming"). It was formed by the Christian Democracy, the Socialist Party and the Radical Party, gathered in the Alianza Democrática (Democratic Alliance). In 1988, several more parties, including the Humanist Party, the Ecologist Party, the Social Democrats, and several Socialist Party splinter groups added their support. On 5 October 1988, the "NO" option won with 55.99% of the votes, against 44.01% of "YES" votes. In the wake of his electoral defeat, Pinochet attempted to implement a plan for an auto-coup. He attempted to implement efforts to orchestrate chaos and violence in the streets to justify his power grab, however, the Carabinero police refused an order to lift the cordon against street demonstrations in the capital, according to a CIA informant. In his final move, Pinochet convened a meeting of his junta at La Moneda, in which he requested that they give him extraordinary powers to have the military seize the capital. Air Force General Fernando Matthei refused, saying that he would not agree to such a thing under any circumstances, and the rest of the junta followed this stance, on grounds that Pinochet already had his turn and lost. Matthei would later become the first member of the junta to publicly admit that Pinochet had lost the plebiscite. Without any support from the junta, Pinochet was forced to accept the result. The ensuing Constitutional process led to presidential and legislative elections the following year. The Coalition changed its name to Concertación de Partidos por la Democracia (Coalition of Parties for Democracy) and put forward Patricio Aylwin, a Christian Democrat who had opposed Allende, as presidential candidate, and also proposed a list of candidates for the parliamentary elections. The opposition and the Pinochet government made several negotiations to amend the Constitution and agreed to 54 modifications. These amendments changed the way the Constitution would be modified in the future, added restrictions to state of emergency dispositions, the affirmation of political pluralism, and enhanced constitutional rights as well as the democratic principle and participation to political life. In July 1989, a referendum on the proposed changes took place, supported by all the parties except the right-wing Southern Party and the Chilean Socialist Party. The Constitutional changes were approved by 91.25% of the voters. Thereafter, Aylwin won the December 1989 presidential election with 55% of the votes, against less than 30% for the right-wing candidate, Hernán Büchi, who had been Pinochet's Minister of Finances since 1985 (there was also a third-party candidate, Francisco Javier Errázuriz, a wealthy aristocrat representing the extreme economic right, who garnered the remaining 15%). Pinochet thus left the presidency on 11 March 1990 and transferred power to the new democratically elected president. The Concertación also won the majority of votes for the Parliament. However, due to the "binomial" representation system included in the constitution, the elected senators did not achieve a complete majority in Parliament, a situation that would last for over 15 years. This forced them to negotiate all law projects with the Alliance for Chile (originally called "Democracy and Progress" and then "Union for Chile"), a center-right coalition involving the Unión Demócrata Independiente (UDI) and Renovación Nacional (RN), parties composed mainly of Pinochet's supporters. Due to the transitional provisions of the constitution, Pinochet remained as Commander-in-Chief of the Army until March 1998. He was then sworn in as a senator-for-life, a privilege granted by the 1980 constitution to former presidents with at least six years in office. His senatorship and consequent immunity from prosecution protected him from legal action. These were possible in Chile only after Pinochet was arrested in 1998 in the United Kingdom, on an extradition request issued by Spanish judge Baltasar Garzón. Allegations of abuses had been made numerous times before his arrest, but never acted upon. The extradition attempt was dramatised in the 2006 BBC television docudrama Pinochet in Suburbia, with Pinochet played by Derek Jacobi. Shortly before giving up power, on September 15, 1989, Pinochet prohibited all forms of abortion, previously authorized in case of rape or risk to the life of the mother. Pinochet argued that due to advances in medicine, abortion was "no longer justifiable". Chile was officially neutral during the Falklands War, but Chile's Westinghouse long-range radar that was deployed in the south of the country gave the British task force early warning of Argentinian air attacks. This allowed British ships and troops in the war zone to take defensive action. Margaret Thatcher, the British prime minister at the time of the war, said that the day the radar was taken out of service for overdue maintenance was the day Argentinian fighter-bombers bombed the troopships Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram, leaving 53 dead and many injured. According to Chilean Junta member and former Air Force commander, General Fernando Matthei, Chilean support included military intelligence gathering, radar surveillance, allowing British aircraft to operate with Chilean colours, and facilitating the safe return of British special forces, among other forms of assistance. In April and May 1982, a squadron of mothballed British Hawker Hunter fighter-bombers departed for Chile, arriving on 22 May and allowing the Chilean Air Force to reform the No. 9 "Las Panteras Negras" Squadron. A further consignment of three frontier surveillance and shipping reconnaissance Canberras left for Chile in October. Some authors have speculated that Argentina might have won the war had the military felt able to employ the elite VIth and VIIIth Mountain Brigades, which remained sitting in the Andes guarding against possible Chilean incursions.[full citation needed] Pinochet subsequently visited the UK on more than one occasion. Pinochet's controversial relationship with Thatcher led Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair to mock Thatcher's Conservatives as "the party of Pinochet" in 1999. Pinochet's regime was responsible for many human rights abuses during its reign, including forced disappearances, murder, and torture of political opponents. According to a government commission report that included testimony from more than 30,000 people, Pinochet's government killed at least 3,197 people and tortured about 29,000. Two-thirds of the cases listed in the report happened in 1973. Professor Clive Foss, in The Tyrants: 2500 Years of Absolute Power and Corruption (Quercus Publishing 2006), estimates that 1,500–2,000 Chileans were killed or "disappeared" during the Pinochet regime. In October 1979, The New York Times reported that Amnesty International had documented the disappearance of approximately 1,500 Chileans since 1973. Among the killed and disappeared during the military regime were at least 663 Marxist MIR guerrillas. The Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front, however, has stated that only 49 FPMR guerrillas were killed but hundreds detained and tortured. According to a study in Latin American Perspectives, at least 200,000 Chileans (about 2% of Chile's 1973 population) were forced to go into exile. Additionally, hundreds of thousands left the country in the wake of the economic crises that followed the military coup during the 1970s and 1980s. Some of the key individuals who fled because of political persecution were followed in their exile by the DINA secret police, in the framework of Operation Condor, which linked South American military dictatorships together against political opponents. According to John Dinges, author of The Condor Years (The New Press 2003), documents released in 2015 revealed a CIA report dated 28 April 1978 that showed the agency by then had knowledge that Pinochet ordered the assassination of Orlando Letelier, a leading political opponent living in exile in the United States. According to Peter Kornbluh in The Pinochet File, "routine sadism was taken to extremes" in the prison camps. The rape of women was common, including sexual torture such as the insertion of rats into genitals and "unnatural acts involving dogs". Detainees were forcibly immersed in vats of urine and excrement and were occasionally forced to ingest it. Beatings with gun butts, fists and chains were routine; one technique known as "the telephone" involved the torturer slamming "his open hands hard and rhythmically against the ears of the victim", leaving the person deaf. At Villa Grimaldi, prisoners were dragged into the parking lot and had the bones in their legs crushed as they were run over with trucks. Some died from torture; prisoners were beaten with chains and left to die from internal injuries. Following abuse and execution, corpses were interred in secret graves, dropped into rivers or the ocean, or just dumped on urban streets in the night. The body of the renowned Chilean singer, theatre director and academic Víctor Jara was found in a dirty canal "with his hands and face extremely disfigured" and with "forty-four bullet holes". The practice of murdering political opponents via "death flights", employed by the juntas of Argentina and Chile, has sometimes been the subject of numerous alt-right and other right-wing extremist groups internet memes, with the suggestion that political enemies and leftists be given "free helicopter rides". In 2001, Chilean President Ricardo Lagos informed the nation that during Pinochet's reign, 120 bodies had been tossed from helicopters into "the ocean, the lakes and the rivers of Chile". In a final assessment of his legacy during his funeral, Belisario Velasco, Chile's interior minister at the time remarked that "Pinochet was a classic right-wing dictator who badly violated human rights and who became rich." During the 1990s, while no longer President still commander-in-chief, Pinochet scoffed at his human rights critics. When asked about the discovery of a mass grave of his government's victims, Pinochet was quoted in the Chilean press as joking that it was an "efficient" way of burial. Pinochet himself expressed his project in government as a national rebirth inspired by Diego Portales, a figure of the early republic: [Democracy] will be born again purified from the vices and bad habits that ended up destroying our institutions. ... [W]e are inspired in the Portalian spirit which has fused together the nation ... — Augusto Pinochet, 11 October 1973. Lawyer Jaime Guzmán participated in the design of important speeches of Pinochet and provided frequent political and doctrinal advice and consultancy. Jacobo Timerman has called the Chilean army under Pinochet "the last Prussian army in the world", suggesting a pre-Fascist origin to the model of Pinochet's military government. Historian Alfredo Jocelyn-Holt has referred to Pinochet's figure as "totemic", and added that it serves as a scapegoat which attracts "all hate". Gabriel Salazar, also a historian, has lamented the lack of an international condemnation of Pinochet in court, since, according to Salazar, that would have damaged his image "irreparably" and that of the judicial system of Chile [for the good] too. In 1989, indigenous Mapuche groups representing the "Consejos Regionales" bestowed Pinochet the title Ulmen Füta Lonko or Great Authority. According to Pinochet, who was aware of his ancestry, he was taught the French language by an uncle, although he later forgot most of it. Pinochet admired Napoleon as the greatest among the French and had a framed picture of him. He also admired Louis XIV. Pinochet's reputation led Peruvians in the 1990s to call Alberto Fujimori "Chinochet" instead of his ordinary nickname "Chino". Chadian dictator Hissène Habré, a Cold War ally of the West, has been characterized as "Africa's Pinochet" for ordering the torture and mass killing of political opponents during his reign, and for the decades long campaign to see him convicted of crimes against humanity. Images of Pinochet have been used in several Internet memes with the caption "Pinochet's Free Helicopter Rides", referencing death flights which saw political dissidents being thrown from helicopters over the Pacific or the Andes during Pinochet's rule. Variations of the internet meme have seen increased popularity with the rise of far-right and alt-right politics. Pinochet and his government have been characterised as fascist. For example, journalist and author Samuel Chavkin, in his book Storm Over Chile: The Junta Under Siege, repeatedly characterizes both Pinochet himself and the military dictatorship as fascist. However, he and his government are generally excluded from academic typologies of fascism. Roger Griffin included Pinochet in a group of pseudo-populist despots distinct from fascism, which included the likes of Saddam Hussein, Suharto, and Ferdinand Marcos. He argues that such regimes may be considered populist ultra-nationalist but lack the rhetoric of national rebirth, or palingenesis, necessary to make them conform to the model of palingenetic ultranationalism. Robert Paxton meanwhile compared Pinochet's regime to that of Mobutu Sese Seko in the former Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo), arguing that both were merely client states that lacked popular acclaim and the ability to expand. He further argued that had Pinochet attempted to build true fascism, the regime would likely have been toppled or at least been forced to alter its relationship to the United States. Anna Cento Bull also excluded Pinochet from fascism, although she has argued that his regime belongs to a strand of Cold War anti-communism that was happy to accommodate neo-fascist elements within its activity. World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia notes that "Although he was authoritarian and ruled dictatorially, Pinochet's support of neoliberal economic policies and his unwillingness to support national businesses distinguished him from classical fascists." Historian Gabriel Salazar stated that high visibility of Pinochet and neglect of co-workers was reminiscent of fascist leadership: It is notable that in all the declarations of Pinochet's men, nobody has mentioned the creators of the new Chilean society and state, I haven't heard anybody mention Jaime Guzmán, Carlos Cáceres, Hernán Büchi, Sergio de Castro. There is no mention of the true brains, or that the whole of the armed forces were involved in this, in dirty and symbolic tasks. Everything is embodied in Pinochet, it's very curious that figures of the stature of Büchi are immolated before the figure of Pinochet, in what is to me a fascist rite, give everything to the Führer, "I did it, but ultimately it was him". Pinochet was publicly known as a man with a lack of culture and this image was reinforced by the fact that he also portrayed himself as a common man with simple ideas. He was also known for being reserved, sharing little about his opinions or feelings. Before wresting power from Allende, Pinochet had written two books, Geopolítica (1968) and Campaña de Tarapacá (1972), which established him as a major figure in Chile's military literature. In Geopolítica, Pinochet plagiarized his mentor general Gregorio Rodríguez Tascón by using paragraphs from a 1949 conference presentation of Rodríguez without attributing them to him. Rodríguez had previously lectured Pinochet and René Schneider and Carlos Prats in geography and geopolitics. In contrast to the two latter Pinochet was not an outstanding student but his persistence and interest in geopolitics made Rodríguez assume the role as his academic mentor. Rodríguez granted Pinochet a slot as assistant lecturer in geopolitics and in geography. According to Rodríguez, Pinochet would have been particularly impressed by his lectures on The Art of War. Pinochet would later succeed Rodríguez in the geopolitics and geography chair. Investigative journalist Juan Cristóbal Peña has put forward the thesis that Pinochet felt intellectual envy of Carlos Prats and that the latter's assassination in 1974 was a relief for Pinochet. During his lifetime, Pinochet amassed more than 55,000 books in his private library, worth an estimated US$2,840,000 (2006–07). The extent of his library was revealed to the public only after a police inspection in January 2006. Pinochet bought books at several small bookshops in the old centre of Santiago and was later supplied with books from abroad by military attachés who bought texts Pinochet was searching for. As ruler of Chile he used discretionary funds for these purchases. The library included many rare books including a first edition (1646) Histórica relación del Reyno de Chile and an original letter of Bernardo O'Higgins. A significant part of the books and documents of the library of José Manuel Balmaceda was found in Pinochet's library in 2006. Pinochet's library contained almost no poetry or fiction. Supporters sometimes refer to Pinochet as my general (the military salutation for a general) while opponents call him pinocho (Spanish for "Pinocchio", from the children's story). A common nickname used by both younger generations is el tata (Chilean Spanish equivalent of "the grandpa"). Since the Riggs Bank scandal he has been referred to sarcastically as Daniel Lopez, one of the fake identities he used to deposit money in the bank. Pinochet was arrested in London on "charges of genocide and terrorism that include murder" in October 1998. The indictment and arrest of Pinochet was the first time that a former government head was arrested on the principle of universal jurisdiction. After being placed under house arrest on the grounds of the Wentworth Club in Britain in October 1998 and initiating a judicial and public relations battle, the latter run by Thatcherite political operative Patrick Robertson, he was released in March 2000 on medical grounds by the Home Secretary Jack Straw without facing trial. Straw had overruled a House of Lords decision to extradite Pinochet to face trial in Spain. Pinochet returned to Chile on 3 March 2000. So as to avoid any potential disruption his flight back to Chile from the UK departed from RAF Waddington, evading those protesting against his release. His first act when landing in Santiago's airport was to triumphantly get up from his wheelchair to the acclaim of his supporters. He was greeted by his successor as head of the Chilean armed forces, General Ricardo Izurieta. President-elect Ricardo Lagos said the retired general's televised arrival had damaged the image of Chile, while thousands demonstrated against him. In March 2000, Congress approved a constitutional amendment creating the status of "ex-president", which granted its holder immunity from prosecution and a financial allowance; this replaced Pinochet's senatorship-for-life. 111 legislators voted for, and 29 against. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of judge Juan Guzmán's request in August 2000, and Pinochet was indicted on 1 December 2000 for the kidnapping of 75 opponents in the Caravan of Death case. Guzmán advanced the charge of kidnapping as the 75 were officially "disappeared": even though they were all most likely dead, the absence of their corpses made any charge of "homicide" difficult. In July 2002, the Supreme Court dismissed Pinochet's indictment in the various human rights abuse cases, for medical reasons (vascular dementia). The debate concerned Pinochet's mental faculties, his legal team claiming that he was senile and could not remember, while others (including several physicians) claimed that he was affected only physically but retained all control of his faculties. The same year, the prosecuting attorney Hugo Guttierez, in charge of the Caravan of Death case, declared, "Our country has the degree of justice that the political transition permits us to have." Pinochet resigned from his senatorial seat shortly after the Supreme Court's July 2002 ruling. In May 2004, the Supreme Court overturned its precedent decision, and ruled that he was capable of standing trial. In arguing their case, the prosecution presented a recent TV interview Pinochet had given to journalist Maria Elvira Salazar for a Miami-based television network, which raised doubts about his alleged mental incapacity. In December 2004, he was charged with several crimes, including the 1974 assassination of General Prats and the Operation Colombo case in which 119 died, and was again placed under house arrest. He suffered a stroke on 18 December 2004. Questioned by his judges in order to know if, as president, he was the direct head of DINA, he answered: "I don't remember, but it's not true. And if it were true, I don't remember." In January 2005, the Chilean Army accepted institutional responsibility for past human rights abuses. In 2006, Pinochet was indicted for kidnappings and torture at the Villa Grimaldi detention center by judge Alejandro Madrid (Guzmán's successor), as well as for the 1995 assassination of the DINA biochemist Eugenio Berrios, himself involved in the Letelier case. Berrios, who had worked with Michael Townley, had produced sarin, anthrax and botulism in the Bacteriological War Army Laboratory for Pinochet; these materials were used against political opponents. The DINA biochemist was also alleged to have created black cocaine, which Pinochet then sold in Europe and the United States. The money for the drug trade was allegedly deposited into Pinochet's bank accounts. Pinochet's son Marco Antonio, who had been accused of participating in the drug trade, in 2006 denied claims of drug trafficking in his father's administration and said that he would sue Manuel Contreras, who had said that Pinochet sold cocaine. On 25 November 2006, Pinochet marked his 91st birthday by having his wife read a statement he had written to admirers present for his birthday: Today, near the end of my days, I want to say that I harbour no rancour against anybody, that I love my fatherland above all and that I take political responsibility for everything that was done which had no other goal than making Chile greater and avoiding its disintegration ... I assume full political responsibility for what happened. Two days later, he was again indicted and ordered preliminary house arrest on charges of kidnapping and murder of two bodyguards of Salvador Allende who were arrested the day of the 1973 coup and executed by firing squad during the Caravan of Death. Pinochet died a few days later, on 10 December 2006, without having been convicted of any of the crimes of which he was accused. In 2004, a United States Senate money laundering investigation led by Senators Carl Levin (D-MI) and Norm Coleman (R-MN)—ordered in the wake of the 11 September 2001 attacks—uncovered a network of over 125 securities and bank accounts at Riggs Bank and other U.S. financial institutions used by Pinochet and his associates for 25 years to secretly move millions of dollars. Though the subcommittee was charged only with investigating compliance of financial institutions under the USA PATRIOT Act, and not the Pinochet regime, Senator Coleman noted: This is a sad, sordid tale of money laundering involving Pinochet accounts at multiple financial institutions using alias names, offshore accounts, and close associates. As a former General and President of Chile, Pinochet was a well-known human rights violator and violent dictator. Over several months in 2005, Chilean judge Sergio Muñoz indicted Augusto Pinochet's wife, Lucia Hiriart; four of his children – Marco Antonio, Jacqueline, Veronica and Lucia Pinochet; his personal secretary, Monica Ananias; and his former aide Oscar Aitken on tax evasion and falsification charges stemming from the Riggs Bank investigation. In January 2006, daughter Lucia Pinochet was detained at Washington DC-Dulles airport and subsequently deported while attempting to evade the tax charges in Chile. In January 2007, the Santiago Court of Appeals revoked most of the indictment from Judge Carlos Cerda against the Pinochet family. Pinochet's five children, his wife and 17 other persons (including two generals, one of his former lawyers and his former secretary) were arrested in October 2007 on charges of embezzlement and use of false passports. They were accused of having illegally transferred $27m (£13.2m) to foreign bank accounts during Pinochet's rule. In September 2005, a joint investigation by The Guardian and La Tercera revealed that the British arms firm BAE Systems had been identified as paying more than £1m to Pinochet, through a front company in the British Virgin Islands, which BAE has used to channel commissions on arms deals. In 2007, fifteen years of investigation led to the conclusion that the 1992 assassination of DINA Colonel Gerardo Huber was most probably related to various illegal arms traffic carried out, after Pinochet's resignation from power, by military circles very close to himself. Huber had been assassinated a short time before he was due to testify in the case concerning the 1991 illegal export of weapons to the Croatian army. The deal involved 370 tons of weapons, sold to Croatia by Chile on 7 December 1991, when the former country was under a United Nations' embargo because of Croatian support for war in Yugoslavia. In January 1992, Judge Hernán Correa de la Cerda wanted to hear testimony from Huber in this case, but the latter may have been silenced to avoid implicating Pinochet—although the latter was no longer President, he remained at the time Commander-in-Chief of the Army. Pinochet was at the center of this illegal arms trade, receiving money through various offshore and front companies, including Banco Coutts International in Miami. Pinochet was stripped of his parliamentary immunity in August 2000 by the Supreme Court and indicted by Judge Juan Guzmán Tapia. Guzmán had ordered in 1999 the arrest of five militarists, including General Pedro Espinoza Bravo [es] of the DINA, for their role in the Caravan of Death following the coup on 11 September. Arguing that the bodies of the "disappeared" were still missing, he made a ruling which had the effect of lifting any statute of limitation on crimes committed by the military. Pinochet's trial continued until his death on 10 December 2006, with an alternation of indictments for specific cases, lifting of immunities by the Supreme Court or, to the contrary, immunity from prosecution, with his health a main argument for, or against, his prosecution. The Supreme Court affirmed, in March 2005, Pinochet's immunity concerning the 1974 assassination of General Carlos Prats in Buenos Aires, which had taken place in the frame of Operation Condor. However, he was deemed fit to stand trial for Operation Colombo, during which 119 political opponents were "disappeared" in Argentina. The Chilean justice also lifted his immunity on the Villa Grimaldi case, a detention and torture center in the outskirts of Santiago. Pinochet, who still benefited from a reputation of righteousness from his supporters, lost legitimacy when he was put under house arrest for tax fraud and passport forgery, following the publication by the US Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of a report concerning the Riggs Bank in July 2004. The report was a consequence of investigations on financial funding of the September 11 attacks in the US. The bank controlled between US$4 million and $8 million of Pinochet's assets, who lived in Santiago in a modest house, cloaking his wealth. According to the report, Riggs participated in money laundering for Pinochet, setting up offshore shell corporations (referring to Pinochet as only "a former public official"), and hiding his accounts from regulatory agencies. Related to Pinochet's and his family's secret bank accounts in the United States and Caribbean islands, this tax fraud filing for an amount of US$27 million further shocked any conservatives who still supported him. Ninety percent of these funds would have been raised between 1990 and 1998, when Pinochet was chief of the Chilean armies, and would essentially have come from weapons traffic (when purchasing French 'Mirage' fighter aircraft in 1994, Dutch 'Leopard 2' tanks, Swiss 'MOWAG' armored vehicles or by illegal sales of weapons to Croatia, during the Balkans war). His wife, Lucía Hiriart, and his son, Marco Antonio Pinochet, were also sued for complicity. For the fourth time in seven years, Pinochet was indicted by Chilean justice. On 30 January 1943, Pinochet married Lucía Hiriart Rodríguez, with whom he had five children: Inés Lucía, María Verónica, Jacqueline Marie, Augusto Osvaldo and Marco Antonio. In 1948, Pinochet was initiated in the regular Masonic Lodge Victoria n°15 of San Bernardo, affiliated with the Grand Lodge of Chile. He received the Scottish Rite degree of companion, but he did not attain the level of Grand Master. Pinochet suffered a heart attack on the morning of 3 December 2006 and was given the last rites the same day. On 4 December 2006, the Chilean Court of Appeals ordered the suspension of his house arrest. On 10 December 2006 at 13:30 local time (16:30 UTC) he was taken to the intensive care unit. He died of congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema, surrounded by family members, at the Military Hospital at 14:15 local time (17:15 UTC). Massive spontaneous street demonstrations broke out throughout the country upon the news of his death. In Santiago, opponents celebrated his death in Alameda Avenue, while supporters grieved outside the Military Hospital. Pinochet's remains lay in repose on 11 December 2006 at the Military Academy in Las Condes. During this ceremony, Francisco Cuadrado Prats—the grandson of Carlos Prats (a former Commander-in-Chief of the Army in the Allende government who was murdered by Pinochet's secret police)—spat on the coffin, and was quickly surrounded by supporters of Pinochet, who assaulted and brutally beat him. Pinochet's funeral took place the following day at the same venue before a gathering of 60,000 supporters. In a government decision, he was not granted a state funeral (an honor normally bestowed upon past presidents of Chile) but a military funeral as former commander-in-chief of the Army appointed by Allende. The government also refused to declare an official national day of mourning, but it did authorize flags at military barracks to be flown at half staff, and for the Chilean flag to be draped on Pinochet's coffin. Socialist President Michelle Bachelet, whose father Alberto was temporarily imprisoned and tortured after the 1973 coup and died shortly afterwards from heart complications, said that it would be "a violation of [her] conscience" to attend a state funeral for Pinochet. The only government authority present at the public funeral was the Defense Minister, Vivianne Blanlot. In Spain, supporters of late dictator Francisco Franco paid homage to Pinochet. Antonio Tejero, who led the failed coup of 1981, attended a memorial service in Madrid. Pinochet's body was cremated in Parque del Mar Cemetery, Concón, on 12 December 2006, according to his request to "avoid vandalism of his tomb", according to his son Marco Antonio. His ashes were delivered to his family later that day, and are deposited in Los Boldos, Santo Domingo, Valparaíso, Chile; one of his personal residences. The armed forces refused to allow his ashes to be deposited on military property. Pinochet was portrayed by Jaime Vadell in the 2023 black comedy film El Conde directed by Pablo Larraín, where he is depicted as a 250-year old French-born vampire who faked his death and is living in seclusion.  Chile: Grand Master of the Order of Merit (1974–1990) Grand Master of the Order of Bernardo O'Higgins (1974–1990)[citation needed] President of the Republic Decoration 10 Years Service Award 20 Years Service Award 30 Years Service Award Minerva Medal (Army War College) Minerva Medal (Army War College) Decoration of the President of the Chilean Red Cross Grand Knight of the Altiplano of Arica  Guatemala: Grand Cross of the Order of the Quetzal  Ecuador: Order of Abdon Calderón, 1st Class Official Honorary General Staff Decoration of the Armed Forces of Ecuador Honorary Staff Officer of the Armed Forces of Ecuador  El Salvador: Order of José Matías Delgado  Paraguay: Collar of Francisco Solano Lopez Grade of the National Order of Merit (Paraguay)  Argentina: Grand Cross of the Order of the Liberator General San Martín Grand Cross of the Order of May  Colombia: Commander of the Order of Military Merit José María Córdova  Spain: Crosses of Military Merit (1973, revoked in 2023)  Sweden: Military Order of Santa Brigada (1975) Chile portal Latin America portal Politics portal History portal Biography portal 1970 Chilean presidential election Book burnings in Chile Pinochetism Colonia, a film about two West Germans caught up in the aftermath of the Pinochet coup who end up in the Colonia Dignidad cult Missing, a film based on the life of U.S. journalist Charles Horman, who disappeared in the aftermath of the Pinochet coup Nostalgia for the Light, a documentary that discusses Pinochet's regime and the disappearances of Chileans. United States involvement in regime change UK: /ˈpiːnəʃeɪ/, US: /ˌpiːnoʊˈʃɛt/; Spanish: [awˈɣusto pinoˈʃe(t)]; evidence suggests Chileans, possibly including Pinochet, pronounced his surname both with and without the final /t/. Recordings with the t-dropping, and more common with-t pronunciation can be found at "Augusto Pinochet". Forvo. 27 August 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Pinochet's rule also surpasses in length that of each colonial governor of the Kingdom of Chile. Authors who consider the role of the United States crucial for the coup include Peter Winn, Peter Kornbluh and Tim Weiner. When the admiration of Louis XIV surfaced in a 1986 interview it provoked APSI to publish a graphic satire made by Guillo which showed Pinochet dressed as Louis XIV on its front page. The magazine was subsequently censored out of the newsagent's shop and its staff imprisoned. See also: corpse of Pedro Eugenio Aramburu, corpse of Evita and Hands of Perón. "Pinochet". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "Pinochet". Free Dictionary. Daniel Engber (12 December 2006). "Augusto Pino-qué?". slate.com. Salonc.com. Archived from the original on 25 September 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2015. Loveman, Brian (1986). "Military Dictatorship and Political Opposition in Chile, 1973–1986". Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs. 28 (4): 1–38. doi:10.2307/165745. JSTOR 165745. Kornbluh, Peter. 2013. The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. The New Press. ISBN 1-59558-912-0. p. ix Archived 28 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine Reel, Monte, and J. Y. Smith. 11 December 2006. A Chilean Dictator's Dark Legacy Archived 17 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 March 2015. "Augusto Pinochet: Timeline". Canada Broadcasting Company. 11 December 2006. Archived from the original on 4 January 2007. Huneeus, Carlos (2007). Las consecuencias del caso Pinochet en la política chilena. Centro de. Estudios de la Realidad Contemporánea. Winn, Peter. 2010. "Furies of the Andes Archived 7 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine." pp. 239–275 in A Century of Revolution, edited by G. M. Joseph and G. Grandin. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822392859. Retrieved 14 January 2014. Kornbluh, Peter. 2013. The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. The New Press. ISBN 1-59558-912-0. Qureshi, Lubna Z. 2009. Nixon, Kissinger, and Allende: U.S. Involvement in the 1973 Coup in Chile. Lexington Books. ISBN 0-7391-2656-3. Cavallo, Ascanio, et al. 1997. La Historia Oculta del Régimen Militar, Grijalbo, Santiago. "Chile under Pinochet – a chronology". The Guardian. London. 24 March 1999. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2010. "National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation Archived 16 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine" (aka the "Rettig Report"). 1 May 1990. – via United States Institute of Peace. 2004 Commission on Torture Archived 5 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine "Chile to sue over false reports of Pinochet-era missing". Latin American Studies. 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Former Chilean army chief charged over 1973 killing of activists Archived 5 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. 8 July 2016. Plummer, Robert (8 June 2005). "Condor legacy haunts South America". BBC. Archived from the original on 24 January 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2020. González, Felipe; Prem, Mounu; I, Francisco Urzúa (2020). "The Privatization Origins of Political Corporations: Evidence from the Pinochet Regime". The Journal of Economic History. 80 (2): 417–456. doi:10.1017/S0022050719000780. ISSN 0022-0507. Esberg, Jane (2020). "Censorship as Reward: Evidence from Pop Culture Censorship in Chile". American Political Science Review. 114 (3): 821–836. doi:10.1017/S000305542000026X. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 219930591. Angell, Alan (1991). The Cambridge History of Latin America, Vol. VI, 1930 to the Present. Ed. Leslie Bethell. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 318. ISBN 978-0-521-26652-9. Archived from the original on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Leight, Jessica (3 January 2005). "Chile: No todo es como parece". COHA. Archived from the original on 27 November 2008. Retrieved 5 May 2008. "Pinochet charged with corruption". Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2017. Andrea Chaparro Solís, Consejo de Defensa del Estado se hace querellante en caso armas a Ecuador Archived 16 January 2013 at archive.today, La Nación, 5 June 2006 (in Spanish) Chang, Jack; Yulkowski, Lisa (13 December 2006). "Vocal minority praises Pinochet at his funeral". Bradenton Herald. Retrieved 13 April 2009. Larry Rohter, Colonel's Death Gives Clues to Pinochet Arms Deals Archived 8 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 19 June 2006 (in English) "Ex Chile Official Assassinated". The Press Democrat. 8 June 1971. "Emergency Decreed After Riots in Chile". Tucson Citizen. 2 December 1971. "Chilean president Salvador Allende committed suicide, autopsy confirms". The Guardian. London. 20 July 2011. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "La Corte chilena confirma el suicidio de Allende y cierra la investigación | Expansión". Expansion.mx. 7 January 2014. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. Constable, Pamela; Valenzuela, Arturo (1993). Nation of Enemies Chile Under Pinochet. W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 50–54. ISBN 978-0-393-30985-0. O'Shaughnessy, Hugh (2000). Pinochet: The Politics of Torture. NYU Press. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-8147-6201-1. "Soldier confirms Chile stadium killings". BBC News. 27 June 2000. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 24 July 2011. El fin de un mito en Chile: el Plan Zeta Archived 18 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Clarín, 5 July 1999 (in Spanish) Comisión Nacional sobre Prisión Política y Tortura CAPÍTULO III Contexto Archived 20 May 2005 at the Wayback Machine. Vial Correa, Gonzalo (23 September 2003). "Carlos Altamirano, el Plan Z y la "Operación Blanqueo"". La Segunda. Meade, Teresa (2016). A History of Modern Latin America 1800 to the present. USA: Wiley. pp. 269–271. ISBN 978-1-118-77248-5. Fine, Philip (23 January 2010). "Cool and mannerly, he was Trudeau's press secretary at a difficult time". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on 21 October 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2010. Read, Peter (24 August 2021). "Pinochet's Chile". History Guild. Archived from the original on 18 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Frank Church; et al. (18 December 1975). "Covert Action in Chile 1963–1973". US Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on 22 July 2010. Retrieved 20 July 2010. Was the United States DIRECTLY involved, covertly, in the 1973 coup in Chile? The Committee has found no evidence that it was. Kornbluh, Peter (2003). The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. The New Press. p. 171. ISBN 1-56584-936-1. Weiner, Tim (2007). Legacy of Ashes: The History of the CIA. Anchor Books. p. 361. ISBN 978-0-307-38900-8. Hitchens, Christopher (2001). The Trial of Henry Kissinger. Verso. ISBN 1-85984-631-9. Devine, Jack (July 2014). "What Really Happened in Chile: The CIA, the Coup against Allende, and the Rise of Pinochet". Foreign Affairs. 93 (4): 26–35. JSTOR 24483554. Peter Kornbluh (19 September 2000). "CIA Acknowledges Ties to Pinochet's Repression: Report to Congress Reveals U.S. Accountability in Chile". Chile Documentation Project. National Security Archive. Archived from the original on 28 November 2006. Retrieved 26 November 2006. McSherry, J. Patrice. 2005. Predatory States: Operation Condor and Covert War in Latin America Archived 26 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 0-7425-3687-4. p. 1 Archived 29 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Rohter, Larry. 24 January 2014. "Exposing the Legacy of Operation Condor Archived 1 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine." The New York Times. Retrieved 26 August 2015. McSherry, J. Patrice (2011). "Chapter 5: "Industrial repression" and Operation Condor in Latin America". In Esparza, Marcia; Henry R. Huttenbach; Daniel Feierstein (eds.). State Violence and Genocide in Latin America: The Cold War Years (Critical Terrorism Studies). Routledge. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-415-66457-8. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2017. Greg Grandin (2011). The Last Colonial Massacre: Latin America in the Cold War Archived 29 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine. University of Chicago Press. p. 75 Archived 31 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine. ISBN 978-0-226-30690-2 Walter L. Hixson (2009). The Myth of American Diplomacy: National Identity and U.S. Foreign Policy Archived 24 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Yale University Press. p. 223 Archived 8 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine. ISBN 0-300-15131-4 Decreta Ley No. 527, "Aprueba Estatuto de la Junta de Gobierno" ""¡Estamos en guerra, señores!". El régimen militar de Pinochet y el "pueblo", 1973–1980 « Revista Historia". Revistahistoria.uc.cl. 2010. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2017. Hudson, Rex A., ed. (1995), "Chile: A Country Study", GPO for the Library of Congress, archived from the original on 25 June 2015, retrieved 20 March 2005 "Cambio22: The great historical fraud - the constitutional plebiscite of 1980. Witnesses confirm that it was all manipulated and arranged, including the final result, Pilar Guevara, 24 June 2012". Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2023. Ensalaco, Mark (2000). Chile under Pinochet: recovering the truth. By Mark Ensalaco. Page 146. Cloth 1999. University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-3520-3. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2010. "Chile: Terrorism still counterproductive. CIA document". Faqs.org. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Krstulovi, Ozren Agnic (2006). Pinochet S.A.: la base de la fortuna. Ozren Agnic Krstulovic. Page 147. RiL Editores 2006. RIL Editores. ISBN 978-956-284-521-2. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2013. "Atentado de Pinochet - Especiales EMOL". www.emol.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2006. Retrieved 13 May 2023. National Review Symposium (11 December 2006). "Pinochet Is History: But how will it remember him?". National Review. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Stern, Steve J. (8 September 2004). Remembering Pinochet's Chile. Duke University Press. pp. 32, 90, 101, 180–81. ISBN 0-8223-3354-6.. Retrieved 24 October 2006. Gallardo, Eduardo. 11 December 2006. "Pinochet Was Unrepentant to the End Archived 28 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine." ABC News. Associated Press. "Chile recognises 9,800 more victims of Pinochet's rule". BBC News. 18 August 2011. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1969–1976, Volume E–11, Part 2, Documents on South America, 1973–1976 - Office of the Historian". history.state.gov. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Bonnefoy, Pascale. 28 January 2015. "2 Sentenced in Murders in Chile Coup Archived 19 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine." The New York Times. Retrieved 20 June 2015. My 35-year fight to find Pinochet torturers who killed my brother Archived 19 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. 8 November 2008. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Chilean ex-navy officers found guilty of murdering priest Archived 19 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. 9 May 2013. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Pinochet directly ordered killing on US soil of Chilean diplomat, papers reveal Archived 12 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. 8 October 2015. Townley, Michael (13 March 1978). "Townley Papers, "Confesión y Acusación [Confession and Accusation]," March 13, 1978". National Security. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "The Pinochet Dictatorship Declassified: Confessions of a DINA Hit Man". National Security Archive. 22 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Ex-Chilean leader 'was murdered' Archived 20 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 23 January 2007 "Chile court overturns convictions for 1982 murder of former president Frei". The Guardian. 25 January 2021. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Bustamante, Paula (25 January 2021). "Chile Court Overturns Murder Verdict In Ex-president Frei's Death". Barron's. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Wilson, J. Andreas (1 March 1978). "Townley Papers, "Dear Don Manuel" [letter from Townley to DINA chief General Manuel Contreras], Undated [Spanish original and English translation]". National Security Archives. Retrieved 25 November 2023. Marcy, Eric B. (23 August 1991). "Department of Justice, "Draft; Marcy/Letelier/Affidavit," August 23, 1991 [Original in English and Spanish translation]". National Security Archive. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "Chile Expelling an American Wanted by U.S. in Assassination Case". The New York Times. 8 April 1978. Retrieved 25 November 2023. Capítulos desconocidos de los mercenarios chilenos en Honduras camino de Iraq Archived 27 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine, La Nación, 25 September 2005 – URL accessed on 14 February 2007 (in Spanish) Verónica Valdivia Ortiz de Zárate (2006). Su revolución contra nuestra revolución: izquierdas y derechas en el Chile. LOM Ediciones. p. 179. ISBN 978-956-282-853-6. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Jonathan Franklin (11 December 2015). Former Chilean soldier charged with murder after stunning radio confession Archived 15 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Retrieved 20 December 2015. "Chilean judge sends 106 former secret agents to prison". BBC. 2 June 2017. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2017. Packenham, Robert A.; Ratliff, William (30 January 2007). "What Pinochet Did for Chile?". Hoover Digest. Vol. 1. Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on 25 June 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2015. "Cómo cambió la economía de Chile en los últimos 40 años". Asociación de Mutuales. 2 November 2013. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Niño, José (27 November 2016). "El legado de Friedman en Chile, 40 años después". PanAm Post. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Moreno León, José Ignacio (21 November 2019). "La crisis en Chile y el fantasma de Allende". OpinionGlobal. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. "Economic growth of Chile". Archived from the original on 29 March 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Kornblu, Peter (24 October 1999). "Still Hidden: A Full Record Of What the U.S. Did in Chile". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 9 May 2009. Sigmund, Paul (1974). The Invisible Blockade and the Overthrow of Allende. Falcoff, Mark. Modern Chile, 1970–1989: A Critical History. 1989. "Augusto Pinochet biography data. Chilean coup d'etat. Pinochet human rights violations". mundoandino.com. Mundo Andino / Andean World. 2006. Archived from the original on 8 September 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Délano, Manuel; Traslaviña, Hugo (4 July 2021). "El boom económico de los años 80: un "milagro" muy especial de la dictadura". Interferencia. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Riesco, Manuel (September–October 2007). "Is Pinochet dead?". New Left Review. II (47). Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Spanish pdf. Archived 8 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Italian pdf. Archived 8 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine Ministerio de Minería (21 January 1982). "Ley 18.097, Orgánica constitucional sobre concesiones mineras". Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Joaquin Vial Ruiz-Tagle, Francisca Castro, The Chilean Pension System, OECD Ageing Working Papers, 1998, page 6 Ministerio de Salud Pública (3 August 1979). "Decreto Ley 2763, Reorganiza el Ministerio de Salud y crea los Servicios de Salud, el Fondo Nacional de Salud, el Instituto de Salud Pública de Chile y la Central de Abastecimiento del Sistema Nacional de Servicios de Salud". Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Ministerio de Salud (19 May 1981). "Decreto con Fuerza de Ley 3, Fija normas para el otorgamiento de prestaciones y beenficios de salud, por Instituciones de Salud Previsional". Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Petras, James; Vieux, Steve (July 1990). "The Chilean "economic miracle": an empirical critique". Critical Sociology. 17 (2): 57–72. doi:10.1177/089692059001700203. S2CID 143590493. Ensalaco, Mark (2000). Chile under Pinochet: recovering the truth. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-8122-3520-3. Preview. Archived 13 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Evolución de la deuda pública de Chile". Ministerio de Hacienda. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Leonard, Thomas M. Encyclopedia Of The Developing World. Routledge. ISBN 1-57958-388-1. p. 322 Constable, Pamela; Valenzuela, Arturo (1993), "The rich", in Constable, Pamela; Valenzuela, Arturo (eds.), A nation of enemies: Chile under Pinochet, New York: W. W. Norton & Company, p. 219, ISBN 978-0-393-30985-0. Winn, Peter, ed. (2004). Victims of the Chilean miracle: workers and neoliberalism in the Pinochet era, 1973–2002. Durham: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-3321-0. Preview. Archived 13 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Alejandro Foxley (guest) (26 March 2001). PBS interview (TV program). PBS. Retrieved 28 September 2015. Conducted for The Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy series. Klein, Naomi (2008). "Cleaning the slate: terror does its work". In Klein, Naomi (ed.). The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. Picador. p. 105. ISBN 978-0-8050-7983-8. Preview. Archived 19 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine Piñera, José. "El Cohete y el Ascensor". Twitter. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Duffe, Macarena (2009). "Pobreza en 1990". La Tercera. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Suárez, Rocío Vargas. "OCDE destaca reducción de la pobreza y la desigualdad en Chile, pero asegura que aún hay desequilibrios". Diario Financiero (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Aravena, Sofía (27 July 2023). "Desigualdad a la baja: índice Gini llega a su menor nivel desde que hay registro". La Tercera. Retrieved 9 October 2023. E. López, Ramón; Sturla, Gino (19 July 2020). "Desigualdad en el Chile democrático, ¿quiénes son más iguales en ingreso?". El Mostrador. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "'We are at war': 8 dead in Chile's violent protests over social inequality". The Washington Post. 21 October 2019. Archived from the original on 24 October 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2020. "'Chile Woke Up': Dictatorship's Legacy of Inequality Triggers Mass Protests". The New York Times. 3 November 2019. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. MacLean, Nancy (2017) "Democracy in Chains: The Deep History of the Radical Right's Stealth Plan for America." New York. Random House, Penguin Books. pages 154-168. ISBN 978-1-101-98096-5 Farrant, Andrew (13 January 2019). "What Should (Knightian) Economists Do? James M. Buchanan's 1980 Visit to Chile: What Should (Knightian) Economists Do?". Southern Economic Journal. 85 (3): 691–714. doi:10.1002/soej.12323. S2CID 158277778. Archived from the original on 27 December 2019. Retrieved 13 May 2023. George Weigel, Biografía de Juan Pablo II – Testigo de Esperanza, Editorial Plaza & Janés (2003), ISBN 84-01-01304-6 Tribunal Calificador, Chilean governmental website (in Spanish) "IIR 6 817 0058 89/Chilean Junta Meeting the Night of the Plebiscite (U)" (PDF). Department of Defense. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2021. Retrieved 28 July 2021. "El plebiscito incomprendido". Apsi. 17 July 1989. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2016. See Juan Guzmán Tapia's autobiography "Le Chili met fin à l'interdiction stricte d'avorter". Le Monde.fr. Lemonde.fr. 16 March 2016. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2017. "Aborto terapéutico: Demanda de las mujeres". Revista Punto Final (in Spanish). 11 April 2003. Archived from the original on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 17 March 2009. "Margaret Thatcher Foundation. Speech on Pinochet at the Conservative Party Conference. 6 October 1999". Margaretthatcher.org. 6 October 1999. Archived from the original on 25 February 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2010. "Mercopress. September 3rd 2005". En.mercopress.com. 3 September 2005. Archived from the original on 25 February 2015. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Nicholas van der Bijl and David Aldea, 5th Infantry Brigade in the Falklands, page 28, Leo Cooper 2003 "UK | UK Politics | Pinochet death 'saddens' Thatcher". BBC News. 11 December 2006. Archived from the original on 15 June 2007. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Not much to be proud of Archived 24 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian, Jeremy Hardy, 9 October 1999 Reel, Monte; J. Y. Smith (11 December 2006). "A Chilean Dictator's Dark Legacy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2009. "A Green Light for The Junta?" The New York Times. 28 October 1977 "Fallen from Mir in different times. Ceme Centro De Estudios Miguel Enriquez" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2013. "For Those who gave everything. El Rodriguista, 11 Years of Fight and Dignity, 1994". 4 November 2005. Archived from the original on 20 November 2008. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Wright, Thomas C.; Oñate Zúñiga, Rody (2007). "Chilean political exile". Latin American Perspectives. 34 (4): 31. doi:10.1177/0094582x07302902. S2CID 145443917. Dinges, John (14 October 2015). "A Bombshell on Pinochet's Guilt, Delivered Too Late". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 18 February 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2019. Peter Kornbluh (11 September 2013). The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. The New Press. ISBN 1-59558-912-0 p. 171 Archived 31 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Qureshi, Lubna Z. (2009). Nixon, Kissinger, and Allende: U.S. Involvement in the 1973 Coup in Chile. Lexington Books. p. 135. ISBN 0-7391-2656-3 Peter Kornbluh (11 September 2013). The Pinochet File: A Declassified Dossier on Atrocity and Accountability. The New Press. ISBN 1-59558-912-0 p. 162 Archived 27 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Caffier, Justin (25 January 2017). "Get to Know the Memes of the Alt-Right and Never Miss a Dog-Whistle Again". Vice. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2017. Franklin, Jonathan (9 January 2001). "Chilean army admits 120 thrown into sea". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 December 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2017. The World's Most Notorious Dictators. Athlon Special Issue. 2017. p. 53 "Augusto Pinochet, 91, Ex-Dictator of Chile, Dies". The New York Times. 10 December 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2022. Pinochet, Augusto (11 October 1973). "A un mes de la constitución de la junta de gobierno". Discursos. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013 – via Beers & Politics. Huneus, Carlos (3 April 2001). "Jaime Guzmán no fue un defensor de los Derechos Humanos en el Régimen de Pinochet" [Jaime Guzmán was not a defender of human rights in the Pinochet regime] (PDF) (in Spanish). Archivo Chile. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 July 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2015. Christian, Shirley (14 November 1987). "Buenos Aires Journal; Timerman, Stranger in Two More Strange Lands". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017. Vergara, José Antonio (4 April 2010). "Pinochet por Salazar y Joceyn-Holt". Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Foerster, Rolf; Menard, André (2009). "Futatrokikelu: Don y autoridad en la relación mapuche-wingkaa". Atenea (499): 33–59. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2020. Cayuqueo, Pedro (17 October 2010). "El tamaño de la traición". The Clinic. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2020. Salinas, Luis A. (1999). The London Clinic (in Spanish). LOM Ediciones. p. 29. ISBN 956-282-167-6. Archived from the original on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2020. Cossio, Hector (15 October 2014). "'Chile en llamas': La serie que muestra la censura nuestra de cada día, en dictadura y democracia" ['Chile on fire': The series that shows our daily censorship, in dictatorship and democracy]. El Mostrador (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 3 February 2016. Retrieved 27 January 2016. "Periodista peruano: A Fujimori le gustaba que lo llamaran 'Chinochet'" [Peruvian journalist: Fujimori liked being called 'Chinochet']. Cooperativa (in Spanish). 2 May 2014. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018. Lusher, Adam (30 May 2016). "Hissène Habré, 'Africa's Pinochet', found guilty of crimes against humanity". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 5 December 2019. "Augusto Pinochet es un ícono dentro del movimiento de derecha radical que llevó a Donald Trump a la presidencia" [Augusto Pinochet is an icon within the radical right-wing movement that brought Donald Trump to the presidency]. El Desconcierto (in Spanish). 8 August 2017. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018. Caffier, Justin (25 January 2017). "Get to Know the Memes of the Alt-Right and Never Miss a Dog-Whistle Again". VICE. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2017. Stan, Adele M. (20 April 2016). "As GOP Reconsiders Trump as Standard Bearer". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 2 December 2018. Neil, Andrew (22 October 1998). "Pinochet was a vile Fascist but Allende was no hero". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009. Parenti, Michael (1997). Blackshorts and Reds. City Lights Books. ISBN 978-0-87286-329-3. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2009. "Day of Reckoning Near for Pinochet". Transnational Institute. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2009. Horne, Alistair (18 August 2009). "The case for Henry Kissinger". The Independent. Dasnois, Alide (8 July 2009). "Chile and the absurdity of ideological social engineering". The Cape Times. Posner, Michael (17 September 2009). "What it's like to arrive at a place called exile". The Globe & Mail. Sàenz, Mario (31 August 1999). The Identity of Liberation in Latin American Thought... Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0084-4. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2009. "Samuel Chavkin Journalist and Author, 81". The New York Times (obituary). 30 July 1994. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Chavkin, Samuel (1985). Storm Over Chile: The Junta Under Siege. Laurence Hill Books. ISBN 978-1-55652-067-9. Griffin, R. (2003). The Nature of Fascism. London: Routledge. pp. 36–37. Paxton, R. O. (2004). The Anatomy of Fascism. London: Allen Lane. p. 201. A. Cento Bull (2009). "Neo-Fascism". In Bosworth, R. J. B. (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of Fascism. Oxford University Press. p. 604. Laqueur, Walter (1997). Fascism: Past, Present, Future. Oxford University Press. p. 115. Blamires, Cyprian; Jackson, Paul (2006). World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia. Vol. 1. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9. Retrieved 10 March 2010. Peña, Cristóbal (6 December 2007). "Exclusivo: Viaje al fondo de la biblioteca de Pinochet". Ciper. Archived from the original on 16 March 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. EFE (8 July 2013). "Pinochet, un 'intelectual limitado' que copió libros, según escritor" [Pinochet, a 'limited intellectual' who copied books, according to writer]. Radio Cooperativa (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 1 June 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. "Los libros de Pinochet" (PDF). La Tercera (in Spanish). 4 May 2013. p. R24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Salazar, Carlos (4 June 2014). "Juan Cristóbal Peña: 'Se ha menospreciado a Pinochet en su capacidad intelectual'" [Juan Cristóbal Peña: "Pinochet has been belittled in his intellectual capacity"]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 15 August 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Romero, Simon (9 January 2014). "A Chilean Dictator's Secret Book Collection: Heavy on Napoleon, Light on Fiction". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 March 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2015. "Latin American Studies Association: Login" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 17 December 2009. "Pinochet, con nombres de 'chapa', abrió cuentas en el Riggs en 1985" [Pinochet opened accounts at Riggs under false names in 1985]. Radio Cooperativa (in Spanish). 20 November 2004. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014. Retrieved 20 August 2014. Bartrop, Paul R; Totten, Samuel (30 November 2007). "Pinochet, Augusto, Case Against". Dictionary of Genocide. Vol. 1. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood. p. 331. ISBN 978-0-313-34642-2. OCLC 883597633. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2021. Robertson, Geoffrey, Crimes Against Humanity. Penguin Books, 2006. Ppg. 336-7. "The rich v the very, very rich: the rebellion at Wentworth golf club". The Guardian. 2 March 2021. Archived from the original on 5 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Evening Standard 21 June 1995 Pinochet set free Archived 16 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 2 March 2000 (in English) Pinochet arrives in Chile Archived 26 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 3 March 2000 (in English) video of Pinochet arriving at Santiago airport on YouTube, 3 March 2000 Alex Bellos and Jonathan Franklin, Pinochet receives a hero's welcome on his return Archived 13 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, 4 March 2000 (in English) Thousands march against Pinochet Archived 26 May 2004 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 4 March 2000 Chile offers Pinochet new immunity Archived 26 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 25 March 2000 (in English) Pinochet charged with kidnapping Archived 26 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 1 December 2000 (in English) "The Appeals Court Ruling Is Negotiated Out for Pinochet" Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Interview with Attorney Hugo Gutierrez, by Memoria y Justicia,21 February 2002 (in English) María Elvira Salazar (10 November 2010), ENTREVISTA A PINOCHET – MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, archived from the original on 18 January 2022, retrieved 20 April 2019 "Pinochet Competent, Must Stand Trial, Judge Rules". Los Angeles Times. 14 December 2004. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "El juez Guzmán procesa a Pinochet y ordena su arresto domiciliario por asesinato y secuestro". El País (in Spanish). 14 December 2004. ISSN 1134-6582. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Chile's Pinochet 'suffers stroke'". BBC News. 18 December 2004. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2012. 16 November 2005. Spanish: "No me acuerdo, pero no es cierto. Y si es cierto, no me acuerdo". Quoted in Las frases para el bronce de Pinochet Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, La Nacion, 11 December 2006 (in Spanish) General Juan Emilio Cheyre, "Ejército de Chile: el fin de una visión", La Tercera, 11 May 2004 Court 'lifts Pinochet immunity' Archived 18 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 8 September 2006. Levée de l'immunité de Pinochet pour le meurtre d'un chimiste Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, news agency cable, 12 October 2006 (in French) Jonathan Franklin, Pinochet 'sold cocaine to Europe and US' Archived 18 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, 11 July 2006 (in English) General (r) Manuel Contreras: Eugenio Berríos está vivo, Radio Cooperativa, 10 July 2006 (in Spanish) "Hijo de Pinochet acusa de "mentiroso y canalla" a ex jefe DINA". Archived from the original on 2 April 2008. Retrieved 2 April 2008., Los Tiempos, 10 July 2006 (in Spanish) United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations of the Committee on Governmental Affairs. "Levin-Coleman Staff Report Discloses Web of Secret Accounts Used by Pinochet" (Press release). US Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 16 March 2005. Las frases para el bronce de PinochetArchived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, La Nacion, 11 December 2006 (in Spanish) "The Associated Press". Associated Press. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Ailing Pinochet Takes Responsibility". archive.globalpolicy.org. Retrieved 13 May 2023. Eduardo Gallardo: "Pinochet indicted for 1973 executions," Associated Press Archived 5 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine, 27 November 2006. Procesan a Pinochet y ordenan su arresto por los secuestros y homicidios de la "Caravana de la Muerte" Archived 5 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine, 20minutos, 28 November 2006. "U.S. Sends Back Pinochet Daughter," CNN, 28 January 2006 Corte revoca mayoría de procesamientos en caso Riggs Archived 10 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine, El Mercurio, 3 January 2007 (in Spanish) Pinochet family arrested in Chile Archived 30 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine, BBC, 4 October 2007 (in English) Cobertura Especial: Detienen a familia y principales colaboradores de Pinochet Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, La Tercera, 4 October 2007 (in Spanish) David Leigh, Jonathan Franklin and Rob Evans, Detective story that linked £1m Pinochet cash to BAE Archived 18 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, 15 September 2005 (in English) Larry Rohter, Colonel's Death Gives Clues to Pinochet Arms Deals Archived 8 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 19 June 2006 (in English) Biographical notice Archived 7 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine on Memoria Viva website (in Spanish) Andrea Chaparro, CDE insiste en unir caso Huber con tráfico de armas a Croacia Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, La Nación, 15 August 2005 (in Spanish) Andrea Chaparro Solís, Generales (R) y civiles de Famae procesados en caso armas a Croacia Archived 29 June 2012 at archive.today, La Nación, 13 June 2006 (in Spanish) U.S. sends back Pinochet daughter Archived 11 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine, CNN, 28 January 2006 "Alberto Bachelet Martinez and his desire of freedom and justice" (in French). 29 December 2016. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. "Pinochet non fu mai un maestro massone" [Pinochet wasn't never a Grand Master of Freemasonry]. Grand Orient of Italy (in Italian). 27 October 2019. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2020. "Americas | Chile's Pinochet has heart attack". BBC News. 13 December 2006. Archived from the original on 2 January 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "Pinochet's condition improves, doctors say | CBC News". Archived from the original on 2 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Muere el ex dictador Chileno Augusto Pinochet Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine EFE Augusto Pinochet falleció en el Hospital Militar tras sufrir recaída Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine "; El Mercurio" Chile's Gen Pinochet dies at 91 Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine BBC News "Pinochet's funeral draws 60,000". CBC News. 12 December 2006. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 5 March 2013. "Clashes Break out after Pinochet's death", Yahoo!News, 11 December 2006 EFE (12 December 2006). "La ministra chilena de Defensa, insultada en el funeral de Pinochet" [Chilean Defense Minister insulted at Pinochet's funeral]. El Periódico. EFE. Archived from the original on 18 January 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2021. ""Viudos de Franco" homenajearon a Pinochet en España". Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Family Wants Pinochet Cremation". Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2023. Pedregoso camino para que cenizas de Pinochet llegaran a Los Boldos Archived 3 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine, La Nación 26 December 2006 "Pablo Larraín y Netflix preparan "El Conde", una sátira sobre un Pinochet vampiro". www.ambito.com. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Palma, Claudia (15 April 2015). Prensa Libre (ed.). "Polémica Orden del Quetzal". Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. "Biografía de los miembros de la Junta de Gobierno" (PDF). memoriachilena.cl. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2015. Decreto n.° 2904/76. Boletín Oficial de la República Argentina. 6 December 1976. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 20 July 2021. "Ley de derogación de condecoraciones entregadas al dictador Augusto Pinochet Ugarte" (PDF). Senado y Cámara de Diputados de la Nación Argentina. 18 August 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. "El Gobierno retira a Pinochet la Cruz al Mérito Militar que mantenía desde 1975". elDiario.es (in Spanish). 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "España retirará la Gran Cruz al Mérito Militar concedida a Pinochet en 1975". El País (in Spanish). 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Bawden, John R (2016). The Pinochet Generation: The Chilean Military in the Twentieth Century. University of Alabama. ISBN 978-0-8173-1928-1. Cooper, Marc (2002). Pinochet and Me. Verso. ISBN 1-85984-360-3. Dinges, John (2005). The Condor Years: How Pinochet And His Allies Brought Terrorism To Three Continents. New York: The New Press. ISBN 1-56584-977-9. Muñoz, Heraldo (2008). The dictator's shadow: life under Augusto Pinochet. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00250-4. Retrieved 20 January 2008. (Reviewed in The Washington Post, Book World, p. 2, 2009-10-19) O'Shaughnessy, Hugh (2000). Pinochet: The Politics of Torture. New York: NYU Press. ISBN 0-8147-6201-8. Robin, Marie-Monique (2004), Escadrons de la mort, l'école française, Cahiers libres, La Découverte, ISBN 2707141631 Whelan, James R. (1989). Out of the Ashes: Life, Death and Transfiguration of Democracy in Chile, 1833–1988. Regnery. ISBN 978-0-895-265531. OCLC 18256127. Augusto Pinochet at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Extensive bio by Fundación CIDOB Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Augusto Pinochet (1915–2006) – A Biography BBC coverage (special report) Documentary Film on Chilean Concentration Camp from Pinochet's Regime: Chacabuco CIA Acknowledges Ties to Pinochet's Repression via George Washington University NSA archive Chile under Allende and Pinochet by Hugo S. Cunningham (1998) Human Rights Violations by the Military Dictatorship in Chile (1973-1990), digital archive Chile: The Price of Democracy Archived 21 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine New English Review What Pinochet Did for Chile via Hoover Institution (2007)