As of January 2024, there are a total of 1,199 World Heritage Sites located across 168 countries, of which 933 are cultural, 227 are natural, and 39 are mixed properties. The countries have been divided by the World Heritage Committee into five geographical zones: Africa, the Arab States, Asia and the Pacific, Europe and North America, and Latin America and the Caribbean. With 59 selected areas, Italy is the country with the most sites; followed by China with 57, then France and Germany with 52 each. Of the 195 state parties of the World Heritage Convention, 27 have no properties inscribed on the World Heritage List: The Bahamas, Bhutan, Brunei, Burundi, the Comoros, the Cook Islands, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eswatini, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Kuwait, Liberia, Maldives, Monaco, Niue, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Sudan, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, and Tuvalu. Only two UN member states are not state parties of the World Heritage Convention: Liechtenstein and Nauru. This overview lists the 34 countries with 10 or more World Heritage Sites: Index of conservation articles Lists of World Heritage Sites Former UNESCO World Heritage Sites List of World Heritage in Danger List of World Heritage Sites by year of inscription World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme § Sites The natural site Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe is shared between Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and Ukraine. The mixed site Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region is shared between Albania and North Macedonia. The cultural site Jesuit Missions of the Guaranis: San Ignacio Mini, Santa Ana, Nuestra Señora de Loreto and Santa Maria Mayor (Argentina), Ruins of Sao Miguel das Missoes (Brazil) is shared between Argentina and Brazil. The cultural site The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier, an Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement is shared between Argentina, Belgium, France, Germany, India, Japan, and Switzerland. The cultural site Qhapaq Ñan, Andean Road System is shared between Argentina, Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru. The cultural site Fertö / Neusiedlersee Cultural Landscape is shared between Austria and Hungary. The cultural site Prehistoric Pile dwellings around the Alps is shared between Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Slovenia and Switzerland. The cultural site Frontiers of the Roman Empire – The Danube Limes (Western Segment) is shared between Austria, Germany and Slovakia. The cultural site Struve Geodetic Arc is shared among Belarus, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Moldova, Russia, Sweden, and Ukraine. The natural site Belovezhskaya Pushcha / Białowieża Forest is shared between Belarus and Poland. The cultural site Belfries of Belgium and France is shared between Belgium and France. The natural site W-Arly-Pendjari Complex is shared between Benin, Burkina Faso, and Niger. The cultural site Stecci : Medivial Tombstones is shared between Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, Serbia. The natural site Sangha Trinational is shared between Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo( The Republic of). The natural sites Kluane / Wrangell-St Elias / Glacier Bay / Tatshenshini-Alsek and Waterton Glacier International Peace Park are shared between Canada and the United States. The cultural site Silk Roads: the Routes Network of Chang'an-Tianshan Corridor is shared between China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan. The natural site Talamanca Range-La Amistad Reserves / La Amistad National Park is shared between Costa Rica and Panama. The natural site Mount Nimba Strict Nature Reserve is shared between Côte d'Ivoire and Guinea. The cultural site Erzgebirge/Krušnohoří Mining Region is shared between Germany and the Czech Republic. The natural site High Coast / Kvarken Archipelago is shared between Finland and Sweden. The cultural site Taputapuatea is located in the French Polynesia. The natural site French Austral Lands and Seas is located in the Indian Ocean. The natural site Lagoons of New Caledonia: Reef Diversity and Associated Ecosystems is located in New Caledonia. The natural site Pitons, cirques and remparts of Reunion Island is located in the Réunion. The mixed site Pyrénées – Mont Perdu is shared between France and Spain. The cultural site Stone Circles of Senegambia is shared between Gambia and Senegal. The cultural site Frontiers of the Roman Empire is shared between Germany and the United Kingdom. The cultural site Muskauer Park / Park Mużakowski is shared between Germany and Poland. In addition, the former cultural site Dresden Elbe Valley has been delisted. The natural site The Wadden Sea is shared between Germany and the Netherlands. The natural site Caves of Aggtelek Karst and Slovak Karst is shared between Hungary and Slovakia. The cultural site Historic Centre of Rome, the Properties of the Holy See in that City Enjoying Extraterritorial Rights and San Paolo Fuori le Mura is shared between the Holy See and Italy. The cultural site Rhaetian Railway in the Albula / Bernina Landscapes is shared between Italy and Switzerland. The natural site Monte San Giorgio is shared between Italy and Switzerland. "Old City of Jerusalem and its Walls" is listed separately, without State Party, owing to the unresolved nature of its status. For purposes of convenience, it is listed in the "Arab States" UNESCO region, without inference as to it legal or political status therein. The natural site Western Tien-Shan is shared between Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan. The mixed site Maloti-Drakensberg Park is shared between Lesotho and South Africa. The cultural site Curonian Spit is shared between Lithuania and Russia. The natural site Uvs Nuur Basin is shared between Mongolia and Russia. Kathmandu Valley has seven groups of monuments & buildings within its boundaries and are listed under one name. The seven groups are: the Durbar Squares of Kathmandu, Patan, and Bhaktapur, Buddhist Stupas of Swayambhunath and Boudhanath, and Hindu Temples of Pashupatinath and Changu Narayan, also there are places like muktinath, budanilkantha which are listed are world heritage site In addition, the former natural site Arabian Oryx Sanctuary has been delisted. The cultural site Wooden Tserkvas of the Carpathian Region in Poland and Ukraine is shared between Poland and Ukraine. The cultural site Prehistoric Rock-Art Sites in the Côa Valley and Siega Verde is shared between Portugal and Spain. The cultural site Heritage of Mercury. Almadén and Idrija is shared between Slovenia and Spain. The natural site Mosi-oa-Tunya / Victoria Falls is shared between Zambia and Zimbabwe. "World Heritage List". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "World Heritage List Statistics". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "UNESCO World Heritage Centre – World Heritage List (transboundary)". UNESCO. Retrieved 3 July 2018. "World Heritage List (Order by: Region)". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Retrieved 26 September 2023. "CLT-82/CH/CONF.015/8 – Report of the 1st Extraordinary Session of the Committee". UNESCO. Retrieved 23 October 2013. "CC-81/CONF. 008/2 Rev. - Justification for inscription on the List of World Heritage in Danger, 1982: Report of the 6th Session of the Committee". UNESCO. Retrieved 23 October 2013. UNESCO World Heritage Sites – Official website List of UNESCO World Heritage Sites – Official website World Heritage Site – World Heritage Details website 360° panophotography – The World Heritage List in pano-photography and virtual tours VRheritage.org – Documentation of World Heritage Sites UNESCO World Heritage List – Complete list with links and map of all sites whc.unesco.org – The Official World Heritage List in Google Earth (en français) whc.kmz – The World Heritage List in Google Earth (en français) Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage at Law-Ref.org – Fully indexed and crosslinked with other documents Organization of World Heritage Cities – Dealing with urban sites only Portals:  Environment  Society